The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Orthogonal Weight Normalization: Solution to Optimization over
Multiple Dependent Stiefel Manifolds in Deep Neural Networks
Lei Huang,† Xianglong Liu,† Bo Lang,† Adams Wei Yu,‡ Yongliang Wang, Bo Li
†

State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, P.R.China
‡
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University

JD.COM, Beijing, P.R.China

Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley
To achieve this goal, we focus on the orthogonality constraint, which is imposed in linear transformation between
layers of DNNs. This technique performs optimization over
low embedded submanifolds, where weights are orthogonal,
and thus regularizes networks. Besides, the orthogonality implies energy preservation, which is extensively explored for
ﬁlter banks in signal processing and guarantees that energy of
activations will not be ampliﬁed (Zhou, Do, and Kovacevic
2006) . Therefore, it can stabilize the distribution of activations over layers within DNNs (Desjardins et al. 2015;
Rodrı́guez et al. 2017) and make optimization more efﬁcient.
Orthogonal matrix has been actively explored in Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNNs) (Arjovsky, Shah, and Bengio 2016;
Wisdom et al. 2016; Vorontsov et al. 2017). It helps to avoiding gradient vanishing and explosion problem in RNNs due
to its energy preservation property (Dorobantu, Stromhaug,
and Renteria 2016). However, the orthogonal matrix here
is limited to be square for the hidden-to-hidden transformation in RNNs. More general setting of learning orthogonal
rectangular matrix is barely studied in DNNs (Harandi and
Fernando 2016), especially in deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) (Ozay and Okatani 2016). We formulate such
a problem as Optimization over Multiple Dependent Stiefel
Manifolds (OMDSM), due to the fact that the weight matrix
with orthogonality constraint in each layer is an embedded
Stiefel Manifold (Absil, Mahony, and Sepulchre 2008) and
the weight matrix in certain layer is affected by those in
preceding layers in DNNs.
To solve OMDSM problem, one straightforward idea is
to use Riemannian optimization method that is extensively
used for single manifold or multiple independent manifolds
problem, either in optimization communities (Absil and Malick 2012; Wen and Yin 2013; Cunningham and Ghahramani
2015) or in applications to the hidden-to-hidden transformation of RNNs (Wisdom et al. 2016). However, Riemannian
optimization methods suffer instability in convergence or
inferior performance in deep feed-forward neural networks
based on our comprehensive experiments. Therefore, a stable
method is highly required for OMDSM problem.
Inspired by the orthogonality-for-vectors problem (Garthwaite et al. 2012) and the fact that eigenvalue decomposition
is differentiable (Ionescu, Vantzos, and Sminchisescu 2015),
we propose a novel proxy parameters based solution referred
to as orthogonal weight normalization. Speciﬁcally, we de-

Abstract
Orthogonal matrix has shown advantages in training Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), but such matrix is limited to
be square for the hidden-to-hidden transformation in RNNs.
In this paper, we generalize such square orthogonal matrix to
orthogonal rectangular matrix and formulating this problem
in feed-forward Neural Networks (FNNs) as Optimization
over Multiple Dependent Stiefel Manifolds (OMDSM). We
show that the orthogonal rectangular matrix can stabilize the
distribution of network activations and regularize FNNs. We
propose a novel orthogonal weight normalization method to
solve OMDSM. Particularly, it constructs orthogonal transformation over proxy parameters to ensure the weight matrix
is orthogonal. To guarantee stability, we minimize the distortions between proxy parameters and canonical weights over all
tractable orthogonal transformations. In addition, we design orthogonal linear module (OLM) to learn orthogonal ﬁlter banks
in practice, which can be used as an alternative to standard linear module. Extensive experiments demonstrate that by simply
substituting OLM for standard linear module without revising
any experimental protocols, our method improves the performance of the state-of-the-art networks, including Inception
and residual networks on CIFAR and ImageNet datasets.

Introduction
Standard deep neural networks (DNNs) can be viewed as
a composition of multiple simple nonlinear functions, each
of which usually consists of one linear transformation with
learnable weights or parameters followed by an element-wise
nonlinearity. Such hierarchy and deep architectures equip
DNNs with large capacity to represent complicated relationships between inputs and outputs. However, they also introduce potential risk of overﬁtting. Many methods have been
proposed to address this issue, e.g. weight decay (Krogh and
Hertz 1992) and Dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014) are commonly applied by perturbing objectives or adding random
noise directly. These techniques can improve generalization
of networks, but hurt optimization efﬁciency, which means
one needs to train more epochs to achieve better performance.
This naturally rises one question: is there any technique that
can regularize DNNs to guarantee generalization while still
guarantee efﬁcient convergence?
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3271

