The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

TIMERS: Error-Bounded SVD Restart on Dynamic Networks
Ziwei Zhang,1 Peng Cui,1 Jian Pei,2 Xiao Wang,1 Wenwu Zhu1

1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, China
2
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, Canada
zw-zhang16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn, jpei@cs.sfu.ca
wangxiao007@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn,wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

static networks. In real world, however, networks are dynamic in nature. New nodes and edges may be added
and existing nodes and edges may be deleted at any
time. These dynamic changes make the previous SVD results unreliable. Incremental SVD methods (Brand 2006;
Chen and Tong 2015) are proposed to update previous
SVD results to incorporate the changes without restarting
the algorithm. However, as they all make some approximations in the incremental updating process, error accumulation is inevitable as the number of dynamic changes
keeps increasing. In order to overcome serious deviation
from the optimal SVD, incremental SVD methods still need
to restart SVD at some points (Chen and Candan 2014;
Chen and Tong 2015). Surprisingly, the problem of when
to restart SVD for dynamic networks largely remains open in
literature. This problem is critical because the effectiveness
and efﬁciency of SVD restarts heavily depend on the restart
timing. On the one hand, a too early restart results in redundant calculation and a severe waste of computation resources.
On the other hand, a too late restart leads to serious error
accumulation.
How to optimally conduct SVD restart for dynamic networks is a challenging problem. The main reason is that
dynamic changes of networks per se are sophisticated, and
different changes have different impacts on SVD results,
causing non-uniform error accumulation in different time periods or different batches of changes (as shown in Figure 1).
Therefore, this problem cannot be straightforwardly settled
by heuristic methods, such as restarting after a certain time
interval or a certain number of changes (as shown in Figure
2). (Chen and Candan 2014) propose to monitor the reconstruction loss and restart SVD when the loss exceeds a preset
threshold. However, the reconstruction loss is constituted
by both the intrinsic loss in SVD model and the accumulated error caused by approximations in incremental updates.
Because the intrinsic loss in SVD model is not related to
incremental updates and still exists even after restarting, it
is the second part of the loss that should be used to instruct
SVD restart, rather than the whole reconstruction loss.
To solve this problem, we propose TIMERS1 (for Theoretically Instructed Maximum-Error-bounded Restart of SVD),
a novel approach to optimally set the restart time in order to

Abstract
Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) is a popular approach
in various network applications, such as link prediction and
network parameter characterization. Incremental SVD approaches are proposed to process newly changed nodes and
edges in dynamic networks. However, incremental SVD approaches suffer from serious error accumulation inevitably
due to approximation on incremental updates. SVD restart is
an effective approach to reset the aggregated error, but when to
restart SVD for dynamic networks is not addressed in literature.
In this paper, we propose TIMERS, Theoretically Instructed
Maximum-Error-bounded Restart of SVD, a novel approach
which optimally sets the restart time in order to reduce error
accumulation in time. Speciﬁcally, we monitor the margin
between reconstruction loss of incremental updates and the
minimum loss in SVD model. To reduce the complexity of
monitoring, we theoretically develop a lower bound of SVD
minimum loss for dynamic networks and use the bound to replace the minimum loss in monitoring. By setting a maximum
tolerated error as a threshold, we can trigger SVD restart automatically when the margin exceeds this threshold. We prove
that the time complexity of our method is linear with respect to
the number of local dynamic changes, and our method is general across different types of dynamic networks. We conduct
extensive experiments on several synthetic and real dynamic
networks. The experimental results demonstrate that our proposed method signiﬁcantly outperforms the existing methods
by reducing 27% to 42% in terms of the maximum error for
dynamic network reconstruction when ﬁxing the number of
restarts. Our method reduces the number of restarts by 25% to
50% when ﬁxing the maximum error tolerated.

1

Introduction

Many methods have been proposed for network analysis,
aiming to unlock the power of network data. Among them,
Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) (Eckart and Young
1936) is a major player and proven to be successful in various network applications, such as link prediction (Ou et al.
2016) and network parameter characterization (Chen and
Tong 2015).
Most of the existing SVD methods, such as the widely
used Lanczos Algorithm (Lanczos 1950), are designed for
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

224

The code is available at http://nrl.thumedia.org/

