The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Constructing Hierarchical
Bayesian Networks with Pooling
Kaneharu Nishino, Mary Inaba
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
{nishino.kaneharu, mary}@ci.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

this layer, and each of the input nodes is a child of one of the
child nodes. The child variables are ternary, allowing states
of T, F, and X, where T and F are as before and X is required
for consistency of the 1pT assumption that will be described
later (The X state is not used in recognition and learning).
After that, the parent-layer sits on top of the child-layer, and
the links between them are tuned through learning.
BAE nets use two parameter types: conditional probabilities (CPs) and link intensities (LIs). To reduce the number of CPs, we employ the one-parent-T (1pT) assumption,
namely that features cannot coexist in the same region. Under this assumption, the CPs that a child is in state T or
F given that two or more of its parents are in state T are
both 0. The 1pT assumption reduces the number of CPs to
O(n) from O(2n ) for n parents. Moreover, the potential inferences that multiple parents have state T are eliminated.
Features are recognized exclusively within the same region
and their sparsity is obtained. The LIs take continuous values between 0 (completely cut) and 1(fully connected). The
1pT assumption strongly limits the conditional probabilities,
to the point where they cannot express the situation where
variables are independent. The LIs are used to extend the
conditional probabilities so that they can handle the case.
The parameters are tuned in different ways. The CPs are
tuned to minimize the difference between top-down and
bottom-up inference for the child, while the LIs are tuned to
maximize the mutual information between the parents and
the input data.

Abstract
Inspired by the Bayesian brain hypothesis and deep learning,
we develop a Bayesian autoencoder, a method of constructing recognition systems using a Bayesian network. We construct hierarchical Bayesian networks based on feature extraction and implement pooling to achieve invariance within
a Bayesian network framework. The constructed networks
propagate information bidirectionally between layers. We expect they will be able to achieve brain-like recognition using
local features and global information such as their environments.

Introduction
Deep learning (Bengio et al. 2007) extracts multiple levels
of abstract features from input data. Local concrete features
appear in the lower layers, while global abstract features,
composed of lower-level features, appear in the higher layers. These feature hierarchies are similar to the visual areas
in the cerebral neocortex (Lee, Ekanadham, and Ng 2008).
That said, in contrast to most neural networks, brains
have paths not only from lower to higher areas (bottom-up),
but from higher to lower areas (top-down). The top-down
paths integrate global information for recognition (Bullier
2001). The Bayesian brain hypothesis (Doya et al. 2007)
proposed for handling top-down paths uses a Bayesian network (Bayes net) as a neural computation model and integrates top-down information such as prediction and bottomup sensory perception in a manner of probability theory.
Based on this work, we propose the Bayesian autoencoder
(BAE) as a method of constructing networks that can extract
and recognize features with in a Bayes net framework.

(a) One parent-layer BAE net

Bayesian Autoencoder
BAE Network

(b) BAE net pooling layer

Figure 1: Architectures of BAE nets

BAE extracts features from the input and constructs a hierarchical Bayes net called a BAE net. Each hidden variable represents a feature and is binary in nature: it can be true (T: the
feature exists) or false (F: the feature does not). First, we describe a BAE net with one parent-layer, as shown in Fig. 1a.
The lowest layer is the input-layer, and the observable nodes
represent continuous variables. The child-layer sits on top of

BAE Net Pooling Layer
The parent variables are inferred by the product of messages
from its children. Therefore if we construct BAE nets only
with parent-layers, its features will have no invariance. To
avoid this, we implement pooling layers to BAE nets.
The pooling layer is shown in Fig. 1b and is constructed
as follows. Low-child variables are connected to the lower

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8125

