The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Stratiﬁed Feature Ranking Method for Supervised Feature Selection
1

Renjie Chen,1 Xiaojun Chen,2∗ Guowen Yuan,2 Wenya Sun,2 Qingyao Wu1
School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, P.R. China.
College of Computer Science and Software, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, P.R. China
sechenrenjie@mail.scut.edu.cn, xjchen@szu.edu.cn, 243864952@qq.com,
2160230419@email.szu.edu.cn, qyw@scut.edu.cn

2

Abstract

Stratiﬁed Feature Ranking method

Most feature selection methods usually select the highest rank
features which may be highly correlated with each other. In
this paper, we propose a Stratiﬁed Feature Ranking (SFR)
method for supervised feature selection. In the new method,
a Subspace Feature Clustering (SFC) is proposed to identify
feature clusters, and a stratiﬁed feature ranking method is
proposed to rank the features such that the high rank features
are lowly correlated. Experimental results show the superiority
of SFR.

In this paper, we propose a stratiﬁed feature selection method.
In the new method, we ﬁrst cluster the features into a set
of feature clusters. To rank the features in multiple feature
clusters, we propose a stratiﬁed feature ranking method to
generate a ranked feature list, according to both subspace
feature weights and feature clusters.
Let X ∈ Rn×m be a labeled data matrix with n objects
and m features. To cluster X into k row clusters and l column clusters, chen et al. proposed a subspace weighting
co-clustering method, named SWCC(Chen et al. 2017a). In
the new method, a subspace weight matrix C ∈ Rk×l is
introduced into the objective function, in which cgj is the
weight of the j-th column in the g-th row cluster. In supervised feature selection task, since the class labels in X are
known, the class indicator matrix U ∈ Rn×k can be directly
constructed. By extending the objective function of SWCC,
we propose the following objective function

Introduction
Feature selection methods can be classiﬁed into three groups,
i.e., ﬁlter methods, wrapper methods and embedded methods. The ﬁlter methods select feature subsets according
to the general characteristics of the data without involving any learning algorithm. The wrapper methods use the
predictor as a black box and the predictor performance
as the objective function to evaluate the feature subset,
but such methods are usually time consuming. Embedded methods include feature selection as part of the training process. Among the three types of methods, embedded methods are superior to others in many respects, and
have received more and more attentions (Nie et al. 2010;
Chen et al. 2017b). However, selected the highest rank features by conventional methods may be highly correlated.
In this paper, we propose a Stratiﬁed Feature Ranking
(SFR) method for supervised feature selection. In this method,
we ﬁrst propose a Subspace Feature Clustering (SFC) method
to cluster features into a set of feature clusters, in which a subspace weight matrix is introduced for weighting individual
features on classes. The subspace weight matrix is automatically learned during the feature clustering process. After
that, the features in different feature clusters are separately
ranked according to the weight matrix. Finally, we propose a
stratiﬁed weighting feature ranking method in order to select
high rank features from all feature clusters.
SFR was compared with ﬁve feature ranking methods on
6 high-dimensional data sets. The results show that SFR
outperformed other feature ranking methods on most results.

k

l

n

m

1 
uig vjh cgj (xi,j − zg,h )2
V,Z,C mn
g=1
i=1 j=1
min

h=1

+

k
 m


η
cgj log cgj
m g=1 j=1

s.t.

l

h=1

vjh = 1, vjh ∈ {0, 1},

m


cgj = 1, cgj ∈ (0, 1)

j=1

(1)
We deﬁne an iterative algorithm, named Subspace Feature
Clustering (SFC), to solve problem (1), in which V, Z and
C are alternately updated in each iteration until convergency.
Obviously, problem (1) has the same solutions of V, Z and
C as SWCC. Since in each step we obtain the minima of
problem (1), it is strictly decreasing during the optimization
process.
Finally, we propose a stratiﬁed feature ranking method
for ranking features according to the feature clusters produced by SFC. In the new method, we ﬁrst sort features in
each feature cluster in ascending order order according to
{c1 1 , ..., cm 1 }. Assume the index of the j-th feature in
the corresponding feature cluster is j , we compute a stratiﬁed weighting feature ranking vector θ ∈ Rm for m feature

∗

Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8059

