The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

DarkEmbed: Exploit Prediction with Neural Language Models
Nazgol Tavabi

Palash Goyal

Mohammed Almukaynizi

USC Information Sciences Institute
nazgolta@isi.edu

USC Information Sciences Institute
palashgo@usc.edu

Arizona State University
malmukay@asu.edu

Paulo Shakarian

Kristina Lerman

Arizona State University
shak@asu.edu

USC Information Sciences Institute
lerman@isi.edu
ity Database (NVD)1 —fewer than 3% of these have exploits
that exist in the wild (Sabottke, Suciu, and Dumitras 2015;
Allodi and Massacci 2014). Given that so few vulnerabilities are exploited, how should vendors prioritize which ones
to patch? To address this problem, researchers have recently
turned to machine learning techniques to analyze different
data sources about vulnerabilities for clues to exploitability
(Bozorgi et al. 2010; Edkrantz and Said 2015). Along this
approach (Sabottke, Suciu, and Dumitras 2015) used terms
appearing in Twitter posts associated with vulnerabilities, as
features to train a classiﬁer to predict which ones will be
exploited. However, traditional text mining approaches fail
to capture the context of the discussions, and thereby have
a hard time distinguishing between potentially threatening
posts and non-malicious discussions of vulnerabilities. The
two posts below illustrate these differences.

Software vulnerabilities can expose computer systems to
attacks by malicious actors. With the number of vulnerabilities discovered in the recent years surging, creating
timely patches for every vulnerability is not always feasible. At the same time, not every vulnerability will be exploited by attackers; hence, prioritizing vulnerabilities by
assessing the likelihood they will be exploited has become
an important research problem. Recent works used machine learning techniques to predict exploited vulnerabilities by analyzing discussions about vulnerabilities on social media. These methods relied on traditional text processing techniques, which represent statistical features of words,
but fail to capture their context. To address this challenge,
we propose DarkEmbed, a neural language modeling approach that learns low dimensional distributed representations, i.e., embeddings, of darkweb/deepweb discussions to
predict whether vulnerabilities will be exploited. By capturing linguistic regularities of human language, such as syntactic, semantic similarity and logic analogy, the learned embeddings are better able to classify discussions about exploited vulnerabilities than traditional text analysis methods.
Evaluations demonstrate the efﬁcacy of learned embeddings
on both structured text (such as security blog posts) and unstructured text (darkweb/deepweb posts). DarkEmbed outperforms state-of-the-art approaches on the exploit prediction task with an F1 -score of 0.74.

• “. . . ﬁrst advertise of this kit after several months of
shutdown. rates for wm are 20/30%prices:100$/day600$/
week2000$/ month. . . exploits:cve-2015-5122cve-20155119cve-2015-3043cve-2015-2419cve-2015-2445cve2015-0311cve-2014-6332 . . . ”
• “. . . this is a really dangerous security ﬂaw. poc of cve2014-0476 is available lookup google linux kernel vulnerable to privilege escalation and dos attack”
The ﬁrst post advertises an exploit kit for sale on a darkweb marketplace with a considerable price, which is a leading indicator of an attack. In contrast, the second post simply talks about a vulnerability. Given the words in the two
posts, the second post seems more likely to be connected
to a threat, but this is actually not the case. Traditional text
mining methods that do not capture the context of words
will fail to detect the differences. Another disadvantage is
that they use sparse, high-dimensional features, which may
lead to suboptimal performance in a classiﬁcation task.
To address these challenges, we describe a neural language model that analyzes discussions about vulnerabilities
to predict whether they will be exploited in the wild. Specifically, we use paragraph vector (Le and Mikolov 2014), an
unsupervised algorithm that embeds variable-length texts in
a low-dimensional vector space, to learn distributed representations of discussions on the darkweb/deepweb (D2Web).

Introduction
Vulnerabilities in software expose computer systems to attacks by cybercriminals. The consequences of an attack can
be severe, as demonstrated on May 12, 2017, when Wannacry ransomware (Martin, Kinross, and Hankin 2017), exploiting a vulnerability in Microsoft Windows operating
system, crippled hundreds of thousands of computer systems worldwide, including critical systems used by hospitals and others health services (Kostov, Neumann, and Woo
2017). To avoid attacks on their software, vendors need
to create patches for discovered vulnerabilities. However,
not every vulnerability is equally critical to patch. While
a growing number of vulnerabilities are discovered each
year—in the ﬁrst four months of 2017 alone more than
5,000 vulnerabilities were disclosed by National VulnerabilCopyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All
rights reserved.

1

7849

https://nvd.nist.gov

