The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Exact Clustering via Integer Programming
and Maximum Satisﬁability
Atsushi Miyauchi,1 Tomohiro Sonobe,2, 3 Noriyoshi Sukegawa4
1

RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan
National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan
3
JST, ERATO, Kawarabayashi Large Graph Project, Tokyo, Japan
4
Chuo University, Tokyo, Japan
atsushi.miyauchi.hv@riken.jp, tomohiro sonobe@nii.ac.jp, sukegawa.15k@g.chuo-u.ac.jp
2

k

l=1 Vl = V and Vi ∩ Vj = ∅ for i = j) of V that maximizes
the sum of edge weights within the clusters in C, i.e.,

{i,j}∈E cij δ(C(i), C(j)), where C(i) is the (unique) cluster
to which i ∈ V belongs and δ is Kronecker’s symbol, which
is equal to 1 if two arguments are the same and 0 otherwise.
Note here that in this problem, there is no restriction on the
number of clusters in the output partition; thus, the algorithms
are allowed to specify the optimal number of clusters endogenously. This problem is known as the clique partitioning problem (CPP), which was originally introduced by Grötschel and
Wakabayashi (1989). As described in Section 2, the high generality of CPP leads to a wide variety of real-world applications, including correlation clustering, group technology, and
community detection. The NP-hardness was demonstrated in
Wakabayashi (1986).
In the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence, mathematical programming and constraint satisfaction are known to be key
frameworks to solve NP-hard optimization problems. In these
frameworks, we ﬁrst formulate a problem at hand as a mathematical programming problem or a constraint satisfaction
problem such as an integer programming (IP) problem or a
maximum satisﬁability (MaxSAT) problem, and then solve
it using powerful mathematical programming or constraint
satisfaction solvers. For example, in the case of IP problems,
we may use Gurobi Optimizer or IBM ILOG CPLEX. The
problem we address, CPP, is not an exception; in fact, both
of mathematical programming formulations and constraint
satisfaction formulations have been actively developed.

Abstract
We consider the following general graph clustering problem:
given a complete undirected graph G = (V, E, c) with an
edge weight function c : E → Q, we are asked to ﬁnd a
partition C of V that maximizes the sum of edge weights
within the clusters in C. Owing to its high generality, this
problem has a wide variety of real-world applications, including correlation clustering, group technology, and community
detection. In this study, we investigate the design of mathematical programming formulations and constraint satisfaction
formulations for the problem. First, we present a novel integer linear programming (ILP) formulation that has far fewer
constraints than the standard ILP formulation by Grötschel
and Wakabayashi (1989). Second, we propose an ILP-based
exact algorithm that solves an ILP problem obtained by modifying our above ILP formulation and then performs simple
post-processing to produce an optimal solution to the original
problem. Third, we present maximum satisﬁability (MaxSAT)
counterparts of both our ILP formulation and ILP-based exact
algorithm. Computational experiments using well-known realworld datasets demonstrate that our ILP-based approaches and
their MaxSAT counterparts are highly effective in terms of
both memory efﬁciency and computation time.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a fundamental tool in data analysis. Roughly
speaking, the task of clustering is to divide a given set of
objects into subsets of homogeneous objects. To date, various problem settings and optimization algorithms have been
extensively studied (Aggarwal and Reddy 2013; Jain, Murty,
and Flynn 1999; Xu and Wunsch 2005).
Let us consider the following general graph clustering
problem. An instance is a complete undirected graph G =
(V, E, c) with an edge weight function c : E → Q, where
Q is the set of rational numbers. For simplicity, we denote
cij = c({i, j}) for each {i, j} ∈ E. The edge weight
cij expresses the degree of preference that i, j ∈ V are
assigned to the same cluster; if cij is positive, we wish
to assign i, j ∈ V to the same cluster, whereas if cij is
negative, we wish to assign i, j ∈ V to different clusters.
The goal is to ﬁnd a partition C = {V1 , V2 , . . . , Vk } (i.e.,

Mathematical programming formulations. Grötschel
and Wakabayashi (1989) introduced a 0-1 integer linear
programming (ILP) formulation for CPP, which has been
employed by many algorithms for CPP and its variants
(e.g., (Agarwal and Kempe 2008; Bruckner et al. 2013;
Jaehn and Pesch 2013; Miyauchi and Miyamoto 2013;
Nowozin and Jegelka 2009; Oosten, Rutten, and Spieksma
2001; Van Gael and Zhu 2007)). The ILP formulation is
simple and intuitive, but not sufﬁciently scalable for realworld applications in terms of both memory requirements
and computation time. In particular, the issue of memory
requirements is quite
serious. Letting n = |V |, the ILP for
mulation has 3 n3 = Θ(n3 ) constrains, which grows rapidly
as n increases. For example, if n = 1,000, the number of con-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1387

