The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Teaching a Machine to Read Maps
with Deep Reinforcement Learning
Gino Brunner, Oliver Richter, Yuyi Wang, Roger Wattenhofer∗
ETH Zurich
{brunnegi, richtero, yuwang, wattenhofer}@ethz.ch

accordingly. In addition, the agent gets to see a map of the
maze, also an image, as can be seen in Figure 1. One location on the map is marked with an “X” - the agent’s target.
The crux is that the agent does not know where on the map it
currently is. Several locations on the map might correspond
well with the current view. Thus the agent needs to move
around to learn its position and then move to the target, as
illustrated in Figures 6 and 8. We do equip the agent with an
approximate orientation angle, i.e., the agent roughly knows
the direction it is moving or looking. In the map, up is always
north. During training the agent learns which approximate
orientation corresponds to north.
A complex multi-stage task, such as navigating a maze
with the help of a map, can be naturally decomposed into
several subtasks: (i) The agent needs to observe its 3D environment and compare it to the map to determine its most
likely position. (ii) The agent needs to understand the map,
or in our case associate symbols on the map with rewards
and thereby gain an understanding of what a wall is, what
navigable space is, and what the target is. (iii) Finally the
agents needs to learn how to follow a plan in order to reach
the target.
Our contribution is as follows: We present a novel modular reinforcement learning architecture that consists of a reactive agent and several intermediate subtask modules. Each
of these modules is designed to solve a speciﬁc subtask. The
modules themselves can contain neural networks or alternatively implement exact algorithms or heuristics. Our presented agent is capable of ﬁnding the target in random mazes
roughly three times the size of the largest mazes it has seen
during training.
Further contributions include:

Abstract
The ability to use a 2D map to navigate a complex 3D environment is quite remarkable, and even difﬁcult for many humans. Localization and navigation is also an important problem in domains such as robotics, and has recently become a
focus of the deep reinforcement learning community. In this
paper we teach a reinforcement learning agent to read a map
in order to ﬁnd the shortest way out of a random maze it has
never seen before. Our system combines several state-of-theart methods such as A3C and incorporates novel elements
such as a recurrent localization cell. Our agent learns to localize itself based on 3D ﬁrst person images and an approximate orientation angle. The agent generalizes well to bigger
mazes, showing that it learned useful localization and navigation capabilities.

1

Introduction

One of the main success factors of human evolution is our
ability to craft and use complex tools. Not only did this
ability give us a motivation for social interaction by teaching others how to use different tools, it also enhanced our
thinking capabilities, since we had to understand ever more
complex tools. Take a map as an example; a map helps us
navigate places we have never seen before. However, we
ﬁrst need to learn how to read it, i.e., we need to associate the content of a two-dimensional map with our threedimensional surroundings. With algorithms becoming increasingly capable of learning complex relations, a way to
make machines intelligent is to teach them how to use already existing tools. In this paper, we teach a machine how
to read a map with deep reinforcement learning.
The agent wakes up in a maze. The agent’s view is an image: the maze rendered from the agent’s perspective, like a
dungeon in a ﬁrst person video game. This rendered image
is provided by the DeepMind Lab environment (Beattie et
al. 2016). The agent can be controlled by a human, or as
in our case, by a complex deep reinforcement learning architecture.1 The agent can move (forward, backward, left,
right) and rotate (left, right), and its view image will change

• The Recurrent Localization Cell that outputs a location
probability distribution based on an estimated stream of
visible local maps.
• A simple mapping module that creates a visible local 2D
map from 3D RGB input. The mapping module is robust,
even if the agent’s compass is inaccurate.

∗

Names in alphabetic order
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Our code can be found here: https://github.com/OliverRichter/
map-reader.git

2

Related Work

Reinforcement learning in relation to AI has been studied since the 1950’s (Minsky 1954). Important early work
on reinforcement learning includes the temporal difference

2763

