The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Situation Calculus Semantics for Actual Causality
Vitaliy Batusov

Mikhail Soutchanski

York University
Toronto, Canada
vbatusov@cse.yorku.ca

Ryerson University
Toronto, Canada
http://www.scs.ryerson.ca/mes

of the model’s mechanisms. Selecting proper contingencies
proved to be a challenging task (Halpern 2015). As mentioned in (Halpern 2016) on p.27, “The jury is still out on
what the ‘right’ deﬁnition of causality is”.
The HP approach is prone to producing results that cannot be reconciled with intuitive understanding due to the
limited expressiveness of causal models (Hopkins 2005;
Hopkins and Pearl 2007). The ontological commitments
of structural causal models resemble propositional logic,
they have no objects, no relationships, no time, no support
for quantiﬁed causal queries. Thus, causal models are too
coarse to distinguish between enduring conditions and transitional events, providing only atomic propositions to model
both. Moreover, causal models represent presence and absence of an event identically — by assigning a value to a
propositional variable. Both of these deﬁciencies stem from
the lack of a mechanism for modelling change over time.
Since counterfactual theories of actual causality based on
structural equations share the same ailments (Menzies 2014;
Glymour et al. 2010), it seems natural to explore actual
causality from a different perspective. We do this in the language of the situation calculus under the classical Tarskian
semantics, where the notion of a cause naturally aligns with
the notion of an action, and the effect can be speciﬁed by a
FOL formula with quantiﬁers over object variables. In contrast to HP whose analysis is based on observing the end
results of interventions, we do so by analyzing the dynamics
which lead to the end results.
We start with a brief introduction to situation calculus
(SC) in Section 2, and to HP’s causal models in Section 3.
In Section 4 we propose our new deﬁnition of an achievement cause. We investigate the formal relation between our
deﬁnition and the recent HP’s (“modiﬁed”) deﬁnition of an
actual cause in Section 5. Finally, in Section 6 we discuss
related work, and then conclude in Section 7.

Abstract
The deﬁnitions of actual cause given by Pearl and Halpern
(HP) in the framework of causal models provided vital computational insight into an old philosophical problem but by
no means resolved it. One source of concern is the lack of
objective criteria for selecting possible worlds to be admitted
into the counterfactual analysis, epitomized by the competition between multiple proposals by HP and others. Another
concern is due to the modest expressivity of propositionallevel structural equations which limits their applicability and,
arguably, contributes to the the former problem. We tackle
both of these issues using a novel approach. We build our
deﬁnition of actual cause from ﬁrst principles in the context
of atemporal situation calculus (SC) action theories with sequential actions. As a result, we can successfully identify
actual causes of conditions expressed in ﬁrst-order logic. We
validate the HP approach by providing a formal translation
from causal models to SC and proving a relationship between
our deﬁnitions of actual cause and that of HP. Using wellknown and new examples, we show that long-standing disagreements between alternative deﬁnitions of actual causality
can be mitigated by faithful SC modelling of the domains.

1

Introduction

Actual causality, also known as token-level causality, is concerned with ﬁnding in a given scenario a singular event
that caused another event. This is in contrast to type-level
causality which is concerned with universal causal mechanisms governing the world. The leading line of computational enquiry into actual causality was pioneered by (Pearl
1998; 2000) and continued by (Halpern and Pearl 2005;
Halpern 2000; Eiter and Lukasiewicz 2002; Hopkins 2005;
Halpern 2015; 2016) and in other publications. We call
it the HP approach. It is based on the concept of structural equations (Simon 1953; 1977) and implemented in the
framework of causal models. The HP approach follows the
Humean counterfactual deﬁnition of causation, which posits
that saying “an event A caused an outcome B” is the same
as saying “if A had not been, then B never had existed”.
This deﬁnition is well-known to suffer from the problem
of preemption: it could be the case that in the absence of
event A, B would still have occurred due to another event,
which in the original scenario was preempted by A. HP address this by performing counterfactual analysis only under
carefully selected contingencies which suspend some subset

2

Situation Calculus

SC is proposed in (McCarthy and Hayes 1969) and elaborated in (Reiter 2001). In the Reiter’s SC, the constant S0 denotes the initial situation that represents an empty list of actions, while the complex situation term do([α1 , ...., αn ], S0 )
represents the situation that results from executing actions
α1 , ..., αn consecutively so that α1 is executed in S0 ,
and αn is executed last. If none of the action terms αi
have variables, then we call this situation term an (actual)
narrative. An action term αi may occur in the narrative

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1744

