The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Coarse-to-Fine Structured
Feature Embedding for Vehicle Re-Identiﬁcation
Haiyun Guo, Chaoyang Zhao, Zhiwei Liu, Jinqiao Wang, Hanqing Lu
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, 100190
{haiyun.guo, chaoyang.zhao, zhiwei.liu, jqwang, luhq}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Vehicle re-identiﬁcation (re-ID) is to identify the same vehicle across different cameras. It’s a signiﬁcant but challenging
topic, which has received little attention due to the complex
intra-class and inter-class variation of vehicle images and the
lack of large-scale vehicle re-ID dataset. Previous methods
focus on pulling images from different vehicles apart but neglect the discrimination between vehicles from different vehicle models, which is actually quite important to obtain a correct ranking order for vehicle re-ID. In this paper, we learn a
structured feature embedding for vehicle re-ID with a novel
coarse-to-ﬁne ranking loss to pull images of the same vehicle
as close as possible and achieve discrimination between images from different vehicles as well as vehicles from different
vehicle models. In the learnt feature space, both intra-class
compactness and inter-class distinction are well guaranteed
and the Euclidean distance between features directly reﬂects
the semantic similarity of vehicle images. Furthermore, we
build so far the largest vehicle re-ID dataset “Vehicle-1M”1
which involves nearly 1 million images captured in various
surveillance scenarios. Experimental results on “Vehicle-1M”
and “VehicleID” demonstrate the superiority of our proposed
approach.

Figure 1: The complex intra-class and inter-class variation
for vehicle re-ID. The column from left to right contains images of the same vehicle, vehicles of the same vehicle model
and vehicles from different vehicle models respectively.

whether two images contain the identical vehicle. It’s a more
challenging task and there are few previous attempts purely
by visual appearance. The main reasons are two-fold. For
one thing, the intra-class and inter-class variation of vehicle
images are quite complex, as illustrated in Fig 1. Images of
the same vehicle may bear little resemblance to each other,
due to illumination change and viewpoint shift. While different vehicles may look quite similar, especially when they belong to the same vehicle model. In this case, we can only differentiate two vehicles based on the special marks, such as
the inspection marks and decorations as shown in the circles
in Fig 1. Additionally, even when two vehicles are from different vehicle models, it can still be hard to distinguish them
since the difference between some vehicle models, such as
“BMW-3-2005” and “BMW-3-2009”, is very subtle. For another, there is a lack of large-scale dataset for vehicle re-ID.
Most existing vehicle datasets, such as CARS196 (Krause et
al. 2013), CARS333 (Xie et al. 2015) and CompCars (Yang
et al. 2015), are designed for vehicle model categorization
and unﬁt for vehicle re-ID due to the lack of vehicle ID label. There are only a handful of vehicle re-ID datasets by
now, including VeRi (Liu et al. 2016b), VeRi-776 (Liu et al.
2016c) and VehicleID (Liu et al. 2016a), which are relatively
small and cover limited surveillance scenarios.
Recently, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) has
achieved state-of-the-art performance in various vision

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed an explosive growing requirement of vehicle re-identiﬁcation (re-ID) from massive
surveillance video in public security ﬁeld. Similar to pedestrian re-ID, vehicle re-ID is to identify the same vehicle
across different cameras. As a unique ID of a vehicle, license plate has been widely used for vehicle re-ID. However,
license plate recognition is quite sensitive to image quality, camera view and occlusion. Furthermore, license plate
may be removed, altered even faked in some cases, making it unreliable to identify a vehicle simply by its license
plate. Therefore, vehicle re-ID by visual appearance is of
great practical value in real-world applications.
Different from vehicle model veriﬁcation, which is to tell
whether two vehicles belong to the same vehicle model,
vehicle re-ID is more ﬁne-grained and aims to distinguish
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Available at http://www.nlpr.ia.ac.cn/iva/homepage/jqwang/
Vehicle1M.htm.

6853

