The Twenty-Third AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium

Complexity of Optimally
Defending and Attacking a Network
Kamran Najeebullah
UNSW Sydney, Australia and Data61, CSIRO, Australia
kamran.najeebullah@data61.csiro.au

Introduction

Related Work

Networks are widely studied across numerous scientiﬁc
ﬁelds. Mostly, the objective of these studies is to establish
and maintain a stable and fully functional network. However, sometimes an unstable or dysfunctional network is
equally desirable. Examples include epidemic, terrorist and
drug trafﬁcking networks. Strategic aspects of network analysis is an important research area in many ﬁelds including AI (Michalak, Rahwan, and Wooldridge. 2017). Within
this area, identifying the most important nodes or edges
is a fundamental problem (Zheng, Dunagan, and Kapoor
2011). Applications include disrupting the spread of an epidemic (Kovács and Barabási 2015), weakening a terrorist
network (Michalak et al. 2015), pinpointing the most vulnerable nodes (Holme et al. 2002) and blocking a contagion
for network security (Zheng, Dunagan, and Kapoor 2011).
The problem is relevant to various ﬁelds and sectors such as
epidemiology, sociology, physics, security and logistics.
We focus on the problem of optimizing the performance
of a network by identifying the most critical nodes or
edge whose removal has signiﬁcant impact on the performance of the network. We choose to quantify the network
performance
by Inverse Geodesic Length (IGL). Formally,
1
where d(u, v) denotes the
IGL(G) = {u,v}⊆V,u=v d(u,v)
distance between u and v. Our choice is driven by two factors. One, IGL has been frequently studied in the relevant
literature as a global measure of robustness of a network.
Two, IGL remains effective irrespective of the input graph
structure. Interestingly, despite its widespread use as a network performance measure, the optimization problem with
respect to IGL has not been examined previously.
Parameterized complexity analysis: A parameterized decision problem Π is in FPT (Fixed Parameter Tractable), if
there is an algorithm solving any instance x with parameter
k in time f (k) · |x|c , where f (k) is a computable function
of k and c is a constant. Denoted by W [1] is a class of parameterized decision problems that are considered unlikely
to be in FPT (Downey and Fellows 2013). A para-NP-hard
problem is NP-hard even for constant values of the parameter. See (Cygan et al. 2015) for a detailed discussion on
parameterized complexity.

The problem of optimizing the network performance by
identifying critical nodes or edges has been considered both
in social network analysis and artiﬁcial intelligence; see,
e.g., (Lindelauf, Hamers, and Husslage 2013; Michalak et
al. 2015). A common trend among these studies is to rank
the vertices by their importance using a heuristic (Michalak et al. 2015; Szczepanski, Michalak, and Rahwan 2015).
To measure the quality of their ranking they either use expert domain knowledge on the importance of vertices in
the network or existing network performance measures like
component order connectivity (size of the largest connected
component) (Gross et al. 2013) and inverse geodesic length
(IGL). IGL has been used to examine network vulnerability (Holme et al. 2002) and the effect of critical nodes
(Barabási and Albert 1999) in the network security domain.
It has also been used to identify inﬂuential nodes in a social network (Morone and Makse 2015). Game-theoretic
values and centrality measures, such as the Shapley value
and betweenness centrality of the nodes, have been used
as heuristics to delete nodes with large impact on network
performance (Holme et al. 2002; Michalak et al. 2015;
Szczepanski, Michalak, and Rahwan 2015). Particularly,
Szczepanski, Michalak, and Rahwan delete the nodes with
the highest Shapley value as a heuristic to decrease the IGL.

Results
Although the inverse geodesic length is prominent in network analysis, we formally initiate research on the complexity of the optimization problem with respect to IGL.
In (Aziz, Gaspers, and Najeebullah 2017) we consider the
single-agent, vertex deletion optimization problem corresponding to IGL called M INIMIZE IGL (M IN IGL). In
M IN IGL, given a network G, a budget k, and a target inverse
geodesic length T , the question is: does there exist a set
X ⊆ V (G), such that |X| ≤ k and IGL(G − X) ≤ T ? Our
main focus is a parameterized complexity analysis of the
problem. We observe that M IN IGL is equivalent to V ER TEX C OVER when T = 0 and is therefore NP-Complete.
This also implies that it is para-NP-hard for parameter T . For
parameter k, we give reductions from C LIQUE on regular
graphs to show that M IN IGL is W [1]-hard and NP-complete
even when restricted to bipartite and split graphs. For parameter k + T , we give a kernel of size O(k 2 + T ), which estab-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8026

