The Eighth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence 2018 (EAAI-18)

Diagnosing University Student Subject Proficiency and
Predicting Degree Completion in Vector Space
Yuetian Luo

Zachary A. Pardos

UW-Madison, USA

UC Berkeley, USA

yluo86@wisc.edu

zp@berkeley.edu

Abstract

pleting a degree after four years and 56.4% after five. The
problem is worse among public institutions (37.1%) compared with private (64%). A more recent national survey
by the National Student Clearinghouse Research Center
(2016) shows the situation has not changed for four-year
public institutions, with 37.5% students graduating within
the intended four-year period.
College completion has long since been a focus of researchers. Much of the academic groundwork around student dropout was done in the 1970s-1980s. Tinto (1975)
distinguished different types of dropout, such as dropout
resulting from academic failure or voluntary withdrawal
and permanent or temporary dropout and a theoretical
model to explain the process. Bean (1980) developed a
causal model to investigate the determinants of student
attrition in institutions of higher education. They found that
institutional commitment (loyalty to the organization) and
routinization were two of the most significant factors that
affected dropout. Recently, with readily available computing resources and the ubiquity of data, the student dropout
problem has been revived, analytically. Dekker et al.
(2009) use a host of machine learning approaches to predict student dropout among a group of 648 students in the
Electrical Engineering department at the Eindhoven University of Technology using the first semester’s grades.
They have shown that a simple and intuitive classifier
could give a result with accuracies between 75%-80%. In
Bayer et al. (2012)’s work, they have shown a significant
increase of prediction accuracy of drop out by taking students’ social behavior into consideration. Aulck et al.
(2016) modeled student drop out using the largest known
dataset on higher education attrition, which tracks over
32,500 students’ demographics and transcript records.
They found that GPA in Math, English, Chemistry and
Psychology classes were among the strongest individual
predictors of student retention. If those factors are known,
a hypothesis has been that an early warning system could
be instituted to deploy appropriate interventions before the
student drops out. Jayaprakash et al. (2014) trialed such an

We investigate the issues of undergraduate on-time graduation with respect to subject proficiencies through the lens of
representation learning, training a student vector embeddings from a dataset of 8 years of course enrollments. We
compare the per-semester student representations of a cohort of undergraduate Integrative Biology majors to those of
graduated students in subject areas involved in their degree
requirements. The result is an embedding rich in information about the relationships between majors and pathways taken by students which encoded enough information
to improve prediction accuracy of on-time graduation to
95%, up from a baseline of 87.3%. Challenges to preparation of the data for student vectorization and sourcing of
validation sets for optimization are discussed.

Introduction
We propose a novel approach to representing students’
course paths by applying word vector models to course
enrollment sequences. Students’ per-semester vectors,
which represent their course history, are then used as input
to train a predictive models of on-time graduation. We explore if the semantics of the space allow for diagnosing
student gaps in proficiencies through their vector similarity
to representations of subject degree requirements.

Related Work
Keeping time to degree near the four-year expected norm
is a priority of colleges and universities as extending beyond that time stresses the finances of both the student and
financial aid departments and can reflect poorly on the
institution’s educational mission. Various reports, including from Higher Education Research Institution at UCLA
(2004), show that this problem is widespread, with only
38.9% of undergraduate student across the country comCopyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7920

