The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Reduced-Rank Linear Dynamical Systems
Qi She,1,3 Yuan Gao,2 Kai Xu,4,5 Rosa H. M. Chan3
1

Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University
2
Tencent AI Lab
3
Department of Electronic Engineering, City University of Hong Kong
4
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
5
School of Computer Science, National University of Defense Technology

Abstract
Linear Dynamical Systems are widely used to study the underlying patterns of multivariate time series. A basic assumption of these models is that high-dimensional time series
can be characterized by some underlying, low-dimensional
and time-varying latent states. However, existing approaches
to LDS modeling mostly learn the latent space with a prescribed dimensionality. When dealing with short-length highdimensional time series data, such models would be easily
overﬁtted. We propose Reduced-Rank Linear Dynamical Systems (RRLDS), to automatically retrieve the intrinsic dimensionality of the latent space during model learning. Our key
observation is that the rank of the dynamics matrix of LDS
captures the intrinsic dimensionality, and the variational inference with a reduced-rank regularization ﬁnally leads to a
concise, structured, and interpretable latent space. To enable
our method to handle count-valued data, we introduce the
dispersion-adaptive distribution to accommodate over-/ equal/ and under-dispersion nature of such data. Results on both
simulated and experimental data demonstrate our model can
robustly learn latent space from short-length, noisy, countvalued data and signiﬁcantly improve the prediction performance over the state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: Latent trajectories reconstructed from (a) unconstrained dynamics matrix and (b) reduced-rank dynamics
matrix (different colors indicate different simulated trials).
The low-dimensional manifold in (b) is smoother and better
structured.

ing models need a predeﬁned latent dimensionality. In order
to ensure the models’ capability, it is typically set to be a large
value, which leads to the difﬁculties in modeling the shortlength high-dimensional time series data due to overﬁtting.
This modeling problem is troublesome since the short-length
time series data exist in many real-world scenarios. For example, in neuroscience, we cannot obtain long sequences of
high-quality neural data in experiments because of (i) the
short lifetime of some neurons, (ii) the limited viable time of
recording materials and (iii) the micro-movement of recording electrodes during an activity of the animal (Spira and Hai
2013). In the clinical domain, the length of patient clinical
data is usually less than 50 because the hospitalization period
for most patients is less than two weeks (Banaee, Ahmed,
and Loutﬁ 2013). In economics, the econometric multivariate
time series, such as gross domestic product and consumer
price index, are measured quarterly or yearly which results
in short-length data.
Second, real-world time series data are often count-valued
(rather than real-valued). The application of standard LDS,
which assumes the observation follows Gaussian distribution,
is infeasible (She, So, and Chan 2016). Examples include
multiple spike trains recorded from neural populations (Paninski et al. 2010), the data of trades on the S&P 100 index (Linderman and Adams 2014), to name just a few. Extensions on
model to handle count nature of the data are necessary. Recently, Poisson linear dynamical system (PLDS) (Buesing et
al. 2014) was proposed for count data modeling. Nevertheless,
the Poisson assumption implies equal dispersion of the observations, i.e., the conditional mean and variance are equal.

Introduction
Deciphering the latent structure from high-dimensional time
series is one of the fundamental problems of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, which has been extensively applied in various
ﬁelds from social, economics, to biology science (Linderman, Stock, and Adams 2014; She, So, and Chan 2015;
She, Chen, and Chan 2016; So et al. 2016; Hein et al. 2016).
In such settings, many studies and theories posit that highdimensional time series are noisy observations of some underlying, low-dimensional, and time-varying signal of interest (Pfau, Pnevmatikakis, and Paninski 2013; Archer et
al. 2014; Sussillo et al. 2016). Linear Dynamical Systems
(LDS) have been employed to extract a low-dimensional
implicit network structure from observed multivariate time
series data (Archer et al. 2014; Lakshmanan et al. 2015;
Linderman et al. 2017), which captures the variability of
observations, both spatially and temporally.
However, two main challenges exist when using LDS to
retrieve an optimal implicit network structure. First, the existc 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4050

