The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Optimal Approximation of Random Variables for
Estimating the Probability of Meeting a Plan Deadline
Liat Cohen,1 Tal Grinshpoun,2 Gera Weiss1

1
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva 84105, Israel
2
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management
Ariel University, Ariel 40700, Israel

and whose nodes specify combinations of their sub-trees,
that represent, recursively, composite tasks, either sequentially or in parallel. Consider the problem of estimating the
probability that the plan makespan does not exceed a given
deadline. Algorithms for solving such problems often apply
operations like addition, multiplication and maximization,
over random variables, see, e.g., (Shperberg, Shimony, and
Felner 2017). In many cases the analysis found in the literature of the complexity of such algorithms focuses on the
complexity stemming from the dependency graph and ignores the complexity that stems from the growth of the support, see, e.g., (Hagstrom 1988). However, when we look
closer, we see that this complexity is not always negligible.
For example, the size of the support of X +Y may be a product of the sizes of the supports of X and of Y , i.e., the size
of a standard representation of the variables, by a table that
assigns a probability to each value in the support, may grow
exponentially with additions. This may have a dramatic effect on both memory and time complexity of algorithms.
While there may be other solutions to the problem, e.g.,
by choosing different representations of the variables, our
approach in this paper is to compute approximations of the
random variables: Given a random variable X, we propose a
way to compute a random variable X  with support(X  ) <
support(X), such that if we replace X with X  in the remainder of the computation, we get a result that is close to
the one that we would have gotten if we used X. In this paper we use the notation support(X) to denote the set of all
the realizations of X that have a nonzero probability of being observed. The size of the support is proportional to the
size of the table that people usually use as a data structure to
represent discrete random variables.
The above idea is similar to the very common practice
of rounding intermediate numerical results in long computations.√This is a must when dealing with irrational numbers,
e.g., 2 ≈ 1.414, and is also common for saving time and
memory, e.g., rounding like $24.456 ≈ $24.46 in ﬁnancial
computations.
While in the context of real numbers the notion of approximation, i.e., the distance (or rounding error) between
two numbers, is clear, it is not so when dealing with random variables. There are various different distances known
in the literature such as the Kolmogorov distance (Lilliefors
1967) and the Wasserstein distance (Vallender 1974). The

Abstract
In planning algorithms and in other domains, there is often a
need to run long computations that involve summations, maximizations and other operations on random variables, and to
store intermediate results. In this paper, as a main motivating
example, we elaborate on the case of estimating probabilities
of meeting deadlines in hierarchical plans. A source of computational complexity, often neglected in the analysis of such
algorithms, is that the support of the variables needed as intermediate results may grow exponentially along the computation. Therefore, to avoid exponential memory and time complexities, we need to trim these variables. This is similar, in a
sense, to rounding intermediate results in numerical computations. Of course, to maintain the quality of algorithms, the
trimming procedure should be efﬁcient and it must maintain
accuracy as much as possible. In this paper, we propose an
optimal trimming algorithm with polynomial time and memory complexities for the purpose of estimating probabilities
of deadlines in plans. More speciﬁcally, we show that our algorithm, given the needed size of the representation of the
variable, provides the best possible approximation, where approximation accuracy is considered with a measure that ﬁts
the goal of estimating deadline meeting probabilities.

1

Introduction

Various stochastic problems in AI, and more speciﬁcally, in
the decision making and planning literature, involve deadlines (Herroelen and Leus 2005; Beck and Wilson 2007;
Fu, Varakantham, and Lau 2010; Buyya, Garg, and Calheiros 2011; Cohen, Shimony, and Weiss 2015). In these
problems, the goal is to estimate the probability that a random variable gets a value that is below a given threshold (a
deadline). If the random variable is X and the deadline is T ,
this amounts to evaluating FX (T ) where FX is the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of X. While this is straightforward when the distribution of X is given explicitly, it may
be computationally hard when X is speciﬁed implicitly.
To demonstrate the type of computational complexities
that we focus on in this paper, we brieﬂy describe an example from the hierarchical planning domain. Assume that we
are given a plan for the operation of a robot described as a
tree whose leaves represent tasks with uncertain durations
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6327

