The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Improved English to Russian Translation
by Neural Sufﬁx Prediction
Kai Song,1,2 Yue Zhang,3 Min Zhang,1 Weihua Luo,2
1

Soochow University, Suzhou, China
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
3
Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
{songkai.sk, weihua.luowh}@alibaba-inc.com
yue zhang@sutd.edu.sg, minzhang@suda.edu.cn
2

Manning, 2016), while others (Jean et al., 2014; Mi, Wang,
and Ittycheriah, 2016) effectively expand target side vocabulary. However, though those methods can avoid OOV, none
of them has explicitly modeled the target side morphology.
When dealing with language pairs such as English-Russian,
the number of different target side words is large due to the
rich sufﬁxes in Russian. The above methods are limited in
distinguishing one sufﬁx from another.
Since the total number of different stems in a morphologically rich language is much less than the number of
words, a natural perspective to make a better translation on a
morphologically-rich target-side language is to model stems
and sufﬁxes separately. We design a simple method, which
takes a two-step approach for the decoder. In particular, stem
is ﬁrst generated at each decoding step, before sufﬁx is predicted. Two types of target side sequences are used during
training, namely stem sequence and sufﬁx sequence, which
are extracted from the original target side word sequence, as
shown in Figure 1. Sparsity is relieved since the number of
stem types is much smaller than word types, and sufﬁx types
can be as small as several hundreds. Another advantage of
this structure is that during the prediction of sufﬁx, the previously generated stem sequence can be considered, which
can further improve the accuracy of sufﬁx prediction.
We empirically study this method and compare it with
previous work on reducing OOV rates (Sennrich, Haddow,
and Birch, 2015b; Lee, Cho, and Hofmann, 2016). Results
show that our method gives signiﬁcant improvement on the
English to Russian translation task on two different domains
and two popular NMT architectures. We also verify our
method on training data consisting of 50M bilingual sentences, which proves that this method works effectively on
large-scale corpora.

Abstract
Neural machine translation (NMT) suffers a performance deﬁciency when a limited vocabulary fails to cover the source
or target side adequately, which happens frequently when
dealing with morphologically rich languages. To address
this problem, previous work focused on adjusting translation granularity or expanding the vocabulary size. However,
morphological information is relatively under-considered in
NMT architectures, which may further improve translation
quality. We propose a novel method, which can not only reduce data sparsity but also model morphology through a simple but effective mechanism. By predicting the stem and sufﬁx separately during decoding, our system achieves an improvement of up to 1.98 BLEU compared with previous work
on English to Russian translation. Our method is orthogonal to different NMT architectures and stably gains improvements on various domains.

Introduction
Neural machine translation (NMT) (Bahdanau, Cho, and
Bengio 2014) has shown better performance compared with
statistic machine translation (Zens, Och, and Ney 2002).
Such methods encode a source sentence into hidden states
and generate target words sequentially by calculating a probability distribution on the target-side vocabulary. Most NMT
systems limit target side vocabulary to a ﬁxed size, considering the limit of graphics memory size and high computing complexity when predicting a word over the whole target side vocabulary (e.g., 30K or 50K). In addition, a larger
target-side vocabulary can also make the prediction task
more difﬁcult. Word-level NMT systems suffer the problem
of out of vocabulary (OOV) words, particularly for morphologically rich languages. For example, English to Russian
machine translation faces a big challenge due to rich morphology of Russian words, which leads to much more OOV
words than some other languages. Typically a speciﬁc tag is
used to represent all OOV words, which is then translated
during a post process (Luong et al. 2014). This can be harmful to the translation quality.
There has been several methods to address this problem.
Some focused on translation granularity (Sennrich, Haddow,
and Birch, 2015b; Lee, Cho, and Hofmann, 2016; Luong and

Related Work
Translation Granularity
Subword based (Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch 2015b) and
character-based (Lee, Cho, and Hofmann, 2016; Luong and
Manning, 2016) NMT are the two directions of adjusting
translation granularity, which can be helpful to our problem.
In Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch (2015b)’s work, commonly appearing words remain unchanged, while others
are segmented into several subword units, which are from

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

410

