The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Context-Aware Symptom Checking for Disease Diagnosis
Using Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning
Hao-Cheng Kao∗

Kai-Fu Tang∗

Edward Y. Chang

HTC Research & Healthcare
haocheng kao@htc.com

HTC Research & Healthcare
tkevin tang@htc.com

HTC Research & Healthcare
edward chang@htc.com

The primary goal of a symptom checker is to achieve
high disease-prediction accuracy. Attaining the best possible accuracy requires full information about a patient, including not only his/her symptoms, but also his/her medical
record, family medical history, and lab tests. However, an
online symptom checker may only be able to obtain a list of
symptoms, and therefore must rely on partial information.
This lack of information often means the online symptom
checker cannot attain extremely high accuracy. At the same
time, even obtaining a list of symptoms in a user friendly
manner is a challenge, since there are over one hundred different medical symptoms, and few patients may be willing
to ﬁll out such a long symptom questionnaire. Consequently,
this problem leads to the second requirement for an effective
symptom checker, good user experience. The primary consideration in achieving good user experience is for a symptom checker to make only a limited number of inquiries.
The design goal is then to maximize information gain when
only a limited number of symptom inquiries can be made to
achieve high diagnosis accuracy.

Abstract
Online symptom checkers have been deployed by sites such
as WebMD and Mayo Clinic to identify possible causes and
treatments for diseases based on a patient’s symptoms. Symptom checking ﬁrst assesses a patient by asking a series of
questions about their symptoms, then attempts to predict potential diseases. The two design goals of a symptom checker
are to achieve a high accuracy and intuitive interactions. In
this paper we present our context-aware hierarchical reinforcement learning scheme, which signiﬁcantly improves accuracy of symptom checking over traditional systems while
also making a limited number of inquiries.

Introduction
With the quantity of information available online, selfdiagnosis of health related ailments has become increasingly prevalent. According to a survey in 2012 (Semigran
et al. 2015), 35% of U.S. adults in the U.S. have attempted
to self-diagnose their ailments through online services This
process often starts by searching a particular symptom on a
search engine. While online searches have fast accessibility
and require no cost, search quality can potentially be dissatisfactory since search results could be irrelevant, imprecise or even incorrect.
As stated in (Ledley and Lusted 1959), there are three
components in a disease diagnosis process: (i) medical
knowledge, (ii) signs and symptoms presented by the patient, and (iii) the ﬁnal diagnosis itself. We refer to such
processes as symptom checking, and refer to an agent capable of performing such diagnoses as a symptom checker.
In a symptom checker, a medical knowledge base serves as
the source of medical knowledge, which depicts the probabilistic relationship between symptoms and diseases. An inference engine is responsible for formulating symptom inquiries, collecting patient information, and then performing
diagnosis by utilizing both the individual’s information and
the medical knowledge base. If the prediction conﬁdence is
not high, the inference engine may suggest conducting relevant lab tests to facilitate diagnosis. Finally, the diagnosis
process outputs a list of potential diseases that the patient
may have.

In previous works (Kononenko 2001; Kohavi 1996;
Kononenko 1993), Bayesian inference and decision trees as
well as entropy or impurity functions were proposed to select disease symptoms and to perform diagnoses. However,
these works generally considered only local optimums by
some means of greedy or approximation schemes. These approaches often result in compromised accuracy. Expert systems are also used in medical diagnosis systems (Hayashi
1991). In this regime, rule-based representations are extracted from human knowledge or medical data. The ﬁnal
inference quality depends on the quality of the extracted
rules. For example, in (Hayashi 1991), if-else rules are extracted from fuzzy neural networks learned from medical
data. Their rule-based representation focuses on knowledge
acquisition and does not pursue a shorter section of interactions with users. Our prior work (Tang et al. 2016) proposes
neural symptom checking, adopting reinforcement learning
to simultaneously conduct symptom inquiries and diagnose.
The optimization objective captures a combination of inquiry length and diagnosis accuracy. Though our top-1 accuracy reaches 48% (for 73 diseases), which is higher than the
34% average accuracy achieved by online services surveyed
by a Harvard report (Semigran et al. 2015), substantial room
exists for further improvement. (Table 1 presents details.)

∗

The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this paper.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2305

