The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Ranking Users in Social Networks with Higher-Order Structures
∗

Huan Zhao,∗1 Xiaogang Xu,†1 Yangqiu Song,∗ Dik Lun Lee,∗ Zhao Chen,‡ Han Gao‡
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
†
College of Information Science & Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
‡
Tencent Technology (SZ) Co., Ltd., China
∗
{hzhaoaf,yqsong,dlee}@cse.ust.hk † xiaogangxu@zju.edu.cn ‡ {gilbertchen,alangao}@tencent.com

Abstract
PageRank has been widely used to measure the authority or
the inﬂuence of a user in social networks. However, conventional PageRank only makes use of edge-based relations, ignoring higher-order structures captured by motifs, subgraphs
consisting of a small number of nodes in complex networks.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework, motif-based
PageRank (MPR), to incorporate higher-order structures into
conventional PageRank computation. We conduct extensive
experiments in three real-world networks, i.e., DBLP, Epinions, and Ciao, to show that MPR can signiﬁcantly improve
the effectiveness of PageRank for ranking users in social networks. In addition to numerical results, we also provide detailed analysis for MPR to show how and why incorporating higher-order information works better than PageRank in
ranking users in social networks.1

Figure 1: A graph with four nodes.

VIPs but he/she may not be as famous as the VIPs. Then
when the journalist expresses an opionion, it could be read
by the VIPs, who would propagate the opinion much farther
in the future. Moreover, when analyzing a citation network,
even if a paper P is highly cited by many other papers, we
are not sure how P’s inﬂuence might be affected if the citing
papers have mutual citations among themselves.
For trustworthiness, we use a concrete example to show
why higher-order structures matter. As shown in Figure 1, an
edge eij means user i follows user j. In traditional PageRank, the initial weights of e12 and e14 will be set to the same
value. However, it can be observed that user 1 trusts user 2
more than user 4 because user 1 also follows user 3, who
is a friend of user 2 (user 3 and user 2 follow each other).
This indicates that user 1 has a closer relation to user 2 than
user 4. Thus, it is unreasonable to set the weights of e12 and
e14 to the same value due to the existence of the triangular
structure where user 1 and user 2 both appear. The premise
of this paper is that it is important in social network mining
to consider higher-order structures involving multiple nodes.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework, called motifbased PageRank (MPR), to incorporate such higher-order
structures into PageRank computation for user ranking in
networks. The higher-order structures can be represented as
network motifs (or subgraphs or graphlets) (Milo et al. 2002;
Benson, Gleich, and Leskovec 2016a). We show some typical 3-node motifs in Figure 2, where M6 characterizes the
triangular structure in Figure 1. In this work, we prove that
motif-based and traditional edge-based relations are complementary to each other in computing the authority of a
node in complex networks. We propose to ﬁrst compute the
motif-based adjacency matrix, which captures the pairwise
relations between two nodes appearing in a speciﬁc motif.

Introduction
Online social networks have become the everyday communication and interaction platform for most people. User
ranking in social networks is a general problem for opinion
leader mining (Song et al. 2007), inﬂuence analysis (Tang
et al. 2009; Xiang et al. 2013) and social trustworthiness (Wang et al. 2015). Besides customized features such
as content and topic (Tang et al. 2009), PageRank (Page
et al. 1999) can be considered as a general algorithm for
ranking users in social networks. PageRank measures the
authority of nodes in the network, which can be used as
a measure for opionion leader mining, and inﬂuence and
trustworthiness analysis (Song et al. 2007; Tang et al. 2009;
Xiang et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2015). However, PageRank
has several limitations in social network analysis. In a network, there could be some important structures that can affect the inﬂuence or trustworthiness of the nodes. For example, when mining opinion leaders in a social network, it
is obvious that an authority node, which many other users
connect to, should be given high inﬂuence score. However,
there could be a node that connects to multiple such authority nodes but itself is not an authority node. For example, in a
social network a journalist could have connections to many
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Equal contribution. This work was done when Xiaogang Xu
was an intern at HKUST.

232

