The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Secure and Automated Enterprise Revenue Forecasting
Jocelyn Barker

Amita Gajewar

Konstantin Golyaev

Microsoft Corp.,
CA, USA.
jocelyn.barker@microsoft.com

Microsoft Corp.,
CA, USA.
amitag@microsoft.com

Microsoft Corp.,
WA, USA.
konstantin.golyaev@microsoft.com

Gagan Bansal ∗

Matt Conners

Google Inc.,
CA, USA.
gagan.bansal@gmail.com

Microsoft Corp.,
WA, USA.
matt.conners@microsoft.com
using a variety of off-the-shelf packages that rely on basic
statistical analysis. In addition to being error prone, the forecasts are biased by human judgment, are time-consuming to
create, and cannot easily incorporate new data streams as
they become available nor easily adapt to changing business
environments.
In this paper, we present our secure and automated revenue forecasting solution developed for Microsoft’s Finance
organization. Our solution generates automated forecasts for
100% of Microsoft revenue across all geographies and products in a few hours, and has implemented security controls needed to protect the high business impact (HBI) data
such as revenue. Owing to the consistent accuracy over the
past few quarters, the machine learning forecasts have been
widely adopted by various Finance teams within Microsoft.
As an overview, we ﬁrst review classical time series models in Section 2. We then propose our machine learning
based modeling framework in Section 3 which extends classical time series models into a generic regression framework
and allows us to easily combine external sources of data
with historical information. We also include details on the
methods we used for tuning of hyperparameters of machine
learning models, selection of best model, and computation
of calibrated conﬁdence intervals. We then provide detail architecture of our automated solution using services from the
Cortana Intelligence Suite (e.g., Azure Data Factory, Azure
Machine Learning, etc.) in Section 4. We built this solution
on Azure since it is a scalable and cost-efﬁcient platform for
building and operationalizing data-intensive advanced analytics workloads. However, since it is a public cloud with
many multi-tenant services, strict controls are required to
ensure the security of sensitive data like revenue. Hence, we
mention the steps taken to meet the corresponding stringent
security standards recommended by our enterprise IT team.
The key contributions of our paper are twofold.

Abstract
Revenue forecasting is required by most enterprises for strategic business planning and for providing expected future results to investors. However, revenue forecasting processes in
most companies are time-consuming and error-prone as they
are performed manually by hundreds of ﬁnancial analysts. In
this paper, we present a novel machine learning based revenue
forecasting solution that we developed to forecast 100% of
Microsoft’s revenue (around $85 Billion in 2016), and is now
deployed into production as an end-to-end automated and
secure pipeline in Azure. Our solution combines historical
trend and seasonal patterns with additional information, e.g.,
sales pipeline data, within a uniﬁed modeling framework. In
this paper, we describe our framework including the features,
method for hyperparameters tuning of ML models using time
series cross-validation, and generation of prediction intervals.
We also describe how we architected an end-to-end secure
and automated revenue forecasting solution on Azure using
Cortana Intelligence Suite. Over consecutive quarters, our
machine learning models have continuously produced forecasts with an average accuracy of 98-99 percent for various
divisions within Microsoft’s Finance organization. As a result, our models have been widely adopted by them and are
now an integral part of Microsoft’s most important forecasting processes, from providing Wall Street guidance to managing global sales performance.

1

Introduction

Revenue forecasting is a key function of any ﬁnance organization in an enterprise. Most companies continuously
need to plan future spending, such as marketing budgets or
employee hiring. Accurate revenue forecasts allow companies to estimate their future spending ability thereby signiﬁcantly improving their strategic business planning. Accurate revenue forecasts also allow companies to provide
a precise view of their ﬁnancials to shareholders and convince investors to fund necessary investments. Despite the
importance of the forecasting process, ﬁnance organizations
in large enterprises face signiﬁcant challenges today as the
amount and availability of relevant data has grown exponentially. Most organizations currently manage their forecasts

1. We propose a machine learning based modeling framework for time series data that uniquely combines external
data sources like macroeconomic factors, sales pipeline
data, social data, product launches with the historical revenue data to generate accurate long range (multi-quarter
or multi-year) forecasts. This gives more visibility to business leaders about their business allowing them to manage

∗

Work was done while author was at Microsoft.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7657

