The Eighth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence 2018 (EAAI-18)

Introducing Ethical Thinking about
Autonomous Vehicles into an AI Course
Heidi Furey

Fred Martin

Manhattan College
Philosophy
Riverdale, NY 10471 USA
hfurey01@manhattan.edu

University of Massachusetts Lowell
Computer Science
Lowell, MA 01854 USA
fred martin@uml.edu
recidivism—thus guiding judges in assignment of the individual’s prison sentence (Angwin et al. 2016). These are
fundamentally hard problems. A related research study assessed several fairness criteria that are used to evaluate these
“recidivism prediction instruments.” The study determined
that “the criteria cannot all be simultaneously satisﬁed when
recidivism prevalence differs across groups” (Chouldechova
2017).
In the ﬁeld of autonomous robotics, self-driving cars have
captured our attention. They have transformed from science
ﬁction to reality in what seems a blink of the eye. Consumer
systems are now in use; e.g., Tesla’s Autopilot is described
as having “full self-driving capability” (Tesla 2017).
Tesla further asserts that Autopilot drives its cars “at a
safety level substantially greater than that of a human driver”
(ibid). Research studies may well demonstrate this claim
to be true, but legal and ethical questions remain. What
happens when autonomous cars make mistakes? If an autonomous vehicle gets into an accident, who is at fault—the
driver or the manufacturer?
Further, to what lengths should an autonomous car go to
protect its passengers? This question is an intriguing twist on
what is known as the “Trolley Problem,” introduced shortly,
which forms the basis for our in-class ethics activities with
our students.1
Goldsmith and Burton (2017) elaborate why it is important to teach our students to reason about the ethical implications of the AI systems we create. As they summarize,
our students must be prepared so that “they make ethical design and implementation choices, ethical career decisions,
and that their software will be programmed to take into account the complexities of acting ethically in the world.”

Abstract
A computer science faculty member and a philosophy faculty member collaborated in the development of a one-week
introduction to ethics which was integrated into a traditional
AI course. The goals were to: (1) encourage students to think
about the moral complexities involved in developing accident
algorithms for autonomous vehicles, (2) identify what issues
need to be addressed in order to develop a satisfactory solution to the moral issues surrounding these algorithms, and
(3) and to offer students an example of how computer scientists and ethicists must work together to solve a complex
technical and moral problems. The course module introduced
Utilitarianism and engaged students in considering the classic “Trolley Problem,” which has gained contemporary relevance with the emergence of autonomous vehicles. Students
used this introduction to ethics in thinking through the implications of their ﬁnal projects. Results from the module indicate that students gained some ﬂuency with Utilitarianism,
including a strong understanding of the Trolley Problem. This
short paper argues for the need of providing students with instruction in ethics in AI course. Given the strong alignment
between AI’s decision-theoretic approaches and Utilitarianism, we highlight the difﬁculty of encouraging AI students to
challenge these assumptions.

The Need for Ethical Reasoning in AI
The last decade has seen growing recognition of the individual and societal impact of human-designed AI and machine learning systems. However unwittingly, these algorithms seem to encode biases that many recognize as unfair.
There are many examples. Face recognition systems fail
to work properly across all racial groups (Garcia 2016). Predictive algorithms determine individuals’ credit ratings, a
hugely consequential judgment, and are typically not open
to inspection (Citron and Pasquale 2014). An analysis of
Google’s personalized “Ad Settings” system revealed that
“setting the gender to female resulted in getting fewer instances of an ad related to high paying jobs” than setting it
to male (Datta, Tschantz, and Datta 2015).
Abuses abound. The newsmagazine ProPublica discovered pernicious racial biases in widely-used, proprietary
software which predicts a criminal offender’s likelihood of

Teaching Ethics in AI
In a 2016 survey, 40% of faculty reported teaching “ethics
and social issues” in their undergraduate AI courses (Wollowski et al.). Compared with other topics in the survey, this
is a strong commitment to this material. However, research
on approaches for engaging students in understanding the
1
The philosopher Philippa Foot described the Trolley Problem
in “The Problem of Abortion and the Doctrine of the Double Effect,” in Virtues and Vices and Other Essays in Moral Philosophy,
1978, which originally appeared in the Oxford Review, No. 5, 1967.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7900

