The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

SEE: Towards Semi-Supervised
End-to-End Scene Text Recognition
Christian Bartz, Haojin Yang, Christoph Meinel
Hasso Plattner Institute, University of Potsdam
Prof.-Dr.-Helmert Straße 2-3
14482 Potsdam, Germany
{christian.bartz, haojin.yang, meinel}@hpi.de
Predicted Bounding Boxes

Abstract
Input Image

Detecting and recognizing text in natural scene images is a
challenging, yet not completely solved task. In recent years
several new systems that try to solve at least one of the
two sub-tasks (text detection and text recognition) have been
proposed. In this paper we present SEE, a step towards
semi-supervised neural networks for scene text detection and
recognition, that can be optimized end-to-end. Most existing
works consist of multiple deep neural networks and several
pre-processing steps. In contrast to this, we propose to use
a single deep neural network, that learns to detect and recognize text from natural images, in a semi-supervised way.
SEE is a network that integrates and jointly learns a spatial
transformer network, which can learn to detect text regions in
an image, and a text recognition network that takes the identiﬁed text regions and recognizes their textual content. We
introduce the idea behind our novel approach and show its
feasibility, by performing a range of experiments on standard
benchmark datasets, where we achieve competitive results.

Detector

Recognizer

"Place"
"Erik"
"Satie"

Figure 1: Schematic overview of our proposed system. The
input image is fed to a single neural network that consists
of a text detection part and a text recognition part. The text
detection part learns to detect text in a semi-supervised way,
by being jointly trained with the recognition part.

The majority of existing research works developed endto-end scene text recognition systems that consist of complex two-step pipelines, where the ﬁrst step is to detect regions of text in an image and the second step is to recognize
the textual content of that identiﬁed region. Most of the existing works only concentrate on one of these two steps.
In this paper, we present a solution that consists of a single Deep Neural Network (DNN) that can learn to detect and
recognize text in a semi-supervised way. In this setting the
network only receives the image and the textual labels as input. We do not supply any groundtruth bounding boxes. The
text detection is learned by the network itself. This is contrary to existing works, where text detection and text recognition systems are trained separately in a fully-supervised
way. Recent work (Dai, He, and Sun 2016) showed that Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are capable of learning how to solve complex multi-task problems, while being
trained in an end-to-end manner. Our motivation is to use
these capabilities of CNNs and create an end-to-end trainable scene text recognition system, that can be trained on
weakly labelled data. In order to create such a system, we
learn a single DNN that is able to ﬁnd single characters,
words or even lines of text in the input image and recognize their content. This is achieved by jointly learning a localization network that uses a recurrent spatial transformer
(Jaderberg et al. 2015b; Sønderby et al. 2015) as attention
mechanism and a text recognition network. Figure 1 provides a schematic overview of our proposed system.
Our contributions are as follows: (1) We present a novel

Introduction
Text is ubiquitous in our daily lives. Text can be found on
documents, road signs, billboards, and other objects like
cars or telephones. Automatically detecting and reading text
from natural scene images is an important part of systems,
that are to be used for several challenging tasks, such as
image-based machine translation, autonomous cars or image/video indexing. In recent years the task of detecting text
and recognizing text in natural scenes has seen much interest from the computer vision and document analysis community. Furthermore, recent breakthroughs (He et al. 2016a;
Jaderberg et al. 2015b; Redmon et al. 2016; Ren et al. 2015)
in other areas of computer vision enabled the creation of
even better scene text detection and recognition systems than
before (Gómez and Karatzas 2017; Gupta, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2016; Shi et al. 2016). Although the problem of Optical Character Recognition (OCR) can be seen as solved
for text in printed documents, it is still challenging to detect
and recognize text in natural scene images. Images containing natural scenes exhibit large variations of illumination,
perspective distortions, image qualities, text fonts, diverse
backgrounds, etc.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6674

