The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Reinforcement Mechanism Design for
Fraudulent Behaviour in E-Commerce∗
Qingpeng Cai

Aris Filos-Ratsikas

IIIS, Tsinghua University, China
cqp14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

University of Oxford, UK
Aris.Filos-Ratsikas@cs.ox.ac.uk

Pingzhong Tang

Yiwei Zhang

IIIS, Tsinghua University, China
kenshinping@gmail.com

UC Berkeley, USA
zhangyiwei1234567@126.com
Most major websites, such as Taobao, Amazon or eBay,
incorporate reputation systems (Jurca and Faltings 2007)
for allocating buyer impressions. Sellers with higher reputations, typically expressed through higher conversion rates
(the number of transactions that a seller can carry out given
one unit of buyer impressions) and higher overall transaction
numbers, will normally be rewarded with higher chances of
showing up in buyers’ recommendation lists. As a result,
sellers with higher reputations are usually rewarded with
more buyer impressions, a process which is implemented
implicitly via the employment of an impression allocation
algorithm. The intention of such reputation schemes is to
bring the most capable sellers forward, ultimately generating more revenue in the long run.
However, knowing that all these allocation algorithms
are heavily based on historical transaction records, sellers
have been known to manipulate the algorithms by faking
the number of transactions using various illicit ways. In fact,
there has even been an emerging underground industry that
provides sophisticated services for the sellers who want to
quickly increase the number of historical transactions. Xu
et al. (2015) refer to such enterprises as seller-reputationescalation (SRE) markets. Attesting to the severity of the
problem are the several lawsuits by Amazon against sellers
that were allegedly using fake reviews to boost their proﬁts,
the most recent of which was against more than 1000 sellers
in 2016 (e.g. see (Techcrunch 2016)).
Detecting such behaviour is usually achieved by a combination of machine learning techniques (Mukherjee et al.
2013; Jindal and Liu 2008; Yoo and Gretzel 2009; Hooi et al.
2016; Schoenebeck, Snook, and Yu 2016), as well as manual
labour, to minimize the number of “false positives”, i.e. the
chances of penalizing honest sellers (Ott et al. 2011). This
is achievable in a smaller scale, but becomes increasingly
more difﬁcult as the number of sellers grows very large.
An alternative approach that has been proposed recently
(Cai et al. 2016) is to use the principles of mechanism design
to prevent such fraudulent behaviour. The idea is to design
the allocation algorithms in a way that does not incentivize
the sellers to resort to illicit means of boosting their reputations. Speciﬁcally, Cai et al. (2016) model the problem
as an instance of truthful resource allocation (Shoham and

Abstract
In large e-commerce websites, sellers have been observed to
engage in fraudulent behaviour, faking historical transactions
in order to receive favourable treatment from the platforms,
speciﬁcally through the allocation of additional buyer impressions which results in higher revenue for them, but not for the
system as a whole. This emergent phenomenon has attracted
considerable attention, with previous approaches focusing on
trying to detect illicit practices and to punish the miscreants.
In this paper, we employ the principles of reinforcement
mechanism design, a framework that combines the fundamental goals of classical mechanism design, i.e. the consideration of agents’ incentives and their alignment with the objectives of the designer, with deep reinforcement learning for
optimizing the performance based on these incentives. In particular, ﬁrst we set up a deep-learning framework for predicting the sellers’ rationality, based on real data from any allocation algorithm. We use data from one of largest e-commerce
platforms worldwide and train a neural network model to predict the extent to which the sellers will engage in fraudulent
behaviour. Using this rationality model, we employ an algorithm based on deep reinforcement learning to optimize the
objectives and compare its performance against several natural heuristics, including the platform’s implementation and
incentive-based mechanisms from the related literature.

Introduction
One of the most fundamental optimization challenges in ecommerce websites is the allocation of impressions to the
sellers who offer their products on the platform. When a user
enters a keyword in the search ﬁeld, a list of sellers with
related products is displayed to the user. But how should one
choose which sellers to be displayed or equivalently, how
should the platform divide millions of user impressions to
sellers with products that match the keyword?
∗
Qingpeng Cai and Pingzhong Tang were supported in part by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China Grant 61303077,
61561146398, a Tsinghua University Initiative Scientiﬁc Research
Grant, a China Youth 1000-talent program and Alibaba Innovative
Research program. Aris Filos-Ratsikas was supported by the ERC
Advanced Grant 321171 (ALGAME).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

957

