The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

AdaFlock: Adaptive Feature Discovery for
Human-in-the-Loop Predictive Modeling
Ryusuke Takahama

Yukino Baba

scouty Inc.∗
r.takahama7591@gmail.com

Kyoto University
baba@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Nobuyuki Shimizu, Sumio Fujita

Hisashi Kashima

Yahoo Japan Corporation
{nobushim, sufujita}@yahoo-corp.jp

Kyoto University; RIKEN Center for AIP
kashima@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract

(a)

Feature engineering is the key to successful application of
machine learning algorithms to real-world data. The discovery of informative features often requires domain knowledge
or human inspiration, and data scientists expend a certain
amount of effort into exploring feature spaces. Crowdsourcing is considered a promising approach for allowing many
people to be involved in feature engineering; however, there
is a demand for a sophisticated strategy that enables us to
acquire good features at a reasonable crowdsourcing cost. In
this paper, we present a novel algorithm called AdaFlock to
efﬁciently obtain informative features through crowdsourcing. AdaFlock is inspired by AdaBoost, which iteratively
trains classiﬁers by increasing the weights of samples misclassiﬁed by previous classiﬁers. AdaFlock iteratively generates informative features; at each iteration of AdaFlock,
crowdsourcing workers are shown samples selected according to the classiﬁcation errors of the current classiﬁers and are
asked to generate new features that are helpful for correctly
classifying the given examples. The results of our experiments conducted using real datasets indicate that AdaFlock
successfully discovers informative features with fewer iterations and achieves high classiﬁcation accuracy.

1

(b)
Feature
Deﬁnition

Samples shown to crowds

Are clouds illustrated in this painting?
Is the ground illustrated in this painting?
Is this painted with bold brushwork?
Is this painting abstract?

Crowd-feature deﬁnitions
Feature
Labeling

Filter

(d)Weak

(c)
0011110001…

classiﬁer
Ensemble
classiﬁer

Update

1101100101…

:0.7
Weights

:0.2

…

0100111010…

:0.4

Crowd-feature labels

Figure 1: Overview of AdaFlock, which iteratively generates informative features by asking crowdsourcing workers
to provide features that are helpful for correctly classifying
the misclassiﬁed examples.

and Jones 2004) or human body detection (Dalal and Triggs
2005).
Although careful feature engineering for a particular task
would be beneﬁcial for improving classiﬁcation performance, the broad exploration of features is quite laborious. The recent expansion of crowdsourcing platforms allows many people to be involved in feature engineering.
Although it is difﬁcult for non-expert crowdsourcing workers to provide correct answers for ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation
tasks, they may have capabilities to determine informative
features for classiﬁcation (Branson et al. 2010).
Recently, a few methods for crowdsourced feature discovery have been proposed. Cheng and Bernstein developed
an interactive platform called Flock (Cheng and Bernstein
2015), which asks crowdsourcing workers to compare paired
examples and describe their differences. The collected descriptions are organized as features, such as “does this painting contain ﬂowers?”; feature labels (i.e., “yes” or “no”) for
each example are then generated using another set of crowdsourcing tasks. The paired examples are randomly chosen
by Flock; however, features may be able to be generated in
a more efﬁcient manner by adaptively selecting the exam-

Introduction

Feature engineering is the key to the successful design of
machine learning classiﬁers for real-world data. The learning of a good predictive model is difﬁcult if we fail to
determine useful features for classiﬁcation. The discovery of informative features often requires domain knowledge or human inspiration. Considerable efforts have been
made in machine learning projects to explore feature spaces.
Researchers in several ﬁelds have attempted to construct
task-speciﬁc features by incorporating heuristics. For instance, in the computer vision area, SIFT (Lowe 2004) and
SURF (Bay, Tuytelaars, and Gool 2006) were designed for
general object recognition tasks, and different features were
proposed for detailed tasks such as face detection (Viola
∗

This work has been done while the ﬁrst author worked at JST,
ERATO, Kawarabayashi Large Graph Project, Grant Number JPMJER1201, Japan
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1619

