The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

EAD: Elastic-Net Attacks to
Deep Neural Networks via Adversarial Examples
Pin-Yu Chen,1∗ Yash Sharma,2∗† Huan Zhang,3† Jinfeng Yi,4‡ Cho-Jui Hsieh,3
1

AI Foundations Lab, IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
2
The Cooper Union, New York, NY 10003, USA
3
University of California, Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA
4
Tencent AI Lab, Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
pin-yu.chen@ibm.com, ysharma1126@gmail.com, ecezhang@ucdavis.edu,
jinfengy@us.ibm.com, chohsieh@ucdavis.edu
Abstract

Recent studies have highlighted the vulnerability of deep neural networks (DNNs) to adversarial examples - a visually
indistinguishable adversarial image can easily be crafted to
cause a well-trained model to misclassify. Existing methods
for crafting adversarial examples are based on L2 and L∞
distortion metrics. However, despite the fact that L1 distortion
accounts for the total variation and encourages sparsity in the
perturbation, little has been developed for crafting L1 -based
adversarial examples.
In this paper, we formulate the process of attacking DNNs via
adversarial examples as an elastic-net regularized optimization
problem. Our elastic-net attacks to DNNs (EAD) feature L1 oriented adversarial examples and include the state-of-the-art
L2 attack as a special case. Experimental results on MNIST,
CIFAR10 and ImageNet show that EAD can yield a distinct set
of adversarial examples with small L1 distortion and attains
similar attack performance to the state-of-the-art methods in
different attack scenarios. More importantly, EAD leads to
improved attack transferability and complements adversarial
training for DNNs, suggesting novel insights on leveraging
L1 distortion in adversarial machine learning and security
implications of DNNs.

(a) Image

(b) Adversarial examples with target class labels

Figure 1: Visual illustration of adversarial examples crafted
by EAD (Algorithm 1). The original example is an ostrich
image selected from the ImageNet dataset (Figure 1 (a)). The
adversarial examples in Figure 1 (b) are classiﬁed as the
target class labels by the Inception-v3 model.

which are classiﬁed as “safe”, “shoe shop” and “vacuum” by
the Inception-v3 model (Szegedy et al. 2016), a state-of-theart image classiﬁcation model.
The lack of robustness exhibited by DNNs to adversarial
examples has raised serious concerns for security-critical
applications, including trafﬁc sign identiﬁcation and malware detection, among others. Moreover, moving beyond
the digital space, researchers have shown that these adversarial examples are still effective in the physical world at
fooling DNNs (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016a;
Evtimov et al. 2017). Due to the robustness and security implications, the means of crafting adversarial examples are called attacks to DNNs. In particular, targeted attacks aim to craft adversarial examples that are misclassiﬁed as speciﬁc target classes, and untargeted attacks aim
to craft adversarial examples that are not classiﬁed as the
original class. Transfer attacks aim to craft adversarial examples that are transferable from one DNN model to another. In addition to evaluating the robustness of DNNs,
adversarial examples can be used to train a robust model
that is resilient to adversarial perturbations, known as adversarial training (Madry et al. 2017). They have also
been used in interpreting DNNs (Koh and Liang 2017;
Dong et al. 2017).
Throughout this paper, we use adversarial examples to
attack image classiﬁers based on deep convolutional neural
networks. The rationale behind crafting effective adversarial
examples lies in manipulating the prediction results while

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) achieve state-of-the-art performance in various tasks in machine learning and artiﬁcial
intelligence, such as image classiﬁcation, speech recognition, machine translation and game-playing. Despite their
effectiveness, recent studies have illustrated the vulnerability of DNNs to adversarial examples (Szegedy et al. 2013;
Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015). For instance, a
carefully designed perturbation to an image can lead a welltrained DNN to misclassify. Even worse, effective adversarial examples can also be made virtually indistinguishable to
human perception. For example, Figure 1 shows three adversarial examples of an ostrich image crafted by our algorithm,
∗

Pin-Yu Chen and Yash Sharma contribute equally to this work.
This work was done during the internship of Yash Sharma and
Huan Zhang at IBM T. J. Watson Research Center.
‡
Part of the work was done when Jinfeng Yi was at AI Foundations Lab, IBM T. J. Watson Research Center.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

10

