The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Contextual Collaborative Filtering for
Student Response Prediction in Mixed-Format Tests
Shumin Jing

Sheng Li

University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52246
shumin-jing@uiowa.edu

Adobe Research
San Jose, CA 95110
sheli@adobe.com

Methodology

Abstract

Item response theory is powerful in characterizing the test
items. For instance, the classical 3PL model uses 3 parameters to quantize the difﬁculty, discrimination, and guessing.
On the other hand, collaborative ﬁltering, especially the matrix factorization based methods, has shown impressive performance in response prediction (Li, Kawale, and Fu 2015).
Motivated by these two techniques, we propose a novel matrix factorization method named contextual collaborative ﬁltering (CCF), by leveraging the characteristics of test items
to boost the response prediction performance.
Let X ∈ RN ×T denote an item response matrix, from N
students to T items. Each row in X corresponds to a student, and each column corresponds to an item. The element
Xij denotes the response from the i-th student to the j-th
test item. X could be very sparse, as we might not know all
the responses from students to test items. In mixed-format
tests, Xij ∈ [0, C], where C is the maximum number of
categories in the response. Matrix factorization is an effective collaborative ﬁltering approach (Koren and Bell 2015),
which decomposes the response matrix X into two latent
factors U and V , i.e., X ≈ U V , U ∈ RN ×K , V ∈ RK×T ,
where K is the dimensionality of latent factors and it’s usually much smaller than N and T . The objective function of
standard matrix factorization is:
arg min f (U, V ) = I  (X − U V T )2F
U,V
(1)
+ λ(U 2F + V 2F ),
where I is an indictor matrix with Iij = 1 if Xij is a valid
value and 0 otherwise,  denotes the Hadamard product
(i.e., element-wise product), and λ is a trade-off parameter.
The ﬁrst term in (1) denotes the approximation errors, and
the last two terms are regularizations used to prevent overﬁtting.
Each row in U is a compact vector, which can be considered as parameters (or features) for characterizing the corresponding student. Similarly, each column in V can be regarded as the parameters for the corresponding item. Thus,
this approach offers more ﬂexibility than IRT, in terms of
modeling the response patterns of students. However, a major limitation of model (1) is that it doesn’t exploit additional
information from the test items. For instance, the test items
could be characterized by a few item parameters, which enables us to model the similarity among all test items. As each

The purpose of this study is to design a machine learning approach to predict the student response in mixed-format tests.
Particularly, a novel contextual collaborative ﬁltering model
is proposed to extract latent factors for students and test items,
by exploiting the item information. Empirical results from a
simulation study validate the effectiveness of the proposed
method.

As large-scale assessment data become available in recent
years, especially in the online education scenario (e.g., massive open online course, MOOC), a scalable approach for
assessing student ability is highly demanded. Traditional approaches like Item Response Theory (IRT) have been widely
applied for estimating student ability (Embretson and Reise
2013), but they still have some limitations. For instance, the
three parameter logistic (3PL) model only utilizes three parameters to characterize each test item, which might be insufﬁcient in large-scale settings. Machine learning, as an interdisciplinary ﬁeld of computer science and statistics, has
achieved impressive performance in many domains. Given
sufﬁcient training data, machine learning approaches optimize the model parameters, and generate predictive results for speciﬁc tasks. As an effective machine learning approach, collaborative ﬁltering can be used to predict the item
response for dichotomous test items (Bergner et al. 2012).
However, to the best of our knowledge, the response prediction for mixed-format tests using machine learning approach has not been investigated before. The primary goal
of this study is to design a machine learning approach for
item response prediction in mixed-format tests, and evaluate
its performance on simulated data. Particularly, the contributions of this work include:
• We design a novel contextual collaborative ﬁltering
(CCF) approach to predict item responses in mixedformat tests. CCF can take advantages of the item characteristics estimated by IRT models.
• We evaluate the model performance with different test
length, sample size, and proportions for item types in
mixed-format tests.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8095

