The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Examining CNN Representations
with Respect to Dataset Bias
†

Quanshi Zhang,† Wenguan Wang,†‡ Song-Chun Zhu†
University of California, Los Angeles

‡

Beijing Institute of Technology

6FRUHRI³ZHDULQJOLSVWLFN´

Abstract

2ULJLQDO



3DVWHG



0DVNHG



2ULJLQDO



3DVWHG



0DVNHG



...

Given a pre-trained CNN without any testing samples, this
paper proposes a simple yet effective method to diagnose feature representations of the CNN. We aim to discover representation ﬂaws caused by potential dataset bias. More specifically, when the CNN is trained to estimate image attributes,
we mine latent relationships between representations of different attributes inside the CNN. Then, we compare the mined
attribute relationships with ground-truth attribute relationships to discover the CNN’s blind spots and failure modes
due to dataset bias. In fact, representation ﬂaws caused by
dataset bias cannot be examined by conventional evaluation
strategies based on testing images, because testing images
may also have a similar bias. Experiments have demonstrated
the effectiveness of our method.

ZHDULQJOLSVWLFN

Figure 1: Biased representations in a CNN. Considering
potential dataset bias, a high accuracy on testing images
cannot always ensure that a CNN learns correct representations. The CNN may use unreliable co-appearing contexts to make predictions. For example, we manually modify mouth appearances of two faces by masking mouth regions or pasting another mouth, but such modiﬁcations do
not signiﬁcantly change prediction scores for the lipstick attribute. We show heat maps of inference patterns of the lipstick attribute, where patterns with red/blue colors are positive/negitive with the attribute score. The CNN mistakenly
considers unrelated patterns as contexts to infer the lipstick.
We propose a method to automatically discover such biased
representations from a CNN without any testing images.

Introduction
Given a convolutional neural network (CNN) that is pretrained to estimate image attributes (or labels), how to diagnose black-box knowledge representations inside the CNN
and discover potential representation ﬂaws is a crucial issue for deep learning. In fact, there is no theoretical solution
to identifying good and problematic representations in the
CNN. Instead, people usually just evaluate a CNN based on
the accuracy obtained using testing samples.
In this study, we focus on representation ﬂaws caused
by potential bias in the collection of training samples (Torralba and Efros 2011). As shown in Fig. 1, if an attribute
usually co-appears with certain visual features in training
samples, then the CNN may be learned to use the coappearing features to represent this attribute. When the used
co-appearing features are not semantically related to the target attribute, we consider these features as biased representations. This idea is related to the disentanglement of the local,
bottom-up, and top-down information components for prediction (Wu, Xia, and Zhu 2007; Yang, Wu, and Zhu 2009;
Wu and Zhu 2011). We need to clarify correct and problematic contexts for prediction. CNN representations may
be biased even when the CNN achieves a high accuracy on
testing samples, because testing samples may have a similar
bias.

In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective method
that automatically diagnoses representations of a pre-trained
CNN without given any testing samples. I.e., we only use
training samples to determine the attributes whose representations are not well learned. We discover blind spots and
failure modes of the representations, which can guide the
collection of new training samples.
Intuition, self-compatibility of network representations: Given a pre-trained CNN and an image I, we use the
CNN to estimate attribute A for I. We also mine inference
patterns1 of the estimation result, which are hidden in conv1

We regard a neural pattern as a group of units in a channel of
a conv-layer’s feature map, which are activated and play a crucial
role in the estimation of the attribute A.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4464

