The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

ROAR: Robust Label Ranking for Social Emotion Mining
Jason (Jiasheng) Zhang, Dongwon Lee
College of Information Sciences and Technology
The Pennsylvania State University, USA
{jpz5181,dlee}@ist.psu.edu

Abstract
Understanding and predicting latent emotions of users toward online contents, known as social emotion mining, has
became increasingly important to both social platforms and
businesses alike. Despite recent developments, however, very
little attention has been made to the issues of nuance, subjectivity, and bias of social emotions. In this paper, we ﬁll this
gap by formulating social emotion mining as a robust label
ranking problem, and propose: (1) a robust measure, named
as G-mean-rank (GMR), which sets a formal criterion consistent with practical intuition; and (2) a simple yet effective
label ranking model, named as ROAR, that is more robust
toward unbalanced datasets (which are common). Through
comprehensive empirical validation using 4 real datasets and
16 benchmark semi-synthetic label ranking datasets, and a
case study, we demonstrate the superiorities of our proposals
over 2 popular label ranking measures and 6 competing label
ranking algorithms. The datasets and implementations used
in the empirical validation are available for access1 .

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Two Washington Post Facebook posts with different emoticon reactions @ www.facebook.com/washingtonpost/
Yang, and Chen 2008; Tang and Chen 2011; Bai et al. 2012;
Lei et al. 2014; Zhu et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2014). On
the one hand, as taken by most present works, predicting
one dominant emoticon as a classiﬁcation problem may fail
to catch the nuance of human emotions. For example, two
posts in Fig. 1 share the same top-2 dominating emoticons,
like and haha, rendering such a classiﬁcation approach be
less useful. On the other hand, the subjectivity makes predicting the exact composition of emotions as a regression
problem to be less useful too. For instance, in Fig. 1(a), reporting the emotion of users as 69/430 haha, 40/430 love
and 1/430 wow conveys little extra information than simply
saying that users feel more haha than love and few wow.
Therefore, to reﬂect the nuance and subjectivity of human
emotions, we propose to formulate social emotion mining
as a label ranking problem, where the emotions of users toward a given post are represented by a ranking among a set
of emotion labels. In this way, for nuance, the number of all
possible emotions becomes d!, as opposed to d in a classiﬁcation framework, where d is the size of emotional label set.
For subjectivity, only relative rather than absolute strength
of different emotional labels is mined.
The label ranking problem asks if one can learn a model
to annotate an instance with a ranking over a ﬁnite set of
predeﬁned labels. Label ranking can be seen as a speciﬁc
type of the preference learning problem (Hüllermeier et al.
2008) in AI. However, in the case of social emotion mining,
some labels may be preferred, causing a skewed distribution
of chosen labels. For example, ordinary Facebook users (i.e.,
posters) tend to post more happy stories and their friends
(i.e., readers) are more willing to give positive feedback

Introduction
It has become increasingly important for businesses to better
understand their users and leverage the learned knowledge
to their advantage. One popular method for such a goal, socalled social emotion mining, is to mine users’ digital footprints to unearth users’ “emotions” toward particular products or services on social platforms. Users’ latent emotions
can be indirectly peeked via various channels–e.g., low star
rating given to an Amazon review, angry comments left to
a YouTube video, upvote to a news story in Reddit, or retwitting a friend’s post. In particular, we note one recentlyintroduced function to social platforms where users may select one emoticon, out of many choices, to more precisely
express their emotions. Facebook introduced this function
in 2016, while Chinese news portal, Sina, supports a similar
function. Two Facebook posts are shown in Fig. 1 as examples. Then, a natural question is whether one can predict the
emotions expressed as emoticons in such a setting.
Most existing research on social emotion mining focuses
on extracting informative features to infer emotions from
data (Jia, Chen, and Yu 2009; Lin and Chen 2008; Lin,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://pike.psu.edu/download/aaai18/

4422

