The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Decomposition Strategies for
Constructive Preference Elicitation
Paolo Dragone∗

Stefano Teso†

University of Trento, Italy
TIM-SKIL, Trento, Italy
paolo.dragone@unitn.it

KU Leuven, Belgium
stefano.teso@cs.kuleuven.be

Mohit Kumar †

Andrea Passerini

KU Leuven, Belgium
mohit.kumar@cs.kuleuven.be

University of Trento, Italy
andrea.passerini@unitn.it
customer’s preferences. Applications include recommending custom PCs or cars, suggesting touristic travel plans,
designing room and building layouts, and producing recipe
modiﬁcations, among others.

Abstract
We tackle the problem of constructive preference elicitation,
that is the problem of learning user preferences over very
large decision problems, involving a combinatorial space of
possible outcomes. In this setting, the suggested conﬁguration is synthesized on-the-ﬂy by solving a constrained optimization problem, while the preferences are learned iteratively by interacting with the user. Previous work has shown
that Coactive Learning is a suitable method for learning user
preferences in constructive scenarios. In Coactive Learning
the user provides feedback to the algorithm in the form of an
improvement to a suggested conﬁguration. When the problem
involves many decision variables and constraints, this type of
interaction poses a signiﬁcant cognitive burden on the user.
We propose a decomposition technique for large preferencebased decision problems relying exclusively on inference and
feedback over partial conﬁgurations. This has the clear advantage of drastically reducing the user cognitive load. Additionally, part-wise inference can be (up to exponentially) less
computationally demanding than inference over full conﬁgurations. We discuss the theoretical implications of working
with parts and present promising empirical results on one synthetic and two realistic constructive problems.

A major weakness of existing CPE methods (Teso,
Passerini, and Viappiani 2016; Teso, Dragone, and Passerini
2017) is that they require the user to provide feedback on
complete conﬁgurations. In real-world constructive problems such as trip planning and layout design, conﬁgurations can be large and complex. When asked to evaluate or
manipulate a complex product, the user may become overwhelmed and confused, compromising the reliability of the
obtained feedback (Mayer and Moreno 2003). Human decision makers can revert to a potentially uninformative prior
when problem solving exceeds their available resources.
This effect was observed in users tasked with solving simple SAT instances (three variables and eight clauses) (Ortega and Stocker 2016). In comparison, even simple constructive problems can involve tens of categorical variables
and features, in addition to hard feasibility constraints. On
the computational side, working with complete conﬁgurations poses scalability problems as well. The reason is that,
in order to select recommendations and queries, constructive
recommenders employ constraint optimization techniques.
Clearly, optimization of complete conﬁgurations in large
constructive problems can become computationally impractical as the problem size increases.

Introduction
In constructive preference elicitation (CPE) the recommender aims at suggesting a custom or novel product to a
customer (Teso, Passerini, and Viappiani 2016). The product is assembled on-the-ﬂy from components or synthesized anew by solving a combinatorial optimization problem. The suggested products should of course satisfy the
customer’s preferences, which however are unobserved and
must be learned interactively (Pigozzi, Tsoukiàs, and Viappiani 2016). Learning proceeds iteratively: the learner
presents one or more candidate recommendations to the customer, and employs the obtained feedback to estimate the

Here we propose to exploit factorized utility functions (Braziunas and Boutilier 2009), which occur very naturally in constructive problems, to work with partial conﬁgurations. In particular, we show how to generalize Coactive
Learning (CL) (Shivaswamy and Joachims 2015) to partwise inference and learning. CL is a simple, theoretically
grounded algorithm for online learning and preference elicitation. It employs a very natural interaction protocol: at
each iteration the user is presented with a single, appropriately chosen candidate conﬁguration and asked to improve
it (even slightly). In (Teso, Dragone, and Passerini 2017), it
was shown that CL can be lifted to constructive problems
by combining it with a constraint optimization solver to efﬁciently select the candidate recommendation. Notably, the
theoretical guarantees of CL remain intact in the construc-

∗
PD is a fellow of TIM-SKIL Trento and is supported by a TIM
scholarship.
†
ST and MK are supported by the ERC Advanced Grant
SYNTH – Synthesising inductive data models.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2934

