The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Customized Nonlinear Bandits for Online
Response Selection in Neural Conversation Models
Bing Liu,∗ Tong Yu,∗ Ian Lane, Ole J. Mengshoel
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University
{liubing, lane}@cmu.edu, tongy1@andrew.cmu.edu, ole.mengshoel@sv.cmu.edu

al. 2016b) and movie conversations (Vinyals and Le 2015;
Li et al. 2016c). Most of the existing work focuses on the ofﬂine supervised dialog model training setting, in which the
models are trained with a large number of context-response
pairs. Online learning methods for neural conversational
models, which are useful in building personalized dialog
systems and transfering systems to new dialog domains, is
not widely studied in literature.
In neural conversational models, response to a dialog
context can either be generated directly by the model or
can be selected from a repository of predeﬁned responses.
Generation-based models have advantages in producing responses that are more diverse. However, they often require
a large number of training samples. Evaluating generationbased systems is also challenging, with recent studies (Liu
et al. 2016) showing that many of the automatic evaluation
methods for response generation are poorly correlated with
human judgement. Retrieval-based models that select a dialog response from a candidate set based on a dialog context can be seen as an intermediate step towards generationbased systems. Response selection is similar to response
generation when the set of candidate responses is very large
(Lowe et al. 2015; 2016). There are well deﬁned automatic
evaluation metrics for response selection models.
In this work, we focus on online learning for retrievalbased conversational models. We propose a neural nonlinear
bandit model (NNBM) that can be trained online for dialog
response selection. Given a dialog context, the model selects
a most likely response from a list of response candidates.
Binary feedback is collected from users indicating whether
or not the selected responses are appropriate. This binary
feedback serves as the reward to the contextual bandits.
Our main contributions in this work are:

Abstract
Dialog response selection is an important step towards natural response generation in conversational agents. Existing
work on neural conversational models mainly focuses on ofﬂine supervised learning using a large set of context-response
pairs. In this paper, we focus on online learning of response
selection in retrieval-based dialog systems. We propose a contextual multi-armed bandit model with a nonlinear reward
function that uses distributed representation of text for online response selection. A bidirectional LSTM is used to produce the distributed representations of dialog context and
responses, which serve as the input to a contextual bandit.
In learning the bandit, we propose a customized Thompson sampling method that is applied to a polynomial feature
space in approximating the reward. Experimental results on
the Ubuntu Dialogue Corpus demonstrate signiﬁcant performance gains of the proposed method over conventional linear contextual bandits. Moreover, we report encouraging response selection performance of the proposed neural bandit
model using the Recall@k metric for a small set of online
training samples.

Introduction
Conversational agents, or chatbots, have a wide range of
applications such as in technical support, personalized service, and entertainment (Young et al. 2013; Serban et al.
2016). Conventional approaches in conversational modeling
include using rule-based and learning-based methods (Oh
and Rudnicky 2000; Schatzmann et al. 2006) that typically
require expert knowledge in designing rules and features.
Such systems are usually designed to model dialogs in a speciﬁc domain. Transferring such models from one domain to
another is often difﬁcult.
With the explosive growth of conversational data in social media, neural network based data-driven approaches
(Shang, Lu, and Li 2015; Vinyals and Le 2015) to conversational modeling have been explored. These models are
trained based on large dialog corpora, making few assumptions about dialog domain or structures. They are suitable in
modeling non-task-oriented conversations, and have shown
promising performance in modeling social media chats (Ritter, Cherry, and Dolan 2011; Shang, Lu, and Li 2015; Li et

• We design a contextual bandit model, NNBM, that has a
nonlinear reward function applied on selected dimensions
of a polynomial feature space. The proposed method signiﬁcantly outperforms contextual bandits with linear rewards that are widely used in online recommendations.
• We apply neural contextual multi-armed bandits to online
learning of response selection in retrieval-based dialog
models. To our best knowledge, this is the ﬁrst attempt at
combining neural network methods and contextual multiarmed bandits in this setting.

∗

These two authors contributed equally.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5245

