The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Twitter Summarization Based
on Social Network and Sparse Reconstruction ∗
Ruifang He, Xingyi Duan
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cognitive Computing and Application, Tianjin 300350, China
{rfhe,xingyiduan}@tju.edu.cn

tion and aid agencies monitor crisis progress so as to assist
recovery and provide disaster relief.
Despite document summarization has been researched for
many years, it is still a knotty problem due to the large
scale short, noisy and informal nature of messages in social media, such as tweets. Existing Twitter summarization approaches usually regard tweets as sentences, and
adopt traditional summarization methods (Inouye and Kalita
2011), such as SumBasic (Vanderwende et al. 2007), Centroid (Radev, Blair-Goldensohn, and Zhang 2001), LexRank
(Erkan and Radev 2004) and TextRank (Mihalcea and Tarau
2004) to validate the relevant performance on microblogging posts. However, it is not clear whether adding the complexity of methods will improve the performance of Twitter
summarization. Some other researches (Chang et al. 2016;
Liu et al. 2012) explore to utilize static social features except for textual content, such as number of replies, number
of retweets, number of likes, author popularity (i.e. number
of followers for a given tweet’s author) and temporal signals.
All the above methods ignore the fact that Twitter data
is networked. There exist some researches (Chang et al.
2013; Duan et al. 2012) exploiting social network information. These approaches mainly consider network information from the user-level perspective, assuming that high authority users are more likely to post salient tweets. However,
tweets are also potentially networked through user connections. Different from traditional methods, which obtain associated tweet information through measuring similarity between tweets purely based on content information, the networked tweets may contain more semantic clues than purely
text-based methods. So we need to explore a new method for
modeling the tweet-level networked information.
The social theories indicate the reciprocal inﬂuence of
networked information. People themselves are more likely
to keep the same sentiment (Hu et al. 2013), preference
(Wang et al. 2015) on a speciﬁc topic in a short period, and
this phenomenon is called expression consistency. Moreover, relationship between people is established through a
series of interactions and feedbacks. The inﬂuence is subtle
and can make a great impact on ones’ preference, speaking
manner or even expression content. Thus people gradually
have similar viewpoints about a topic with their friends and
show them with almost the similar tone and words, which
is regarded as expression contagion. Inspired by these two

Abstract
With the rapid growth of microblogging services, such as
Twitter, a vast of short and noisy messages are produced by
millions of users, which makes people difﬁcult to quickly
grasp essential information of their interested topics. In this
paper, we study extractive topic-oriented Twitter summarization as a solution to address this problem. Traditional summarization methods only consider text information, which is
insufﬁcient in social media situation. Existing Twitter summarization techniques rarely explore relations between tweets
explicitly, ignoring that information can spread along the
social network. Inspired by social theories that expression
consistence and expression contagion are observed in social network, we propose a novel approach for Twitter summarization in short and noisy situation by integrating Social Network and Sparse Reconstruction (SNSR). We explore whether social relations can help Twitter summarization, modeling relations between tweets described as the social regularization and integrating it into the group sparse
optimization framework. It conducts a sparse reconstruction
process by selecting tweets that can best reconstruct the original tweets in a speciﬁc topic, with considering coverage and
sparsity. We simultaneously design the diversity regularization to remove redundancy. In particular, we present a mathematical optimization formulation and develop an efﬁcient algorithm to solve it. Due to the lack of public corpus, we construct the gold standard twitter summary datasets for 12 different topics. Experimental results on this datasets show the
effectiveness of our framework for handling the large scale
short and noisy messages in social media.

Introduction
Twitter has become one of the most popular social network
platforms, through which amounts of users can freely produce content (called tweets) on their interested topics. However, the rapid growth of tweets makes it difﬁcult for people
to quickly grasp essential information. Twitter summarization aims to generate a succinct summary delivering the core
information from a sheer volume of tweets in a given topic.
It can be used to help ordinary people fastly acquire informa∗

This work is supported by NSFC (61472277) and partly supported by National Program on Key Basic Research Project (973
Program, 2013CB329301) and NSFC (61772361).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5787

