The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Optimised Maintenance of
Datalog Materialisations
Pan Hu, Boris Motik, Ian Horrocks
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom
ﬁrstname.lastname@cs.ox.ac.uk

expensive. Systems thus typically use an incremental maintenance algorithm, which aims to avoid repeating most of
the work. Fact insertion can be effectively handled using
the seminaı̈ve algorithm (Abiteboul, Hull, and Vianu 1995),
but deletion is much more involved since one has to check
whether deleted facts have derivations that persist after the
update. The Delete/Rederive (DRed) algorithm (Gupta, Mumick, and Subrahmanian 1993; Staudt and Jarke 1996), the
Backward/Forward (B/F) algorithm (Motik et al. 2015), and
the Counting algorithm (Gupta, Mumick, and Subrahmanian
1993) are well-known solutions to this problem.
The DRed algorithm handles deletion by ﬁrst overdeleting all facts that depend on the removed explicit facts,
and then rederiving the facts that still hold after overdeletion. The rederivation stage further involves rederiving all
overdeleted facts that have alternative derivations, and then
recomputing the consequences of the rederived facts until a ﬁxpoint is reached. The algorithm and its variants
have been extensively used in practice (Urbani et al. 2013;
Ren and Pan 2011). In contrast to DRed, the B/F algorithm
searches for alternative derivations immediately (rather than
after overdeletion) using a combination of backward and forward chaining. This makes deletion exact and avoids the potential inefﬁciency of overdeletion. In practice, B/F often,
but not always, outperforms DRed (Motik et al. 2015).
Both DRed and B/F search for derivations of deleted facts
by evaluating rules ‘backwards’: for each rule whose head
matches the fact being deleted, they evaluate the partially instantiated rule body as a query; each query answer thus corresponds to a derivation. This has two consequences. First,
one can examine rule instances that ﬁre both before and after the update, which is redundant. Second, evaluating rules
‘backwards’ can be inherently more difﬁcult than matching the rules during initial materialisation: our experiments
show that this step can, in some cases, prevent effective materialisation maintenance even for very small updates.
In contrast, the Counting algorithm (Gupta, Mumick, and
Subrahmanian 1993) does not evaluate rules ‘backwards’,
but instead tracks the number of distinct derivations of each
fact: a counter is incremented when a new derivation for the
fact is found, and it is decremented when a derivation no
longer holds. A fact can thus be deleted when its counter
drops to zero, without the potentially costly ‘backward’ rule
evaluation. The algorithm can also be made optimal in the

Abstract
To efﬁciently answer queries, datalog systems often materialise all consequences of a datalog program, so the materialisation must be updated whenever the input facts change.
Several solutions to the materialisation update problem have
been proposed. The Delete/Rederive (DRed) and the Backward/Forward (B/F) algorithms solve this problem for general datalog, but both contain steps that evaluate rules ‘backwards’ by matching their heads to a fact and evaluating the
partially instantiated rule bodies as queries. We show that
this can be a considerable source of overhead even on very
small updates. In contrast, the Counting algorithm does not
evaluate the rules ‘backwards’, but it can handle only nonrecursive rules. We present two hybrid approaches that combine DRed and B/F with Counting so as to reduce or even
eliminate ‘backward’ rule evaluation while still handling arbitrary datalog programs. We show empirically that our hybrid algorithms are usually signiﬁcantly faster than existing
approaches, sometimes by orders of magnitude.

1

Introduction

Datalog (Abiteboul, Hull, and Vianu 1995) is a rule language that is widely used in modern information systems.
Datalog rules can declaratively specify tasks in data analysis applications (Luteberget, Johansen, and Steffen 2016;
Piro et al. 2016), allowing application developers to focus on the objective of the analysis—that is, on specifying
what needs to be computed rather than how to compute it
(Markl 2014). Datalog can also capture OWL 2 RL (Motik
et al. 2009) ontologies possibly extended with SWRL rules
(Horrocks et al. 2004). It is implemented in systems such
as WebPIE (Urbani et al. 2012), VLog (Urbani, Jacobs,
and Krötzsch 2016), Oracle’s RDF Store (Wu et al. 2008),
OWLIM (Bishop et al. 2011), and RDFox (Nenov et al.
2015), and it is extensively used in practice.
When performance is critical, datalog systems usually
precompute the materialisation (i.e., the set of all consequences of a program and the explicit facts) in a preprocessing step so that all queries can later be evaluated directly over the materialisation. Recomputing the materialisation from scratch whenever the explicit facts change can be
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1871

