The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multi-Channel Encoder for Neural Machine Translation
Hao Xiong, Zhongjun He, Xiaoguang Hu, Hua Wu
Baidu Inc. No. 10, Shangdi 10th Street, Beijing, 100085, China
{xionghao05, hezhongjun, huxiaoguang, wu hua} @baidu.com

vectors from the RNN, which can be roughly interpreted as
context-aware embedding of the words in the source sentence. With this design, the encoder learns relatively uniform
composition of the sentence, despite the RNN in the encoder
are already equipped with some advanced gating mechanism, such as long short term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber 1997) network and gated recurrent unit
(GRU) (Cho et al. 2014). For translation, it is common that
we hope the decoder to take pieces of source sentence at
varying composition levels suiting its own linguistic structure. This need can be illustrated through the following two
examples

Abstract
Attention-based Encoder-Decoder has the effective architecture for neural machine translation (NMT), which typically
relies on recurrent neural networks (RNN) to build the blocks
that will be lately called by attentive reader during the decoding process. This design of encoder yields relatively uniform
composition on source sentence, despite the gating mechanism employed in encoding RNN. On the other hand, we often hope the decoder to take pieces of source sentence at varying levels suiting its own linguistic structure: for example, we
may want to take the entity name in its raw form while taking an idiom as a perfectly composed unit. Motivated by this
demand, we propose Multi-channel Encoder (MCE), which
enhances encoding components with different levels of composition. More speciﬁcally, in addition to the hidden state
of encoding RNN, MCE takes 1) the original word embedding for raw encoding with no composition, and 2) a particular design of external memory in Neural Turing Machine
(NTM) for more complex composition, while all three encoding strategies are properly blended during decoding. Empirical study on Chinese-English translation shows that our
model can improve by 6.52 BLEU points upon a strong open
source NMT system: DL4MT1 . On the WMT14 EnglishFrench task, our single shallow system achieves BLEU=38.8,
comparable with the state-of-the-art deep models.

• we may want to take the entity name in the source in its
raw form while taking an idiom as a densely composed
unit;
• when we translating the substantive, we may again want
to know the surrounding words of the noun and then determine its singular or plural forms.
Motivated by this demand, we propose Multi-channel Encoder (MCE), which takes encoding components with different levels of composition. More speciﬁcally, in addition
to the hidden state of encoding RNN, MCE takes the original word embedding for raw encoding with no composition, and a particular design of external memory in NTM
(Graves, Wayne, and Danihelka 2014) for more complex
composition, in a way analogous to visual channels with different frequency. All three encoding strategies are properly
blended during decoding controlled by parameters can be
learned in an end-to-end fashion. More speciﬁcally, we design a gate that can automatically tunes the weights of different encoding channels.
In this paper, we also empirically investigate MCE on
different translation tasks. We ﬁrst test our models on the
NIST Chinese-English machine translation tasks, achieving an average improvement by 6.52 BLEU over the
strong DL4MT system. Furthermore, experiments on the
WMT2014 English-French machine translation task show
that our single shallow model obtains a BLEU score of 38.8,
which is comparable to the state-of-the-art models.
The reminder of this paper is organized as follows: in the
next section, we will brieﬂy introduce the basics of conventional attention-based NMT. After that, we will present
MCE in more details. After that, we will report extensive ex-

Introduction
Attention-based neural machine translation has arguably
the most effective architecture for neural machine translation (NMT), outperforming conventional statistical machine
translation (SMT) systems on many language pairs (Sennrich et al. 2017). The superiority of attention-based model
over canonical encoder-decoder model (Sutskever, Vinyals,
and Le 2014) lies in the fact that it can dynamically retrieve
relevant pieces of the source (much isomorphic to alignment
in SMT) through a relatively simple matching function. In
other words, attention-based model beneﬁts from a richer
representation of source sentence with its ﬂexibility representing local structure.
In a typical attention-based NMT system, a bidirectional
recurrent neural networks (biRNN) (Schuster and Paliwal
1997) is used to encode the source, yielding a sequence of
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/nyu-dl/dl4mt-tutorial

4962

