The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Selective Experience Replay for Lifelong Learning
David Isele

Akansel Cosgun

The University of Pennsylvania
and Honda Research Institute
isele@seas.upenn.edu

Honda Research Institute
akansel.cosgun@gmail.com

what has been termed catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey
and Cohen 1989; Ratcliff 1990; Goodfellow et al. 2013).
We focus on deep reinforcement learning where the effects of catastrophic forgetting are even more pronounced.
In deep reinforcement learning, experiences are typically
stored in a ﬁrst-in-ﬁrst-out (FIFO) replay buffer. A network
may experience forgetting on a single task if rarely occurring events fall out of the buffer (Lipton et al. 2016) or if
the network converges to behavior that does not consistently
visit the state space (de Bruin et al. 2015). This can be mitigated by having a replay buffer with limitless capacity or, if
the task boundaries are known a priori, by maintaining separate buffers for each task. However, as the number of tasks
grows large, storing all experiences of all tasks becomes prohibitively expensive, and ultimately infeasible for lifelong
learning.
In this paper, we develop a process for accumulating experiences online that enables their long term retention given
limited memory. We treat preserving prior ability as an active process where replay of prior tasks are incorporated into
the current learning process. In order to efﬁciently store prior
experiences, we propose a rank-based method for the online
collection and preservation of a limited set of training examples to reduce the effects of forgetting. We then explore
four different selection strategies to identify a good ranking
function for selecting the experiences. To validate the selection process, we apply each strategy to an autonomous driving domain where different tasks correspond to navigating
different unsigned intersections. This domain has recently
been analyzed as a multi-task setting that both beneﬁts from
transfer and allows for the speciﬁcation of a large variety
of tasks (Isele and Cosgun 2017). We additionally show our
results generalize with further testing in a grid world navigation task, and lifelong variant of the MNIST classiﬁcation
problem. In this work, we make the following contributions:

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning has emerged as a powerful tool
for a variety of learning tasks, however deep nets typically exhibit forgetting when learning multiple tasks in sequence. To
mitigate forgetting, we propose an experience replay process
that augments the standard FIFO buffer and selectively stores
experiences in a long-term memory. We explore four strategies for selecting which experiences will be stored: favoring
surprise, favoring reward, matching the global training distribution, and maximizing coverage of the state space. We show
that distribution matching successfully prevents catastrophic
forgetting, and is consistently the best approach on all domains tested. While distribution matching has better and more
consistent performance, we identify one case in which coverage maximization is beneﬁcial - when tasks that receive less
trained are more important. Overall, our results show that selective experience replay, when suitable selection algorithms
are employed, can prevent catastrophic forgetting.

1

Introduction

Lifelong machine learning (Thrun 1996) examines learning
multiple tasks in sequence, with an emphasis on how previous knowledge of different tasks can be used to improve
the training time and learning of current tasks. The hope is
that, if sequential learning can be repeated indeﬁnitely, then
a system can continue to learn over the course of its lifetime.
A continual learning agent is thought to be an important step
toward general artiﬁcial intelligence.
Recent advances in deep learning continue to motivate research into neural networks that can learn multiple tasks.
Some approaches include training separate networks for
each task (Rusu et al. 2016; Yin and Pan 2017) and discovering action hierarchies (Tessler et al. 2016), but these methods become inefﬁcient when scaling to multiple tasks. Efﬁciently retaining knowledge for every task over the course
of a system’s lifetime is a core difﬁculty in implementing a
such a network. When learning multiple tasks in sequence,
each new task changes the distribution of experiences, the
optima move, and a large set of states are no longer visited.
As a result of the non-stationary training distribution, the
network loses its ability to perform well in previous tasks in

• We propose a selective experience replay process to augment the FIFO replay buffer to prevent catastrophic forgetting.
• We present and compare four selection strategies for preserving experiences over the course of a system’s lifetime.
• We analyze the trade-offs between the two most successful selection strategies: distribution matching and coverage maximization.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3302

