The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning User Preferences to Incentivize
Exploration in the Sharing Economy
Christoph Hirnschall

Adish Singla

Sebastian Tschiatschek

Andreas Krause

ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
chirnsch@gmail.com

MPI-SWS
Saarbrücken, Germany
adishs@mpi-sws.org

Microsoft Research*
Cambridge, United Kingdom
setschia@microsoft.com

ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
krausea@ethz.ch

Such dynamics create a need for platforms in the sharing economy to actively engage users to shape demand and
improve efﬁciency. Several previous papers have proposed
the idea of using monetary incentives to encourage desirable behavior in such systems. One example is (Frazier et al.
2014), who studied the problem in a multi-armed bandit setting, where a principal (e.g. a marketplace) attempts to maximize utility by incentivizing agents to explore arms other
than the myopically preferred one. In their setting, the optimal amount is known to the system, and the main goal is to
quantify the required payments to achieve an optimal policy
with myopic agents. The idea of shaping demand through
monetary incentives in the sharing economy has also been
tested in practice. For example, (Singla et al. 2015) use monetary incentives to encourage users of bike sharing systems
to return bikes at beneﬁcial locations, making automatic offers through the bike sharing app.
In this context, an important question is what amounts a
platform should offer to maximize its utility. (Singla et al.
2015) introduce a simple protocol for learning optimal incentives in the bike sharing system to make users switch
from the preferred station to a more beneﬁcial one, ignoring information about speciﬁc switches and additional context. Extending on these ideas, we explore a general online
learning protocol for efﬁciently learning optimal incentives.

Abstract
We study platforms in the sharing economy and discuss the
need for incentivizing users to explore options that otherwise
would not be chosen. For instance, rental platforms such as
Airbnb typically rely on customer reviews to provide users
with relevant information about different options. Yet, often a
large fraction of options does not have any reviews available.
Such options are frequently neglected as viable choices, and
in turn are unlikely to be evaluated, creating a vicious cycle.
Platforms can engage users to deviate from their preferred
choice by offering monetary incentives for choosing a different option instead. To efﬁciently learn the optimal incentives
to offer, we consider structural information in user preferences and introduce a novel algorithm - Coordinated Online
Learning (CoOL) - for learning with structural information
modeled as convex constraints. We provide formal guarantees on the performance of our algorithm and test the viability of our approach in a user study with data of apartments on
Airbnb. Our ﬁndings suggest that our approach is well-suited
to learn appropriate incentives and increase exploration on the
investigated platform.

Introduction
In recent years, numerous sharing economy platforms with
a variety of goods and services have emerged. These platforms are shaped by users that primarily act in their own
interest to maximize their utility. However, such behavior
might interfere with the usefulness of the platforms. For example, users of mobility sharing systems typically prefer to
drop off rentals at the location in closest proximity, while a
more balanced distribution would allow the mobility sharing
service to operate more efﬁciently.
Undesirable user behavior in the sharing economy is in
many cases even self-reinforcing. For example, users in the
apartment rental marketplace Airbnb are less likely to select
infrequently reviewed apartments and are therefore unlikely
to provide reviews for these apartments (Fradkin 2014). This
is also reﬂected in the distribution of reviews, where in many
cities 20% of apartments account for more than 80% of customer reviews1 .

Our Contributions
We provide the following main contributions in this paper:
• Structural information: We consider structural information in user preferences to speed up learning of incentives, and provide a general framework to model structure
across tasks via convex constraints. Our algorithm, Coordinated Online Learning (CoOL) is also of interest for
related multi-task learning problems.
• Computational efﬁciency: We introduce two novel ideas
of sporadic and approximate projections to increase the
computational efﬁciency of our algorithm. We derive formal guarantees on the performance of the CoOL algorithm and achieve no-regret bounds in this setting.
• User study on Airbnb: We collect a unique data set
through a user study with apartments on Airbnb and test
the viability and beneﬁt of the CoOL algorithm on this
dataset.

* Work performed while at ETH Zurich.
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Data from insideairbnb.com.

2248

