The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Towards Ultra-High Performance and Energy Efﬁciency of Deep Learning
Systems: An Algorithm-Hardware Co-Optimization Framework
Yanzhi Wang,1 Caiwen Ding,1 Zhe Li,1 Geng Yuan,1 Siyu Liao,2
Xiaolong Ma,1 Bo Yuan,2 Xuehai Qian,3 Jian Tang,1 Qinru Qiu,1 Xue Lin4
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, City University of New York, New York, NY 10031
3
Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089
4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115
in industry and academia (Farabet et al.,Suda et al.,Qiu et al.,
Zhang et al.,Zhang et al.,Han et al.,Zhao et al.,Zhang and Li,
Umuroglu et al.,com,com,Chen et al.,Han et al.,Chen et al.).
As a representative technique, FPGA-based accelerators can
offer the advantages of programmability, high degree of parallelism and short development cycle. Important progresses
have been reported on FPGA accelerations of original DNNs
(Farabet et al., Suda et al., Zhang et al., Zhang et al.), binary
neural networks (Zhao et al., Umuroglu et al.), and more recently, on DNNs and recurrent neural networks (RNNs) with
model compression techniques (Qiu et al., Han et al.). These
prior work mainly focus on the inference phase of DNNs,
and suffer from frequent access to off-chip memory systems
because the limited on-chip memory can hardly accommodate the large model sizes. Accessing off-chip memory is
highly energy inefﬁcient. As pointed out in (Han et al., Han,
Mao, and Dally), the per-bit access energy of off-chip memory is 200X compared with on-chip memory storage, and
dominates the whole system power consumptions. Besides,
it is also desirable to achieve algorithmic-level accelerations
to accommodate the further scaling of DNNs, instead of simply adding more and more hardware devices.

Abstract
Hardware accelerations of deep learning systems have been
extensively investigated in industry and academia. The aim
of this paper is to achieve ultra-high energy efﬁciency and
performance for hardware implementations of deep neural
networks (DNNs). An algorithm-hardware co-optimization
framework is developed, which is applicable to different
DNN types, sizes, and application scenarios. The algorithm
part adopts the general block-circulant matrices to achieve
a ﬁne-grained tradeoff of accuracy and compression ratio.
It applies to both fully-connected and convolutional layers
and contains a mathematically rigorous proof of the effectiveness of the method. The proposed algorithm reduces computational complexity per layer from O(n2 ) to O(n log n)
and storage complexity from O(n2 ) to O(n), both for training and inference. The hardware part consists of highly efﬁcient Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA)-based implementations using effective reconﬁguration, batch processing,
deep pipelining, resource re-using, and hierarchical control.
Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed framework achieves at least 152X speedup and 71X energy efﬁciency gain compared with IBM TrueNorth processor under
the same test accuracy. It achieves at least 31X energy efﬁciency gain compared with the reference FPGA-based work.

The second important trend is the model size compression
and algorithmic-level acceleration of DNNs (with very minor accuracy loss), including weight quantization (Lin, Talathi, and Annapureddy, Lin et al.), sparsity regularization
(Feng and Darrell, Wen et al., Li, Park, and Tang), connection pruning (Han et al.,Han, Mao, and Dally), and low rank
approximation (Denil et al.,Denton et al.). These approaches
can offer a reasonable amount of parameter reduction (e.g.,
by 9× to 13× in (Han et al., Han, Mao, and Dally)) and/or a
reasonable speedup (e.g., around 50% to 2× in (Wen et al.)).
However, they suffer from the following limitations: (i) the
sparsity regularization and pruning methods will likely result in an irregular and sparse network structure, thereby undermining the compression ratio and increasing computation
time (especially inefﬁcient on GPUs and dedicated hardware
which has high parallelism capability); (ii) the training complexity will be increased by incorporating additional pruning
process (Han et al., Han, Mao, and Dally), additional low
rank approximation step (Denil et al., Denton et al.), or extra trade-off parameters (Wen et al.); (iii) the compression
or acceleration factors are heuristic numbers that cannot be
precisely controlled, not to mention a mathematically rigor-

Introduction
The recent deep neural networks (DNNs), especially deep
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), have been able to
deliver remarkable success in visual and recognition tasks
(Deng et al.,Taigman et al.) and real-world applications (Huval et al., Collobert and Weston, Burbidge et al.), by leveraging large-scale neural network sizes and learning from a
huge volume of data. Despite the advantage of improved
overall accuracy, the deep layered structure and large model
sizes increase the computational complexity and memory
requirements. It is projected that the majority of inference
tasks will be performed on embedded, IoT and mobile systems which are with limited power and computational resources. In order to achieve higher scalability, performance,
and energy efﬁciency, two orthogonal research and development trends have both attracted enormous interests.
The ﬁrst is hardware accelerations of deep learning systems/applications, which have been extensively investigated
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4235

