The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Effective Broad-Coverage Deep Parsing
James F. Allen, Omid Bahkshandeh, William de Beaumont, Lucian Galescu, Choh Man Teng
IHMC, 40 S. Alcaniz St, Pensacola, FL 32501
{jallen, omidb, wbeaumont, lgalescu, cmteng}@ihmc.us,

that evoke FrameNet (Johnson and Fillmore, 2000) frames,
and identify the word sequences that act as arguments to
the identified frame elements, which is by no means a detailed enough representation to support significant reasoning or inference. On the other hand, semantic parsers that
are trained to produce AMR representations (Banarescu et
al, 2013) produce a richer semantic representation that
identifies the full predicate argument structures in the sentence. However, AMR representations typically only assign word senses to the words denoting events, tagging
them with senses from PropBank (Palmer et al, 2005). The
rest of the sentence, including most nouns, adjectives and
adverbs remain as lexical items not tagged with senses.
Deep semantic parsers can be found for some specific
domains, where the parser learns to map language input
into an executable meaning representation. Many of these
involve generating queries to databases (Branavan et al,
2010; Chen et al, 2011, 2013; Berant et al, 2013, Zhong et
al, 2017; Pasupat, 2015) or generating a sequence of commands to a robot (Matuszek, et al, 2012; Tellex et al,
2013). The representations produced, however, are highly
specific to the domain and are not transferable to other
domains. Because of the high domain specificity, limited
inventory of word senses, and relatively simple sentences,
they do not hit significant search issues when parsing.
Unlike the previous work, the goal of the TRIPS parser
(Allen & Teng, 2017) is to produce a semantic parser that
is 1) broad-coverage, 2) domain-generic, and 3) deep1. We
define broad-coverage to mean that the parser produces a
semantic representation for any given English sentence.
Domain-generic means the parser is usable for input text or
ASR output in any domain, and deep means that it generates a representation of the meaning of the sentence that

Abstract
Current semantic parsers either compute shallow representations over a wide range of input, or deeper representations
in very limited domains. We describe a system that provides
broad-coverage, deep semantic parsing designed to work in
any domain using a core domain-general lexicon, ontology
and grammar. This paper discusses how this core system
can be customized for a particularly challenging domain,
namely reading research papers in biology. We evaluate
these customizations with some ablation experiments.

Introduction: Broad, Deep Semantic Parsing
Representing the underlying meaning of language has been
of interest to computational linguistics for a long time.
Recently there has been a renewed interest in developing
effective parsers that can generate deep semantic representations. This endeavor is complicated by the fact that the
search space for semantic parsers is far greater than that for
syntactic parsers. Specifically, context-free syntactic
parsers can take advantage of the fact that one only needs
to consider a single constituent of any syntactic type (e.g.,
NP, S) between any two positions in the sentence. This
property enables effective parsing algorithms such as the
Earley algorithm (Earley, 1970) and various Chart-based
parsing strategies. Semantic parsers, on the other hand,
cannot make this assumption. A single noun phrase might
have many different semantic meanings due to word sense
ambiguity as well as attachment ambiguity within the noun
phrase. Thus a key problem for semantic parsers is how to
manage this larger search space.
Researchers have dealt with this problem in different
ways by limiting the scope and/or depth of the representations produced. Broad-coverage semantic dependency
parsers such as those developed and tested in SemEval
series (Oepen et al., 2014) generate a shallow and partial
semantic representation. Some other semantic parsing
aproaches such as Das (2014), essentially tag the words

1

Currently, the TRIPS parser, using the same grammar, lexicon and ontology, is in active use in many domains, including the following: reading
research papers in biology to extract information about causal models of
biological pathways (Allen et al, 2015); understanding text-based conversation with teens about managing asthma (Rhee et al, 2014); understanding human/system dialog to collaboratively plan and build structures in a
physical blocks world (Perera et al, 2017); understanding dialog about
music for collaborative music composition (Quick & Morrison, 2017).

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4776

