The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Kernel Cross-Correlator
1

Chen Wang,1 Le Zhang,2 Lihua Xie,1 Junsong Yuan1
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Advanced Digital Sciences Center, Singapore
wang.chen@zoho.com, zhang.le@adsc.com.sg, {elhxie, jsyuan}@ntu.edu.sg

changes of the input can be estimated by viewing the corresponding movement of the maixmum output. The estimation
for other transformations are usually achieved by combining
multiple CFs with different input transforms, e.g. the scale
ﬁlters in (Danelljan et al. 2017). Second, KCF extends CF
to non-linear case but is only applicable for training data
with circulant structure (each sample is circular translation
of others) and non-weighted kernel functions, which limit
its usage in other applications where those assumptions turn
out to be invalid (Henriques, Caseiro, and Martins 2015). To
address these problems, a kernel cross-correlator (KCC) is
proposed. In summary, the main contributions are:

Abstract
Cross-correlator plays a signiﬁcant role in many visual perception tasks, such as object detection and tracking. Beyond
the linear cross-correlator, this paper proposes a kernel crosscorrelator (KCC) that breaks traditional limitations. First, by
introducing the kernel trick, the KCC extends the linear crosscorrelation to non-linear space, which is more robust to signal
noises and distortions. Second, the connection to the existing works shows that KCC provides a uniﬁed solution for
correlation ﬁlters. Third, KCC is applicable to any kernel
function and is not limited to circulant structure on training
data, thus it is able to predict afﬁne transformations with customized properties. Last, by leveraging the fast Fourier transform (FFT), KCC eliminates direct calculation of kernel vectors, thus achieves better performance yet still with a reasonable computational cost. Comprehensive experiments on
visual tracking and human activity recognition using wearable devices demonstrate its robustness, ﬂexibility, and efﬁciency. The source codes of both experiments are released at
https://github.com/wang-chen/KCC.

• By introducing the kernel trick, the KCC extends the
cross-correlation to non-linear space, which is more robust to signal noises and distortions;
• Compared to KCF, KCC can be applied to any data structure using any kernel functions, hence its properties are
customizable and can be used to predict any afﬁne transformations, especially the rotation, scale, and translation;
• KCC generalizes the existing CFs and provides uniﬁed solutions, which improves the performance of visual tracking while still keeps efﬁciency;

Introduction
Cross-correlator (CC) or correlation ﬁlter (CF) usually refers
to the function or device to compute cross-correlation for
signals. It has been widely used in many visual perception
tasks such as object detection, recognition, and tracking.
The recent extensions in visual tracking, which are usually
named as correlation ﬁlters, e.g., minimum output sum of
squared error (MOSSE) (Bolme et al. 2010), rekindle the interest of real-time applications due to their robust translation
prediction. One of the main advantages of CF is its efﬁcient
calculation with a complexity of O(n log n) in Fourier domain versus O(n3 ) in spatial domain, where n is the length
of a signal. The kernelized correlation ﬁlter (KCF) extends
MOSSE to kernel case and obtains impressive performance
on robust object tracking (Henriques, Caseiro, and Martins
2015). Discriminative scale space tracking (DSST) (Danelljan et al. 2017) learns separate CFs on different scales, enabling estimation of both the translation and scale variants.
In spite of the theoretical improvements, the existing CFs
are still limited in some aspects. First, only the translational

• KCC provides a similarity measurement for signals with
transformation. The extensive experiments on human activity recognition using wearable devices demonstrate its
robustness and ﬂexibility.
Without loss of generality, the name ‘cross-correlator’ is
preferred in this paper rather than ‘correlation ﬁlter’, since
the former is designed not only for ﬁltering purpose. Considering that the CFs have shown their great capabilities in
numerous applications including template matching, visual
tracking, face veriﬁcation, etc., we believe that KCC will
also play an important role in those ﬁelds.

Related Work
The wealth of research in this area is such that we cannot
give an exhaustive review. Instead, only several milestones
on CFs and visual tracking are presented.

Correlation Filter

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

One of the earliest correlation ﬁlters is the synthetic discriminant ﬁlter (SDF) that describes a signal as a linear

4179

