The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Risk-Sensitive Submodular Optimization
Bryan Wilder
Department of Computer Science
and Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Society
University of Southern California
bwilder@usc.edu

CVaR takes a tunable parameter α. Roughly, it measures the
performance of a decision in the worst α fraction of scenarios. It is known that when the objective F is a concave function, then CVaR can be optimized via a concave program as
well. However, many natural objective functions are not concave, and no general algorithms are known for nonconcave
functions. We focus on submodular functions. Submodularity captures diminishing returns and appears in application
domains ranging from viral marketing (Kempe, Kleinberg,
and Tardos 2003), to machine learning (Kulesza and Taskar
2012), to auction theory (Vondrák 2008). We analyze submodular functions in two settings:
Continuous: Continuous submodularity, which has lately
received increasing attention (Bach 2015; Bian et al. 2017;
Staib and Jegelka 2017) generalizes the notion of a submodular set function to continuous domains. Many wellknown discrete problems (e.g., sensor placement, inﬂuence
maximization, or facility location) admit natural extensions
where resources are divided in a continuous manner. Continuous submodular functions have also been extensively
studied in economics as a model of diminishing returns
or strategic substitutes (Koçkesen, Ok, and Sethi 2000;
Sampson 2016). Our main result is a (1 − 1e )-approximation
algorithm for maximizing the CVaR of any monotone, continuous submodular function. No algorithm was previously
known for this problem.
Portfolio of discrete sets: Our results for continuous submodular functions also transfer to set functions. We study
a setting where the algorithm can select a distribution over
feasible sets, which is of interest when the aim is to select a
portfolio of sets to hedge against risk (Ohsaka and Yoshida
2017). Similar settings have also been studied in robust submodular optimization (Krause, Roper, and Golovin 2011;
Chen et al. 2017; Wilder 2017). We give a black-box reduction from the discrete portfolio problem to CVaR optimization of continuous submodular functions, allowing us to apply our algorithm for the continuous problem. The state of
the art for the discrete portfolio setting is an algorithm by
Ohsaka and Yoshida (2017) for CVaR inﬂuence maximization. Our results are stronger in two ways: (i) they apply to
any submodular function and (ii) give stronger approximation guarantee. Allowing the algorithm to select a convex
combination of sets is provably necessary: Maehara (2015)
proved that restricted to single sets, it is NP-hard to compute

Abstract
The conditional value at risk (CVaR) is a popular risk measure which enables risk-averse decision making under uncertainty. We consider maximizing the CVaR of a continuous
submodular function, an extension of submodular set functions to a continuous domain. One example application is allocating a continuous amount of energy to each sensor in a
network, with the goal of detecting intrusion or contamination. Previous work allows maximization of the CVaR of a
linear or concave function. Continuous submodularity represents a natural set of nonconcave functions with diminishing
returns, to which existing techniques do not apply. We give a
(1−1/e)-approximation algorithm for maximizing the CVaR
of a monotone continuous submodular function. This also
yields an algorithm for submodular set functions which produces a distribution over feasible sets with guaranteed CVaR.
Experimental results in two sensor placement domains conﬁrm that our algorithm substantially outperforms competitive
baselines.

Introduction
Decision-making under uncertainty is an ubiquitous problem. Suppose we want to maximize a function F (x, y),
where x is a vector of decision variables and y a random
variable drawn from a distribution D. A natural approach
is to maximize Ey [F (x, y)], i.e., to maximize the expected
value of the chosen decision. However, decision makers are
often risk-averse: they would rather minimize the chance of
having a very low reward than focus purely on the average.
This is a rational behavior when failure can have large consequences. For instance, if a corporation suffers a disastrous
loss, they may simply go out of business. Or in many cases,
low performance entails safety issues. For instance, if a sensor network for water contamination detects problems instantly in 80% cases, but fails entirely in 20%, the population
will inevitably be exposed to an unacceptable health risk. It
is much better to have a sensor network which always detects contaminants, even if it requires somewhat more time
on average.
Hence, it is natural to move beyond average-case analysis and optimize a risk-aware objective function. One
widespread choice is the conditional value at risk (CVaR).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6451

