The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Matrix Variate Gaussian Mixture
Distribution Steered Robust Metric Learning
Lei Luo, Heng Huang∗
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, USA
lel94@pitt.edu, heng.huang@pitt.edu

rithms have shown great success in many applications, ﬁnding a robust distance metric from real-world data remains a
big challenge.
To enhance the performance of metric learning models,
some recent methods, represented by low-rank or sparse
metric learning (Huo, Nie, and Huang 2016; Ying, Huang,
and Campbell 2009), actively integrate different regularization terms associated with the matrix M in modeling. On
one hand, using these regularization terms can effectively
prevents the overﬁtting problem since it is equivalent to
adding the prior knowledge into M. On the other hand, these
regularization terms can extract partial structure information
of the matrix M. The structure of a variable corresponds to
its spatial distribution. However, for many practical applications, the spatial distribution of M is generally irregular
and complicated. The simple matrix norm regularizers cannot characterize the structure information well. For instance,
L2 or L1 -norm regularization is based on the hypothesis that
the elements of M are independently distributed with Gaussian distribution or Laplace distribution (Luo et al. 2016b).
Obviously, they cannot capture the spatial structure of M.
The low-rank and Fantope regularizers (Law, Thome, and
Cord 2014) overcome this limitation, but they lack the generalization because the distance matrix M may not be lowrank for real data.
Many previous works make use of multiple matrix norms
to jointly characterize a matrix variate with complex distribution. Nevertheless, these strategies are limited to some
special cases. For example, Least Soft-threshold Squares
method (Wang, Lu, and Yang 2013) is only suitable for
the variate following Gaussian-Laplace distribution, while
Nuclear-L1 joint regression model (Luo et al. 2015; 2016a)
focuses on the structural and sparse matrix variate. To adapt
more practical problems, some scholars carry out the variate
estimation task under the framework of the Gaussian Mixture Regression (GMR) (Cao et al. 2015). This is originated
from a basic fact: Gaussian Mixture distribution can construct a universal approximator to any continuous density
function in theory (Bishop 2007). The experimental results
show the advantages of this strategy, but most of these methods (related to GMR) are based on regression analysis. As
we know, many practical problems cannot be formulated as
regression-like models. Accordingly, it is expected to extend
GMR to other formulations. Additionally, these GMR based

Abstract
Mahalanobis Metric Learning (MML) has been actively studied recently in machine learning community. Most of existing
MML methods aim to learn a powerful Mahalanobis distance
for computing similarity of two objects. More recently, multiple methods use matrix norm regularizers to constrain the
learned distance matrix M to improve the performance. However, in real applications, the structure of the distance matrix
M is complicated and cannot be characterized well by the
simple matrix norm. In this paper, we propose a novel robust
metric learning method with learning the structure of the distance matrix in a new and natural way. We partition M into
blocks and consider each block as a random matrix variate,
which is ﬁtted by matrix variate Gaussian mixture distribution. Different from existing methods, our model has no any
assumption on M and automatically learns the structure of
M from the real data, where the distance matrix M often is
neither sparse nor low-rank. We design an effective algorithm
to optimize the proposed model and establish the corresponding theoretical guarantee. We conduct extensive evaluations
on the real-world data. Experimental results show our method
consistently outperforms the related state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Mahalanobis metric learning (MML) has been actively studied in machine learning community and successful applied
to address numerous applications (Kuznetsova et al. 2016).
MML methods target to learn a good Mahalanobis metric to effectively gauge the pairwise distance between data
objects. Particularly, the distance matrix M plays a crucial role in MML. A well-learned M can precisely reﬂect
domain-speciﬁc connections and relationships. Toward this
end, many metric learning algorithms under various problem settings have been proposed, such as pairwise constrained component analysis (PCCA) (Mignon and Jurie
2012), neighborhood repulsed metric learning (NRML) (Lu
et al. 2014), large margin nearest neighbor (LMNN) (Weinberger and Saul 2009), logistic discriminant metric learning (LDML) (Guillaumin, Verbeek, and Schmid 2009), and
Hamming distance learning (Zheng, Tang, and Shao 2016;
Zheng and Shao 2016). Although these supervised algo∗

To whom all correspondence should be addressed.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3722

