The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Robust Formulation for PCA: Avoiding
Mean Calculation with 2,p -Norm Maximization
Shuangli Liao, Jin Li, Yang Liu, Quanxue Gao,∗ Xinbo Gao
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks,
Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, Shaanxi, P. R. China

how to improve robustness of PCA for dimensionality reduction. PCA aims to seek projection matrix such that the
projected data well reconstruct the original data in a least
squares sense. It is well known that least square criterion remarkably enlarges the large distance, which results in sensitivity of PCA to outliers and noise (Gao et al. 2013;
Shahid et al. 2015).
To handle this problem, many approaches have been developed. These methods can be broadly divided into two categories: nuclear norm based methods and L1-norm based
methods. Nuclear-norm based methods aim to seek clean
data with low-rank structure. The representative methods include robust PCA (RPCA) (Li, Ma, and Wright 2009) and
RPCA with graph (GRPCA) (Shahid et al. 2015). This kind
of methods does not get the low-dimensional representation,
in other words, they cannot be suitable for dimensionality
reduction. Different from nuclear norm based methods, 1 norm PCA uses 1 -norm instead of squared Euclidean distance as the distance metric in the criterion function of PCA.
There are two formulations for 1 -norm based PCA. One
is L1-PCA, which minimizes the 1 -norm reconstruction
error (Ke and Kanade 2005). It well improves the robustness of PCA to oultiers, but it is difﬁcult to solve L1-PCA
and does not have rotational invariance (Ding et al. 2006;
Gao et al. 2017; Wang and Gao 2017). Another is PCA-L1
that maximizes 1 -norm covariance and has become an active topic in pattern analysis (Kwak 2008; Wang et al. 2015;
Ju et al. 2015; Wang and Wang 2013).
Compared with traditional PCA, the aforementioned 1 norm PCA methods effectively improve the robustness of
algorithms, but they involve the mean estimation of data,
which is calculated in the least squared sense. Some works
have witnessed that the mean in the least squared sense is
not optimal for other different distance metrics such as 1 norm, 2,1 -norm and nuclear norm (Oh and Kwak 2016;
He et al. 2011; Wang et al. 2017). This effects the robustness of algorithms. To tackle this problem, some enhanced
robust PCA methods were proposed by simultaneously optimizing mean and projection matrix in the criterion function. For example, Nie et al. (Nie, Yuan, and Huang 2014)
simultaneously optimized mean and projection matrix by
maximizing 2,1 -norm variance, which was extended to robust two-dimensional formulation with F-norm minimization (Wang et al. 2017). However, all of them cannot ob-

Abstract
Most existing robust principal component analysis (PCA) involve mean estimation for extracting low-dimensional representation. However, they do not get the optimal mean for real
data, which include outliers, under the different robust distances metric learning, such as 1 -norm and 2,1 -norm. This
affects the robustness of algorithms. Motivated by the fact
that the variance of data can be characterized by the variation
between each pair of data, we propose a novel robust formulation for PCA. It avoids computing the mean of data in
the criterion function. Our method employs 2,p norm as the
distance metric to measure the variation in the criterion function and aims to seek the projection matrix that maximizes the
sum of variation between each pair of the projected data. Both
theoretical analysis and experimental results demonstrate that
our methods are efﬁcient and superior to most existing robust
methods for data reconstruction.

Introduction
In real applications, we usually get the data such as face images and gene expressions with high-dimensionality. If we
directly analyze on these high-dimensional data, it will suffer from the curse of dimensionality and cause performance
degradation with complexity computation. Thus, how to ﬁnd
an effective representation for high-dimensional data has
been an active and fundamental problem in the ﬁelds of pattern recognition and machine learning. For this task, dimensionality reduction is an effective and successful approach.
It aims to seek a low-dimensional space such that class
distribution becomes more apparent which can improve
the robustness of subsequent analysis (Jiang et al. 2013;
Gao et al. 2017).
To analyze different data types, many dimensionality
reduction methods have been developed in the literature,
among which principal component analysis (PCA) and linear discriminant analysis (LDA) are two of the most representative methods (Turk and Pentland 1991; Belhumeur,
Hespanha, and Kriegman 1997). Moreover, PCA is also usually used as a preprocessing step in almost dimensionality
methods including LDA. Thus, in this paper, we focus on
∗

Corresponding author: Q. Gao: qxgao@xidian.edu.cn
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3604

