The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Algorithms for Generalized Topic Modeling
Avrim Blum

Nika Haghtalab

Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
avrim@ttic.edu

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
nhaghtal@cs.cmu.edu

As a theoretical model for document generation, however,
an obvious problem with the standard topic modeling framework is that documents are not actually created by independently drawing words from some distribution. Moreover,
important words within a topic often have meaningful correlations, like shooting a free throw or kicking a ﬁeld goal.
Better would be a model in which sentences are drawn i.i.d.
from a distribution over sentences. Even better would be
paragraphs drawn i.i.d. from a distribution over paragraphs
(this would account for the word correlations that exist within
a coherent paragraph). Or, even better, how about a model in
which paragraphs are drawn non-independently, so that the
second paragraph in a document can depend on what the ﬁrst
paragraph was saying, though presumably with some amount
of additional entropy as well? This is the type of model we
study here.
Note that an immediate problem with considering such
a model is that now the task of learning an explicit distribution (over sentences or paragraphs) is hopeless. While a
distribution over words can be reasonably viewed as a probability vector, one could not hope to learn or even represent
an explicit distribution over sentences or paragraphs. Indeed,
except in cases of plagiarism, one would not expect to see
the same paragraph twice in the entire corpus. Moreover, this
is likely to be true even if we assume paragraphs have some
natural feature-vector representation. Instead, we bypass this
issue by aiming to directly learn a predictor for documents—
that is, a function that given a document, predicts its mixture
over topics—without explicitly learning topic distributions.
Another way to think of this is that our goal is not to learn
a model that could be used to write a new document, but
instead just a model that could be used to classify a document
written by others. This is much as in standard supervised
learning where algorithms such as SVMs learn a decision
boundary (such as a linear separator) for making predictions
on the labels of examples without explicitly learning the distributions D+ and D− over positive and negative examples
respectively. However, our setting is unsupervised (we are
not given labeled data containing the correct classiﬁcations
of the documents in the training set) and furthermore, rather
than each data item belonging to one of the k classes (topics),
each data item belongs to a mixture of the k topics. Our goal
is given a new data item to output what that mixture is.
We begin by describing our high level theoretical formu-

Abstract
Recently there has been signiﬁcant activity in developing algorithms with provable guarantees for topic modeling. In this
work we consider a broad generalization of the traditional
topic modeling framework, where we no longer assume that
words are drawn i.i.d. and instead view a topic as a complex
distribution over sequences of paragraphs. Since one could
not hope to even represent such a distribution in general (even
if paragraphs are given using some natural feature representation), we aim instead to directly learn a predictor that given a
new document, accurately predicts its topic mixture, without
learning the distributions explicitly. We present several natural
conditions under which one can do this from unlabeled data
only, and give efﬁcient algorithms to do so, also discussing
issues such as noise tolerance and sample complexity. More
generally, our model can be viewed as a generalization of the
multi-view or co-training setting in machine learning.

1

Introduction

Topic modeling is an area with signiﬁcant recent work in
the intersection of algorithms and machine learning (Arora
et al. 2012; Arora, Ge, and Moitra 2012; Arora et al. 2013;
Anandkumar et al. 2012; 2014; Bansal, Bhattacharyya, and
Kannan 2014). In topic modeling, a topic (such as sports,
business, or politics) is modeled as a probability distribution
over words, expressed as a vector ai . A document is generated by ﬁrst selecting a mixture w over topics, such as 80%
sports and 20% business, and then choosing words i.i.d. from
the associated mixture distribution, which in this case would
be 0.8asports +0.2abusiness . Given a large collection of such
documents (and some assumptions about the distributions ai
as well as the distribution over mixture vectors w) the goal
is to recover the topic vectors ai and then to use the ai to
correctly classify new documents according to their topic mixtures. Algorithms for this problem have been developed with
strong provable guarantees even when documents consist of
only two or three words each (Arora, Ge, and Moitra 2012;
Anandkumar et al. 2012; Papadimitriou et al. 1998). In addition, algorithms based on this problem formulation perform
well empirically on standard datasets (Blei, Ng, and Jordan
2003; Hofmann 1999).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2730

