The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Attention-Based Transactional Context
Embedding for Next-Item Recommendation
†

Shoujin Wang, † Liang Hu, † Longbing Cao, ‡ Xiaoshui Huang, * Defu Lian, † Wei Liu
‡
GBDTC, FEIT, Univeristy of Technology Sydney
Advanced Analytics Institute, Univeristy of Technology Sydney
*
Big Data Research Center, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
shoujin.wang@student.uts.edu.au, rainmilk@gmail.com,
{longbing.cao, xiaoshui.huang, wei.liu}@uts.edu.au, dove.ustc@gmail.com
†

should be recommended when a collection of items has been
placed into a transaction. This generates the need to recommend the next item under a transactional context by analyzing intra-transaction dependency. Here, the context for recommending the next item refers to the corresponding itemrelated transaction, e.g., a shopping-basket record consisting
of multiple chosen items.
Let us illustrate the above problem with an example. A
user ﬁrst puts three items {milk, apple, orange} into a cart
and then adds bread to the same cart. Subsequently, the
transaction is ﬁnalized as {milk, apple, orange, bread}. If
we take the ﬁrst three items as the context and the last one
as the target to recommend, existing methods may suggest
vegetables like green salad due to the nearest contextual
items (orange and apple). However, the choice of the target item bread may depend on the ﬁrst item (milk). In this
case, a TBRS should pay more attention to milk than to
orange and apple, because milk may be more related to
the next choice bread. This example shows the importance
of next-item recommendation which can be misled by irrelevant items in a transaction. Moreover, real-world transactional data often only indicates those items co-appear in a
transaction with the order (e.g., the item timestamps) between items. Therefore, it may not be possible and realistic
to recommend transactional items with a rigid order.
It is quite challenging to learn the relevance and transition between items in a transactional context. In TBRSs,
a general challenge is to build an attentive context which
outputs the real next choice with a high probability (Verbert et al. 2012). Some existing approaches aim to generate recommendations by taking a transaction as the context. However, most existing TBRSs utilize a partial context with an ordering assumption. Sequential pattern mining (Yap, Li, and Philip 2012) is used to predict the next
item using associations between items with a rigid order
assumption. However, items in a context may be arbitrary,
which may fail to match any mined patterns. Markov chain
(MC) (Rendle, Freudenthaler, and Schmidt-Thieme 2010;
Cao, Ou, and Yu 2012) is another way to model sequential
data. However, MC only captures the transition from one
item to the next one rather than from a contextual sequence,
i.e., it only captures the ﬁrst-order transition. Recently, a matrix factorization (MF) based approach (Chou et al. 2016)
factorizes the matrix of transition probability from the cur-

Abstract
To recommend the next item to a user in a transactional context is practical yet challenging in applications such as marketing campaigns. Transactional context refers to the items
that are observable in a transaction. Most existing transactionbased recommender systems (TBRSs) make recommendations by mainly considering recently occurring items instead
of all the ones observed in the current context. Moreover, they
often assume a rigid order between items within a transaction,
which is not always practical. More importantly, a long transaction often contains many items irreverent to the next choice,
which tends to overwhelm the inﬂuence of a few truely relevant ones. Therefore, we posit that a good TBRS should not
only consider all the observed items in the current transaction but also weight them with different relevance to build
an attentive context that outputs the proper next item with a
high probability. To this end, we design an effective attentionbased transaction embedding model (ATEM) for context embedding to weight each observed item in a transaction without
assuming order. The empirical study on real-world transaction datasets proves that ATEM signiﬁcantly outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods in terms of both accuracy and novelty.

Introduction
Nowadays, recommender systems (RSs) play an important
role in real-world business especially in the e-commerce domain. However, most existing RS theories face various issues (Cao 2016) such as tending to repeat items that are
similar to what users may have already chosen (Deshpande
and Karypis 2004). In reality, users may prefer items that are
novel and different from that already in hand. To address this
aspect, new recommendation paradigm (Cao 2016) needs to
be made on a transactional context, i.e., what has already
been chosen in a transaction. On one hand, transaction-based
RSs (TBRSs) (Huang and Zeng 2011) incorporate previous
transactions, i.e., inter-transactions, to generate more sensible and reliable new transactional recommendations, such
as next-basket and next-item recommendations (Wang et al.
2015) through analyzing inter-transaction coupling relationships (Cao 2015). These are quite different from the typical RS approaches built on user preferences and item property. On the other, however, it is still unclear what next-item
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2532

