The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Algorithms for Trip-Vehicle Assignment in Ride-Sharing
Xiaohui Bei

Shengyu Zhang

School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong

Manhattan distance (i.e., 1 -norm), Euclidean distance (i.e.,
2 -norm), or distance on graphs if a city map is available.
Here for any ﬁxed tuple (k, {i, j}), the driver of taxi k has
four possible routes, from the combination of the following
two choices: he can pick agent i ﬁrst or agent j ﬁrst, and
he can drop agent i ﬁrst or drop agent j ﬁrst. We assume
that the driver is experienced enough to take the best among
these four choices. Thus we use the total distance of this
best route as the driving cost of tuple (k, {i, j}), denoted by
cost(k, {i, j}). We hope to ﬁnd an assignment
M = {(k, {i, j}) : 1 ≤ i, j ≤ m, 1 ≤ k ≤ n}
that assigns the maximum number of requests,
and
in the meanwhile with the cost(M )
=

(k,{i,j})∈M cost(k, {i, j}), summation of the driving
cost, as small as possible. Here an assignment is a matching
in the graph in the sense that each element in R ∪ D appears
at most once in M .
In this paper, we formulate this ride-sharing assignment
as a combinatorial optimization problem. We show that the
problem is NP-hard, and then present an approximation algorithm which, on any input, runs in time O(n3 ) and outputs a solution M with cost(M ) at most 2.5 times the optimal value. Our algorithm does not assume speciﬁc distance
measure; indeed it works for any distance1 . We conducted
experiments where inputs are generated from uniform distributions and Gaussian mixture distributions. The approximation ratio on these empirical data is about 1.1-1.2, which
is much better than the worst case guarantee 2.5. In addition,
the results indicate that the larger n and m are, the better the
approximation ratio is. Considering that n and m are very
large numbers in practice, the performance of our algorithm
may be even more satisfactory for practical scenarios.

Abstract
We investigate the ride-sharing assignment problem from an
algorithmic resource allocation point of view. Given a number of requests with source and destination locations, and a
number of available car locations, the task is to assign cars to
requests with two requests sharing one car. We formulate this
as a combinatorial optimization problem, and show that it is
NP-hard. We then design an approximation algorithm which
guarantees to output a solution with at most 2.5 times the optimal cost. Experiments are conducted showing that our algorithm actually has a much better approximation ratio (around
1.2) on synthetically generated data.

Introduction
The sharing economy is estimated to grow from $14 billion in 2014 to $335 billion by 2025 (Yaraghi and Ravi
2017). As one of the largest components of sharing economy, ride-sharing provides socially efﬁcient transport services that help to save energy and to reduce congestion.
Uber has 40 million monthly active riders reported in October 2016 (Kokalitcheva 2016) and Didi Chuxing has more
than 400 million users(Tec 2017). A large portion of the revenue of these companies comes from ride sharing with one
car catering two passenger requests, which is the topic investigated in this paper. A typical scenario is as follows: There
are a large number of requests with pickup and drop-off location information, and a large number of available cars with
current location information. One of the tasks is to assign the
requests to the cars, with two requests for one car. The assignment needs to be made socially efﬁcient in the sense that
the ride sharing does not incur much extra traveling distance
for the drivers or and extra waiting time for the passengers.
In this paper we investigate this ride-sharing assignment
problem from an algorithmic resource allocation point of
view. Formally, suppose that there are a set R of requests
{(si , ti ) ∈ R2 : i = 1, . . . , m} where in request i, an agent
is at location si and likes to go to location ti . There are also
a set D of taxis {dk ∈ R2 : k = 1, . . . , n}, with taxi k
currently at location dk . The task is to assign two agents i
and j to one taxi k, so that the total driving distance is as
small as possible. The distance measure d(x, y) here can be

Related Work
Ridesharing has become a key feature to increase urban
transportation sustainability and is an active ﬁeld of research. Several pieces of work have looked at dynamic
ridesharing (Caramia et al. 2002; Fabri and Recht 2006;
Agatz et al. 2012; Santos and Xavier 2013; Alonso-Mora
et al. 2017), and multi-hop ridesharing (Herbawi and Weber 2011; Drews and Luxen 2013; Teubner and Flath 2015).

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
That is, the algorithm only needs that d is nonnegative, symmetric and satisﬁes the triangle inequality.

3

