The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

DeepUrbanMomentum: An Online Deep-Learning System
for Short-Term Urban Mobility Prediction
Renhe Jiang,† Xuan Song,†‡∗ Zipei Fan,† Tianqi Xia,† Quanjun Chen†
Satoshi Miyazawa,† Ryosuke Shibasaki †
†

Center for Spatial Information Science, The University of Tokyo
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Center, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
{jiangrh, songxuan, xiatianqi, koitaroh, shiba}@csis.u-tokyo.ac.jp, {fanzipei, chen1990}@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp
‡

Abstract
Big human mobility data are being continuously generated
through a variety of sources, some of which can be treated and
used as streaming data for understanding and predicting urban dynamics. With such streaming mobility data, the online
prediction of short-term human mobility at the city level can
be of great signiﬁcance for transportation scheduling, urban
regulation, and emergency management. In particular, when
big rare events or disasters happen, such as large earthquakes
or severe trafﬁc accidents, people change their behaviors from
their routine activities. This means people’s movements will
almost be uncorrelated with their past movements. Therefore,
in this study, we build an online system called DeepUrbanMomentum to conduct the next short-term mobility predictions by using (the limited steps of) currently observed human
mobility data. A deep-learning architecture built with recurrent neural networks is designed to effectively model these
highly complex sequential data for a huge urban area. Experimental results demonstrate the superior performance of
our proposed model as compared to the existing approaches.
Lastly, we apply our system to a real emergency scenario and
demonstrate that our system is applicable in the real world.

Figure 1: Can we develop an online intelligent system for
short-term human mobility prediction with high precision
by using recent momentary mobility at a citywide level? Big
human mobility data and deep-learning technologies provide us with the opportunity to implement this system.1

Introduction
The next-generation 5G mobile Internet technologies will
mark a new era in the information industry, and they will
play an important role in stimulating the growth of the Internet of Things (IoT). Against this background, massive
GPS trajectories that are being continuously generated from
sources, such as smartphones, GPS devices on cars, WLAN
networks, and location-based social networks, become important for use as real-time human mobility data streams.
With such valuable streaming data, people’s future behaviors and movements can be predicted step-by-step in an
online manner, based on an intuitive Markov-like assumption that people’s next behaviors mostly rely on their recent
ones. Especially, when big rare events or disasters, such as
high-magnitude earthquakes happen, people’s behaviors and
movements will become rather different from their daily
routines. Such online short-term predictions using recent

momentary mobility will become very necessary and practical. Elevating this to a citywide level, namely predicting UrbanMomentary human mobility for a huge urban area, can
play a crucial role in effective urban planning, transportation
scheduling, and emergency management.
However, even for a short period, human mobility and
transportation transitions for a large-scale transportation
system are highly complex, which are almost impossible
to be effectively modeled using classical methodologies
or simple neural network-based models. Emerging deeplearning technologies have demonstrated superior performances on various datasets (e.g., images, texts, and videos)
(Bengio 2009; Vincent et al. 2010; Demuth et al. 2014) of
existing classical approaches. Hence, in this study, we investigate the various aspects of human mobility during a short
period in a large urban area by using a deep-learning-based

∗

Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

784

