The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

An Interactive Multi-Label Consensus Labeling
Model for Multiple Labeler Judgments
Ashish Kulkarni,1∗ Narasimha Raju Uppalapati,2 Pankaj Singh,3 Ganesh Ramakrishnan4
1

Amazon, Bangalore, India. 2 Samsung R&D Institute, Bangalore, India. 3 Lokavidya Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Bombay, Mumbai, India.
{kulashish, raju.atl007, pr.pankajsingh}@gmail.com, ganesh@cse.iitb.ac.in

Inter-label correlation: Certain labels, especially in a large
label space (E.g. lake-water), might be mutually (semantically) correlated. This correlation may be exploited to minimize labeling cost (Xie et al. 2013).
Labeler reliability: We assume the availability of multiple
labelers, not only humans, but also machine-learned multilabel classiﬁcation models. These labelers might have complementary expertise, such that, the judgments by a labeler
might be more reliable on a subset of labels. Can the labelers
mutually beneﬁt from their individual expertise (Raykar et
al. 2010)?
Collective prediction: How do we aggregate the judgments
from individual labelers, while accounting for inter-label
correlation and labeler reliability to generate high conﬁdence consensus label predictions for each instance? Table 1
shows an illustrative example from an image labeling task,
where a simple majority-based consensus falls short of obtaining the expected labeled output.
Labeling cost: Can we use the consensus output to “actively” train classiﬁcation models in order to minimize the
overall labeling budget (Tong and Chang 2001)?
These challenges form the focus of our study. We argue
that in a problem like this involving multiple (i) instances,
(ii) labels and (iii) labelers, with varying degrees of noise or
confusion, it is the “consensus” along these three dimensions
that orients the labeling towards the desired ground truth.

Abstract
Multi-label classiﬁcation is crucial to several practical applications including document categorization, video tagging,
targeted advertising etc. Training a multi-label classiﬁer requires a large amount of labeled data which is often unavailable or scarce. Labeled data is then acquired by consulting
multiple labelers—both human and machine. Inspired by ensemble methods, our premise is that labels inferred with high
consensus among labelers, might be closer to the ground
truth. We propose strategies based on interaction and active
learning to obtain higher quality labels that potentially lead
to greater consensus. We propose a novel formulation that
aims to collectively optimize the cost of labeling, labeler reliability, label-label correlation and inter-labeler consensus.
Evaluation on data labeled by multiple labelers (both human
and machine) shows that our consensus output is closer to
the ground truth when compared to the “majority” baseline.
We present illustrative cases where it even improves over the
existing ground truth. We also present active learning strategies to leverage our consensus model in interactive learning
settings. Experiments on several real-world datasets (publicly
available) demonstrate the efﬁcacy of our approach in achieving promising classiﬁcation results with fewer labeled data.

1

Introduction

Multi-label classiﬁcation is a widely studied problem
(Zhang and Zhou 2014) and naturally manifests in several real-world applications (Ueda and Saito 2002; Katakis,
Tsoumakas, and Vlahavas 2008; Qi et al. 2007) that include text categorization, image or video tagging, information retrieval, recommendation systems, etc. Training of
these models typically requires large amounts of labeled
data which is often unavailable or scarce. Labeled data is
then generated either by an expert oracle, by multiple humans or by a semi-automatic human-in-the-loop approach.
We consider this problem of labeling a large (possibly
growing) multi-label data, beginning with the “cold start”
setting, in which, there is little or no labeled data. We
would like to label, with high conﬁdence, all instances in
the dataset and additionally, limit the labeling cost as much
as possible. The problem poses several unique challenges.

2

Related Work

Active learning (Settles 2009; Tong and Koller 2002) is a
well researched area. Pool-based sampling (Tong and Chang
2001), a popular active learning strategy, assumes the availability of a small set of labeled data and a large pool of unlabeled data. Two main measures used to evaluate informativeness for sampling instances are query by uncertainty (Tong
and Chang 2001) and query by committee (Seung, Opper,
and Sompolinsky 1992).
Whereas the body of literature cited above targets singlelabel classiﬁcation problems, active learning for multi-label
classiﬁcation has received some attention as well. Brinker
(2006) uses a one-vs-all approach to multi-label classiﬁcation and selects instances that minimize the smallest SVM
margin amongst all the one-vs-all binary classiﬁers. Li,
Wang, and Sung (2004) propose a mean max loss (MML)
strategy that samples instances that lead to the maximum re-

∗
This work was conducted by the author at IIT Bombay prior to
joining Amazon
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1479

