The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Visual Relationship Detection with Deep Structural Ranking
1

Kongming Liang,1,3 Yuhong Guo,2 Hong Chang,1 Xilin Chen1,3

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
School of Computer Science, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
kongming.liang@vipl.ict.ac.cn, yuhong.guo@carleton.ca, {changhong, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn
Abstract
Visual relationship detection aims to describe the interactions
between pairs of objects. Different from individual object
learning tasks, the number of possible relationships are much
larger, which makes it hard to explore only based on the visual appearance of objects. In addition, due to the limited human effort, the annotations for visual relationships are usually
incomplete which increases the difﬁculty of model training
and evaluation. In this paper, we propose a novel framework,
called Deep Structural Ranking, for visual relationship detection. To complement the representation ability of visual
appearance, we integrate multiple cues for predicting the relationships contained in an input image. Moreover, we design a new ranking objective function by enforcing the annotated relationships to have higher relevance scores. Unlike
previous works, our proposed method can both facilitate the
co-occurrence of relationships and mitigate the incompleteness problem. Experimental results show that our proposed
method outperforms the state-of-the-art on the two widely
used datasets. We also demonstrate its superiority in detecting
zero-shot relationships.

Figure 1: Detecting the visual relationships contained in
an image. A visual relationship instance is deﬁned as
subject-predicate-object. (a) Multiple predicates
may co-occur for a paired object, as the person can hold a
cat and also be behind the cat. (b) The annotations are usually not complete. For example, chair-in the front
of-lamp is not included. (c) The diversity within the same
predicate is high since person can wear or be behind many
kinds of objects.

Introduction
To achieve the goal of holistic image understanding, researchers have made great progress on recognizing, detecting and describing individual objects within an image. Over
the past few years, the state-of-the-art of object recognition
(Simonyan and Zisserman 2014) and object detection (Ren
et al. 2015; Girshick 2015) have been dramatically improved
thanks to the advances of deep learning. Based on these basic building blocks for single object understanding, visual
relationship detection aims to accurately localize a pair of
objects and determine the predicate between them as shown
in Fig. 1. As a mid-level learning task, visual relationship
detection can beneﬁt many high-level image understanding tasks such as image captioning (Kulkarni et al. 2013;
Vinyals et al. 2015; Xu et al. 2015) and visual question answering (Antol et al. 2015).
Different from single object based image understanding, visual relationship detection is used to describe two
objects which makes the number of possible relationships much larger. If we represent the relationship as

subject-predicate-object, the number of possible relationships are O(N 2 K) when there are N object categories and K predicates. Since the object cooccurrence is infrequent, a large number of relationships contain few examples. Therefore previous method
(Sadeghi and Farhadi 2011) which directly takes the tuple subject-predicate-object as a whole learning task can not scale well on large datasets. One possible solution (Lu et al. 2016) is to learn the objects
and predicates separately and fuse the result to predict
the relationship. In that way, different relationships (e.g.
truck-on-street, car-on-street) are merged
into the same category if they share the same predicate.
Therefore, only O(N + K) detectors are needed but the
samples within the same predicate category are highly diverse as shown in Fig.1(c). This problem also exists in
some other relevant tasks. For visual attribute learning, an
attribute may be used to describe various objects which

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7098

