The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Sentiment Lexicon Enhanced Attention-Based LSTM for Sentiment Classiﬁcation
Zeyang Lei, Yujiu Yang ∗

Min Yang

Graduate School at Shenzhen,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology,
Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, P. R. China
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, P.R.China
leizy16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn and yangyj@gmail.com
min.yang1129@gmail.com

attention methods (Vaswani et al. 2017). The single-head attention computes attention weights of different word locations according to their intent importance associated with
sentiment lexicon, which usually only focuses on speciﬁc
parts of the input. However, the multi-head attention allows
the model to jointly attend to information from different representation subspaces at different positions. The experiment
results show that our model is efﬁcient and achieves stateof-the-art results.

Abstract
Deep neural networks have gained great success recently
for sentiment classiﬁcation. However, these approaches do
not fully exploit the linguistic knowledge. In this paper, we
propose a novel sentiment lexicon enhanced attention-based
LSTM (SLEA-LSTM) model to improve the performance of
sentence-level sentiment classiﬁcation. Our method successfully integrates sentiment lexicon into deep neural networks
via single-head or multi-head attention mechanisms. We conduct extensive experiments on MR and SST datasets. The experimental results show that our model achieved comparable
or better performance than the state-of-the-art methods.

Our Model
We ﬁrst use two independent LSTM layers to convert the
sequence of input word embeddings into two sequences of
hidden states H c = [hc1 , ..., hcm ] and H s = [hs1 , ..., hsn ] for
context words and sentiment words, where m represents the
length of the sequence and n represent the number of sentiment words. Then, the representation of sentiment words
can be
by applying a mean-pooling operation:
computed
n
zs = i=1 hsi /n.

Introduction
In general, sentiment classiﬁcation is the problem of classifying the sentiment polarity of a text as positive, negative or
neutral. Most existing work establishes sentiment classiﬁers
using supervised machine learning approaches, such as support vector machine (SVM), convolutional neural network
(CNN) (Lei, Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2015), long short-term
memory (LSTM) (Tai, Socher, and Manning 2015).
Despite the effectiveness of previous studies, sentiment
classiﬁcation still remains a challenge in real-world. A comprehensive and high quality sentiment lexicon plays a crucial role in traditional sentiment classiﬁcation approaches.
Despite its usefulness, to date, the sentiment lexicon has received little attention in recent neural network models (e.g.,
CNN and LSTM) that achieve the state-of-the-art in generic
sentiment classiﬁcation.
To address the aforementioned limitation, we propose a
novel sentiment lexicon enhanced attention-based LSTM
(SLEA-LSTM) model. More speciﬁcally, our model consists of two independent LSTM networks with additional attention layers on the top. The two LSTM networks are used
to learn the hidden representations of context and sentiment
words of input, respectively. In addition, we explore two
types of attention mechanisms: single-head and multi-head

Single-head Attention model
Most existing attention approaches compute an attention
weight vector for each input, which we call single-head attention mechanism. With single-head attention, the ﬁnal lexicon enhanced sentence representation is a weighted sum of
context hidden states:
m

exp(σ([hci ; zs ])
(1)
ai hci , with ai = m
o=
c
i=1 exp(σ([hi ; zs ])
i=1

where ai indicates the importance of the i-th word in the
context, and σ is a score function that calculates the importance of hci in the context. The score function σ is deﬁned
as:
(2)
σ([hci , zs ]) = uTs1 tanh(Ws1 [hci ; zs ])
c
where [hi ; zs ] denotes the concatenation of hci and zs , Ws1
and us1 are parameters to be learned.

Multi-head Attention model
Instead of using attention weight vectors for single-head attention, multi-head attention produces attention weight matrix. With multi-head attention, the ﬁnal sentence representation takes the following form:
exp(ρ([hci ; zs ])
(3)
o = f latten(AH c ), withA = m
c
i=1 exp(ρ([hi ; zs ])

∗

Corresponding author. This work was supported in part by
the Research Fund for the development of strategic emerging industries by ShenZhen city (No.JCYJ20160301151844537 and No.
JCYJ20170412170118573).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8105

