The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Planning with Pixels in (Almost) Real Time
Wilmer Bandres

Blai Bonet

Hector Geffner

Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
twilmer0593@gmail.com

Universidad Simón Bolı́var
Caracas, Venezuela
bonet@usb.ve

ICREA & Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
hector.geffner@upf.edu

sulting scores can be compared with those achieved by humans and learning methods. For this, planning is performed
using the visible information from the screen. The “screen
states” are associated with the values of a set of boolean
pixel features called B-PROST (Liang et al. 2016), deﬁned
and motivated by the neural net architecture underlying the
successful DQN algorithm. The number of feature bits in BPROST is more than 20,000,000, and the number of possible screen states is exponential in this number. Yet, while the
complexity of planning algorithms like breadth-ﬁrst search
grows with the number of reachable states, the complexity
of algorithms such as IW(1) (Lipovetzky and Geffner 2012)
is linear in the number of features.
We show that the IW(1) planning algorithm using the BPROST pixel features turns out to achieve scores that compare well with those reported for humans and learning algorithms. Our main focus, however, will be on achieving such
scores by planning over very short time windows, approaching real-time play. For this, we formulate an episodic, rollout
version of IW(k) and show that it has a much better anytime behavior than IW(k). Rollout IW(k) is not a systematic
tree-search algorithm like IW(k), but a sequence of rollouts
or episodes reminiscent of (open loop) Monte Carlo algorithms, all starting in the same node, each one given by a
sequence of actions. The sequence of rollouts is designed to
emulate IW(k) in polynomial time. More precisely, if a goal
has width k (Lipovetzky and Geffner 2012), Rollout IW(k)
will reach the goal in a polynomial number of rollouts.
The empirical results show that Rollout IW(1) achieves
scores comparable to those of humans and RL algorithms
almost in real-time: decisions are made in 0.5 seconds using
a frameskip of 15 that would require decisions made in 0.25
seconds for real-time play. The results involve other simple
extensions of IW(1) that are also discussed.
The paper is organized as follows. We review ALE, IW
planning, and the B-PROST visual feature set, and then consider Rollout IW, extensions, and the experimental results.

Abstract
Recently, width-based planning methods have been shown to
yield state-of-the-art results in the Atari 2600 video games.
For this, the states were associated with the (RAM) memory
states of the simulator. In this work, we consider the same
planning problem but using the screen instead. By using the
same visual inputs, the planning results can be compared with
those of humans and learning methods. We show that the
planning approach, out of the box and without training, results in scores that compare well with those obtained by humans and learning methods, and moreover, by developing an
episodic, rollout version of the IW(k) algorithm, we show that
such scores can be obtained in almost real time.

Introduction
The Atari 2600 video games supported in the ALE environment (Bellemare et al. 2013) provide a challenging set of
benchmarks for reinforcement learning (RL) and planning
algorithms. The breakthrough results achieved by the deep
reinforcement algorithm DQN (Mnih et al. 2015) made it to
the popular press, and were followed by similar results obtained using more standard (shallow) RL methods operating
on suitably deﬁned screen features (Liang et al. 2016).
The learning and planning settings for ALE deal with the
same games but compute different forms of control. Learning is done off-line and results in close-loop controllers that
require no lookahead. Planning, on the other hand, is done
on-line: an action is selected by looking ahead in the future,
the action is applied, and the process iterates until the game
terminates or a maximum number of frames is reached. The
learning approach is slow but the selection of actions, once
the controller has been learned, is very fast. The planning approach, on the other hand works right out of the box without
training but results in a selection of actions that is slower.
Another difference is that the planning approaches (Bellemare et al. 2013; Lipovetzky, Ramı́rez, and Geffner 2015),
unlike the reported RL approaches, plan with the (RAM)
memory states of the Atari emulator using information that
is not available to humans.
In this work, we address some of the limitations of current planning approaches to the Atari games, so that the re-

Planning and Model
ALE supports a planning and a learning setting. In the planning setting, the agent performs a lookahead using the simulator, selects and applies an action, and the process iterates
until the game terminates or a given number of frames is
reached. Often a frameskip of N is used, meaning that de-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6102

