The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Adaptive Graph Convolutional Neural Networks
Ruoyu Li, Sheng Wang, Feiyun Zhu, Junzhou Huang∗
The University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, 518057, China



1

Abstract



Graph Convolutional Neural Networks (Graph CNNs) are
generalizations of classical CNNs to handle graph data such as
molecular data, point could and social networks. Current ﬁlters
in graph CNNs are built for ﬁxed and shared graph structure.
However, for most real data, the graph structures varies in both
size and connectivity. The paper proposes a generalized and
ﬂexible graph CNN taking data of arbitrary graph structure as
input. In that way a task-driven adaptive graph is learned for
each graph data while training. To efﬁciently learn the graph, a
distance metric learning is proposed. Extensive experiments on
nine graph-structured datasets have demonstrated the superior
performance improvement on both convergence speed and
predictive accuracy.











Figure 1: Example of graph-structured data: organic compound 3,4-Lutidine (C7H9N) and its graph structure.
In some cases, e.g classiﬁcation of point cloud, the topological structure of graph is more informative than vertex
feature. Unfortunately, the existing graph convolution can
not thoroughly exploit the geometric property on graph due
to the difﬁculty of designing a parameterized spatial kernel
matches a varying number of neighbors (Shuman et al. 2013).
Besides, considering the ﬂexibility of graph and the scale of
parameter, learning a customized topology-preserving spatial
kernel for every unique graph is impractical.
Beyond spatial convolution on restricted graphs, spectral
networks, based on graph Fourier transform, offer an elastic
kernel (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016). Inherited from classical CNNs, a shared kernel among samples is
still assumed. Consequently, to ensure the uniﬁed dimensionality of layer output, the inputs have to be resized, which is
also a constraint of classical CNNs. However, this kind of
preprocessing on graph data may destroy the completeness
of graph-oriented information. For instance, the coarsening
of molecule is hard to be justiﬁed chemically, and it is likely
that the coarsened graph has lost the key sub-structures that
differentiate the molecule from others. In Figure. 1, removing
any Carbon atom from the graph breaks the Benzene ring.
It would be much better if the graph CNNs could accept
original data samples of diverse graph structures.
Lastly, the data we feed to graph CNNs either have an intrinsic graph structure or we can construct one by clustering.
At previous graph CNNs, the initial graph structure will be
ﬁxed during the training process (Bruna et al. 2013). But,
it is hard to evaluate if the graphs constructed by unsupervised clustering (or from domain knowledge) are optimal
for supervised learning tasks. Although the supervised graph
construction with fully connected networks has been proposed (Henaff, Bruna, and LeCun 2015), their dense training

Introduction
Although the Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have
been proven supremely successful on a wide range of machine learning problems (Hinton et al. 2012; Dundar et al.
2015), they generally require inputs to be tensors. For instance, images and videos are modeled as 2-D and 3-D tensor
separately. However, in many real problems, the data are on
irregular grid or more generally in non-Euclidean domains,
e.g. chemical molecules, point cloud and social networks.
Instead of regularly shaped tensors, those data are better to
be structured as graph, which is capable of handling varying
neighborhood vertex connectivity as well as non-Euclidean
metric. Under the circumstances, the stationarity and the compositionality, which allow kernel-based convolutions on grid,
are no longer satisﬁed. Therefore, it is necessary to reformulate the convolution operator on graph structured data.
However, a feasible extension of CNNs from regular grid
to irregular graph is not straightforward. For simplicity of constructing convolution kernel, the early graph CNNs usually
assume that data is still low-dimensional (Bruna et al. 2013;
Henaff, Bruna, and LeCun 2015). Because the convolver handled nodes separately according to node degree. And their
convolution kernel is over-localized and infeasible to learn
hierarchical representations from complex graphs with unpredictable and ﬂexible node connectivity, e.g molecules and
social networks.
∗

Corresponding author: J. Huang, jzhuang@uta.edu
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3546

