The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Table-to-Text: Describing Table
Region with Natural Language
Junwei Bao,†∗ Duyu Tang,‡ Nan Duan,‡ Zhao Yan,§ Yuanhua Lv, Ming Zhou,‡ Tiejun Zhao†
§

†
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China ‡ Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
Beihang University, Beijing, China  Microsoft AI and Research, Sunnyvale CA, USA
baojunwei001@gmail.com, {dutang, nanduan, yuanhual, mingzhou}@microsoft.com
yanzhao@buaa.edu.cn, tjzhao@hit.edu.cn

booking and production comparison. However, it is impractical for a conversational agent to read a table of multiple
rows and columns on a smart-phone. Table-to-text technology could transform the data into natural language sentences
which could be sent back to users with utterances or voice
via text-to-speech transformation.
The task of table-to-text generation has three challenges.
The ﬁrst one is how to learn a good representation of a table. A table has underlying structures such as attributes, cells
and a caption. Understanding the meaning of a table is the
foundation of the following steps for table-to-text generation. The second challenge is how to automatically generate
a natural language sentence, which is not only ﬂuent but also
closely relevant to the meaning of the table. The third challenge is how to effectively use the informative words from
a table which are typically of low-frequency, such as name
entities and numbers, to generate a sentence.
To address the aforementioned challenges, we introduce
a neural network model that takes a row from a table and
generates a natural language sentence describing that row.
The backbone of our approach is the encoder-decoder framework, which has been successfully applied in many tasks
including machine translation (Kalchbrenner and Blunsom
2013; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and
Bengio 2014) and dialogue generation (Sordoni et al. 2015).
In the encoder part, the model leverages table structures to
represent a row as a continuous vector. In the decoder part,
we develop a powerful copying mechanism that is capable
of generating rare words from table cells, attributes and caption. The entire model can be conventionally trained in an
end-to-end fashion with back-propagation. Furthermore, we
introduce an open-domain dataset, WIKITABLETEXT, including 13,318 explanatory sentences for 4,962 tables.
We conduct experiments on three datasets to verify the effectiveness of the proposed approach. On
WIKITABLETEXT, our approach achieves a BLEU-4 score
of 38.23, substantially better than template-based and neural
language model based approaches by an order of magnitude.
Thorough model analysis shows that our copying mechanism not only dramatically boosts performance, but also has
the ability to selectively replicate appropriate contents from
a table to the output sentence. On two synthetic datasets,
WIKIBIO and SIMPLEQUESTIONS, our approach improves
the state-of-the-art BLEU-4 score from 34.7 to 40.26 and

Abstract
In this paper, we present a generative model to generate a natural language sentence describing a table region, e.g., a row.
The model maps a row from a table to a continuous vector
and then generates a natural language sentence by leveraging
the semantics of a table. To deal with rare words appearing
in a table, we develop a ﬂexible copying mechanism that selectively replicates contents from the table in the output sequence. Extensive experiments demonstrate the accuracy of
the model and the power of the copying mechanism. On two
synthetic datasets, WIKIBIO and SIMPLEQUESTIONS, our
model improves the current state-of-the-art BLEU-4 score
from 34.70 to 40.26 and from 33.32 to 39.12, respectively.
Furthermore, we introduce an open-domain dataset WIKITABLETEXT including 13,318 explanatory sentences for
4,962 tables. Our model achieves a BLEU-4 score of 38.23,
which outperforms template based and language model based
approaches.

Introduction
1

A Table is a widely-used type of data source on the web,
which has a formal structure and contains valuable information. Understanding the meaning of a table and describing
its content is an important problem in artiﬁcial intelligence,
with potential applications like question answering, building
conversational agents and supporting search engines. (Pasupat and Liang 2015; Sun et al. 2016; Yin et al. 2015;
Jauhar, Turney, and Hovy 2016; Konstas and Lapata 2013;
Li et al. 2016; Yan et al. 2016). In this paper, we focus on the
task of table-to-text generation. The goal is to automatically
describe a table region (e.g., a row) with natural language.
The task of table-to-text could be used to support many
applications, such as search engines and conversational
agents. On one hand, the task could be used to generate descriptive sentences for the structured tables on the web. Current search engines could serve structured tables as answers
by regarding the generated sentences as keys and tables as
values. On the other hand, tables could also be used as responses for conversational agents such as the intents of ticket
∗
Contribution during internship at Microsoft Research Asia
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Table (information)

5020

