The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Phase-Parametric Policies for
Reinforcement Learning in Cyclic Environments
Arjun Sharma, Kris M. Kitani
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{arjuns2, kkitani}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
In many reinforcement learning problems, parameters of the
model may vary with its phase while the agent attempts to
learn through its interaction with the environment. For example, an autonomous car’s reward on selecting a path may depend on trafﬁc conditions at the time of the day or the transition dynamics of a drone may depend on the current wind direction. Many such processes exhibit a cyclic phase-structure
and could be represented with a control policy parameterized
over a circular or cyclic phase space. Attempting to model
such phase variations with a standard data-driven approach
(e.g. deep networks) without explicitly modeling the phase
of the model can be challenging. Ambiguities may arise as
the optimal action for a given state can vary depending on
the phase. To better model cyclic environments, we propose
phase-parameterized policies and value function approximators that explicitly enforce a cyclic structure to the policy
or value space. We apply our phase-parameterized reinforcement learning approach to both feed-forward and recurrent
deep networks in the context of trajectory optimization and
locomotion problems. Our experiments show that our proposed approach has superior modeling performance than traditional function approximators in cyclic environments.

Figure 1: Many processes such as monoped (top) and biped
(bottom) motion exhibit a cyclic nature. Plots in the ﬁgure
depict the motion of the centre of mass of the body.

Introduction

(Mnih et al. 2015; Schulman et al. 2015a; Mnih et al. 2016;
Levine et al. 2016; Schulman et al. 2015b), most current
techniques do not explicitly account for phase changes that
may occur in the environment. When information regarding
the phase of the environment is available (e.g., a wind sensor,
clock, pedometer), a simple strategy may be to append that
phase information to the state representation when learning
the policy or value function. However, for high-dimensional
state spaces, which are common in many real-world problems, it may be difﬁcult for the underlying estimator (e.g.,
a deep neural network) to vary its policy drastically based
on a single phase input variable. Another strategy may be
to learn a set of independent estimators for different phases
or modes of the environment. However, this approach does
not scale as the number of phases increases and would also
be highly sample inefﬁcient as experience gained to learn a
policy in one phase would not be used to learn the policy for
another.
In this work, we look at the class of problems where the
phase-structure is cyclic. Phase cycles need not follow a periodic pattern and their evolution may even be stochastic.

In reinforcement learning, an agent learns by interacting
with the environment. The agent takes an action and receives a reward from the environment which transitions to
a new state. In many real world problems, model parameters
such as reward and transition dynamics may vary while the
agent is still learning through its interactions. For example,
a drone may experience winds from different directions as
it learns to navigate, requiring different strategies to counteract movement caused by the wind. An autonomous car
may receive a high reward on choosing a particular path to
its destination at one time of the day but low reward during another as trafﬁc conditions vary. Such variations make
learning with standard data-driven approaches challenging
as these methods must learn to model such variations in
feedback without explicitly modeling the phase structure of
the model (e.g., wind direction, trafﬁc conditions).
While deep learning based methods have been successfully applied to various reinforcement learning problems
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6540

