The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Toward Deep Reinforcement Learning without
a Simulator: An Autonomous Steering Example
Bar Hilleli, Ran El-Yaniv
Department of Computer Science
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel
rani@cs.technion.ac.il
barh@campus.technion.ac.il
Neural Networks (CNNs) as mapping functions from highdimensional data to control actions and to instantaneous reward signals. The choice of CNNs is based on their proven
ability to extract informative features from images in the
context of classiﬁcation and control tasks (Mnih et al. 2015;
Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), thus obviating the
exhausting task of manually deﬁning features. For example,
in the work of Mnih et al. (2015), a CNN was successfully
trained to predict desired control actions in the Atari 2600
domain, given high-dimensional pixel data.
Two of the most promising approaches for robot training are Imitation Learning (IL) and Reinforcement Learning
(RL). In IL, a human demonstrator performs the desired task
with the goal of teaching a (robotic) agent to mimic her actions (Argall et al. 2009). The demonstrations are used to
learn a mapping from a given world state, s, received via
sensors, to a desired action, a, consisting of instructions to
the agent’s controllers. In RL, the goal is to enable the agent
to ﬁnd its own policy, one that maximizes a value function
deﬁned in terms of certain guidance reward signals received
during its interaction with the environment. IL and RL can
be naturally combined, as was recently proposed by Taylor, Suay, and Chernova (2011). The idea is to initiate the
reinforcement learning process with a policy learned during a preceding IL stage. This combined approach can signiﬁcantly accelerate the RL learning process and minimize
costly agent–environment interactions. In addition, deploying the RL algorithm after the IL stage compensates for the
noisy demonstrations from which IL can suffer and extends
the imitation strategy to previously unseen areas of the state
space.
Noisy demonstrations in the IL stage typically result from
inconsistent strategies adopted by the human demonstrator.
Consequently, the performance of an IL agent is limited by
the quality of the observed demonstration. Another drawback of IL is its susceptibility to ‘distributional divergences’,
where a sequence of minor errors in the agent’s behavior is
compounded and leads to a state that is completely outside
the scope of the training sample. The agent’s behavior in
such states can be arbitrary and possibly dangerous. RL has
it ﬂaws as well: it either requires a realistic simulation of
the agent’s interaction with the environment or requires operating the agent in a real-world environment, which can be
quite costly. Moreover, the sample complexity of RL can be

Abstract
We propose a scheme for training a computerized agent to
perform complex human tasks such as highway steering.
The scheme is designed to follow a natural learning process
wherein a human instructor teaches a computerized trainee.
It enables leveraging the weak supervision abilities of a (human) instructor who – while unable to perform the required
task well herself – can provide coherent and learnable instantaneous reward signals to the computerized trainee. The
learning process consists of three supervised elements followed by reinforcement learning. The supervised learning
stages are: (i) supervised imitation learning; (ii) supervised
reward induction; and (iii) supervised safety module construction. We implemented this scheme using deep convolutional networks and successfully created a computerized
agent capable of autonomous highway steering in the wellknown racing game Assetto Corsa. We demonstrate that the
use of all components is essential to effectively carry out reinforcement learning of the steering task using vision alone,
without access to a driving simulator internals, and operating
in wall-clock time.

1

Introduction

Consider the task of designing a robot capable of performing a complex human task such as dishwashing, driving or
ironing clothes. Although these tasks are natural for adult
humans, designing a hard-coded algorithm for such a robot
can be a daunting challenge. Obstacles include difﬁculties
in accurately modeling the robot and its interaction with
the environment, creating hand-crafted features from highdimensional sensor data, and guaranteeing that the robot is
able to adapt to new situations, to name just a few. In this
paper, we propose a general scheme that combines several
learning techniques to tackle such challenges. As a proof a
concept, we implemented the scheme and applied it to the
challenging problem of autonomous highway steering. To
this end, we use one of the most popular computer racing
games (Assetto Corsa)1 , and attempt to create a self-steering
car in the sense that given raw image pixels (of the car racing game screen), we wish to output correct steering control commands for the steering wheel. We use Convolutional
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
At the time of writing, this game is considered to be one of the
most realistic computer racing environments.

1471

