The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Selecting Proper Multi-Class SVM Training Methods
Yawen Chen,† Zeyi Wen,‡ Jian Chen,†∗ Jin Huang§
†

ywchenscut@gmail.com, ellachen@scut.edu.cn
South China University of Technology, China
‡
wenzy@comp.nus.edu.sg
National University of Singapore, Singapore
§
jinhuang@scnu.edu.cn
South China Normal University, China
In this work, we do not concentrate on which method is better in general, but aim to ﬁnd an approach to help users, especially those who are from other ﬁelds, to automatically
choose the most appropriate method for a given problem.
Our key idea is to select the training method based on the
distribution of training data and the similarity between different classes. According to the balance and similarity of the
data, we estimate the unclassiﬁable rate of each multi-class
SVM training method, and select the training method with
the minimum unclassiﬁable rate. Our initial ﬁndings show:
(i) SSVMs with linear kernel perform worse than OVO and
OVA; (ii) MMS often produces SVM classiﬁers that can
conﬁdently classify unseen instances.

Abstract
Support Vector Machines (SVMs) are excellent candidate
solutions to solving multi-class problems, and multi-class
SVMs can be trained by several different methods. Different
training methods commonly produce SVMs with different effectiveness, and no multi-class SVM training method always
outperforms other multi-class SVM training methods on all
problems. This raises difﬁculty for practitioners to choose
the best training method for a given problem. In this work,
we propose a Multi-class Method Selection (MMS) approach
to help users select the most appropriate method among
one-versus-one (OVO), one-versus-all (OVA) and structural
SVMs (SSVMs) for a given problem. Our key idea is to select
the training method based on the distribution of training data
and the similarity between different classes. Using the distribution and class similarity, we estimate the unclassiﬁable
rate of each multi-class SVM training method, and select the
training method with the minimum unclassiﬁable rate. Our
initial ﬁndings show: (i) SSVMs with linear kernel perform
worse than OVO and OVA; (ii) MMS often produces SVM
classiﬁers that can conﬁdently classify unseen instances.

Our MMS approach
Considering the constraints of each method, we propose a
Multi-class Method Selection (MMS) approach to help users
automatically choose the appropriate multi-class SVM training method for a given problem. Next, we present two measurements for training data, and describe our MMS method.

Measurement of balance

Introduction

We use the variance to measure the balance of data distribution. We ﬁrst normalize the number of instances in each
class, and then compute the variance V using Equation (1).
nl
, l = 1, 2, · · · , K
nl =
n1 + n2 + · · · + nK
(1)
1 2

ΣK
l=1 (nl − K )
V =
K −1
where K is the number of classes, nl is the number of instances in class l, and nl is the normalized nl .

Existing studies have shown that Support Vector Machines
(SVMs) (Vapnik 1998) perform well in solving multi-class
classiﬁcation problems (Hsu and Lin 2002). There are two
types of approaches to solving multi-class problems using
SVMs. One is solving the multi-class problem using one
optimization problem, and the other is by decomposing the
multi-class problem into several binary SVM training problems. Structural SVMs (SSVMs) solve the multi-class problem as one optimization problem; one-versus-one (OVO)
and one-versus-all (OVA) decomposition solve the multiclass problem using several binary SVM training problems.
With several approaches to multi-class SVM training and
classiﬁcation, choosing a proper approach to solve a particular problem is difﬁcult, since different training methods commonly produce SVMs with signiﬁcantly different
effectiveness. Existing studies (Crammer and Singer 2002;
Hsu and Lin 2002) have shown that no multi-class SVM
training method outperforms other methods in all problems.

Measurement of similarity
Although other similarity functions will be explored in this
work, here we use a radials basis function (RBF) kernel to
measure the similarity of each pair of classes in a dataset. We
ﬁrst randomly choose some instances in each class. Then we
follow Equation (2) to obtain the similarity S̄ of the dataset.
xi − xj 2
)}, i ∈ I, j ∈ J
S(I, J) = min{exp(−
2σ 2

I∈K,J∈K,I=J S(I, J)
S̄ =
K

∗

Jian Chen is the corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8061

(2)

