The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

On Consensus in Belief Merging
Nicolas Schwind

Pierre Marquis

National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology, Tokyo, Japan
nicolas-schwind@aist.go.jp

CRIL-CNRS, Université d’Artois,
Institut Universitaire de France
Lens, France
marquis@cril.fr

Since consensus operators are BM operators, it is important to situate them within the family of BM operators.
This family received much attention in AI and some rationality postulates (the so-called IC postulates) associated with
representation theorems have been pointed out (Konieczny
and Pino Pérez 2002a). As BM operators, consensus operators are thus expected to satisfy as many IC postulates as
possible. Unfortunately, using fully rational merging operators does not lead to compute merged bases which are consensuses in the general case.

Abstract
We deﬁne a consensus postulate in the propositional belief
merging setting. In a nutshell, this postulate imposes the
merged base to be consistent with the pieces of information provided by each agent involved in the merging process.
The interplay of this new postulate with the IC postulates
for belief merging is studied, and an incompatibility result is
proved. The maximal sets of IC postulates which are consistent with the consensus postulate are exhibited. When satisfying some of the remaining IC postulates, consensus operators
are shown to suffer from a weak inferential power. We then
introduce two families of consensus operators having a better
inferential power by setting aside some of these postulates.

Example 1 Consider a set of three US citizens, Alice, Bob,
Charlie traveling together to Paris, and planning a trip to
Normandy. They all know that they have to take a train at
station Gare St Lazare but have different beliefs about the
location and availability of the station from CDG Airport.
Thus, Alice (agent 1) believes that Gare St Lazare is located
at the north of Paris midtown, and at the west. Bob (agent 2)
has been told that Gare St Lazare is located at the south of
Paris midtown, and that it is not reachable from CDG airport in less than 30mn, and Charlie (agent 3) believes that
it is located at the north of Paris midtown, and is reachable from CDG airport in less than 30mn. Representing the
information using three propositional symbols (a: Gare St
Lazare is located at the south of Paris midtown, b: Gare St
Lazare is located at the east of Paris midtown, and c: Gare
St Lazare is reachable from CDG airport in less than 30mn),
the belief bases of Alice, Bob, and Charlie are respectively
ϕ1 = {¬a ∧ ¬b}, ϕ2 = {a ∧ ¬c}, and ϕ3 = {¬a ∧ c}. Here
there are no integrity constraint (μ = ). Suppose one takes
advantage of the distance-based merging operator ΔdH ,Σ
to merge the belief bases of the proﬁle K = {ϕ1 , ϕ2 , ϕ3 }
under μ. ΔdH ,Σ is based on the Hamming distance and uses
sum as the aggregation function. It is known to satisfy all the
IC postulates (Konieczny and Pino Pérez 2002a), thus it appears prima facie as a good candidate for this job. However,
ΔdμH ,Σ ({ϕ1 , ϕ2 , ϕ3 }) is equivalent to the base {¬a ∧ ¬b},1
which is not a consensus for {ϕ1 , ϕ2 , ϕ3 } under μ since it
conﬂicts with Bob’s beliefs.
In order to satisfy the consensus condition for this example, a logically weaker merged base must be computed.
Thus, merging operators having quite a low inferential
power look at a ﬁrst glance as suitable consensus operators.

Introduction
In this paper, we are interested in deﬁning consensus operators for aggregating pieces of propositional information.
We consider a set of n communicating agents, each of them
wanting to reﬁne her own propositional beliefs ϕi by merging them with the beliefs of the other agents of the group.
Reaching this goal requires ﬁrst to merge all the belief bases,
then to determine how to reﬁne each ϕi with the result of the
merging process. To achieve the ﬁrst step, many belief merging (BM) operators can be exploited, see e.g., (Lin 1996;
Revesz 1997; Liberatore and Schaerf 1998; Konieczny and
Pino Pérez 2002a; Konieczny and Pino Pérez 2011). The
second step calls for revision policies, as considered in
(Schwind et al. 2015; 2016).
Here the focus is laid on agents which are reluctant to
change: each agent is ready to accept the merged base, provided that it allows her to reﬁne her prior beliefs ϕi but
does not question them. Thus, the revision policy which is
adopted by each such agent consists in expanding her belief
base ϕi by the merged base if the conjunction is consistent,
and to keep ϕi unchanged otherwise. In order to avoid the
latter case, we are interested in deﬁning consensus operators, i.e., merging operators such that the merged base C
that is generated satisﬁes the consensus condition: C is consistent with every input base ϕi that is consistent with the
integrity constraint μ. In such a case, C is said to be a consensus for K under μ.
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

1949

Details of the computations are reported in Table 1.

