The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Solving Generalized Column
Subset Selection with Heuristic Search
Swair Shah, Baokun He, Ke Xu, Crystal Maung, Haim Schweitzer
{swair,baokun.he,ke.xu5,ktm016100,hschweitzer}@utdallas.edu

Abstract
EPCA (X, r) = min Θ(X − V A)

We address the problem of approximating a matrix by the
linear combination of a column sparse matrix and a low rank
matrix. Two variants of a heuristic search algorithm are described. The ﬁrst produces an optimal solution but may be
slow, as these problems are believed to be NP-hard. The second is much faster, but only guarantees a suboptimal solution.
The quality of the approximation and the optimality criterion
can be speciﬁed in terms of unitarily invariant norms.

1

V,A

subject to |V | = r
ECSSP (X, r) = min Θ(X − SA)
S,A

subject to S ⊂ X, |S| = r
EDLRR (X, r1 , r2 ) = min Θ(X − SA1 − V A2 )
S,A1 ,V,A2

subject to S ⊂ X, |S| = r1 , |V | = r2

Introduction

Approximating a matrix by a linear combination of a small
number of vectors is an important problem encountered in
many applications of numerical linear algebra. Let X and
V be two matrices. The approximation of X in the column
subspace of V can be written as:
X ≈ V A,

approximation error = Θ(X − V A)

2

The algorithm

Our method conducts a heuristic search on the column subsets graph that was originally described in (Arai, Maung,
and Schweitzer 2015). The graph nodes correspond to column subsets, and there is an edge from subset Si to subset
Sj if adding one column to Si creates Sj . The graph generated for the matrix X = (x1 , x2 , x3 ) is depicted in the top
part of Fig 1.
The heuristic search algorithm is shown at the bottom of
Fig 1. The algorithm keeps a fringe list L of nodes that need
to be examined, and a list C of closed nodes, containing
nodes that will not be visited again. The nodes are selected
from the fringe according to the value of the heuristic function f  . The algorithm terminates at the ﬁrst time that a node
ni is selected which has a column subset of size r1 .
This algorithm is essentially the same as the classic A∗ algorithm (Pearl 1984). However, the standard heuristic functions d, f, g, h that are used by the classic A∗ do not have a
trivial equivalent in our case. We proceed to deﬁne heuristic
functions with similar notation to the ones used in the classic
A∗ algorithm.

(1)

Here A is the coefﬁcients matrix and Θ is an error criterion.
When the columns of V are restricted to be the columns of
X, the problem is the well known Column Subset Selection Problem (CSSP); when all the columns of V are unrestricted, the problem is the classic Principal Component
Analysis (PCA).
The generalization of these two problems is the case where
some of the columns of the V are required to be columns of
X, and the rest are unrestricted. In this case the approximation (1) can be written as:
X ≈ SA1 + V A2

(3)

(2)

Here S consists of columns from X, and V is unrestricted.
We refer to this representation as the “double low-rank representation” (DLRR). The algorithms described in this paper are for the DLRR, and thus can be applied to the CSSP.
The approximation errors of the three representations considered here are shown in (3). The notation |S| is used for the
number of columns of the matrix S, and the notation S ⊂ X
indicates that the columns of S are a also columns of X.
We propose heuristic search algorithms for the DLRR that
are optimal for all unitarily invariant norms (e.g. Spectral,
Nuclear, Frobenius).

2.1

Heuristic functions

The DLRR is deﬁned in terms of X, r1 , r2 . At each node
ni the subset Si and its size ki are known. Deﬁne e∗ to be
the smallest error of approximating X by a selection of r1
columns and the best possible additional r2 unrestricted vectors. The heuristic functions are deﬁned at each node ni . The
function d is deﬁned as the smallest error of approximating
X by a selection of r1 columns that include Si and the best
possible additional r2 unrestricted vectors. The function g
is deﬁned as the smallest error of approximating X by the

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8153

