The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Feature Representations
for Keyphrase Extraction
Corina Florescu, Wei Jin
Computer Science and Engineering
University of North Texas, Denton, TX, 76207
CorinaFlorescu@my.unt.edu, wei.jin@unt.edu

An intuitive approach to replace the process of feature design is to use the existing neural language models (Mikolov,
Yih, and Zweig 2013). Learning word representations from
large collections of text is an efﬁcient way to capture rich
semantic and syntactic information about words. However,
even if these representations may carry a lot of information,
they are not effective enough if directly used for KE. Similar to the design of hand-crafted features which are built on
various observations, a feature learning process should exploit the structure of the text itself to discover patterns that
keyphrases exhibit. Recently, Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena
(2014) introduced a generalization of the neural language
models that allows for the exploration of a network structure
through a stream of short random walks. Applying a similar
line of reasoning to word graphs built from natural language
documents results in representations that capture characteristics of words in relation to the topology of the document.
Inspired by this work, we propose SurfKE, a supervised
approach to KE that represents a document as a word graph
and learns feature representations of graph nodes. Our experiments on a synthesized dataset show that: (1) our approach has the potential to automatically learn informative
features for KE; (2) our model that uses its self-discovered
features obtains better results than strong baselines.

Abstract
In supervised approaches for keyphrase extraction, a candidate phrase is encoded with a set of hand-crafted features
and machine learning algorithms are trained to discriminate
keyphrases from non-keyphrases. Although the manuallydesigned features have shown to work well in practice, feature engineering is a difﬁcult process that requires expert
knowledge and normally does not generalize well. In this paper, we present SurfKE, a feature learning framework that
exploits the text itself to automatically discover patterns that
keyphrases exhibit. Our model represents the document as
a graph and automatically learns feature representation of
phrases. The proposed model obtains remarkable improvements in performance over strong baselines.

Introduction
Keyphrase extraction (KE) is the task of automatically extracting descriptive phrases or concepts that represent the
main topics of a document. Keyphrases associated with a
document have shown to improve many natural language
processing and information retrieval tasks. Due to their importance, numerous approaches to KE have been proposed
along two lines of research: supervised and unsupervised.
In supervised approaches, a candidate phrase is encoded
with a set of features, such as its tf-idf, position in the document or part-of-speech tag, and machine learning algorithms
are trained to classify it as either positive (i.e., keyphrases)
or negative (i.e., non-keyphrases). The supervised line of research has mainly been concerned with the design of various hand-crafted features which may yield better classiﬁers
that more accurately predict the keyphrases of a document.
For example, Hulth (2003) used a combination of lexical
and syntactic features, such as the collection frequency and
the part-of-speech tag of a phrase; Medelyan, Frank, and
Witten (2009) designed features to include the spread of a
phrase and Wikipedia-based keyphraseness. Although these
features have shown to work well in practice, many of them
are computed based on statistical information collected from
the training documents which are less suited outside of that
domain. Thus, it is essential to automatically discover such
features or representations without relying on feature engineering which normally does not generalize well.

Proposed Model
Our model involves three essential steps, as detailed below.
Graph Construction. Let dt be a target document for extracting keyphrases. We build an undirected word graph
G = (V, E), where each unique word that passes the part-ofspeech ﬁlters corresponds to a vertex vi ∈ V . Two vertices
vi and vj are linked by an edge (vi , vj ) ∈ E if the words
corresponding to these vertices co-occur within a window of
w contiguous tokens in dt . The weight of an edge (denoted
as wij ) is computed based on the co-occurrence count of the
two words within a window of w successive tokens in dt .
Learning Feature Representations. Let G be an undirected
graph constructed as above. Our goal is to learn a mapping
function f : V → IR|V |×d , d ≤ |V | where d is a parameter
specifying the number of dimensions for the embeddings.
This function f represents the latent representations associated with each vertex vi ∈ V . Similar to neural language
models, the network feature learning model needs a corpus
and a vocabulary in order to learn a mapping of nodes to

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8077

