The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Diverse Exploration for Fast
and Safe Policy Improvement
Andrew Cohen

Lei Yu

Robert Wright

Binghamton University
acohen13@binghamton.edu

Binghamton University
Yantai University
lyu@binghamton.edu

Assured Information Security
wrightr@ainfosec.com

2003)) at the “state” level, and achieve exploration by “deviating” from the best policy according to current knowledge.
In this work, we take a radically different approach to
exploration by performing exploration over the space of
stochastic policies. We propose Diverse Exploration (DE)
which learns and deploys a diverse set of safe policies to explore the environment. Following the insight that in almost
all cases, there exist different safe policies with similar performance for complex problems, DE makes exploratory decisions at the “policy” level, and achieves exploration at little
to no sacriﬁce to performance by searching policy space and
“exploiting” multiple diverse policies that are safe according
to current knowledge.
The main contributions of this paper are four-fold. First,
it formally deﬁnes the FSI problem. Second, it proposes a
new exploration strategy DE as a solution. Third, it provides
DE theory which shows how diversity in behavior policies
in one iteration promotes diversity in subsequent iterations,
enabling effective exploration under uncertainty in the space
of safe policies. Finally, it proposes a general algorithmic
framework for DE. The framework iteratively learns a diverse set of policies from a single batch of experience data
and evaluates their quality through off-policy evaluation by
importance sampling before deploying them. We compare
this to a baseline algorithm, referred to as SPI (safe policy
improvement), which follows the same framework but only
learns and deploys a single safe policy at every iteration. Experiments on three domains show that the DE framework can
achieve both safe performance and fast policy improvement.

Abstract
We study an important yet under-addressed problem of
quickly and safely improving policies in online reinforcement learning domains. As its solution, we propose a novel
exploration strategy - diverse exploration (DE), which learns
and deploys a diverse set of safe policies to explore the environment. We provide DE theory explaining why diversity in
behavior policies enables effective exploration without sacriﬁcing exploitation. Our empirical study shows that an online
policy improvement algorithm framework implementing the
DE strategy can achieve both fast policy improvement and
safe online performance.

Introduction
Recent advances in autonomy technology have promoted the
widespread emergence of autonomous agents in various domains such as autonomous vehicles, online marketing, and
ﬁnancial management. Common to all of these domains is
the requirement to quickly improve from the current policy/strategy in use while ensuring safe operations. We call
this requirement the Fast and Safe (policy) Improvement
(FSI) problem. On one hand, fast policy improvement demands that an agent acquire a better policy quickly (i.e,
through fewer interactions with the environment). On the
other hand, a new policy to be deployed needs to be safe
- guaranteed to perform at least as well as a baseline policy (e.g., the current policy). Untested policies and/or unrestricted exploratory actions that potentially cause degenerated performance are not acceptable.
Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 1998)
has great potential in enabling robust autonomous agents
that learn and optimize from new experiences. The exploration/exploitation problem is a well studied RL problem.
Past research has focused mainly on learning an optimal or
near-optimal policy, instead of the FSI problem. Conventional exploration strategies do not provide a suitable tradeoff between exploitation and exploration to achieve both fast
and safe policy improvement. They make potentially suboptimal and unsafe exploratory action choices (either blindly
like -greedy (Sutton and Barto 1998) or intentionally to
reduce uncertainty like R-MAX (Brafman and Tennenholtz

Preliminaries
RL problems can be elegantly described within the context
of Markov Decision Processes (MDP) (Puterman 2009). An
MDP, M , is deﬁned as a 5-tuple, M = (S, A, P, R, γ),
where S is a fully observable ﬁnite set of states, A is a ﬁnite
set of possible actions, P is the state transition model such
that P (s |s, a) ∈ [0, 1] describes the probability of transitioning to state s after taking action a in state s, Ras,s is the
expected value of the immediate reward r after taking a in s,
resulting in s , and γ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor on future
rewards. A solution to an MDP is a policy, π(a|s) which
provides the probability of taking action a in state s when
following policy π. The quality or performance of a policy
is determined by the expected value that can be obtained by

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2876

