The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Event Representations for Automated
Story Generation with Deep Neural Nets
Lara J. Martin, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Xinyu Wang,
William Hancock, Shruti Singh, Brent Harrison, Mark O. Riedl
School of Interactive Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA
{ljmartin; raj.ammanabrolu; lillywang1126; whancock;
shruti.singh; brent.harrison; riedl} @gatech.edu
model from available data (Li et al. 2013; Roemmele et al.
2017) or to reuse data and knowledge available from a corpus (Swanson and Gordon 2012).
In this paper, we explore the use of recurrent encoderdecoder neural networks (e.g., Sequence-to-Sequence
(Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014)) for open story generation. An encoder-decoder RNN is trained to predict the next
token(s) in a sequence, given one or more input tokens. The
network architecture and set of weights θ comprise a generative model capturing and generalizing over patterns observed in the training data. For open story generation, we
must train the network on a dataset that encompasses as
many domains as possible. For this work, we use a corpus
of movie plot summaries extracted from Wikipedia (Bamman, O’Connor, and Smith 2014) under the premise that the
set of movie plots on Wikipedia covers the range of domains
that people want to tell stories about.
In narratological terms, an event is a unit of story featuring
a world state change (Prince 1987). Textual story corpora,
including Wikipedia movie plot corpora, are comprised of
unstructured textual sentences. One beneﬁt to dealing with
movie plots is the clarity of events that occur, although this
is often at the expense of more creative language. Even so,
character- or word-level analysis of these sentences would
fail to capture the interplay between the words that make
up the meaning behind the sentence. Character- and wordlevel recurrent neural networks can learn to create grammatically correct sentences but often fail to produce coherent narratives beyond a couple of sentences. On the other
hand, sentence-level events would be too unique from each
other to ﬁnd any real relationship between them. Even with a
large corpus of stories, we would most likely have sequences
of sentences that would only ever be seen once. For example, “Old ranch-hand Frank Osorio travels from Patagonia
to Buenos Aires to bring the news of his daughter’s demise
to his granddaughter Alina.” occurs only once in our corpus,
so we have only ever seen one example of what is likely to
occur before and after it (if anything). Due to event sparsity,
we are likely to have poor predictive ability.
In order to help maintain a coherent story, one can provide
an event representation that is expressive enough to preserve
the semantic meaning of sentences in a story corpus while

Abstract
Automated story generation is the problem of automatically
selecting a sequence of events, actions, or words that can be
told as a story. We seek to develop a system that can generate stories by learning everything it needs to know from
textual story corpora. To date, recurrent neural networks that
learn language models at character, word, or sentence levels
have had little success generating coherent stories. We explore the question of event representations that provide a midlevel of abstraction between words and sentences in order
to retain the semantic information of the original data while
minimizing event sparsity. We present a technique for preprocessing textual story data into event sequences. We then
present a technique for automated story generation whereby
we decompose the problem into the generation of successive
events (event2event) and the generation of natural language
sentences from events (event2sentence). We give empirical
results comparing different event representations and their
effects on event successor generation and the translation of
events to natural language.

Introduction
Automated story generation is the problem of automatically
selecting a sequence of events, actions, or words that can be
told as a story. To date, most story generation systems have
used symbolic planning (Young et al. 2013) or case-based
reasoning (Gervás et al. 2005). While these automated story
generation systems were able to produce impressive results,
they rely on a human-knowledge engineer to provide symbolic domain models that indicated legal characters, actions,
and knowledge about when character actions can and cannot be performed; these systems are limited to only telling
stories that are covered by the domain knowledge. Consequently, it is difﬁcult to determine whether the quality of the
stories produced by these systems is a result of the algorithm
or good knowledge engineering.
Open story generation (Li et al. 2013) is the problem of
automatically generating a story about any domain without
a priori manual knowledge engineering. Open story generation requires an intelligent system to either learn a domain
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

868

