The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Deep Q-Learning from Demonstrations
Todd Hester

Matej Vecerik

Olivier Pietquin

Marc Lanctot

Google DeepMind
toddhester@google.com

Google DeepMind
matejvecerik@google.com

Google DeepMind
pietquin@google.com

Google DeepMind
lanctot@google.com

Tom Schaul

Bilal Piot

Dan Horgan

John Quan

Google DeepMind
schaul@google.com

Google DeepMind
piot@google.com

Google DeepMind
horgan@google.com

Google DeepMind
johnquan@google.com

Andrew Sendonaris

Ian Osband

Gabriel Dulac-Arnold

John Agapiou

Google DeepMind
sendos@yahoo.com

Google DeepMind
iosband@google.com

Google DeepMind
gabe@squirrelsoup.net

Google DeepMind
jagapiou@google.com

Joel Z. Leibo

Audrunas Gruslys

Google DeepMind
jzl@google.com

Google DeepMind
audrunas@google.com
clude deep model-free Q-learning for general Atari gameplaying (Mnih et al. 2015), end-to-end policy search for control of robot motors (Levine et al. 2016), model predictive
control with embeddings (Watter et al. 2015), and strategic
policies that combined with search led to defeating a top human expert at the game of Go (Silver et al. 2016). An important part of the success of these approaches has been to
leverage the recent contributions to scalability and performance of deep learning (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015).
The approach taken in (Mnih et al. 2015) builds a data set of
previous experience using batch RL to train large convolutional neural networks in a supervised fashion from this data.
By sampling from this data set rather than from current experience, the correlation in values from state distribution bias
is mitigated, leading to good (in many cases, super-human)
control policies.
It still remains difﬁcult to apply these algorithms to
real world settings such as data centers, autonomous vehicles (Hester and Stone 2013), helicopters (Abbeel et al.
2007), or recommendation systems (Shani, Heckerman, and
Brafman 2005). Typically these algorithms learn good control policies only after many millions of steps of very poor
performance in simulation. This situation is acceptable when
there is a perfectly accurate simulator; however, many real
world problems do not come with such a simulator. Instead,
in these situations, the agent must learn in the real domain
with real consequences for its actions, which requires that
the agent have good on-line performance from the start of
learning. While accurate simulators are difﬁcult to ﬁnd, most
of these problems have data of the system operating under a
previous controller (either human or machine) that performs
reasonably well. In this work, we make use of this demonstration data to pre-train the agent so that it can perform well
in the task from the start of learning, and then continue im-

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved several
high proﬁle successes in difﬁcult decision-making problems.
However, these algorithms typically require a huge amount of
data before they reach reasonable performance. In fact, their
performance during learning can be extremely poor. This may
be acceptable for a simulator, but it severely limits the applicability of deep RL to many real-world tasks, where the agent
must learn in the real environment. In this paper we study a
setting where the agent may access data from previous control of the system. We present an algorithm, Deep Q-learning
from Demonstrations (DQfD), that leverages small sets of
demonstration data to massively accelerate the learning process even from relatively small amounts of demonstration
data and is able to automatically assess the necessary ratio
of demonstration data while learning thanks to a prioritized
replay mechanism. DQfD works by combining temporal difference updates with supervised classiﬁcation of the demonstrator’s actions. We show that DQfD has better initial performance than Prioritized Dueling Double Deep Q-Networks
(PDD DQN) as it starts with better scores on the ﬁrst million
steps on 41 of 42 games and on average it takes PDD DQN
83 million steps to catch up to DQfD’s performance. DQfD
learns to out-perform the best demonstration given in 14 of
42 games. In addition, DQfD leverages human demonstrations to achieve state-of-the-art results for 11 games. Finally,
we show that DQfD performs better than three related algorithms for incorporating demonstration data into DQN.

Introduction
Over the past few years, there have been a number
of successes in learning policies for sequential decisionmaking problems and control. Notable examples inc 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3223

