The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning to Rank Based on Analogical Reasoning
Mohsen Ahmadi Fahandar, Eyke Hüllermeier
Department of Computer Science
Paderborn University
Pohlweg 49-51, 33098 Paderborn, Germany
ahmadim@mail.upb.de, eyke@upb.de

Abstract
Object ranking or “learning to rank” is an important problem
in the realm of preference learning. On the basis of training
data in the form of a set of rankings of objects represented as
feature vectors, the goal is to learn a ranking function that predicts a linear order of any new set of objects. In this paper, we
propose a new approach to object ranking based on principles
of analogical reasoning. More speciﬁcally, our inference pattern is formalized in terms of so-called analogical proportions
and can be summarized as follows: Given objects A, B, C, D,
if object A is known to be preferred to B, and C relates to
D as A relates to B, then C is (supposedly) preferred to D.
Our method applies this pattern as a main building block and
combines it with ideas and techniques from instance-based
learning and rank aggregation. Based on ﬁrst experimental
results for data sets from various domains (sports, education,
tourism, etc.), we conclude that our approach is highly competitive. It appears to be speciﬁcally interesting in situations
in which the objects are coming from different subdomains,
and which hence require a kind of knowledge transfer.

1

A

B

C

D

Figure 1: A is to B as C is to D (pictures from ImageNet).

and a number of different ranking problems have already
been introduced. Based on the type of training data and
the required predictions, Fürnkranz and Hüllermeier distinguish between the problems of object ranking (Cohen,
Schapire, and Singer 1999; Kamishima, Kazawa, and Akaho
2010), label ranking (Har-Peled, Roth, and Zimak 2002;
Cheng, Hühn, and Hüllermeier 2009; Vembu and Gärtner
2010), and instance ranking (Fürnkranz, Hüllermeier, and
Vanderlooy 2009).
The focus of this paper is on object ranking. Given training data in the form of a set of exemplary rankings of subsets of objects, the goal in object ranking is to learn a ranking function that is able to predict the ranking of any new
set of objects. Our main contribution is a novel approach
that is based on the idea of analogical reasoning, and essentially builds on the following inference pattern: If object A
relates to object B as C relates to D, and knowing that A is
preferred to B, we (hypothetically) infer that C is preferred
to D. Figure 1 provides an illustration with cars as objects.
Cars A and B are more or less the same, except that A is
a cabriolet and has color red instead of black, and the same
is true for cars C and D. Thus, knowing that someone likes
car A more than B, we may conjecture that the same person prefers car C to D. Our method applies this pattern as
a main building block and combines it with ideas and techniques from instance-based learning and rank aggregation.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next
section, we recall the setting of object ranking and formalize the corresponding learning problem. In the next section,

Introduction

Preference learning has received increasing attention in machine learning in recent years (Fürnkranz and Hüllermeier
2011). Roughly speaking, the goal in preference learning is
to induce preference models from observational (or experimental) data that reveal information about the preferences
of an individual or a group of individuals in a direct or indirect way; the latter typically serve the purpose of predictive
modeling, i.e., they are then used to predict the preferences
in a new situation.
In general, a preference learning system is provided with
a set of items (e.g., products) for which preferences are
known, and the task is to learn a function that predicts preferences for a new set of items (e.g., new products not seen
so far), or for the same set of items in a different situation (e.g., the same products but for a different user). Frequently, the predicted preference relation is required to form
a total order, in which case we also speak of a ranking
problem. In fact, among the problems in the realm of preference learning, the task of “learning to rank” has probably received the most attention in the literature so far,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2951

