The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Spherical Hidden Markov Model
for Semantics-Rich Human Mobility Modeling
Wanzheng Zhu,∗ Chao Zhang,∗ Shuochao Yao, Xiaobin Gao, Jiawei Han
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
{wz6, czhang82, syao9, xgao16, hanj}@illinois.edu

are witnessing an increasing importance of modeling human mobility from semantic trace data, where each record
in a trace is associated with a text message that describes the
user’s activity. With the wide proliferation of mobile devices
and the ubiquitous access to the mobile Internet, massive semantic trace data are being collected by various social media
services (e.g., Twitter, Instagram, Facebook) and phone carriers on a daily basis (Cheng et al. 2011; Wu et al. 2015;
Zhang et al. 2016b; 2017). Meanwhile, raw GPS trajectories can be readily linked with external sources (e.g., map
data, land uses) to annotate each record with rich semantic
information (Wu et al. 2015).
The wide availability of semantic trace data necessitates a
shift in the paradigm of human mobility modeling — it becomes possible to interpret human mobilities in a semanticsrich way. In addition to uncovering the spatiotemporal patterns of human movements, we could move one step further to understand what are people’s activities at different
regions, and how and why people move from one region to
another. Such semantics-rich knowledge not only enables us
to understand human mobility in a more interpretable way,
but also plays an important role for prediction and decision
making in various downstream applications.
Unfortunately, learning semantics-rich human mobility
models from semantic trace data is a challenging problem that remains largely unsolved by existing techniques.
Traditional mobility modeling techniques (Giannotti et al.
2007; Li et al. 2010; Cho, Myers, and Leskovec 2011;
Mathew, Raposo, and Martins 2012) mostly focus on mining pure spatiotemporal regularities and cannot handle the
text information in semantic traces. Recently, there have
been research efforts that attempt to integrate the text information into the mobility modeling process based on the
bag-of-words model (Ying et al. 2011; Wu et al. 2015;
Zhang et al. 2016a). Nevertheless, these methods are unable
to make the best use of the text information. First, by considering each keyword as an independent dimension, they
do not model the correlations between keywords (e.g., ‘car’,
‘taxi’ and ‘drive’) and may fail to correlate semantically
similar messages. Further, since the vocabulary size is often
large, their performance is limited by the high dimensionality and text sparsity, and meanwhile results in high computational overhead in the model learning process.
To learn semantics-rich mobility models from semantic

Abstract
We study the problem of modeling human mobility from semantic trace data, wherein each GPS record in a trace is associated with a text message that describes the user’s activity. Existing methods fall short in unveiling human movement regularities for such data, because they either do not
model the text data at all or suffer from text sparsity severely.
We propose SHMM, a multi-modal spherical hidden Markov
model for semantics-rich human mobility modeling. Under
the hidden Markov assumption, SHMM models the generation process of a given trace by jointly considering the observed location, time, and text at each step of the trace. The
distinguishing characteristic of SHMM is the text modeling
part. We use ﬁxed-size vector representations to encode the
semantics of the text messages, and model the generation of
the l2 -normalized text embeddings on a unit sphere with the
von Mises-Fisher (vMF) distribution. Compared with other
alternatives like multi-variate Gaussian, our choice of the
vMF distribution not only incurs much fewer parameters, but
also better leverages the discriminative power of text embeddings in a directional metric space. The parameter inference
for the vMF distribution is non-trivial since it involves functional inversion of ratios of Bessel functions. We theoretically
prove, for the ﬁrst time, that: 1) the classical ExpectationMaximization algorithm is able to work with vMF distributions; and 2) while closed-form solutions are hard to be obtained for the M-step, Newton’s method is guaranteed to converge to the optimal solution with quadratic convergence rate.
We have performed extensive experiments on both synthetic
and real-life data. The results on synthetic data verify our theoretical analysis; while the results on real-life data demonstrate that SHMM learns meaningful semantics-rich mobility
models, outperforms state-of-the-art mobility models for next
location prediction, and incurs lower training cost.

Introduction
Uncovering human mobility patterns is not only a fundamental task for human behavioral analysis, but also an important building block for urban planning, trafﬁc forecasting, mobile health applications, and location-based recommender systems (Gonzalez, Hidalgo, and Barabasi 2008;
Kitamura et al. 2000; Zhang et al. 2016a). Recent years
∗

Equal contribution.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4613

