The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multi-Modal Multi-Task Learning for Automatic Dietary Assessment
Qi Liu,1 Yue Zhang,1 Zhenguang Liu,4 Ye Yuan,1 Li Cheng,2,3 Roger Zimmermann3
1. Singapore University of Technology and Design
2. Bioinformatics Institute, A*STAR, Singapore
3. School of Computing, National University of Singapore
4. Zhejiang Gongshang University
{qi liu, yue zhang, ye yuan}@sutd.edu.sg, liuzhenguang2008@gmail.com,
chengli@bii.a-star.edu.sg, rogerz@comp.nus.edu.sg
Abstract
We investigate the task of automatic dietary assessment:
given meal images and descriptions uploaded by real users,
our task is to automatically rate the meals and deliver advisory comments for improving users’ diets. To address this
practical yet challenging problem, which is multi-modal and
multi-task in nature, an end-to-end neural model is proposed.
In particular, comprehensive meal representations are obtained from images, descriptions and user information. We
further introduce a novel memory network architecture to
store meal representations and reason over the meal representations to support predictions. Results on a real-world dataset
show that our method outperforms two strong image captioning baselines signiﬁcantly.

Figure 1: Application example. Dietitians respond to the
users with meal ratings and comments.
can be highly useful. In this paper, we introduce a new problem, utilizing algorithms to automatically assess uploaded
images and descriptions for diet management. The problem
is challenging in several aspects:

Introduction

• The algorithm has to handle multiple modalities. In addition to their images and text descriptions, meals should
also be evaluated based on user information (e.g. less salt
should be taken by users with hypertension), user characteristics such as gender, age, blood sugar level and smoking or not must be considered.
• The problem is multi-task innate in that the algorithm
needs to provide both meal ratings and advisory comments, which should be instructive for diet management.
• User-uploaded data are highly diverse. Diversities in food
cultures and cooking styles bring in challenges for image evaluation. In addition, the descriptions can be written with poor grammatical quality, and user information
mainly consists of categorical variables, which are highly
sparse in practice.

Chronic diseases such as cardiovascular diseases, type 2 diabetes, metabolic syndromes and cancers are the leading
killers in developed countries and have been increasingly
rampant in developing nations (Alwan 2011). Nowadays,
obesity, diabetes and hypertension are even common among
children. Improving diets is a solution to this epidemics of
metabolic diseases that are inundating the world (Roberts
and Barnard 2005). Any successful strategy to improve a
person’s diet and lifestyle is expected to pay off with improved health in the long term.
Since mobile devices are ubiquitous today and deeply impact daily life, dietary interventions conducted by mobile applications hold the promise for long-term diet management
(Rebedew 2014; Goyal et al. 2017). An example of these
applications is shown in Figure 1. Here users can upload an
image and append a short description for reporting the meal
they are consuming, and dietitians can respond to the users
with a meal rating (a single quantitative score for rating the
meal from very unhealthy to very healthy) and detailed comments. Compared to traditional dietary advisory methods,
mobile applications are more accessible and well-suited for
dietary intervention.
However, relying on manual assessments by dietitians is
both expensive and time-consuming. To this end, tools that
can assist dietitians or even automate the advisory process

Motivated by the success of neural models for feature
representations (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997; Karpathy and Fei-Fei
2015; He and Chua 2017), we devise a multi-modal multitask learning framework to solve the problem. In particular,
we utilize a convolutional neural network (Simonyan and
Zisserman 2014), a bidirectional long short term memory
(Schmidhuber 2005) and a neural factorization machine (He
and Chua 2017) to extract features from an image, a description and their corresponding user information, respectively.
The three feature representations are concatenated to obtain
a comprehensive meal representation for assessment.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2347

