The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

On Social Envy-Freeness
in Multi-Unit Markets
Michele Flammini,†‡ Manuel Mauro,† Matteo Tonelli†
†

Gran Sasso Science Institute, L’Aquila, Italy
‡
University of L’Aquila, L’Aquila, Italy
michele.ﬂammini@univaq.it, manuel.mauro@gssi.it, matteo.tonelli@gssi.it

• An envy-free allocation is an allocation in which each
buyer receives a bundle of goods among the ones that
maximize her utility.

Abstract
We consider a market setting in which buyers are individuals of a population, whose relationships are represented by
an underlying social graph. Given buyers valuations for the
items being sold, an outcome consists of a pricing of the objects and an allocation of bundles to the buyers. An outcome
is social envy-free if no buyer strictly prefers the bundles
of her neighbors in the social graph. We focus on the revenue maximization problem in multi-unit markets, in which
there are multiple copies of a same item being sold and each
buyer is assigned a set of identical items. We consider the four
different cases arising by considering different buyers valuations, i.e., single-minded or general, and by adopting different
forms of pricing, that is item- or bundle-pricing. For all the
above cases we show the hardness of the revenue maximization problem and give corresponding approximation results.
All our approximation bounds are optimal or nearly optimal.
Moreover, we provide an optimal allocation algorithm for
general valuations with item-pricing, under the assumption
of social graphs of bounded treewidth. Finally, we determine
optimal bounds on the corresponding price of envy-freeness,
that is on the worst case ratio between the maximum revenue
that can be achieved without envy-freeness constraints, and
the one obtainable in case of social relationships. Some of
our results close hardness open questions or improve already
known ones in the literature concerning the classical setting
without sociality.

• A pair envy-free allocation is an allocation in which no
buyer ﬁnds convenient to switch the bundle she receives
with the one of any other buyer.
Several works in the literature addressed the problem of
pricing and envy-free allocations (Guruswami et al. 2005;
Briest 2008; Chen and Deng 2010; Hartline and Koltun
2005; Brânzei et al. 2016). Similarly, different papers considered the notion of pair envy-freeness (Colini-Baldeschi
et al. 2014; Feldman et al. 2012; Fiat and Wingarten 2009;
Monaco, Sankowski, and Zhang 2015).
As future market scenarios are predicted to become more
and more decentralized and pervasive, new and more realistic constraints need to be introduced in our models. A major concern is the assumption of full information about the
context possessed by the buyers, like the awareness of the
existence of all the other buyers and, more important, of
their allocations. In fact, when dealing with online, highly
dynamic and distributed environments, such a global knowledge might be unfeasible. The issue of modeling the locality of mutual inﬂuences in game theory was already considered in graphical games (Kearns, Littman, and Singh
2001) and explicitly taken into account in (Bilò et al. 2010;
2011), where the authors introduced the existence of a social
graph of the players, under the assumption that the payoff of
each player is affected only by the strategies of the adjacent ones, representing somehow her neighborhood. Similarly, several works in fair allocations of goods in absence
of pricing assumed an individuals view of the subjective
well-being as based on a comparison with peers, that is restricting (pair) envy-freeness constraints to social neighbors
(Abebe, Kleinberg, and Parkes 2017; Chevaleyre, Endriss,
and Maudet 2007). In this setting, the price of envy-freeness
has been deﬁned as the worst case ratio between the total
utility reachable by any allocation of goods and the one that
can be achieved satisfying envy-freeness constraints (Abebe,
Kleinberg, and Parkes 2017).

Introduction
The choice of the prices a ﬁrm has to set for goods or services put on sale is a non-trivial issue that has to be faced
in setting up a business. One of the main aims of the sellers is to ﬁnd pricing policies that maximize their revenue,
while guaranteeing good levels of customer satisfaction. In
this respect, the fair allocation of goods, resources or services is a crucial matter, especially when selling items available in a limited amount, like for instance in bandwidth allocation. In such a setting, one of the most used concepts to
describe fairness is the so called envy-freeness. This notion
was already introduced in the second half of the past century
(Foley 1967; Varian 1974), and can be intended in different
ways. In the ﬁeld of combinatorial auctions, two basic versions have been mostly considered:

Our contribution

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

We focus on the notion of sociality in the pricing problem. Namely, we consider the social envy-freeness setting

1031

