The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Asymmetric Joint Learning
for Heterogeneous Face Recognition
Bing Cao,1 Nannan Wang,2∗ Xinbo Gao1 Jie Li1
1
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks,
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks,
School of Telecommunications, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China

Abstract
Heterogeneous face recognition (HFR) refers to matching a
probe face image taken from one modality to face images
acquired from another modality. It plays an important role
in security scenarios. However, HFR is still a challenging
problem due to great discrepancies between cross-modality
images. This paper proposes an asymmetric joint learning
(AJL) approach to handle this issue. The proposed method
transforms the cross-modality differences mutually by incorporating the synthesized images into the learning process which provides more discriminative information. Although the aggregated data would augment the scale of intraclasses, it also reduces the diversity (i.e. discriminative information) for inter-classes. Then, we develop the AJL model
to balance this dilemma. Finally, we could obtain the similarity score between two heterogeneous face images through
the log-likelihood ratio. Extensive experiments on viewed
sketch database, forensic sketch database and near infrared
image database illustrate that the proposed AJL-HFR method
achieve superior performance in comparison to state-of-theart methods.

1

photo

synthesized sketch

synthesized photo

sketch

Figure 1: The latent information in synthesized images. Different colors of circles and backgrounds represent different
texture information and domains respectively. For example,
The purple circles with the blue rectangle background represent the texture information of one subject in photo domain
and the purple circles with the green rectangle background
represent the same texture information of the synthesized
sketch in sketch domain.

grouped into three categories: local feature descriptor-based
methods, subspace learning-based methods and synthesisbased methods.
Local feature descriptor-based methods extract local feature descriptors to represent heterogeneous face images,
which is desired to reduce the discrepancies between heterogeneous face images in feature level. Yet, because of the
high computational complexity and limited discriminability, these encoded feature descriptors take much time and
perform poor in recognition tasks. Subspace learning-based
methods project face images from different modalities into
a common subspace to minimize the discrepancies. Within
this subspace, heterogeneous face images can be matched
directly. But, it is inevitable to lose effective information in
the projection procedure, which decreases recognition performance. Synthesis-based methods train a set of reconstruction coefﬁcients to transform heterogeneous face images to
homogeneous face images, which is aimed to reduce the
discrepancies between heterogeneous face images in image
level. Then these homogeneous face images can be directly
applied to conventional face recognition approaches. However, the synthesized photos only change the color of corresponding sketches, which could never reduce the differences
in texture (e.g. the shape of glasses frame, double-fold eyelid and facial outline) between heterogeneous face images
and achieve poor performance in HFR. Recently, an efﬁcient joint formulation (Chen et al. 2017) for conventional

Introduction

Heterogeneous face images refer to images that represent
faces in different modalities, such as sketch images (drawn
by artists), visual (VIS) images (captured through general
camera) and near infrared (NIR) images (captured through
near infrared devices). Matching face images between different modalities is called heterogeneous face recognition
(HFR), which is an important issue in security scenarios.
For instance, the photos of suspects are usually difﬁcult to
obtain during the law enforcement process. Then the HFR
is desired to identify suspects by matching sketches drawn
by artists with photos in mug-shot databases. And HFR is
also aimed to matching NIR images with VIS images when
the circumambient illumination condition is poor for face
recognition in public security.
Due to the great differences between heterogeneous face
images, it is difﬁcult for conventional face recognition methods to identify a face sketch or a near infrared face image from visual face photos. Existing HFR methods can be
∗
Corresponding
author:
Nannan
Wang
(nnwang@xidian.edu.cn)
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6682

