The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Leaf-Smoothed Hierarchical Softmax for Ordinal Prediction
Wesley Tansey*

Karl Pichotta,† James G. Scott‡§

Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
wt2274@cumc.columbia.edu

University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
pichotta@cs.utexas.edu
james.scott@mccombs.utexas.edu

(Ranganath et al. 2016). There have been broad calls from
other ﬁelds for methods that efﬁciently handle more moderate
numbers of samples, as in medical imaging, where one predicts diagnostic scores from histological, MRI, or other highdimensional medical data that is very expensive to gather
(Greenspan, van Ginneken, and Summers 2016). Addressing this challenge is crucial for adapting deep learning from
the engineering realm of “big data” to the scientiﬁc realm,
frequently characterized by smaller high-quality datasets.
In this paper we focus on the form of the output layer
for CPE models that predict (potentially-multivariate) ordinal labels, such as the next waveform (1d) in an audio
clip or the next pixel (1d or 3d) in an image. Typically, this
distribution is modeled by the output layer of a deep neural network and contains either the logits of a multinomial
distribution or the parameters of a mixture model, such as
a Gaussian mixture model (mixture density networks, see
(Bishop 1994)). Previous work (van den Oord et al. 2016a;
2016b) has found empirically that using a multinomial model
often outperforms GMMs on ordinal labels. Methods to improve performance over the naive multinomial model often
involve domain-speciﬁc heuristic compression of the space
into a smaller number of bins (van den Oord et al. 2016a)
or hand-crafting a mixture model to better-suit the marginal
distribution of the data (Salimans et al. 2017).
We propose Leaf-Smoothed Hierarchical Softmax (LSHS)
as a ﬂexible, general alternative model. LSHS leverages the
structure of the ordinal label space by ﬁrst using a hierarchical
decomposition of the output probabilities in a manner similar
to kd-trees. This increases the overall sample efﬁciency of the
model, but increases the error at labels with a neighbor close
in ordinal space but far in leaf-to-leaf path length along the
tree. To overcome this, we draw from the signal processing
literature to develop a graph-based trend ﬁltering regularizer
that locally smooths the area around each target value. These
two techniques leverage the spatial structure in the discrete
distribution to enable points to borrow statistical strength
from their nearby neighbors, improving the estimation of the
latent conditional distribution.
This paper makes the following novel contributions:

Abstract
We propose a new approach to conditional probability estimation for ordinal labels. First, we present a specialized
hierarchical softmax variant inspired by k-d trees that leverages the inherent spatial structure of (potentially-multivariate)
ordinal labels. We then adapt ideas from signal processing on
noisy graphs to develop a novel regularizer for such hierarchical softmax models. Both our tree structure and regularizer
independently boost the sample efﬁciency of a deep learning
model across a series of simulation studies. Furthermore, the
combination of these two techniques produces additive gains
and the model does not suffer from the pathologies of other
approaches in the literature. We validate our approach empirically on a suite of real-world datasets, in some cases reducing
the error by nearly half in comparison to other popular methods in the literature. Our results demonstrate that our method
is a powerful new modeling technique for conditional probability estimation of ordinal labels, especially in the low-to-mid
sample size regimes such as those often found in biological
and other physical sciences.

1

Introduction

Recently there has been a ﬂurry of interest in using deep
learning methods for conditional probability estimate (CPE).
The applications of such models cover a wide variety of scientiﬁc areas, from cosmology (Ravanbakhsh et al. 2016) to
health care (Ranganath et al. 2016; Ng et al. 2017). A subset of this area deals speciﬁcally with discrete conditional
distributions for ordinal labels, where an explicit estimation
of the likelihood is desired—as opposed to simply the ability to sample the distribution, as with GAN-based models
(Goodfellow et al. 2014). Deep learning models that predict
such distributions have achieved state-of-the-art results in
text-to-speech synthesis (van den Oord et al. 2016a), image
generation (van den Oord et al. 2016b; van den Oord, Kalchbrenner, and Kavukcuoglu 2016; van den Oord et al. 2016c;
Gulrajani et al. 2016; Salimans et al. 2017), image superresolution (Dahl, Norouzi, and Shlens 2017), image colorization (Deshpande et al. 2016), and EHR survival modeling
* Department of Systems Biology
†

Department of Computer Science
Department of Information, Risk, and Operations Management
§
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

• An in-depth analysis of existing output models for ordinal
CPE models, including an exploration of failure modes of
each model.

4115

