The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Extreme Low Resolution Activity Recognition
with Multi-Siamese Embedding Learning
Michael S. Ryoo,1,2 Kiyoon Kim,1,3 Hyun Jong Yang 1 ,3
1

EgoVid Inc., Daejeon, South Korea
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA
3
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, Ulsan, South Korea
{mryoo, hjyang}@egovid.com
2

/5YLGHRVZLWKGLIIHUHQWWUDQVIRUPV

Abstract
This paper presents an approach for recognizing human activities from extreme low resolution (e.g., 16x12) videos. Extreme low resolution recognition is not only necessary for analyzing actions at a distance but also is crucial for enabling
privacy-preserving recognition of human activities. We design a new two-stream multi-Siamese convolutional neural
network. The idea is to explicitly capture the inherent property of low resolution (LR) videos that two images originated
from the exact same scene often have totally different pixel
values depending on their LR transformations. Our approach
learns the shared embedding space that maps LR videos with
the same content to the same location regardless of their transformations. We experimentally conﬁrm that our approach of
jointly learning such transform robust LR video representation and the classiﬁer outperforms the previous state-of-theart low resolution recognition approaches on two public standard datasets by a meaningful margin.

Introduction
Although there has been a large amount of progress in human activity recognition research in the past years (Aggarwal and Ryoo 2011; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014;
Ng et al. 2015; Tran et al. 2015), most of the existing
works assume that region-of-interest (ROI) in videos are
large enough. The assumption is that each video region corresponding to an activity has a high enough resolution, allowing the recognition model to capture detailed motion
and appearance changes. However, there are several cases
where this assumption does not hold. For instance, in farﬁeld recognition scenarios (i.e., detecting human activities
at a distance), humans are usually very far away from the
camera and each ROI often has just a few pixels within. This
happens commonly in visual surveillance cameras (Efros et
al. 2003; Reddy et al. 2012), required to cover a large area
while having a low native resolution due to their cost.
Furthermore, there are situations where one wants to intentionally avoid taking high-resolution (HR) videos because of a privacy concern. High resolution cameras including robot cameras and wearable cameras are becoming increasingly available at both public and private places, and
we are afraid of them recording privacy-sensitive videos

Figure 1: Example LR images generated by applying different LR transforms (with slightly different translations) to a
single HR image. Red boxes indicate pixels of the humans.
Although these LR images (right) are all from the identical
HR frame (left), their pixel values become very different.

of us without consent. For example, if such camera system at home (for home security or smart home services) is
cracked by a hacker, there is a risk of one’s 24/7 private life
being monitored/recorded by someone else. The paradigm
of using extreme low resolution (e.g., 16x12) anonymized
videos for privacy-preserving activity recognition is able
to address such societal concern of unwanted video taking at the fundamental-level. Human faces in extreme LR
videos are not identiﬁable (e.g., they are much smaller than
5x5), naturally prohibiting the recognition process from accessing privacy-sensitive face information. This allows designing the device (e.g., a robot) that does not record HR
videos while still recognizing what is going on around it
for its operation. Although extreme low resolution videos
are not the only privacy-preserving data (e.g., super-pixeled

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7315

