The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

The Complexity of Bribery in Network-Based Rating Systems
Umberto Grandi

James Stewart

Paolo Turrini

University of Toulouse
France
umberto.grandi@irit.fr

Imperial College London
United Kingdom
james.stewart13@imperial.ac.uk

University of Warwick
United Kingdom
p.turrini@warwick.ac.uk

to modify their rating, potentially increasing the overall expected revenue. They demonstrate the fundamental effect of
uncertainty in preventing manipulation, in particular showing that the personalised rating system is (optimally) manipulable if the attacker has full knowledge of the underlying
network and even, as is common in real-world rating systems, when a number of users do not express any opinion.
However, nothing is said about the computational difﬁculty of carrying out such an operation. Even when a system
is manipulable in theory, this might for instance require the
solution of a complex combinatorial problem. Understanding the practical barriers to manipulation is therefore an important challenge and it can lead to a major validation of a
system only studied in theory.
In this paper we follow the standard approach of computational voting theory, which has shown that even if strategyproof voting rule cannot be designed, as a consequence
of the Gibbard-Satterthwaite Theorem (Gibbard 1973; Satterthwaite 1975), some voting rules exists that are safe
against manipulation in practice, as computing manipulation
strategies is NP-hard (see, e.g., Conitzer and Walsh, 2016).
Contribution. We show that even if a personalised rating
system is manipulable in theory, the problem of manipulating it is intractable in practice. In particular, we establish
that even when the attacker has full knowledge of the network the problem of determining the existence of a manipulation strategy guaranteeing at least a given reward — and,
notably, an optimal one — is NP-complete. We do so by giving a polynomial-time reduction from the problem of ﬁnding
an independent set of a given size k in a 3-regular graph.
Related Literature Although our focus is personalised
rating, ﬁrst introduced in Grandi and Turrini (2016), there
are a number of relevant approaches that have close connections to our work. First and foremost, Conitzer et al. (2010),
Bu (2013), Todo and Conitzer (2013) and Brill et al. (2016),
who study the effect of adding fake proﬁles to a social network, a closely related problem to that of bribery. As already
pointed at previously, an extremely relevant line of research
is the work of Alon et al. (2015) and Lev and Tennenholtz
(2017), who looks at theoretical guarantees for group recommendations, as well as papers that have looked at social
network-based recommendations, such as (Andersen et al.
2008). See also the recent survey by Grandi (2017) for relevant literature on the interplay between mechanisms for col-

Abstract
We study the complexity of bribery in a network-based rating system, where individuals are connected in a social network and an attacker, typically a service provider, can inﬂuence their rating and increase the overall proﬁt. We derive a
number of algorithmic properties of this framework, in particular we show that establishing the existence of an optimal
manipulation strategy for the attacker is NP-complete, even
with full knowledge of the underlying network structure.

1

Introduction

The widespread use of online rating systems has given rise to
the problem of how we might guarantee their reliability. The
emergence of recommender systems (Bobadilla et al. 2013),
as platforms that construct (often learning-based) protocols
to match users and provide accurate suggestions, is one such
effort to address this issue.
Meanwhile, research in artiﬁcial intelligence, in particular the ﬁelds of mechanism design, algorithmic game theory and computational social choice, has been paying increased attention to the strategic actions of decision-makers,
studying notions such as manipulation and truthfulness for
collective decision making, and coming up with formal requirements for those properties to be realised. Surprisingly
though, as also noted in Tennenholtz (2008) and Alon et al.
(2015), there is a lack of formal study of what guarantees
are needed for recommendation systems to be reliable, an
observation which can be extended to rating systems in general. Users’ evaluations can be carefully screened, and obvious biases (e.g., ethinicity-based discrimination) can be detected, but no theoretical guarantee is provided on whether a
rating-system effectively discourages manipulation.
In a recent paper, Grandi and Turrini (2016) proposed
a network-based rating system and assessed the effect of
bribery, a well known and studied form of manipulation (for
a recent survey see, e.g., Faliszewski and Rothe, 2016), in
comparison with classical rating systems such as the one
R
website. In their model,
used by the popular Tripadvisor
customers’ decision-making is formed by aggregating the
opinions of their peers — their personalised rating — and
an external service provider can give incentives to customers
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1047

