The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning from Unannotated QA Pairs to
Analogically Disambiguate and Answer Questions
Maxwell Crouse, Clifton McFate, Kenneth Forbus
Qualitative Reasoning Group, Northwestern University
mvcrouse@u.northwestern.edu; {c-mcfate, forbus}@northwestern.edu

obtain, to obviate the need for annotated corpora. However, they train from scratch for each new predicate vocabulary and these vocabularies are often domain specific with
limited expressive power (Liang et al. 2013; Berant et al.
2013).
While starting from scratch for each vocabulary is attractive from a machine learning perspective, we believe
that doing so is both expensive and unnecessary. Our approach is instead to build on a robust general-purpose semantic parser, connected to the highly expressive ResearchCyc1 ontology, and use analogy to tune its operation
to a specific domain.
During training, the semantic parser produces competing
sets of potential predicate calculus representations of a
question and answer pair. Our approach uses ontological
connections between this domain general representation
and domain specific facts to guide a search for queries that
evaluate to the correct answer and are supported by the
semantic representations. The information learned is stored
as two kinds of cases: disambiguation cases which are analogically retrieved to help disambiguate future text, and
query cases which are then analogically retrieved and
composed to form a query for unseen questions.
The contributions of this approach are two-fold: we provide a method for adapting a general purpose language
system to a task in a new domain, and we also demonstrate
that adapting an existing system in this way leads to learning with very few examples. We begin by summarizing the
analogical processing used and the semantic parser. Then
we discuss our technique, followed by an evaluation on the
Geoquery benchmark which provides interesting challenges in terms of the compositionality of its language and queries. We close with related and future work.

Abstract
Creating systems that can learn to answer natural language
questions has been a longstanding challenge for artificial
intelligence. Most prior approaches focused on producing a
specialized language system for a particular domain and
dataset, and they required training on a large corpus
manually annotated with logical forms. This paper
introduces an analogy-based approach that instead adapts an
existing general purpose semantic parser to answer
questions in a novel domain by jointly learning
disambiguation heuristics and query construction templates
from purely textual question-answer pairs. Our technique
uses possible semantic interpretations of the natural
language questions and answers to constrain a querygeneration procedure, producing cases during training that
are subsequently reused via analogical retrieval and
composed to answer test questions. Bootstrapping an
existing semantic parser in this way significantly reduces
the number of training examples needed to accurately
answer questions. We demonstrate the efficacy of our
technique using the Geoquery corpus, on which it
approaches state of the art performance using 10-fold cross
validation, shows little decrease in performance with 2folds, and achieves above 50% accuracy with as few as 10
examples.

Introduction
The rise of software assistants and the need to move beyond web search has led to increased interest in natural
language question-answering systems. The standard approach has been to learn, from a corpus annotated with
queries in a domain-specific query language, a semantic
parser that maps natural language questions to domain specific predicates (e.g. Zelle and Mooney 1996; Zettlemoyer
and Collins 2005). Recent approaches have instead used
natural language question answer pairs, which are easier to

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1

654

http://www.cyc.com/platform/researchcyc/

