The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Sentiment-Speciﬁc Word Embedding
via Global Sentiment Representation
Peng Fu,1,2 Zheng Lin,1∗ Fengcheng Yuan,1,2 Weiping Wang,1 Dan Meng1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China1
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China2
{fupeng, linzheng, yuanfengcheng, wangweiping, mengdan}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract

lovely

good

good

bad

Context-based word embedding learning approaches can
model rich semantic and syntactic information. However, it
is problematic for sentiment analysis because the words with
similar contexts but opposite sentiment polarities, such as
good and bad, are mapped into close word vectors in the embedding space. Recently, some sentiment embedding learning methods have been proposed, but most of them are designed to work well on sentence-level texts. Directly applying
those models to document-level texts often leads to unsatisﬁed results. To address this issue, we present a sentimentspeciﬁc word embedding learning architecture that utilizes
local context information as well as global sentiment representation. The architecture is applicable for both sentencelevel and document-level texts. We take global sentiment representation as a simple average of word embeddings in the
text, and use a corruption strategy as a sentiment-dependent
regularization. Extensive experiments conducted on several
benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed architecture outperforms the state-of-the-art methods for sentiment
classiﬁcation.

ugly

excellent
bad

lovely

excellent
terrible

ugly

terrible

Figure 1: Illustrative normal word embedding (left) and
sentiment-speciﬁc word embedding (right) in embedding
space.
sentiment polarities. Therefore, it is desired to propose models that can not only capture the contexts of words but also
model sentiment information of texts, like word embeddings
on right of the Figure 1.
To achieve this goal, Tang et al. proposed two models
based on the C&W(Collobert and Weston 2008) model that
learn sentiment-speciﬁc word embedding by sentiment polarity labels for twitter sentiment classiﬁcation. They also
extended their work with several customized loss functions
(Tang et al. 2016b). These models predict or rank sentiment polarity based on word embeddings in a ﬁxed window of words across a sentence. In addition, based on the
Skip-Gram (Mikolov et al. 2013), Zhang et al.(2015) integrated the sentiment information by using the semantic word
embeddings in the context to predict the sentiment polarity
through a softmax layer, and Yang et al.(2017) proposed a
model that predicted the target word and its label simultaneously. Both of them took sentiment information as a part
of the local context. Due to the limitation of the design of
these training methods, they could only be used in speciﬁc
task and is less efﬁcient for document-level text. Therefore,
the integration of sentiment polarity into semantic word embeddings is still a major challenge for sentiment analysis.
In this paper, we will introduce a sentiment-speciﬁc word
embedding learning architecture that incorporates local context with global sentiment representation. In general, the local context can be regarded as a representation of the target
word, while the global sentiment representation is the averaged vector of the words in the text through a corruption

Introduction
Continuous word representation, commonly called word
embedding, attempt to represent each word as a continuous,
low-dimensional and real-valued vector. Since they can capture various dimensions of semantic and syntactic information and group words with similar grammatical usages and
semantic meanings, they have less susceptible to data sparsity. Therefore, word embeddings are widely used for many
natural language processing tasks, such as sentiment analysis (Wang et al. 2015), machine translation (Ding et al. 2017)
and question answering (Hao et al. 2017).
Existing word embedding learning approaches mostly
represent each word by predicting the target word through
its context (Collobert and Weston 2008; Mikolov et al. 2013)
and map words of similar semantic roles into nearby points
in the embedding space. For example, ‘good’ and ‘bad’ on
the left of the Figure 1 are mapped into close vectors in the
embedding space. However, it is confusing for sentiment
analysis, because these two words actually have opposite
∗

Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4808

