The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Product Quantized Translation
for Fast Nearest Neighbor Search
Yoonho Hwang, Mooyeol Baek, Saehoon Kim,∗
Bohyung Han, Hee-Kap Ahn
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
POSTECH, Korea
{cypher, mooyeol, kshkawa, bhhan, heekap}@postech.ac.kr
and Cover tree (Beygelzimer, Kakade, and Langford 2006).
They typically aim to improve search performance in moderately high dimensional space, and do not suit well for highdimensional data due to their equidistant property. In addition, these methods require signiﬁcant amount of time and
memory space for data structure construction and management (Karger and Ruhl 2002). Another type of exact algorithms incorporates data embedding tricks, where original
data are projected onto low dimensional subspaces either
linearly (Hel-Or and Hel-Or 2005) or nonlinearly (Hwang,
Han, and Ahn 2012). However, it turns out that the linear projection method based on Walsh-Hadamard transform (Hel-Or and Hel-Or 2005) is identical to the sequential
scan if it is applied to the data without inter-dependency1 .
There also exist various techniques to improve throughput
of the algorithm by parallel implementation or batch run of
multiple queries, but they are beyond the scope of this paper.
Instead of computing exact solutions, some algorithms
ﬁnd approximate nearest neighbors in which they focus on
reducing computational complexity while minimizing loss
of accuracy. Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN) search
algorithm (Arya et al. 1998) employs a KD-tree to maintain data, and other techniques based on KD-trees have
also been presented (Silpa-Anan and Hartley 2008; Jia et
al. 2010). In general, they achieve fairly good performance
but require substantial preprocessing time and memory.
FLANN (Muja and Lowe 2014) constructs multiple treebased data structures including randomized KD-trees, priority search k-means tree and hierarchical clustering tree, and
attempts to improve approximate nearest neighbor search
speed by integrating a few additional techniques. Product
Quantization (PQ) approaches generate a large number of
data clusters through the combinations of clusters in multiple axis-aligned subspaces and compute the distances to
individual data from a query efﬁciently using the precomputed distances between identiﬁed cluster centers in the subspaces. It is ﬁrst introduced in (Jégou, Douze, and Schmid
2011) and an optimized solution is discussed in (Ge et al.
2013). Hashing algorithms typically manage a hash table
and reduce nearest neighbor candidates signiﬁcantly using

Abstract
This paper proposes a simple nearest neighbor search algorithm, which provides the exact solution in terms of the Euclidean distance efﬁciently. Especially, we present an interesting approach to improve the speed of nearest neighbor search
by proper translations of data and query although the task
is inherently invariant to the Euclidean transformations. The
proposed algorithm aims to eliminate nearest neighbor candidates effectively using their distance lower bounds in nonlinear embedded spaces, and further improves the lower bounds
by transforming data and query through product quantized
translations. Although our framework is composed of simple operations only, it achieves the state-of-the-art performance compared to existing nearest neighbor search techniques, which is illustrated quantitatively using various largescale benchmark datasets in different sizes and dimensions.

Introduction
Nearest neighbor search is a fundamental technique applicable to various problems in machine learning, computer vision, natural language processing, information retrieval, and
so on. They have been investigated actively in various ﬁelds
of study, and a lot of promising results have been reported.
However, it is not straightforward to identify the nearest
neighbor efﬁciently from large-scale databases in very high
dimensional spaces due to huge computational cost and inherent characteristics of data distribution (Beyer et al. 1999).
The most naı̈ve approach for this problem is sequential
scan, which simply computes the distance from a query to
every entry in database iteratively. Although the running
time of this technique is proportional to database size and dimensionality, it often shows the state-of-the-art performance
in very high dimensional data, because the distances to the
nearest neighbor and the farthest neighbor are not differentiated sufﬁciently and the beneﬁt of algorithms based on sophisticated data structures tends to become negligible compared to their costs (Weber, Schek, and Blott 1998).
Many existing techniques for the exact nearest neighbor search employ tree-based data structures and manage
data through hierarchical partitioning. Representative examples include KD-tree (Bentley 1975; Arya et al. 1998),
∗

1

An example showing the beneﬁt of (Hel-Or and Hel-Or 2005)
is dense nearest neighbor search between all pairs of patches from
images.

S.Kim is also afﬁliated with AItrics.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3295

