The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Deep-Treat: Learning Optimal Personalized Treatments
from Observational Data Using Neural Networks
Onur Atan,1 James Jordon,2 Mihaela van der Schaar2,3,1
1

Electrical Engineering Department, University of California Los Angeles, USA
2
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, UK
3
Alan Turing Institute, London, UK
oatan@ucla.edu, james.jordon@wolfson.ox.ac.uk, mihaela.vanderschaar@eng.ox.ac.uk
informativeness – we control this trade-off with a hyperparameter, λ1 – and the second we call the feedforward policy
optimization network, which is used to learn the optimal policy, taking the transformed data (under Φ) as the training set.
Learning is carried out by ﬁrst learning the auto-encoder
and then learning the policy optimizer. The bias-removing
auto-encoder contains a block used to learn the propensity
function – the function that takes representation-treatment
pairs and maps them to the probability of observing the treatment given the representation. This is then used to force the
learned representations to be less biased.
We illustrate our algorithm on learning treatment effects
from Infant Health and Development (IHDP) dataset and
learning chemotherapy regimes for a breast cancer dataset.
Our results show that our algorithm achieves signiﬁcant improvements with respect to strong baselines.

Abstract
We propose a novel approach for constructing effective treatment policies when the observed data is biased and lacks
counterfactual information. Learning in settings where the
observed data does not contain all possible outcomes for all
treatments is difﬁcult since the observed data is typically biased due to existing clinical guidelines. This is an important
problem in the medical domain as collecting unbiased data is
expensive and so learning from the wealth of existing biased
data is a worthwhile task. Our approach separates the problem into two stages: ﬁrst we reduce the bias by learning a
representation map using a novel auto-encoder network – this
allows us to control the trade-off between the bias-reduction
and the information loss – and then we construct effective
treatment policies on the transformed data using a novel feedforward network. Separation of the problem into these two
stages creates an algorithm that can be adapted to the problem at hand – the bias-reduction step can be performed as a
preprocessing step for other algorithms. We compare our algorithm against state-of-art algorithms on two semi-synthetic
datasets and demonstrate that our algorithm achieves a significant improvement in performance.

Related Work
From a conceptual point of view, the paper most closely
related to ours is (Johansson, Shalit, and Sontag 2016)
which discusses a similar problem: learning representations
from observational data. The approach taken in (Johansson, Shalit, and Sontag 2016) is somewhat different to ours,
though, in that they minimize the predictive loss combined
with discrepancy between the factual and counterfactual representation populations. A more important difference from
our work is that (Johansson, Shalit, and Sontag 2016) assumes that there are only two actions: treat and don’t treat –
in most situations there will be many possible actions. (Johansson, Shalit, and Sontag 2016) states explicitly that generalizing their approach to more than two actions is not an
obvious extension.
From a technical point of view, our work is most closely
related to (Swaminathan and Joachims; 2015a, 2015b) in
that we both aim to learn treatment policies from observational data. The approach taken in (Swaminathan and
Joachims; 2015a, 2015b) is somewhat similar to ours in the
sense that they minimize a ”corrected” loss function using
Inverse Propensity Scores (IPS) corrected by a regularization term over the linear stochastic policy class. We go much
further in our paper by minimizing our loss function over a
much more general class of stochastic policies.
More broadly, our work is related to unsupervised auto
encoder neural networks, counterfactual estimation and es-

Introduction
Potential treatment outcomes for the current patient must be
learned from the outcomes of the treatments given to previous patients. However, treatment outcomes of the patients
are never the same and so the learning process must involve learning how the current patient is alike to previous patients. This learning problem is complicated by the fact that
the data has only the outcomes of the treatments received
– not the potential outcomes of the alternative treatments,
the counterfactuals. Access to similar patients with different treatments is also made difﬁcult as the received treatments are often chosen by some pre-existing clinical guidelines and so it may be the case that similar patients received
the same treatment – the observed data is biased.
This paper proposes a novel approach for treatment policy optimization. We construct two independent feedforward
networks: the ﬁrst we call the bias-removing auto-encoder,
which is used to map the data (using a representation map
Φ) to a less biased representation without losing too much
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2071

