The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Deep Generative Framework for Paraphrase Generation
Ankush Gupta, Arvind Agarwal

Prawaan Singh, Piyush Rai

{ankushgupta,arvagarw}@in.ibm.com
IBM Research Labs
New Delhi, India

prawaan@iitk.ac.in and piyush@cse.iitk.ac.in
Indian Institute of Technology,
Kanpur, India

an important problem for translation, summarization, social
QA (ﬁnding closest question to FAQs/already asked question) (Figueroa and Neumann 2013). Due to the nature and
complexity of the task, all of these problems suffer from lack
of training data, a problem that can readily beneﬁt from the
paraphrase generation task.
Despite the importance of the paraphrase generation problem, there has been relatively little prior work in the literature, though much larger amount of work exists on paraphrase detection problem. Traditionally, paraphrase generation has been addressed using rule-based approaches (McKeown 1983a; Zhao et al. 2009), primarily due to the inherent difﬁculty of the underlying natural language generation problem. However, recent advances in deep learning, in particular generative models (Bowman et al. 2015;
Chung et al. 2015), have led to powerful, data-driven approaches to text generation.
In this paper, we present a deep generative framework for automatically generating paraphrases, given a sentence. Our framework combines the power of sequenceto-sequence models, speciﬁcally the long short-term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), and deep
generative models, speciﬁcally the variational autoencoder
(VAE) (Kingma and Welling 2013; Rezende, Mohamed, and
Wierstra 2014), to develop a novel, end-to-end deep learning
architecture for the task of paraphrase generation.
In contrast to the recent usage of VAE for sentence generation (Bowman et al. 2015), a key differentiating aspect of
our proposed VAE based architecture is that it needs to generate paraphrases, given an original sentence as input. That
is, the generated paraphrased version of the sentence should
capture the essence of the original sentence. Therefore, unconditional sentence generation models, such as (Bowman
et al. 2015), are not suited for this task. To address this
limitation, we present a mechanism to condition our VAE
model on the original sentence for which we wish to generate the paraphrases. In the past, conditional generative models (Sohn, Lee, and Yan 2015; Kingma et al. 2014) have been
applied in computer vision to generate images conditioned
on the given class label. Unlike these methods where number of classes are ﬁnite, and do not require any intermediate representation, our method conditions both the sides (i.e.
encoder and decoder) of VAE on the intermediate representation of the input question obtained through LSTM.

Abstract
Paraphrase generation is an important problem in NLP, especially in question answering, information retrieval, information extraction, conversation systems, to name a few. In this
paper, we address the problem of generating paraphrases automatically. Our proposed method is based on a combination
of deep generative models (VAE) with sequence-to-sequence
models (LSTM) to generate paraphrases, given an input sentence. Traditional VAEs when combined with recurrent neural networks can generate free text but they are not suitable for
paraphrase generation for a given sentence. We address this
problem by conditioning the both, encoder and decoder sides
of VAE, on the original sentence, so that it can generate the
given sentence’s paraphrases. Unlike most existing models,
our model is simple, modular and can generate multiple paraphrases, for a given sentence. Quantitative evaluation of the
proposed method on a benchmark paraphrase dataset demonstrates its efﬁcacy, and its performance improvement over
the state-of-the-art methods by a signiﬁcant margin, whereas
qualitative human evaluation indicate that the generated paraphrases are well-formed, grammatically correct, and are relevant to the input sentence. Furthermore, we evaluate our
method on a newly released question paraphrase dataset, and
establish a new baseline for future research.

Introduction
Paraphrase generation is an important problem in many NLP
applications such as question answering, information retrieval, information extraction, and summarization. QA systems are often susceptible to the way questions are asked;
in fact, for knowledge-based (KB) QA systems, question
paraphrasing is crucial for bridging the gap between questions asked by users and knowledge based assertions (Fader,
Zettlemoyer, and Etzioni 2014; Yin et al. 2015). Similarly
paraphrasing ﬁnds applications in information retrieval by
generating query variants, and in machine translation or
summarization by generating variants for automatic evaluation. In addition to being directly useful in QA systems,
paraphrase generation is also important for generating training data for various learning tasks, such as question type
classiﬁcation, paraphrase detection, etc., that are useful in
other applications. Question type classiﬁcation has application in conversation systems, while paraphrase detection is
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5149

