The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Neural Ideal Point Estimation Network
Kyungwoo Song, Wonsung Lee, Il-Chul Moon
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu
Daejeon 34141, South Korea
{gtshs2,aporia,icmoon}@kaist.ac.kr

large, a main topic of documents, and a word selection when
describing a topic (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003).
Another effort in modeling the latent variable is improving the quality of the latent representation of the data. While
the above probabilistic models focused on the contextual
modeling, the latent variables reside in a high dimensional
and nonlinear space, so the learning of the latent variables
have been limited. For example, the stacked de-noising autoencoder (SDAE) (Vincent et al. 2010) learns this manifold space through encoding the noised inputs into the low
dimensional latent representations; and reconstructing the
original inputs with the latent representations with neural
network layers. Further advances have made through casting
this autoencoding mechanism to the variational inference
approaches, and a variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma
and Welling 2014) optimizes the variational distribution of
the latent representations with neural networks.
Supported by the two research advances, one distinct research direction has been merging the latent representation
learning and the probabilistic graphical model on human behavior. Collaborative deep learning (CDL) (Wang, Wang,
and Yeung 2015) is one example merging SDAE with a
probabilistic model of matrix factorization that often used
to explain and predict the human behavior of recommendations. Whereas CDL gives a clear passway on how we
can further develop various models of human behavior with
support from the deep learning, different application domains require different latent modeling, so the model structure needs to be further customized and expanded.
This paper introduces Neural Ideal Point Estimation Network (NIPEN) which models the generative process of political voting by estimating ideal points in diverse legislative aspects with learning the low dimensional representations from neural networks. Speciﬁcally, we propose two
versions of NIPEN. The ﬁrst version, NIPEN-PGM is a
hybrid model by representing the contextual causalities as
a PGM, and by learning the low dimensional representations with multi-layered perceptron (MLP) autoencoders,
i.e. SDAE and VAE. The second version, NIPEN-Tensor, is
a neural tensor model that substitutes the PGM part with the
neural tensor model. NIPEN-Tensor could be viewed as a
generalized version of NIPEN-PGM. NIPEN-Tensor models the legislative voting with the tensor composition and
the nonlinear operations between diverse legislative factors

Abstract
Understanding politics is challenging because the politics
take the inﬂuence from everything. Even we limit ourselves
to the political context in the legislative processes; we need
a better understanding of latent factors, such as legislators,
bills, their ideal points, and their relations. From the modeling perspective, this is difﬁcult 1) because these observations lie in a high dimension that requires learning on low dimensional representations, and 2) because these observations
require complex probabilistic modeling with latent variables
to reﬂect the causalities. This paper presents a new model to
reﬂect and understand this political setting, NIPEN, including factors mentioned above in the legislation. We propose
two versions of NIPEN: one is a hybrid model of deep learning and probabilistic graphical model, and the other model is
a neural tensor model. Our result indicates that NIPEN successfully learns the manifold of the legislative bill’s text, and
NIPEN utilizes the learned low-dimensional latent variables
to increase the prediction performance of legislators’ votings.
Additionally, by virtue of being a domain-rich probabilistic model, NIPEN shows the hidden strength of the legislators’ trust network and their various characteristics on casting
votes.

Introduction
Recent developments in machine learning have enabled a
deeper understanding of human behavior in diverse contexts.
These advances include divulging intentions and sentiments
in dialogs (Bertero et al. 2016); predicting purchases from
online markets (Chong et al. 2017); recommending movies
to friends (Shah, Rao, and Ding 2017); and discovering social network links between individuals (Guo, Zhang, and
Yorke-Smith 2015). The recent machine learning models
provide the contexts of these behaviors, which have been
regarded as the latent aspects of human behavior.
One latent modeling of human behavior can be a form of
complex Bayesian probabilistic models, a.k.a. probabilistic
graphical model (PGM). The modelers used graphical notations, embedding the probabilistic variables and their causalities, to represent the key factors and their relations. For instance, latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) models the generative process of documents, i.e. the composition of topics at
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2411

