The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Exercise-Enhanced Sequential
Modeling for Student Performance Prediction
Yu Su,†§ Qingwen Liu,§‡ Qi Liu,‡∗ Zhenya Huang,‡ Yu Yin,‡
Enhong Chen,‡ Chris Ding, Si Wei,§ Guoping Hu§

‡

†
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University
Anhui Province Key Lab. of Big Data Analysis and Application, University of Science and Technology of China
§
iFLYTEK Research,  CSE Department, University of Texas at Arlington
{yusu, qwliu}@iﬂytek.com, qiliuql@ustc.edu.cn, {huangzhy, yxonic}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
cheneh@ustc.edu.cn, chqding@uta.edu, {siwei, gphu}@iﬂytek.com

self-improvement, e.g., learning remedy suggestion and personalized exercise recommendation (Kuh et al. 2011), a crucial demand is to predict their performance (e.g., score), i.e.,
forecasting whether or not a student could answer the exercise (e.g., e5 ) correctly in the future (Baker and Yacef 2009).
In the literature, there are many efforts in predicting student performance from both educational psychology and
data mining areas, such as cognitive diagnosis (DiBello,
Roussos, and Stout 2006), knowledge tracing (Corbett and
Anderson 1994), matrix factorization (Thai-Nghe et al.
2010) and deep learning (Piech et al. 2015). Generally,
most methods devote efforts to modeling student exercising records for the prediction. However, they just represent each exercise as knowledge concepts, e.g., exercise
e1 in Figure 1 is represented as the concept “Function”.
These knowledge-speciﬁc concepts are usually marked by
experts (e.g., teachers) in practice, which may be labor intensive (Desmarais, Beheshti, and Naceur 2012). Meanwhile,
these manual representations cannot distinguish individual
characteristics (e.g., difﬁculty) of exercises so that causing
server information loss (DiBello, Roussos, and Stout 2006),
e.g., exercise e1 and e3 are different according to their texts
(e3 is more difﬁcult than e1 ) though they are all labeled with
“Function”. To this end, in this paper, we argue that it is beneﬁcial to combine both student exercising records and the
text of each exercise for more precisely predicting student
performance.
Unfortunately, there are many technical and domain challenges along this line. First, there are diverse expressions
of exercises, which requires a uniﬁed way to automatically
understand and represent the characteristics of them from
a semantic perspective. Second, student performance in the
future is deeply relied on their long-term historical exercising, especially on their important knowledge states. How to
track the focused information for students is very challenging. At last, student performance prediction task suffers from
the “cold start” problem. That is, we usually have to make
predictions for new students and new exercises (Wilson et
al. 2016). In this scenario, limited information could be exploited, and thus, leading to the poor prediction results.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel ExerciseEnhanced Recurrent Neural Network (EERNN) framework

Abstract
In online education systems, for offering proactive services to
students (e.g., personalized exercise recommendation), a crucial demand is to predict student performance (e.g., scores)
on future exercising activities. Existing prediction methods
mainly exploit the historical exercising records of students,
where each exercise is usually represented as the manually
labeled knowledge concepts, and the richer information contained in the text descriptions of exercises is still underexplored. In this paper, we propose a novel Exercise-Enhanced
Recurrent Neural Network (EERNN) framework for student
performance prediction by taking full advantage of both student exercising records and the text of each exercise. Specifically, for modeling the student exercising process, we ﬁrst
design a bidirectional LSTM to learn each exercise representation from its text description without any expertise and information loss. Then, we propose a new LSTM architecture to
trace student states (i.e., knowledge states) in their sequential
exercising process with the combination of exercise representations. For making ﬁnal predictions, we design two strategies under EERNN, i.e., EERNNM with Markov property and
EERNNA with Attention mechanism. Extensive experiments
on large-scale real-world data clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of EERNN framework. Moreover, by incorporating
the exercise correlations, EERNN can well deal with the cold
start problems from both student and exercise perspectives.

1

Introduction

Online education systems, such as massive open online
course (MOOC) and intelligent tutoring system (ITS), provide students with open access for self-learning. Their prevalence and convenience have attracted great attentions from
both educators and general publics (Anderson et al. 2014).
In such education systems, students can get appropriate
guidance and acquire knowledge individually in the process
of exercising. Figure 1 shows an example of such process of
a typical student. Generally, when an exercise is posted (e.g.,
e1 ), the student reads its text and applies knowledge to answer it. Totally, student s1 has done four exercises during the
process. In order to offer students proactive services for their
∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2435

