The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Slim Embedding Layers for Recurrent Neural Language Models
Zhongliang Li, Raymond Kulhanek

Shaojun Wang

Wright State University
{li.141, kulhanek.5}@wright.edu

SVAIL, Baidu Research
swang.usa@gmail.com

Yunxin Zhao

Shuang Wu

University of Missouri
zhaoy@missouri.edu

Yitu. Inc
shuang.wu@gmail.com
It has been shown there is signiﬁcant redundancy in the
parametrization of deep learning models (Denil et al. 2013).
Various pruning and parameter reduction methods have been
proposed. In general, there are two types of neural network compression techniques. The ﬁrst one involves retraining. First a full size model is trained, and its weights are
pruned. Then the model is retrained (Han, Mao, and Dally
2016). The second one is to encode parameter sharing into
the model and directly train the compressed model, such as
HashNet (Chen et al. 2015) and LightRNN (Li et al. 2016).
The approach proposed here belongs to the second type.
The input layer and output layer contain the largest portion of parameters in neural language models since the number is dependent on the vocabulary size. In this paper, we
mainly focus on reducing the number of parameters in the
embedding layers. The main contribution is introducing a
simple space efﬁcient model compression method that randomly shares structured parameters, and can be used in both
the input layer and the output layer. The method is easy to
implement and tune. It can also be viewed as a regularization that leads to improved performance on perplexity and
BLEU scores in certain cases.

Abstract
Recurrent neural language models are the state-of-the-art
models for language modeling. When the vocabulary size
is large, the space taken to store the model parameters becomes the bottleneck for the use of recurrent neural language
models. In this paper, we introduce a simple space compression method that randomly shares the structured parameters
at both the input and output embedding layers of the recurrent neural language models to signiﬁcantly reduce the size
of model parameters, but still compactly represent the original input and output embedding layers. The method is easy to
implement and tune. Experiments on several data sets show
that the new method can get similar perplexity and BLEU
score results while only using a very tiny fraction of parameters.

Introduction
Neural language models are currently the state of the art
model for language modeling. These models encode words
as vectors (word embeddings) and then feed them into the
neural network (Bengio, Ducharme, and Vincent 2003). The
word vectors are normally trained together with the model
training process. In the output layer, the hidden states are
projected to a vector with the same size as the vocabulary,
and then a softmax function translates them into probabilities.
Training neural language models is time consuming,
mainly because it requires estimating the softmax function
at every time stamp. There have been many efforts that try
to reduce the time complexity of the training algorithm,
such as hierarchical softmax (Goodman 2001; Kim et al.
2016), importance sampling (IS) (Bengio and Senécal 2008;
Jozefowicz et al. 2016), and noise contrastive estimation
(NCE) (Mnih and Teh 2012). It is also desirable to train very
compact language models for several reasons: 1. Smaller
models are easier to use and deploy in real world systems.
If the model is too large, it is possible that it will need multiple server nodes. 2. Mobile devices have limited memory
and space, which makes it impossible to use large models
without server access. 3. Smaller models also decrease the
communication overhead of distributed training of the models.

Related Work
There are many efforts that improve the space efﬁciency of
neural language models. Kim et al. (2016) works with character level input, and combines convolutional neural networks (CNN) with highway networks to reduce the number
of parameters. And later Jozefowicz et al. (2016) extends the
CNN embedding idea to the output layer, comes up with a
new CNN softmax layer, and also scales the method to a one
billion word corpus (Chelba et al. 2013). Ling et al. (2015)
introduces a model for constructing vector representations of
words by composing characters using bidirectional LSTMs.
Although the above models use the character level information to reduce the model size of embedding layers, there
have been many approaches that try to reduce the parameters without using this additional information. Mikolov et
al. (2011) introduces the compression layer between the recurrent layer and the output layer, which not only reduces
the number of parameters in the output layer, but also reduces the time complexity of training and inference. Grave
et al. (2016) improves the hierarchical softmax by assigning
word clusters with different sizes of embeddings; it tries to

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5220

