The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Death versus Data Science: Predicting End of Life
Muhammad A Ahmad, Carly Eckert, Greg McKelvey,
Kiyana Zolfagar, Anam Zahid, Ankur Teredesai
KenSci Inc., Seattle, WA USA
{muhammad, carly, greg, kiyana, anam, ankur}@kensci.com

The number of Americans using palliative care services
continues to grow and was estimated at 1.7 million, or about
46% of those who die (NHPCO 2016). Yet these services
are being utilized too late: the median length of stay in hospice care in 2016 was only 23 days. Additionally, 28% of
hospice patients were discharged or died within 7 days of
hospice enrollment (NHPCO 2016). In work by Christakis
and colleagues, they suggest that hospice clinicians consider
80-90 days of hospice care as optimal for the needs of patients and their families (Christakis 1997). Surveys of family
members of decedents indicate that satisfaction with end of
life care is correlated with their perception of timeliness of
hospice referral (Teno et al. 2007). Finally, providers that
commonly encounter in-hospital patient death, like intensivists and critical care nurses, have high rates of professional burnout (Embriaco et al. 2007). It follows to conclude,
therefore, that timely and appropriate end of life care impacts all aspects of the Quadruple Aim in healthcare (quality,
satisfaction, cost savings, and provider satisfaction).

Abstract
Death is an inevitable part of life and while it cannot be
delayed indeﬁnitely it is possible to predict with some certainty when the health of a person is going to deteriorate.
In this paper, we predict risk of mortality for patients from
two large hospital systems in the Paciﬁc Northwest. Using
medical claims and electronic medical records (EMR) data
we greatly improve prediction for risk of mortality and explore machine learning models with explanations for end of
life predictions. The insights that are derived from the predictions can then be used to improve the quality of patient care
towards the end of life.

Introduction
In the United States, 22.2% of Medicare decedents die in
acute care hospitals (Bekelman et al. 2016). For many, the
last six months of life are full of physician visits, medical procedures, and hospital stays (Marik 2015) (Setoguchi,
Stevenson, and Schneeweiss 2007) (Halpern 2015). Such aggressive medical care comes with a high price. In 2011, the
U.S. health system spent $205 billion on the care of individuals in their last year of life (Aldridge and Kelley 2014).
Yet, this incessant and expensive care is without commensurate improvement in outcomes or quality of life (Zhang
et al. 2009). Additionally, 70% of Americans wish to die
at home (Barnato et al. 2009). Services such as palliative
care and hospice are options designed to provide an alternative to hospital-based medicine for patients to spend their
last months before death. Referral to these services can also
save on healthcare costs, if done in a timely manner (Hogan
et al. 2001). Recent work by Morrison and colleagues suggest cost savings associated with palliative care patients of
between nearly $1700- $5000 per admission (Morrison et al.
2008). Other research suggests that Advance Care Planning,
the professionally facilitated approach to discussing end of
life care needs, is also associated with net cost savings in
end of life populations (Klingler, in der Schmitten, and Marckmann 2016). The need to improve patient experience and
quality outcomes while reducing health care costs has fueled
a growing interest in identifying opportunities for improving
end of life care (Hogan et al. 2001).

Patients require physician referral for hospice services
and there is evidence that physician discomfort with end of
life conversations may be partly responsible for the delay in
these referrals (McGorty and Bornstein 2003). Additionally,
physicians have difﬁculty with predicting mortality, particularly among patients that they know well (Christakis 1998).
For patients to qualify for hospice programs, clinicians must
estimate that the patient has less than six months to live
(Medicare 2017). The prognostic error associated with these
estimations is widespread and quite large. Studies show that
physicians are inaccurate when predicting time to patient
death and tend to be overly optimistic about patient survival.
In one study of hospice patients, physicians overestimated
patient survival ﬁve-fold (Christakis et al. 2000). This deﬁcit
of prognosis can be detrimental for patients, their families,
and the health care system. This prognostic error can result
in late referrals to hospice, can set false expectations of survival for families and patients, and can lead to missed opportunities to focus on quality of life. Such expectations can delay important discussions between families thus leading to
more difﬁcult decisions made during times of crisis. Studies show that delays in discussing end of life choices ultimately lead to more aggressive in-hospital treatments, more
in-hospital deaths, and higher costs (Wright et al. 2008). The
ability to provide an earlier option of palliative care and hos-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7719

