The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Belief Reward Shaping in Reinforcement Learning
Oﬁr Marom

Benjamin Rosman

University of the Witwatersrand
Johannesburg, South Africa

University of the Witwatersrand
Johannesburg, South Africa, and
Council for Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research
Pretoria, South Africa

and Sommer 1999; Matignon, Laurent, and le Fort-Piat
2006), using progress estimators to supply the agent with
partial, goal-speciﬁc advice (Mataric 1994; Matignon, Laurent, and le Fort-Piat 2006), or using action priors so that the
agent can positively bias action selection in the initial stages
of learning (Rosman and Ramamoorthy 2012).
Most closely related to the work in this paper is reward
shaping, where an additional reward from a reward shaping
function is added at each step of learning. In the most general case, this reward shaping function can depend on the
full transition information: the current state the agent is in,
the action taken by the agent and the resulting next state. Reward shaping has proven to be a powerful method for speeding up many RL tasks. However, one of the issues discovered is that the agent may learn to enter cycles to optimize
the shaping reward and forget about the true underlying RL
problem (Randløv and Alstrøm 1998) and so may learn an
optimal policy that is not consistent with the optimal policy
learned without reward shaping. To address this, potentialbased reward shaping (PBRS) was introduced, where the reward shaping function is restricted to a difference of potential functions, where the potential function is deﬁned over
states (Ng, Harada, and Russell 1999).
While PBRS has the advantage of ensuring consistency
to the optimal policy, the restriction on the form of the
reward shaping signal limits its expressiveness. This limitation has been alleviated to an extent with a framework
called potential-based advice (PBA) which allows the potential function to also include actions (Wiewiora, Cottrel,
and Elkan 2003), although the form of the shaping reward
is still restricted with PBA since the shaping reward is still
a difference of potential functions. It would be ideal if we
could use the full transition information directly to deﬁne
shaping rewards while still having consistency, as the additional expressive power can speed up convergence to the
optimal policy.
More recently, it has been shown that PBA can be combined with dynamic potential-based reward shaping (Devlin
and Kudenko 2012) to express shaping rewards that can use
the full transition information, although this requires the introduction of a second action-value function that learns the
required potential function concurrently with the main RL
task (Harutyunyan et al. 2015).
In this paper we present a novel approach to reward shap-

Abstract
A key challenge in many reinforcement learning problems is
delayed rewards, which can signiﬁcantly slow down learning.
Although reward shaping has previously been introduced to
accelerate learning by bootstrapping an agent with additional
information, this can lead to problems with convergence. We
present a novel Bayesian reward shaping framework that augments the reward distribution with prior beliefs that decay
with experience. Formally, we prove that under suitable conditions a Markov decision process augmented with our framework is consistent with the optimal policy of the original
MDP when using the Q-learning algorithm. However, in general our method integrates seamlessly with any reinforcement
learning algorithm that learns a value or action-value function
through experience. Experiments are run on a gridworld and
a more complex backgammon domain that show that we can
learn tasks signiﬁcantly faster when we specify intuitive priors on the reward distribution.

1

Introduction

Delayed and sparse rewards present a key challenge in many
reinforcement learning (RL) problems, as this can signiﬁcantly slow down learning through long, uninformed exploration trajectories. For example, when learning to play chess,
typically the only reward signal that the agent receives is at
the end of an episode, which occurs after many timesteps.
A naı̈ve approach to overcome this problem is to provide
additional reward signals to the agent for achieving certain
subgoals. For example, the environment may provide a reward to the agent for taking the opponent’s queen. However,
this is generally undesirable because (a) it forces the agent
to play according to a speciﬁc strategy rather than letting it
learn novel strategies, and (b) this may not be optimal.
Various techniques have been proposed to overcome this
problem. In Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning we decompose a task into subtasks and learn to solve each subtask
individually (Dietterich 1998; Sutton, Precup, and Singh
1999). Speciﬁcally, the MAXQ framework uses pseudorewards to learn the optimal policy for a subtask, which is
analogous to providing more frequent rewards to the agent.
Other techniques proposed include biasing the initial values
of the action-value function using prior knowledge (Hailu
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3762

