The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Consistent and Speciﬁc Multi-View Subspace Clustering
Shirui Luo,1,2 Changqing Zhang,3 Wei Zhang,1 Xiaochun Cao1,2∗
1

SKLOIS, Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
luoshirui@iie.ac.cn, zhangchangqing@tju.edu.cn, {wzhang, caoxiaochun}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract
Multi-view clustering has attracted intensive attention due to
the effectiveness of exploiting multiple views of data. However, most existing multi-view clustering methods only aim
to explore the consistency or enhance the diversity of different views. In this paper, we propose a novel multi-view subspace clustering method (CSMSC), where consistency and
speciﬁcity are jointly exploited for subspace representation
learning. We formulate the multi-view self-representation
property using a shared consistent representation and a set
of speciﬁc representations, which better ﬁts the real-world
datasets. Speciﬁcally, consistency models the common properties among all views, while speciﬁcity captures the inherent difference in each view. In addition, to optimize the nonconvex problem, we introduce a convex relaxation and develop an alternating optimization algorithm to recover the
corresponding data representations. Experimental evaluations
on four benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed approach achieves better performance over several state-of-thearts.

Figure 1: Illustration of our CSMSC approach. Given
data samples with V views X(1) , X(2) , · · · , X(V ) , our
method pursues a view-consistent self-representation matrix C and a set of view-speciﬁc self-representation matrices
D(1) , D(2) , · · · , D(V ) . The afﬁnity matrix produced with C
and {D(v) }v∈[V ] will be used as input to the spectral clustering method to generate the ﬁnal clustering result.

Introduction
Subspace clustering is essential to many scientiﬁc problems,
e.g., representation learning (Liu and Yan 2011), motion
segmentation (Rao et al. 2010) and image processing (Ma
et al. 2007). Given data from multiple categories lying in a
union of subspaces, clustering a dataset into categories reduces to assigning data to their respective subspaces, where
each data sample is expressed by a linear combination of
other samples in the same subspace.
A number of subspace clustering methods have been developed in recent years (Parsons, Haque, and Liu 2004). For
instance, sparse subspace clustering (Elhamifar and Vidal
2013) ﬁnds a sparse representation from the subspaces of
the data. Besides, low-rank representation (Liu et al. 2013)
explores the subspace structures by low-rank constraint to
recover the data. After obtaining self-representation matrix
of the data, spectral clustering (Ng, Jordan, and Weiss 2002)
is applied to get the ﬁnal clustering result. Additionally, innovation pursuit (Rahmani and Atia 2017) proposes another
subspace discovery method, which identiﬁes each subspace
based on its novelty to other subspaces.

Many real-world problems have representations with respect to multiple views (Blum and Mitchell 1998; Chaudhuri et al. 2009). For instance, an image is described by
color, texture, edges and so on. A document can be simultaneously described by several different languages. Thus,
methods only using single view information do not meet
the real-world demand well. Based on a variety of theories, a lot of methods have been developed to extract comprehensive information from multiple views (Xu, Tao, and
Xu 2013), including co-training (Blum and Mitchell 1998;
Kumar, Rai, and Daumé 2011; Kumar and Daumé 2011),
multiple kernel learning (Gönen and Alpaydın 2011) and
subspace learning (Chaudhuri et al. 2009; Cao et al. 2015;
Zhang et al. 2015; Xia et al. 2014).
However, there are several main deﬁciencies for most existing methods. On one hand, single view methods do not
leverage as much information as multi-view methods do. On
the other hand, most multi-view methods only consider the
consistency of multi-view data (Kumar and Daumé 2011;
Kumar, Rai, and Daumé 2011; Zhang et al. 2015), or only
explore the diversity of different subspace representations

∗

Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3730

