The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Semi-Supervised Network Embedding Model for Protein Complexes Detection∗
Wei Zhao,1 Jia Zhu,2 Min Yang,1 Danyang Xiao,2 Gabriel Pui Cheong Fung,3 Xiaojun Chen4
1

SIAT, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
South China Normal University
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Shenzhen University

are represented as vertices and their interactions are represented as edges in the graph. Assume we have a graph
G = (V, E), where V represents a set of vertices in the
graph, V = v1 , ..., vn . E represent a set of edges in the
graph, E = e1 , ..., en . Each edge is associated with two vertices. Let H = h1 , . . . , hn be the set of neighbor vertices
of v, and n is the number of the neighbor vertices of v. For
PPI network, there is no weight for edges. In this section, we
elaborate our semi-supervised network embedding model.
Component for the First-Order proximity. As described
earlier, there is no attributes attached to each vertex in PPI
network, we propose a method to select the important neighbor vertices of each vertex by using the vectors generated by
DeepWalk as its attributes. We ﬁrst apply DeepWalk to the
graph to get a 64-dimensions vector for each vertex. And
then the Euclidean metric is employed to compute the tightness score Scorev,hi between v and each hi . Finally, we
keep these neighbor vertices that have tightness score higher
than the average score as attributes of v.
Once we have the attributes for each vertex, we then can
use the attributes as supervised information to exploit the
ﬁrst-order proximity and reﬁne the representations in the latent space to constrain the similarity of a pair of vertexes.
Component for the Second-Order proximity. The secondorder proximity describes the pairwise similarity between
vertices’ neighborhood structure.
We design a GCN (Kipf and Welling 2016) based autoencoder (Yang et al. 2015) to preserve the second-order
proximity of the graph. Here, we use the attributes from each
vertex as input channels of the GCN, and then after encoding
of l convolutional layers, we can get a representation that is
learned from the original graph. For the decoding part, we
simply use an inner product decoder.
In our proposed model, we can naturally incorporate vertices’ attributes to simultaneously optimize the ﬁrst-order
and second-order proximity referring to the following definition:

Abstract
Protein complex is a group of associated polypeptide chains
which plays essential roles in biological process. Given a
graph representing protein-protein interactions (PPI) network, it is critical but non-trivial to detect protein complexes.
In this paper, we propose a semi-supervised network embedding model by adopting graph convolutional networks to effectively detect densely connected subgraphs. We conduct extensive experiment on two popular PPI networks with various
data sizes and densities. The experimental results show our
approach achieves state-of-the-art performance.

Introduction
Protein complex is a complex graph structure that is linked
by protein-protein interactions (PPI), which plays an essential role in biological process. In general, the PPI network
can be represented as an undirected and unweighted graph
where proteins are represented as vertices and their interactions as edges. Each protein complex consists of two or more
proteins that are shown as densely connected subgraphs,
which indicates graph based clustering methods should be
utilized to discover them.
Recently, network embedding has gained signiﬁcant attention on improving the performance of many graph clustering methods (Wang, Cui, and Zhu 2016). However, most
network embedding methods heavily rely on the attributes
of each vertex in the network, which is not suitable for PPI
network since there is no any metadata associated with each
node except protein name.
In this paper, we propose a semi-supervised network embedding model by adopting graph convolutional network
(GCN) that is capable of capturing both local and global
structure of PPI network even there is no any information associated with each vertex in PPI network. We conduct extensive experiments on two widely used PPI datasets. The experimental results demonstrate that our method consistently
outperforms the previous methods.

Model Description

Deﬁnition 1 Given an undirected, unweighted graph G =
(V, E) with N = |V | vertices. We have an adjacency matrix
A of G and an N × D matrix X as input, D is the number
of attributes per vertex. With a stochastic latent variables zi ,
we can summarize an N × F output matrix Z. where F is
the number of output attributes.

PPI data come in the form of connections between proteins, which is easily described as a graph model. Proteins
∗

Jia Zhu is the corresponding author ( jzhu@m.scnu.edu.cn).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8185

