The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Bayesian Clearing Mechanism
for Combinatorial Auctions
Gianluca Brero

Sébastien Lahaie

University of Zurich
brero@iﬁ.uzh.ch

Google Research
slahaie@google.com

agent valuations. If these valuations are observed, the maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimate for prices corresponds to
market clearing prices. If they remain latent, valuations can
be marginalized away, weighed by their own likelihood according to observed bids. This forms the basis for an auction
scheme to solve the more general clearing problem where
valuations are unknown.
We consider settings where several indivisible items are up
for sale, and agents have super-additive valuation functions
over bundles of items (i.e., the items are pure complements).
We provide an auction implementation using item prices consisting of two components. In the knowledge update component, we maintain a Gaussian posterior over agent valuations,
which is updated as new bids are placed using assumed density ﬁltering (Opper and Winther 1998). Prior information
can be incorporated into the auction by suitably initializing
this component. The knowledge update step presumes that
agents follow myopic best-response strategies and bid on
utility-maximizing bundles at each round. Accordingly, we
discuss an extension to our auction scheme using multiple
price trajectories that incentivizes this behavior in ex post
Nash equilibrium. In the price update component, we obtain an analytical expression for the clearing price objective,
based on the Gaussian model of valuations that the auction
maintains. We establish that the form of the objective is suitable for optimization using expectation maximization. By
alternating the two components, we obtain an intuitive and
tractable auction scheme where agents place bids, knowledge
over latent valuations is updated given bids, and prices are
updated given current knowledge of valuations.
For evaluation purposes, we ﬁrst illustrate our auction on
a stylized instance to gain insight into the auction’s behavior under both unbiased and biased prior information. We
then conduct simulation experiments to compare our auction implementation against a combinatorial clock auction
that updates prices according to excess demand, which is
the standard price update scheme used in practice (Ausubel
and Baranov 2014). The prior information in our Bayesian
auction is obtained by ﬁtting a Gaussian process prior on
a training sample of valuations. The baseline clock auction
is parametrized by a step size, or price increment. We ﬁnd
in our experiments that our Bayesian auction is competitive
against the strongest possible version of the baseline auction,
where the price increment is chosen separately for each in-

Abstract
We cast the problem of combinatorial auction design in a
Bayesian framework in order to incorporate prior information
into the auction process and minimize the number of rounds
to convergence. We ﬁrst develop a generative model of agent
valuations and market prices such that clearing prices become
maximum a posteriori estimates given observed agent valuations. This generative model then forms the basis of an auction
process which alternates between reﬁning estimates of agent
valuations and computing candidate clearing prices. We provide an implementation of the auction using assumed density
ﬁltering to estimate valuations and expectation maximization
to compute prices. An empirical evaluation over a range of
valuation domains demonstrates that our Bayesian auction
mechanism is highly competitive against the combinatorial
clock auction in terms of rounds to convergence, even under
the most favorable choices of price increment for this baseline.

Introduction
Combinatorial auctions address the problem of allocating
multiple distinct items among agents who may view the
items as complements or substitutes. In such auctions, agents
can place bids on entire packages of items in order to express complex preferences, leading to higher allocative efﬁciency. Nevertheless, bidding in a combinatorial auction
places a substantial cognitive burden on agents, because the
process of valuing even a single bundle can be a costly exercise (Kwasnica et al. 2005; Parkes 2006). There is therefore great interest in developing iterative combinatorial auctions, which help to guide the bidding process using price
feedback, and in devising techniques to limit the number of
rounds needed to reach convergence (ideally in the dozens
rather than hundreds) (Petrakis, Ziegler, and Bichler 2012;
Bichler, Hao, and Adomavicius 2017).
In this work, we propose to incorporate prior information
on agent valuations into the auction procedure in a principled
manner, thereby achieving a low number of rounds in practice. We cast the problem of combinatorial auction design
in a Bayesian framework by developing a joint generative
model of agent valuations and market prices. Our generative
model deﬁnes a likelihood function for clearing prices given
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

941

