The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

MDP-Based Cost Sensitive
Classiﬁcation Using Decision Trees
Shlomi Maliah, Guy Shani
Software and Information Systems Engineering
Ben Gurion University, Israel
shlomima@post.bgu.ac.il, shanigu@bgu.ac.il
ter accuracy. In many cases better accuracy results implicitly
in reduced misclassiﬁcation cost. Cost sensitive classiﬁcation (Elkan 2001; Turney 1995; Lomax and Vadera 2013),
on the other hand, takes costs directly into consideration.
For example, several researchers suggested to modify the
splitting criterion of standard decision tree algorithms, such
as C4.5, to take into account costs (Tan 1993; Norton 1989;
Núñez 1991). Turney (1995) used a genetic algorithm to
construct a decision tree, taking into account not only immediate costs, but also future costs.
In this paper we suggest Markov Decision Process (MDP)
(Bellman 1957; Puterman 2014) as a useful tool for modeling cost sensitive classiﬁcation. MDPs allow a classiﬁer to
choose which attribute to measure next taking into consideration the expected future sum of costs. MDPs inherently
take into consideration future actions, rather than considering only the immediate, myopic gain.
We construct a set of decision trees, over all attribute subsets. These decision trees are learned in the standard manner,
ignoring all costs, where each node in the tree is associated
with an attribute to measure, and each outgoing edge is associated with a constraint over the observed value for that
attribute. Leaves are associated with a ﬁnal classiﬁcation decision. The state space of our MDP is the set of leaves of all
trees. When classifying the MDP state conforms to a single
leaf in one of the trees, based on the set of attributes values
that were observed thus far. The available MDP actions are
to select an additional attribute to test, transitioning to a leaf
in other tree, or to classify based on the known attributes.
After choosing an attribute to measure based on the MDP
policy, we transition to a new leaf in another tree given the
observed attribute value. The cost of attribute measurement
actions are the costs of the tests, and the costs for the ﬁnal
classiﬁcation decision are the misclassiﬁcation costs.
Even though we construct multiple decision trees, we do
not propose an ensemble approach (Banﬁeld et al. 2007).
Our approach can be described as constructing a single cost
sensitive decision tree from multiple accuracy driven decision trees.
We provide experiments over a set of benchmarks (Lomax
and Vadera 2013) showing that our MDP approach scales
well over these benchmarks. We provide a set of experiments
when varying the cost of misclassiﬁcation. When the misclassiﬁcation cost is very high, one will query all available

Abstract
In classiﬁcation, an algorithm learns to classify a given
instance based on a set of observed attribute values. In
many real world cases testing the value of an attribute
incurs a cost. Furthermore, there can also be a cost associated with the misclassiﬁcation of an instance. Cost
sensitive classiﬁcation attempts to minimize the expected cost of classiﬁcation, by deciding after each observed attribute value, which attribute to measure next.
In this paper we suggest Markov Decision Processes as
a modeling tool for cost sensitive classiﬁcation. We construct standard decision trees over all attribute subsets,
and the leaves of these trees become the state space of
our MDP. At each phase we decide on the next attribute
to measure, balancing the cost of the measurement and
the classiﬁcation accuracy. We compare our approach to
a set of previous approaches, showing our approach to
work better for a range of misclassiﬁcation costs.

1

Introduction

Classiﬁcation is the task of identifying the class of an instance based on a set of observed attributes. For example,
we may conduct a set of tests for a patient to properly identify her condition, applying an appropriate treatment for that
condition. In many cases some tests, such as measuring temperature and blood pressure are easy to conduct and incur
little cost, while other tests such as gene proﬁling are much
more costly. On the other hand, costly tests are often more
informative than blood pressure, and can be more useful for
diagnosis. In such cases it may be reasonable to collect measurements in an incremental manner, deciding on the next
test after observing the results of the previous test.
In addition, in many applications there is a cost associated
with an error on the ﬁnal classiﬁcation decision. In the diagnosis example above, an error in classiﬁcation may cause
the doctors to apply a wrong treatment, which may be both
costly in hospital resources, as well as damaging to the patient. There are hence two different costs that must be considered — a cost for measuring the value of a attribute, and
the cost of misclassiﬁcation.
Classical classiﬁcation algorithms ignore these costs, focusing on measuring the value of attributes that provide betc 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3746

