The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Rich Coalitional Resource Games
Nicolas Troquard
The KRDB Research Centre
Faculty of Computer Science
Free University of Bozen-Bolzano
Piazza Domenicani, 3
I-39100 Bozen-Bolzano BZ, Italy
Player 2 is self-reliant as she can eat her bacon and be
happy. To make Player 1 happy as well, this bacon must be
used towards the happiness of Player 1. In this case, it is
Player 1’s egg that will be used towards Player 2’s happiness. To add Player 3 into the happy team, Player 3 can provide his egg, which can be transformed into an omelet using
Player 1’s still uncommitted capacity of transforming and
egg into an omelet. The value of the coalitions {2}, {1, 2},
and {1, 2, 3} is thus 1.
In this paper, we propose simple models of interaction capable of representing and reasoning about scenarios such as
Example 1, where resources can be intricately consumed,
transformed, and produced by agents. They are compact
coalitional games reminiscent of (Wooldridge and Dunne
2006) and (Bachrach and Rosenschein 2008). We propose
what is effectively an extension of coalitional resource
games (Wooldridge and Dunne 2006) that takes advantage
of resource-sensitive logics. The exact resource-sensitive
logic will be a parameter L OG, which can be instantiated
with any variant and fragment of Linear Logic (Girard
1987), Bunched Logic (O’Hearn and Pym 1999), etc.

Abstract
We propose a simple model of interaction for resourceconscious agents. The resources involved are expressed in
fragments of Linear Logic. We investigate a few problems relevant to cooperative games, such as deciding whether a group
of agents can form a coalition and act together in a way that
satisﬁes all of them. In terms of solution concepts, we study
the computational aspects of the core of a game. The main
contributions are a formal link with the existing literature, and
complexity results for several classes of models.

Introduction
One crucial theme in multi-agent systems is the one
of resource-conscious agents. As the research in multiagent systems is advancing and one can predict its future widespread implementation in real-world systems, one
needs to acknowledge that the agents evolving in the real
world have limited access to resources. They have to seek
after resource objectives and compete for those resources.
When unable to attain a resource alone, they might have to
form coalitions.
In their abstract deﬁnition, coalitional games are presented as a tuple (Ag, VAL), where Ag is a set of agents,
and VAL : 2Ag −→ R is a coalition collective value. Typically, we assume that VAL(∅) = 0. We call simple game
a coalitional game such that for every coalition C ⊆ N ,
we have VAL(C) = 0 or VAL(C) = 1. Where these utilities
come from however is not part of the description. Here, each
player i of a game is endowed with a multiset of resources
en i . An action for Player i consists in contributing a subset
of en i . Then, each player i has a set of goals Gi , which is a
set of resources, represented by formulas of some resourcesensitive logic L OG. In the resulting coalition games, the
valuation function will depend of these individual endowments and goals.
Example 1. Consider the following setting that will be fully
formalised later. Player 1 is happy with bacon, Player 2 is
happy with either bacon or an egg, and Player 3 is happy
with an omelet. Player 1 is endowed with one egg and the
capacity of using an egg to make an omelet. Player 2 is endowed with bacon. Player 3 is endowed with one egg.

We brieﬂy present the Linear Logic formalism in the next
section. The results of this paper will be applicable to every
fragment and variant of Linear Logic mentioned there.
In Linear Logic, a formula can be interpreted as a resource. It has been used before in social choice and game
theory, e.g., (Porello and Endriss 2010a; 2010b; DeYoung
and Schürmann 2012; Troquard 2016). The propositional
language of Linear Logic can distinguish simultaneous
availability of resources (A ⊗ B), deterministic (A & B) and
non-deterministic (A ⊕ B) choices between resources, resource transformations (A  B), and anti-resources (∼ A).
For instance, $1  ($1⊗$1)⊕1 captures a capacity of gambling, where if an agent gives $1, they receive $2 or nothing
(the vacuous resource 1), and do not get to choose. On the
other hand, $10  ﬁsh & meat captures a capacity of buying a meal, where if an agent gives $10, they receive a meal
of ﬁsh or a meal of meat, and they choose which one. Moreover, the resource-consciousness is a built-in feature of the
entailment of these logics. For instance, it is not the case that
$1  $1 ⊗ $1, unlike its classical counterpart $1  $1 ∧ $1.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Having resources and goals represented in the same way
has important consequences. The language of Linear Logic

1242

