The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Deconvolutional Latent-Variable Model
for Text Sequence Matching
Dinghan Shen, Yizhe Zhang, Ricardo Henao, Qinliang Su, Lawrence Carin
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
{dinghan.shen, yizhe.zhang, ricardo.henao, qinliang.su, lcarin}@duke.edu

such vectors are used for predictions of relationships between the corresponding two sentences (Bowman et al.
2016a; Mou et al. 2015). In this case the matching complexity is independent of sentence length. However, it has
been found that is hard to encode the semantic information
of an entire sequence into a single vector (Bowman et al.
2015).
For these models, it is important to learn an informative sentence representation with two properties: (i) it preserves its fundamental details, e.g., n-gram fragments within
the sequence of text; (ii) the learned representation should
contain discriminative information regarding its relationship
with the target sequence. So motivated, we propose to infer the embedding for each sentence with deep generative
models, due to their ability to make effective use of unlabeled data and learn abstract features from complex data
(Kingma et al. 2014; Yang et al. 2017; Pu et al. 2016;
Wang et al. 2017). Moreover, the objective of a generative
model addresses generation/reconstruction, and thus learns
latent codes that naturally preserve essential information of
a sequence, making them particularly well suited to sentence
matching.
Recent advances in neural variational inference have manifested deep latent-variable models for text (Miao, Yu, and
Blunsom 2016). The general idea is to map the sentence
into a continuous latent variable, or code, via an inference
network (encoder), and then use the generative network (decoder) to reconstruct the input sentence conditioned on samples from the latent code (via its posterior distribution). As
a ﬁrst attempt, (Bowman et al. 2016b) proposed a Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE)-based generative model for text,
with LSTM networks (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997)
as the sequence decoder. However, due to the recurrent nature of the LSTM decoder, the model tends to largely ignore
information from the latent variable; the learned sentence
embedding contains little information from the input, even
with several training modiﬁcations (Bowman et al. 2016b).
To mitigate this issue, (Yang et al. 2017) proposed to use a
dilated CNN, rather than an LSTM, as a decoder in their
latent-variable model. Since this decoder is less dependent on the contextual information from previous words, the
latent-variable representation tends to encode more information from the input sequence.
Unfortunately, regardless of whether LSTMs or dilated

Abstract
A latent-variable model is introduced for text matching, inferring sentence representations by jointly optimizing generative
and discriminative objectives. To alleviate typical optimization challenges in latent-variable models for text, we employ
deconvolutional networks as the sequence decoder (generator), providing learned latent codes with more semantic information and better generalization. Our model, trained in
an unsupervised manner, yields stronger empirical predictive
performance than a decoder based on Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), with less parameters and considerably faster
training. Further, we apply it to text sequence-matching problems. The proposed model signiﬁcantly outperforms several
strong sentence-encoding baselines, especially in the semisupervised setting.

Introduction
The ability to infer the degree of match between two text
sequences, and determine their semantic relationship, is of
central importance in natural language understanding and
reasoning (Bordes et al. 2014). With recent advances in
deep neural networks, considerable research has focused
on developing end-to-end deep learning models for text sequence matching (Hu et al. 2014; Wang and Jiang 2017;
Rocktäschel et al. 2015; Wang, Hamza, and Florian 2017;
Shen et al. 2017). State-of-the-art models typically ﬁrst encode the text sequences into hidden units via a Long Short
term Memory (LSTM) model or a Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN), and techniques like attention mechanisms
(Rocktäschel et al. 2015) or memory networks (Hill et al.
2015) are subsequently applied for the ﬁnal sequence matching, usually addressed as a classiﬁcation problem. However,
the word-by-word matching nature of these models typically
gives rise to high computational complexity, either O(T 2 )
(Wang and Jiang 2017) or O(T ) (Rocktäschel et al. 2015),
where T is the sentence length. Therefore, these approaches
are computationally expensive and difﬁcult to scale to large
datasets or long text sequences.
Another class of models for matching natural language
sentences is based on sentence encoding methods, where
each sentence is mapped to a vector (embedding), and two
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5438

