The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Cross-Lingual Entity Linking for Web Tables
Xusheng Luo, Kangqi Luo, Xianyang Chen, Kenny Q. Zhu∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai, China 200240
{freeﬁsh 6174, luokangqi, st tommy}@sjtu.edu.cn, kzhu@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

” (Postman) in a Chinese table in Figure 1 is not included in
the Chinese Wikipedia but available in the English version.
” to “Il Postino: The Postman” in
Thus, we can link “
the English Wikipedia.
Another important motivation for cross-lingual table linking is to help enrich the facts in the target knowledge
base. Knowledge bases in English, albeit larger and better structured than those in other languages, may contain
long-tail entities. These are entities associated with very
few attributes or relations in the KB, such as Chinese
movies or celebrities, since such information is often ignored by the English-speaking Wiki contributors. On the
other hand, non-English web tables may be a rich source
of semantic relationships among these rare entities. For example, the table in Figure 1 contains the relationship be”(infortween movies and their countries of origin. “
mant) is a Chinese movie that exists in English Wikipedia
(“The Stool Piegon (2010 ﬁlm)”) and hence Freebase, but
it misses a property ﬁlm country. Now if we can link the
mentions in the table to the correct entities in English
Wikipedia, then it is easy to infer that the ﬁlm country property of “The Stool Piegon (2010 ﬁlm)” is China, thus discovering a new fact.

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of linking string mentions
from web tables in one language to the corresponding named
entities in a knowledge base written in another language,
which we call the cross-lingual table linking task. We present
a joint statistical model to simultaneously link all mentions
that appear in one table. The framework is based on neural networks, aiming to bridge the language gap by vector
space transformation and a coherence feature that captures
the correlations between entities in one table. Experimental results report that our approach improves the accuracy of
cross-lingual table linking by a relative gain of 12.1%. Detailed analysis of our approach also shows a positive and important gain brought by the joint framework and coherence
feature. 1

Introduction
The World Wide Web is endowed with billions of HTML tables, i.e. web tables (Cafarella et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2012),
which carry valuable structured information. To enable machines to understand and process such tables (Wang et al.
2012), the ﬁrst step is to link the surface mentions of the entities in the tables to a standard lexicon or knowledge base,
such as Wikipedia, which uniquely identiﬁes entities. This
task is known as entity linking in web tables (Bhagavatula,
Noraset, and Downey 2015; Wu et al. 2016). In this paper,
we also call it “table linking”.
Existing work has been focused on entity linking for web
tables in English (Bhagavatula, Noraset, and Downey 2015;
Limaye, Sarawagi, and Chakrabarti 2010), or mono-lingual
table linking. However, when it comes to linking web tables
in other languages, the corresponding non-English knowledge bases are often not comprehensive enough to cover
all the entity mentions in the tables at hand. The Chinese
Wikipedia, for instance, is just about 1/6 the size of its English counterpart, in terms of the number of entities (articles). This motivates us to link non-English web tables to
English knowledge base, in a novel process that we call
cross-lingual table linking. For example, the movie “




























 
 
 



 


 
 



 


Figure 1: Example of cross-lingual table linking from Chinese to English.
In this paper, we attempt to solve the cross-lingual table
linking problem without using any non-English knowledge
bases. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst attempt
that attacks the cross-lingual table linking problem.
There are two naive approaches to accomplish this crosslingual table linking task. In the ﬁrst approach, one can use
any of the mono-lingual table linking techniques developed
thus far to ﬁrst link the entities to a knowledge base of
that language, and then link to the English knowledge base

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Kenny Q. Zhu is the contact author. This work was supported
by NSFC grant No. 91646205 and 61373031, as well as SJTU
funding project 16JCCS08.

362

