The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Robust Options
Daniel J. Mankowitz,1 Timothy A. Mann,2 Pierre-Luc Bacon,3 Doina Precup,3 Shie Mannor1
1

Technion Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
2
Google Deepmind, London, UK
3
McGill University, Montreal, Canada
danielm@campus.technion.ac.il, timothymann@google.com, pbacon,
dprecup {@cs.mcgill.ca}, shie@ee.technion.ac.il
arm with length l1 can be modelled by a dynamical system Pdynamics1 , also referred to as the state-transition function or transition model. These terms will be used interchangeably throughout the paper. The transition model governs the dynamics of this arm. Different models Pdynamics2
and Pdynamics3 are generated for arms with lengths l2 and
l3 respectively. All of these arms are attempting to perform
the same task. An RL agent trained using model Pdynamics1
may not adequately perform the task using Pdynamics2 or
Pdynamics3 . However, ideally the agent should be agnostic
to the uncertainty in the model parameters and still be able
to solve the task (i.e., lift the box).
Practical applications of RL rely on the following twostep blueprint: Step one - Build a Model: Models are attained in one of three ways - (1) A ﬁnite, noisy batch of
data is acquired and a model is built based on this data; (2)
A simpliﬁed, approximate model of the environment may
be provided directly (e.g., power generation 1 , mining etc);
(3) A model of the environment is derived (e.g., dynamical systems). Step two - Learn a policy: RL methods are
then applied to ﬁnd a good policy based on this model. In
cases (1) and (2), the parameters of the model are uncertain
due to the noisy, ﬁnite data and the simpliﬁed model respectively. In case (3), model uncertainty occurs when the parameters of the physical agent are uncertain as discussed in
the above-mentioned example. This is especially important
for industrial robots that are periodically replaced with new
robots that might not share the exact same physical speciﬁcations (and therefore have slightly different dynamical
models). Learning a policy that is agnostic to the parameters
of the model is crucial to being robust to model uncertainty.
We focus on (3): Learning policies in dynamical systems,
using the robust MDP framework (Bagnell, Ng, and Schneider 2001; Nilim and El Ghaoui 2005; Iyenger 2005), that are
robust to model uncertainty (e.g., robots with different arm
lengths). 2
Why learn robust options? Previous works (Mankowitz,
Mann, and Mannor 2016b; 2016a; Bacon, Harb, and Precup
2017; Mankowitz, Tamar, and Mannor 2017) have shown
that options mitigate Feature-based Model Misspeciﬁcation

Abstract
Robust reinforcement learning aims to produce policies
that have strong guarantees even in the face of environments/transition models whose parameters have strong uncertainty. Existing work uses value-based methods and the
usual primitive action setting. In this paper, we propose robust methods for learning temporally abstract actions, in the
framework of options. We present a Robust Options Policy Iteration (ROPI) algorithm with convergence guarantees,
which learns options that are robust to model uncertainty. We
utilize ROPI to learn robust options with the Robust Options
Deep Q Network (RO-DQN) that solves multiple tasks and
mitigates model misspeciﬁcation due to model uncertainty.
We present experimental results which suggest that policy iteration with linear features may have an inherent form of robustness when using coarse feature representations. In addition, we present experimental results which demonstrate that
robustness helps policy iteration implemented on top of deep
neural networks to generalize over a much broader range of
dynamics than non-robust policy iteration.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we focus on developing methods for learning temporally extended actions (Sutton, Precup, and Singh
1999) which are robust to model uncertainty. Temporally
Extended Actions, also known as options (Sutton, Precup,
and Singh 1999), skills (da Silva, Konidaris, and Barto 2012;
Mankowitz, Mann, and Mannor 2016b; 2016a) or macroactions (Hauskrecht et al. 1998) have been shown both theoretically (Precup, Sutton, and Singh 1998) and experimentally (Mann and Mannor 2014) to result in faster convergence rates in RL planning algorithms. We refer to a Temporally Extended Action as an option from here on in. While
much research has been dedicated to automatically learning
options, e.g. (Şimşek and Barto 2005; da Silva, Konidaris,
and Barto 2012; Mankowitz, Mann, and Mannor 2016b;
2016a; Bacon, Harb, and Precup 2017), no work has, to the
best of our knowledge, focused on learning options that are
robust to model uncertainty.
To understand model uncertainty, consider a two-link
robotic arm that is trying to lift a box (Figure 1a). The

1

http://www.gridlabd.org/
Note that our theoretical framework can also deal with model
uncertainty in cases (1) and (2).

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

6409

