The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Characterization of the Convex Lukasiewicz
Fragment for Learning from Constraints
Francesco Giannini, Michelangelo Diligenti, Marco Gori, Marco Maggini
Department of Information Engineering and Mathematical Sciences
University of Siena
Siena, via Roma 56, Italy
{fgiannini,diligmic,marco,maggini}@diism.unisi.it
approaches logical formulas are assumed to be evaluated as
true-false values, whereas a more general expressiveness is
achieved in Probabilistic Soft Logic (PSL) where formulas
can take any [0, 1] value. PSL (Bach 2015) is a probabilistic
programming language that allows to consider disjunctive
logic clauses (including Horn clauses as a special case) converted into real-valued functions by means of Łukasiewicz
logic operators, where the resulting cost function is shown
to be convex.
In this paper we provide a theoretical result stating that
logic rules expressed in a speciﬁc propositional Łukasiewicz
fragment correspond to convex logical constraints that can
be exploited to train a learning agent. The fragment contains the weak conjunction and the strong disjunction applied to literals. By the McNaughton theorem, each constraint function corresponding to any formula in the fragment is a convex piecewise linear function with integer coefﬁcients. Given the structure of the McNaughton functions
for this speciﬁc fragment, we show that the constraint functions can be implemented as a set of linear constraints in the
variable space. Given this result, we show how a collective
classiﬁcation task can be directly formulated as a quadratic
programming problem. Finally, we provide an example to
show the effect of the logical rules to improve the classiﬁcation performance on a simple benchmark. It is interesting to
notice that the theoretical result regarding the convex fragment is very general and it is not limited to the proposed application. For example, it can be used to extend the fragment
of logic that can be represented in PSL, while preserving
convexity.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reports the
theoretical results characterizing the Łukasiewicz fragment
that yields convex logical constraints. Then in Section 3 it is
shown how the theory can be applied to formulate the collective classiﬁcation task as a quadratic programming problem. Section 4 provides an applicative example showing
the effect of rules expressed by the proposed fragment in
a transductive classiﬁcation task. Finally, some conclusions
are drawn in Section 5.

Abstract
This paper provides a theoretical insight for the integration of
logical constraints into a learning process. In particular it is
proved that a fragment of the Łukasiewicz logic yields a set of
convex constraints. The fragment is enough expressive to include many formulas of interest such as Horn clauses. Using
the isomorphism of Łukasiewicz formulas and McNaughton
functions, logical constraints are mapped to a set of linear
constraints once the predicates are grounded on a given sample set. In this framework, it is shown how a collective classiﬁcation scheme can be formulated as a quadratic programming problem, but the presented theory can be exploited in
general to embed logical constraints into a learning process.
The proposed approach is evaluated on a classiﬁcation task
to show how the use of the logical rules can be effective to
improve the accuracy of a trained classiﬁer.

1

Introduction

The concept of constraint has been considered in the deﬁnition of a general approach for learning that allows us to
exploit different sources of knowledge for training an agent
(Gnecco et al. 2015). In particular, in multi-task learning
beside the supervised examples additional information on
the task can be expressed as abstract knowledge by logical
constraints. Some approaches to embed logical constraints
in the learning procedure have been proposed, especially
in the context of kernel machines (Diligenti et al. 2012;
Diligenti, Gori, and Saccà 2015). These methods exploit
the transcription of logical rules into real valued functions
to deﬁne appropriate cost functions to be optimized in the
learning process. Fuzzy logic is generally used in deﬁning the mapping since it allows the use of continuous values in the unit interval (Diligenti et al. 2012; Seraﬁni and
d’Avila Garcez 2016). Related approaches combine logic
rules with neural network learning (Hu et al. 2016) by an iterative procedure that transfers abstract knowledge encoded
by the logic rules into the parameters of a deep neural
network. It is also worth to mention the related methods
in statistical relational learning (Getoor and Taskar 2007;
De Raedt and Kersting 2008), like Markov logic networks
(Richardson and Domingos 2006) that generate probabilistic graphical models from the rule set. Nevertheless, in such

2

Convex Łukasiewicz Fragment

In a multi–task learning problem, beyond factual knowledge, we can express abstract relations among the objective functions by means of logical constraints. In principle

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3015

