The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Distributed Composite Quantization
Weixiang Hong, Jingjing Meng, Junsong Yuan
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{wxhong,jingjing.meng,JSYUAN}@ntu.edu.sg

Wang et al. 2016a; Zhang and Wang 2016) has recently
triggered interests from computer vision, machine learning
and multimedia retrieval communities, due to its superior
accuracy and comparable efﬁciency compared with hashing techniques. Different from hashing, these methods perform ANN search by learning numerous decimal quantizers,
hence do not suffer from the quantization loss from decimal space to binary space, which is the main reason of
their better accuracy compared with hashing. Meanwhile,
quantization-based methods are also efﬁcient thanks to the
smart use of lookup table.
Despite the prosperity of the quantization techniques, they
are all designed for the centralized setting, or in other words,
are single-machine approaches. Nevertheless, due to the explosion in size and complexity of modern datasets, more
and more real-world applications need to deal with data
distributed across different locations, such as distributed
databases (Corbett et al. 2013), images/videos over the networks (Bhattacharjee et al. 2016; Meng et al. 2016), etc. Furthermore, in some applications, the data is inherently distributed. For example, in video surveillance (Cong, Yuan,
and Liu 2011) and sensor networks (Liang et al. 2014), the
data is collected at distributed sites. In such contexts, the
quantizers should be learned based on the entire dataset in
order to get unbiased quantization codes for the data. One
intuitive way is gathering all data together at a central server
before training, but it is not a feasible option because of the
huge communication overhead. Besides, directly training on
large-scale data is often prohibitive in both time and space,
which further prevents it from practical applications. As a
consequence, it is important to develop quantization algorithms that are both powerful enough to capture the complexity of large scale data, and scalable enough to process
huge datasets in parallel. However, to our knowledge, this
critical and challenging problem has never been explored in
the literature.
This paper proposes Distributed Composite Quantization (DCQ) for data which is distributed across different
nodes of an arbitrary network (e.g., Figure 1). Unlike the
conventional centralized methods which require gathering
the distributed data from all nodes to learn common quantizers, our method learns such quantizers in a distributed manner. Each node learns a set of dictionaries on its local data,
and only exchanges the local dictionaries with other nodes

Abstract
Approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search is a fundamental problem in computer vision, machine learning and
information retrieval. Recently, quantization-based methods
have drawn a lot of attention due to their superior accuracy
and comparable efﬁciency compared with traditional hashing techniques. However, despite the prosperity of quantization techniques, they are all designed for the centralized
setting, i.e., quantization is performed on the data on a single machine. This makes it difﬁcult to scale these techniques
to large-scale datasets. Built upon the Composite Quantization, we propose a novel quantization algorithm for data distributed across different nodes of an arbitrary network. The
proposed Distributed Composite Quantization (DCQ) decomposes Composite Quantization into a set of decentralized subproblems such that each node solves its own sub-problem
on its local data, meanwhile is still able to attain consistent
quantizers thanks to the consensus constraint. Since there is
no exchange of training data across the nodes in the learning
process, the communication cost of our method is low. Extensive experiments on ANN search and image retrieval tasks
validate that the proposed DCQ signiﬁcantly improves Composite Quantization in both efﬁciency and scale, while still
maintaining competitive accuracy.

1. Introduction
Nearest neighbor (NN) search has wide applications in computer vision, machine learning and information retrieval,
e.g., image retrieval, object instance search and k-NN classiﬁer (Shakhnarovich, Indyk, and Darrell 2006), etc. The
straightforward solution, linear scan, is both computationally and memory intensive in large scale high-dimensional
cases, thus is not preferable in practice. Therefore, there
have been a lot of interests in algorithms that perform approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search.
ANN search is traditionally addressed with hashing methods (Wang et al. 2016b; Hong, Yuan, and Das Bhattacharjee
2017; Liu et al. 2017; Hong, Meng, and Yuan 2018), which
have been comprehensively surveyed in (Wang et al. 2017).
However, a family of methods based on vector quantization (Jegou, Douze, and Schmid 2011; Babenko and Lempitsky 2015; Heo, Lin, and Yoon 2014; Zhang et al. 2015;
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

61

