The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Balanced Clustering via Exclusive
Lasso: A Pragmatic Approach
Zhihui Li,1 Feiping Nie,2∗ Xiaojun Chang,3 Zhigang Ma,3 Yi Yang4
1

2

Beijing Etrol Technologies Co., Ltd.
Centre for OPTical Imagery Analysis and Learning, Northwestern Polytechnical University.
3
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University.
4
Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney.
tively. Some researchers claim that the curse of dimensionality may deteriorate the performance of TKM (Ding and
Li 2007). A straightforward solution of this problem is to
project the original dataset to a low-dimensional subspace
by dimensionality reduction, for example, PCA, before performing TKM. Discriminative analysis has been shown effective in enhancing clustering performance (Ding and Li
2007) (la Torre, Fernando, and Kanade 2006) (Ye, Zhao, and
Liu 2007b). Motivated by this fact, discriminative k-means
(DKM) (Ye, Zhao, and Wu 2007) is proposed to incorporate
discriminative analysis and clustering into a single framework to formalize the clustering as a trace maximization
problem.
By contrast, the min-cut clustering is realized by constructing a weighted undirected graph and then partitioning
its vertices into two sets so that the total weight of the set
of edges with endpoints in different sets is minimized (Yuan
et al. 2014) (Raj and Wiggins 2010). Among several graph
clustering methods, min-cut tends to provide more balanced
clusters as compared to other graph clustering criterion. As
the within-cluster similarity in min-cut method is explicitly
maximized, solving the min-cut clustering problem is nontrivial. The main difﬁculty lies in the constraint on the solution. Thus, to make this problem tractable, researchers proposed to relax the constraint.
Although k-means and min-cut have achieved promising performance in many applications, they have certain
limit.Given that the distribution of the data points is balanced, one would expect the clustering result to reﬂect such
balance. That being said, a clustering algorithm shall avoid
partitioning a minority of data points into a cluster. Nonetheless, both K-means and min-cut, as well as some other similar clustering algorithms, do not guarantee balanced clustering result. In many real world data mining applications, the
data from each cluster are about the same. For example, the
male and female populations in the same age range cannot
be very different. Therefore, for those data which are equally
distributed, it is more reasonable to explicitly guarantee the
clustering results balanced.
Motivated by the limit of k-means and min-cut for handling balanced data, we propose to design a balanced clustering algorithm. Speciﬁcally, the exclusive lasso proposed by
Zhou et al. (Zhou, Jin, and Hoi 2010) has been exploited in
our approach to fulﬁll such purpose. The exclusive lasso was

Abstract
Clustering is an effective technique in data mining to generate groups that are the matter of interest. Among various
clustering approaches, the family of k-means algorithms and
min-cut algorithms gain most popularity due to their simplicity and efﬁcacy. The classical k-means algorithm partitions a
number of data points into several subsets by iteratively updating the clustering centers and the associated data points.
By contrast, a weighted undirected graph is constructed in
min-cut algorithms which partition the vertices of the graph
into two sets. However, existing clustering algorithms tend to
cluster minority of data points into a subset, which shall be
avoided when the target dataset is balanced. To achieve more
accurate clustering for balanced dataset, we propose to leverage exclusive lasso on k-means and min-cut to regulate the
balance degree of the clustering results. By optimizing our
objective functions that build atop the exclusive lasso, we can
make the clustering result as much balanced as possible. Extensive experiments on several large-scale datasets validate
the advantage of the proposed algorithms compared to the
state-of-the-art clustering algorithms.

Introduction
Clustering is a fundamental research topic in data mining
and is widely used for many applications in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence, statistics and social sciences (Jain, Murty,
and Flynn 1999; Jain and Dubes 1988a; Girolami 2002;
Wu et al. 2012b; Wang, She, and Cao 2013; Ye, Zhao, and
Liu 2007a; Nie, Cai, and Li 2017). The objective of clustering is to partition the original data points into a number
of groups so that the data points within the same cluster are
close to each other while those in different clusters are far
away from each other (Jain and Dubes 1988b) (Nie, Xu, and
Li 2012) (Chang et al. 2015) (Filippone et al. 2008) (Li et al.
2017).
Among various approaches for clustering, K-means and
min-cut are two most popular choices in reality because of
their simplicity and effectiveness (Wu et al. 2012a). The general procedure of traditional K-means (TKM) is to randomly
initialize c clustering centers, assign each data point to its
nearest cluster and compute a new clustering center itera∗

Corresponding author. Email: feipingnie@gmail.com
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3596

