The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Uniﬁed Locally Linear Classiﬁers with Diversity-Promoting Anchor Points
Chenghao Liu,1,2 Teng Zhang,1,3 Peilin Zhao,4 Jianling Sun,1,3 Steven C.H. Hoi2
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
3
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies, China
4
School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
{twinsken, faramita, sunjl}@zju.edu.cn, chhoi@smu.edu.sg, peilinzhao@hotmail.com
2

2009; Ladicky and Torr 2011; Gu and Han 2013). However, this work essentially divides the learning process into
three independent stages: (1)computeing the anchor points;
(2) encoding the training data with these anchor points; (3)
training the classiﬁer based on the results of encoding. More
speciﬁcally, they ﬁrst compute the anchor points with unsupervised learning methods such as clustering (Van Gemert et
al. 2008) that does not take class label information into account, and then encodes the training data with a predeﬁned
local coding scheme. Finally, they feed the results of encoding to the downstream supervised classiﬁer training process.
We argue that these decoupled approaches oversimplify the
original optimization problem, resulting in a large deviation
due to the disparate purpose of each step. While local coding
techniques minimizes the data reconstruction error and exploits unsupervised learning methods for anchor point learning, the primary objective of classiﬁer learning is to minimize the classiﬁcation error. The anchor points are obtained
in an unsupervised fashion and the local coding coordinates
are calculated with the predeﬁned local coding scheme. Unsurprisingly, without making use of label information and
optimizing a uniﬁed formulation, these anchor points and
local coding coordinates are clearly not optimal for the classiﬁcation task. It is desirable but challenging to achieve a
uniﬁed optimization of anchor points, the local coding coordinates and the classiﬁer model.

Abstract
Locally Linear Support Vector Machine (LLSVM) has been
actively used in classiﬁcation tasks due to its capability of
classifying nonlinear patterns. However, existing LLSVM
suffers from two drawbacks: (1) a particular and appropriate regularization for LLSVM has not yet been addressed;
(2) it usually adopts a three-stage learning scheme composed
of learning anchor points by clustering, learning local coding coordinates by a predeﬁned coding scheme, and ﬁnally
learning for training classiﬁers. We argue that this decoupled
approaches oversimpliﬁes the original optimization problem,
resulting in a large deviation due to the disparate purpose of
each step. To address the ﬁrst issue, we propose a novel diversiﬁed regularization which could capture infrequent patterns
and reduce the model size without sacriﬁcing the representation power. Based on this regularization, we develop a joint
optimization algorithm among anchor points, local coding coordinates and classiﬁers to simultaneously minimize the overall classiﬁcation risk, which is termed as Diversiﬁed and Uniﬁed Locally Linear Support Vector Machine(DU-LLSVM for
short). To the best of our knowledge, DU-LLSVM is the ﬁrst
principled method that directly learns sparse local coding and
can be easily generalized to other supervised learning models.
Extensive experiments showed that DU-LLSVM consistently
surpassed several state-of-the-art methods with a predeﬁned
local coding scheme (e.g. LLSVM) or a supervised anchor
point learning(e.g. SAPL-LLSVM).

Furthermore, one key ingredient in the classiﬁcation
model is the regularization, which reduces overﬁtting by
controlling the complexity of the model. While the effectiveness of 2 -norm has been validated, there is still much
room for improvement by designing a particular and appropriate regularization for locally linear classiﬁers, which
has not been addressed yet. Speciﬁcally, each local classiﬁer with respect to anchor points can capture nonlinear patterns according to discriminative information and geometric
characters. Therefore, a regularization that encourages the
local classiﬁer to be diversiﬁed in terms of anchor points can
reduce the correlation and redundancy between these classiﬁer. Besides alleviating overﬁtting problem, this regularization can also (1) capture infrequent patterns: most local
classiﬁers can capture frequent patterns that have dominant
characteristic in the dataset, and promoting diversity among
local classiﬁers can drive them to give infrequent and frequent patterns an equal treatment; they can also (2) reduce

Introduction
Locally linear coding has been widely shown as a promising approach to approximate data on the nonlinear manifold
(Van Gemert et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2010). The key idea behind this method is that a non-linear manifold behaves linearly in the local neighborhood, and that data on the manifold can be encoded locally in a local coordinate system
established by a set of anchor points. Each data point can
then be approximated through a linear combination of surrounding anchor points, and the weights are local coding coordinates which can be used for subsequent model training.
Recently, several works have brought the advances of local
coding techniques into classiﬁcation task to enhance the capability of modeling nonlinear data (Yu, Zhang, and Gong
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2339

