The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Human Guided Linear Regression
with Feature-Level Constraints
Aubrey Gress, Ian Davidson
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Davis
1 Shields Avenue, Davis, CA, 95616
{adgress@ucdavis.edu, davidson@cs.ucdavis.edu}

“black box,” users may have a wealth of understanding about
the relationships between the features and the output. For example, a scientist performing a longevity study may be conﬁdent that life expectancy decreases with respect to smoking
habits.
We propose three forms of feature level knowledge which
we use to constrain the solution space of linear regression,
thereby reducing the necessary amount of training data.
These constraints are on: parameter signs, relative parameter effect ordering and pairwise parameter signs. This allows
a rich set of feature level guidance to be provided, such as
“feature i will have a positive impact on the label” or “feature j will have a more positive impact than feature k.” This
feature level guidance forms a new set of additional information users can provide even in situations where generating
additional labeled data is not possible or cost effective. This
type of guidance can be feasible in domains where the features have a semantic meaning, such as text, medicine, education and sales data. Additionally, in order to account for
potential errors in the guidance, we develop methods of harnessing this knowledge which are robust to certain amounts
of noise in the feature guidance.
Little work has been done on feature-level guidance for
regression. The most ubiquitous line of work on constraining
the parameters of linear methods is through sparsity promoting regularization such as the Lasso (Tibshirani 1996) and
the Elastic Net (Zou and Hastie 2005), but these methods do
not take in additional guidance the user may be able to provide. The closest work to our own is on “signed” regression
which alleviates the small data problem by taking the standard least squares objective and allowing guidance on the
signs of the coefﬁcients of the parameters (Breiman 1995;
Chen and Plemmons 2009; Slawski and Hein 2011; Slawski,
Hein, and others 2013), but they do not have mechanisms for
allowing noisy guidance (i.e. the user is sometimes wrong)
and are limited to just constraints on the coefﬁcient signs.
Our contributions are:

Abstract
Linear regression methods are commonly used by both researchers and data scientists due to their interpretability and
their reduced likelihood of overﬁtting. However, these methods can still perform poorly if little labeled training data is
available. Typical methods used to overcome a lack of labeled training data somehow involve exploiting an outside
source of labeled data or large amounts of unlabeled data.
This includes areas such as active learning, semi-supervised
learning and transfer learning, but in many domains these approaches are not always applicable because they require either a mechanism to label data, large amounts of unlabeled
data or additional sources of sufﬁciently related data. In this
paper we explore an alternative, non-data centric approach.
We allow the user to guide the learning system through three
forms of feature-level guidance which constrain the parameters of the regression function. Such guidance is unlikely to
be perfectly accurate, so we derive methods which are robust
to some amounts of noise, a property we formally prove for
one of our methods.

1

Introduction

Linear regression methods are often used in practice due to
their simplicity, interpretability and resilience to overﬁtting
(Friedman, Hastie, and Tibshirani 2001), but they can perform poorly if too little labeled data is available. This situation can be addressed by several branches of Machine Learning and Statistics, such as semi-supervised learning, transfer learning and active learning, but each of these areas has
strong data requirements that may not always hold. Semisupervised learning (Zhu 2005) methods can make use of
unlabeled data, but they require large amounts of it and for
the “cluster assumption” to hold (Singh, Nowak, and Zhu
2009). Active Learning (Settles 2010) methods can increase
the amount of labeled data, but require both unlabeled data
and a trained human annotator. Transfer learning (Pan and
Yang 2010) methods can incorporate external data sets, but
require the data to be sufﬁciently similar in order for standard transfer learning techniques to succeed.
We explore an alternative, non-data centric approach - using knowledge the user may have about the features. While
Machine Learning methods generally treat features as a

• We introduce Parameter Sign Constrained Regression
(PSCR), which allows the user to provide guidance on parameter signs and, unlike previous work, is robust to noisy
sign guidance (Section 3).
• We introduce Parameter Relative Constrained Regression
(PRCR), which incorporates relative ordering of the coef-

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3053

