The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Lifelong Learning Networks: Beyond Single Agent Lifelong Learning
Mohammad Rostami

Eric Eaton

Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering
University of Pennsylvania
mrostami@seas.upenn.edu

Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
eeaton@seas.upenn.edu

Inspired by these scenarios, we want to explore the idea
of lifelong learning networks. We consider multiple LML
agents, each facing their own series of tasks, that transfer
knowledge to collectively improve performance and learning speed. To develop algorithms for lifelong learning networks, we follow a parametric approach and formulate the
problem as an online problem over the network. For each
agent, the corresponding task model parameters are represented as a task-speciﬁc sparse combination of atoms of its
local knowledge base (Kumar and Daume III 2012). Each
agent seeks to learn parametric models for its series of (potentially unique) tasks. The network topology imposes communication constraints among the agents. The agents share
their knowledge bases with their neighbors, update them to
incorporate the learned knowledge representations of their
neighboring agents, and come to a local consensus. We
use techniques from distributed optimization to solve this
global optimization problem. This allows for transferring the
learned local knowledge bases without sharing the speciﬁc
learned model parameters among neighboring agents.

Abstract
Lifelong machine learning (LML) is a paradigm to design
adaptive agents that can learn in dynamic environments. Current LML algorithms consider a single agent that has centralized access to all data. However, given privacy and security
constraints, data might be distributed among multiple agents
that can collaborate and learn from collective experience. Our
goal is to extend LML from a single agent to a network of
multiple agents that collectively learn a series of tasks.

Introduction
Collective learning in a network of collaborating agents can
potentially improve learning speed and performance of all
agents. It is the product of individual agents, each with
their own interests and constraints, sharing and accumulating learned knowledge over time. Recent work in LML (Ruvolo and Eaton 2013) has explored the notion of a single
agent accumulating knowledge over time. Such an individual LML agent reuses knowledge from previous tasks to improve its learning on new tasks. This LML process improves
performance over all tasks. Although current work in LML
focuses on a single learning agent that incrementally perceives all task data, many real-world applications involve
scenarios in which multiple agents must collectively learn
a series of tasks. Consider the following scenarios:

Problem Formulation
We consider a network of N collaborating LML agent,
where each agent receives a series of sequential tasks over
time, t. There is also some true underlying hidden knowledge base for all tasks, and each agent learns a local view
of this knowledge base based on its own task distribution.
We represent the communication mode of these agents by an
undirected graph G = (V, E), where the set of static nodes
V = {1, . . . , N } denotes the agents and the set of potentially
dynamic edges Et ⊂ V × V, with |Et | = et , speciﬁes possibility of communication between the agents. We assume
for each edge (i, j) ∈ Et , the nodes i and j are connected or
they can communicate information. The neighborhood N (i)
of node i is the set of all nodes that are connected to it. We
use the graph structure to formulate an LML problem on this
network. Although each agents learns its knowledge base
locally, we assume local knowledge bases of neighboring
nodes to be similar to encourage collaboration.
Each agent in the network is an LML agent that receives a set of T related (but different) supervised regression or classiﬁcation tasks, each with training data, i.e.
(t)
(t)
(t)
(t)
{Zi = (Xi , yi )}Tt=1 , where Xi ∈ Rd×M is task data

• Task data could only be partially accessible by each agent.
For example, ﬁnancial decision support agents may have
access only to one data view or a portion of the data.
• Local data processing can be inevitable, such as when
health care regulations prevent medical data from being
shared between learning systems or for security concerns.
• Data communication may be costly. For instance, home
service robots must process perceptions locally due to the
volume of perceptual data, or wearable devices may have
limited communication bandwidth or battery power.
• Data must be broked and processed in parallel. Big data
often necessitates parallel processing in the cloud across
multiple virtual agents, i.e. CPUs or GPUs.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8145

