The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Weakly Supervised Induction of Affective
Events by Optimizing Semantic Consistency
Haibo Ding, Ellen Riloff
School of Computing
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
{hbding, riloff}@cs.utah.edu
affective events, but prior methods still do not consistently
or accurately recognize them. Our research aims to improve
affective event recognition by extracting a large collection
of stereotypically affective events from a personal story corpus. This paper offers several contributions to this topic:
(1) we present a manual annotation study of randomly sampled events, which demonstrates the prevalence of affective
events (nearly 40% of all events), (2) we represent events
as rich structures that include a predicate, agent, theme, and
prepositional phrase, and (3) we present a novel weakly supervised method for inducing a large set of affective events
(> 100,000) from an unannotated text corpus.
This paper introduces an iterative learning framework that
automatically induces a large collection of affective events
from a personal story corpus. First, the corpus is parsed and
events are extracted into a predicate-argument structure and
incorporated into a graph, where each node represents a distinct event. The events are then linked based on three types
of semantic relations: (1) semantic similarity, (2) semantic
opposition and (3) shared components. Next, initial polarity
values are assigned to events using sentiment analysis tools.
Although sentiment tools are not very accurate for many affective events, they can recognize events that have explicitly
affective language (e.g., “I had fun” or “I yelled in anger”).
Consequently, the initialization step serves as noisy supervision. The learning algorithm is then tasked with inferring
more accurate event polarities by iteratively reﬁning the polarity values to optimize for the overall semantic consistency
in the graph. Intuitively, the algorithm encourages semantically similar events to have similar polarity, semantically opposing events to have opposite polarity, and events to have
polarity values consistent with their components. We applied
this model to a corpus of nearly 1.4 million personal stories and induced a collection of >175,000 affective events,
which achieved higher recall and precision on our affective
event data set than existing affective lexicons and learning
models.

Abstract
To understand narrative text, we must comprehend how people are affected by the events that they experience. For example, readers understand that graduating from college is a
positive event (achievement) but being ﬁred from one’s job
is a negative event (problem). NLP researchers have developed effective tools for recognizing explicit sentiments, but
affective events are more difﬁcult to recognize because the
polarity is often implicit and can depend on both a predicate
and its arguments. Our research investigates the prevalence of
affective events in a personal story corpus, and introduces a
weakly supervised method for large scale induction of affective events. We present an iterative learning framework that
constructs a graph with nodes representing events and initializes their affective polarities with sentiment analysis tools as
weak supervision. The events are then linked based on three
types of semantic relations: (1) semantic similarity, (2) semantic opposition, and (3) shared components. The learning
algorithm iteratively reﬁnes the polarity values by optimizing semantic consistency across all events in the graph. Our
model learns over 100,000 affective events and identiﬁes their
polarities more accurately than other methods.

Introduction
When people discuss events, people understand not only the
literal meaning of the event but they also infer the probable
affective state of the person who experienced the event. For
example, if someone says that they got a job, broke a record,
or went to Disneyland, then most people assume these were
desirable experiences and offer congratulations or shared excitement. Conversely, if someone says that they were ﬁred
from their jobs, broke their arms, or went to a funeral, then
most people assume these were undesirable experiences and
offer sympathy or assistance. Understanding the affective
state associated with an event is essential for many NLP
tasks including narrative text understanding (Goyal, Riloff,
and Daumé III 2013; Lehnert 1981), opinion analysis (Deng,
Wiebe, and Choi 2014), and sarcasm recognition (Riloff et
al. 2013). We refer to events that typically affect people in
positive or negative ways as affective events.
Many NLP tools have been developed for sentiment analysis, and some research has begun to focus speciﬁcally on

Related Work
Many resources for sentiment analysis have been created,
including the MPQA Subjectivity Lexicon (Wilson, Wiebe,
and Hoffmann 2005), SenticNet (Cambria, Olsher, and Rajagopal 2014; Cambria et al. 2015), SentiWordNet (Baccianella, Esuli, and Sebastiani 2010), the NRC Emotion

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5763

