The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Rating Super-Resolution
Microscopy Images with Deep Learning
Louis-Émile Robitaille,∗ Audrey Durand,
Marc-André Gardner, Christian Gagné
LVSN, Université Laval, Canada

Paul De Koninck
Flavie Lavoie-Cardinal
CERVO, Université Laval, Canada

In order to improve their understanding, cellular mechanisms need to be observed at the nanoscale, which is allowed by optical super-resolution microscopy. Among these
techniques, STimulated Emission Depletion (STED) microscopy (Hell and Wichmann 1994; Klar et al. 2000; Willig
et al. 2006)1 brings a 10 fold improvement of the imaging
resolution over conventional optical microscopy, allowing
to observe molecular structures and protein complexes of
living cells in action (Sahl, Hell, and Jakobs 2017). Superresolution microscopes are highly specialized devices, signiﬁcantly more complex to use than conventional optical microscopes, hence reducing their accessibility. Moreover, the
overall quality of the obtained images can vary a lot depending on the imaging parameters or the biological structure of
interest. It is therefore very difﬁcult to evaluate the quality
of such images for non-expert users, making it a challenge
when tuning imaging parameters toward good images.
In this work, we tackle the problem of learning to evaluate the quality of STED images. This could allow not only to
support non-experts in their measurements, but also constitute a step toward a fully automated imaging system. We address this problem using deep learning. To this end, a brand
new dataset was built, which is used to train the network
and assess its performance. We then conduct a user study
to evaluate the capability of the network for fooling an expert in front of other experts. We also evaluate the capability
of the network to generalize its quality prediction to STED
images of a different protein.

to the imaging process, or the observability of speciﬁc structures. The quality score given to an image by an expert is
therefore some sort of (unknown) tradeoff between several
objectives.

Problem Statement

User Study

Let I denote the space of possible STED images. We aim
at learning the quality function f : I → [0, 1] that takes as
input an image and outputs a quality score. This corresponds
to a standard regression problem.
The quality score of an image incorporates several features such as the resolution of the observed structures, the
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), the deterioration of the ﬂuorophores (photobleaching) and structure (photoxicity) due

If the MSE is a an acceptable loss function for training, it
is not very informative for assessing the ability of the neural
network to fully replace a human expert in the learning loop.
Indeed, if experts appear to be very noisy, the MSE might
be high while the system might be performing quite well.
It is therefore interesting to compare the system predictions
against the expert, from the perspective of another expert.
To this extent, we developed a web-based application that
would sequentially present an expert with STED images and
two scores: the target and the network prediction, in random
order. The expert would either pick the most relevant score,
mark both scores as equivalent, or discard the image. The
last case means that an error occured at the time of the labeling since that neither the prediction nor the target appears

Proposed Approach
We propose to learn the quality function from an expert using a CNN (Convolutional Neural Network). More speciﬁcally, we consider a network made of 6 convolutional layers
and 2 fully connected layers. An ELU activation (Exponential Linear Unit) is used after each convolutional and fully
connected unit. Max pooling (kernel 2x2, stride 1) is added
after each convolutional unit. Batch normalization is applied
to all the layers except the ﬁrst one. The output is driven by
a nonlinear activation (sigmoid) to retrieve a quality score
between 0 and 1.
A brand new dataset has been built for the task at hand.
It contains 1140 grayscale images of 224 × 224 pixels of
20 nm. Each image was obtained by the imaging of the protein actin. Different qualities of images were produced by
changing the acquisition parameters. Images have been labeled by an expert, where each label corresponds to a quality score in [0, 1]. A 80/10/10 split of the randomly shufﬂed
dataset is used for training, validation, and testing respectively. The training set was doubled using data augmentation, resulting in 1,824 training images. MSE was used as
loss function and we reached ∼ 12% RMSE.

∗
1065, avenue de la Médecine, Québec, QC, Canada,+1 (581)
308-3921, louis-emile.robitaille.1@ulaval.ca
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Stefan W. Hell was awarded a Nobel prize in 2014 for this
revolutionary microscopy technique.

8141

