The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

StackReader: An RNN-Free Reading Comprehension Model
Yibo Jiang

Zhou Zhao

Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
yj2460@columbia.edu

College of Computer Science
Zhejiang University
zhaozhou@zju.edu.cn

and its variants in the reading comprehension problem. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst attempt to use an
RNN-free neural model to solve the reading comprehension
problem.

Abstract
Machine comprehension of text is the problem to answer a
query based on a given context. Many existing systems use
RNN-based units for contextual modeling linked with some
attention mechanisms. In this paper, however, we propose
StackReader, an end-to-end neural network model, to solve
this problem, without recurrent neural network (RNN) units
and its variants. This simple model is based solely on attention mechanism and gated convolutional neural network. Experiments on SQuAD have shown to have relatively high accuracy with a signiﬁcant decrease in training time.

Model Structure
The system overview is shown in Figure 1. The whole model
can be roughly divided into three parts: the embedding layer,
the modeling and attention layer, and the output layer.

Introduction
Machine comprehension, as a subﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence, has been studied extensively in recent years. With
the introduction of neural attention mechanism which allows
the system to focus on targeted areas with interests, this ﬁeld
has witnessed many remarkable results in both computer vision and natural language processing areas. In particular,
this paper is focused on reading comprehension, an application of machine comprehension in natural language processing, which requires the machine to answer a question
based on paragraphs of information. In addition, this paper
uses SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al. 2016) dataset where answers
are phrases or sentences in the context paragraphs.
Thanks to recent developments in large benchmarks like
SQuAD, reading comprehension has gained signiﬁcant attraction lately as those benchmarks enable the training of
end-to-end neural models. Due to the nature of text data, almost all reading comprehension models use RNN, LSTM
or GRU in their models. But these RNN-based units would
slow the training time because they are hard to parallelize on
GPU compared to other basic operations like multiplication
and convolution. On the other hand, even though LSTM or
GRU can theoretically learn long distance dependences, in
reality, it often only attends to local information. Because of
these two limitations and inspired by recent achievements in
machine translation like transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017)
and ConvS2S (Gehring et al. 2017), we propose a new reading comprehension model, StackReader, that utilizes attention and gated CNN to overcome the dependence of RNN

Figure 1: System Overview
Embedding Layer Let {c1 , c2 , ..., cn } and {q1 , q2 , .., qm }
be words in the context paragraph and query. The ﬁrst layer
converts those words to the concatenation of word-level
embeddings and char-level embeddings. Word-level embeddings can be acquired through pre-trained GloVe (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014) while we obtain char-level
embeddings using Convolutional Neural Networks (Kim
2014).
Modeling and Attention Layer Unlike other popular
reading comprehension models that have separate contextual
modeling and attention layers. Our model tries to combine
these layers in an intertwined fashion. It starts with a selfattention modeling layer and then it jumps from interactive
attention layer to self-attention layer iteratively.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8091

