The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Deep Low-Resolution Person Re-Identiﬁcation
Jiening Jiao,1,2 Wei-Shi Zheng,3,4∗ Ancong Wu,1 Xiatian Zhu,5 Shaogang Gong5
1

School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, China
Collaborative Innovation Center of High Performance Computing, NUDT, China
3
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing (Sun Yat-sen University), Ministry of Education, China
5
School of Engineering and Computer Science, Queen Mary University of London, UK
jiaojn@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org, wuancong@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,
xiatian.zhu@qmul.ac.uk, s.gong@qmul.ac.uk
2

9DU\LQJ5HVROXWLRQV

Abstract
Person images captured by public surveillance cameras often
have low resolutions (LR) in addition to uncontrolled pose
variations, background clutters and occlusions. This gives rise
to the resolution mismatch problem when matched against the
high resolution (HR) gallery images (typically available in
enrolment), which adversely affects the performance of person re-identiﬁcation (re-id) that aims to associate images of
the same person captured at different locations and different time. Most existing re-id methods either ignore this problem or simply upscale LR images. In this work, we address
this problem by developing a novel approach called Superresolution and Identity joiNt learninG (SING) to simultaneously optimise image super-resolution and person re-id
matching. This approach is instantiated by designing a hybrid
deep Convolutional Neural Network for improving crossresolution re-id performance. We further introduce an adaptive fusion algorithm for accommodating multi-resolution LR
images. Extensive evaluations show the advantages of our
method over related state-of-the-art re-id and super-resolution
methods on cross-resolution re-id benchmarks.

&DPHUD$

&DPHUD%

Figure 1: Illustration of person images with varying resolutions in the open-space person re-identiﬁcation task. Three
images of a person were captured by two camera views at
different locations of a shopping centre. The image captured
by camera B has a higher resolution than the other two from
camera A. Person re-id across different resolutions and disjoint camera views is challenging.
ten enrol high resolution (HR) images1 of target people into
the gallery set. As such, it is challenging to reliably match
low-resolution (LR) probe images against the HR gallery
images across both camera views and resolutions. This requires to address the information amount discrepancy challenge in cross-resolution matching since LR images contain
much less information with discriminative appearance details largely lost in the image acquisition process. We call
this setting as Low-Resolution person re-identiﬁcation.
While most existing methods ignore the resolution mismatch problem and normalise all images to a single size,
a couple of works have recently been proposed to address
this LR re-id problem (Jing et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2016;
Li et al. 2015). However, these methods share a few com-

Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation (re-id) is a task of matching identity classes in person bounding box images extracted from
non-overlapping camera views in open surveillance spaces
(Gong et al. 2014). Existing re-id methods typically focus on addressing the variations in illumination, occlusion,
and background clutter by designing feature representation (Liao et al. 2015; Matsukawa et al. 2016) or learning
matching distance metrics (Zheng, Gong, and Xiang 2013;
Wang et al. 2014; He, Chen, and Lai 2016; Zhang, Xiang, and Gong 2016) or their combinations (Li et al. 2014;
Ahmed, Jones, and Marks 2015; Xiao et al. 2016; Li, Zhu,
and Gong 2017) under the assumption that all person images have similar and sufﬁciently high resolutions. However,
surveillance person images often have varying resolutions
due to variations in the person-camera distance and camera deployment settings (Fig. 1). This gives rise to the resolution mismatch problem. Speciﬁcally, human operators of-

1

Note that in visual surveillance, the deﬁnition quality of socalled high resolution images is poorer than social media photos
taken by professional photographers. In this context, we deﬁne low
and high resolutions in a relative sense for surveillance quality image data. By default, we refer “resolution” to the underlying resolution (Wong et al. 2010) rather than the image spatial size (scale).
A given image can be arbitrarily resized, but with little change in
its underlying resolution (Fig. 2). Hence, the image spatial size is
not an accurate indicator of the underlying resolution.

∗

Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6967

