The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

The Conference Paper Assignment Problem:
Using Order Weighted Averages to Assign Indivisible Goods
Jing Wu Lian

Nicholas Mattei

Renee Noble

Toby Walsh

UNSW Sydney
Sydney, Australia
Lianjingwu@gmail.com

IBM Research AI
New York, USA
n.mattei@ibm.com

Data61, CSIRO
Sydney, Australia
renee.noble@data61.csiro.au

Data61, UNSW Sydney,
and TU Berlin
Sydney, Australia
toby.walsh@data61.csiro.au

There are a number of ways one can improve the quality
of peer review (Price and Flach 2016). First is to ensure that
reviewers are not incentivized to misreport their reviews for
personal gain. Along this line there has been signiﬁcant interest recently in strategyproof mechanisms for peer review
(Aziz et al. 2016). Unfortunately, the method that we discuss
in this paper is not strategyproof. Another way is to ensure
that reviewers are competent to provide judgements on the
papers they are assigned. The Toronto Paper Matching System (Charlin and Zemel 2013) is designed to improve the
process from this paper-centric model. A third alternative,
and the one we focus on in this study, is ensuring that reviewers are happy with the diversity and quality of papers they
are asked to review (Ahmed, Dickerson, and Fuge 2017).
Formally, we study the Conference Paper Assignment
Problem (CPAP) (Goldsmith and Sloan 2007) which is a
special case of the Multi-Agent Resource Allocation Problem (MARA) (Bouveret, Chevaleyre, and Lang 2016), and
propose a novel assignment, the Σ-OWA assignment. In the
CPAP setting we have a two-sided market where on one side
the agents/reviewers have preferences over the other side,
the objects/papers, and both sides have (possibly inﬁnite)
upper and lower capacities. A fundamental tension in assignment settings is the tradeoff between maximizing the social
welfare, also known as the utilitarian maximal assignment
and the Rawlsian (Rawls 1971) fairness concept of maximizing the utility of the worst off agent, known as the egalitarian
maximal assignment. These two ideas are incompatible optimization objectives and diverge in a computational sense
as well: computing the utilitarian assignment for additive
utilities can be done in polynomial time, while computing
the egalitarian assignment is NP-complete (Demko and Hill
1988). This, perhaps, could be the reason that implementers
of large conference paper assignment software often opt for
utilitarian assignments, as is supposedly the case for EasyChair (Garg et al. 2010).1 However, it is also not clear if an
egalitarian assignment is desirable for CPAP.
Contributions. We establish a motivation for using OWA

Abstract
We propose a novel mechanism for solving the assignment
problem when we have a two sided matching problem with
preferences from one side (the agents/reviewers) over the
other side (the objects/papers) and both sides have capacity
constraints. The assignment problem is a fundamental in both
computer science and economics with application in many
areas including task and resource allocation. Drawing inspiration from work in multi-criteria decision making and social choice theory we use order weighted averages (OWAs), a
parameterized class of mean aggregators, to propose a novel
and ﬂexible class of algorithms for the assignment problem.
We show an algorithm for ﬁnding an Σ-OWA assignment in
polynomial time, in contrast to the NP-hardness of ﬁnding
an egalitarian assignment. We demonstrate through empirical
experiments that using Σ-OWA assignments can lead to high
quality and more fair assignments.

Introduction
Assigning indivisible objects to multiple agents is a fundamental problem in many ﬁelds including computer science,
economics and operations research. Algorithms for matching and assignment are used in a variety of application areas including allocating runways to airplanes, residents to
hospitals, kidneys to patients (Dickerson, Procaccia, and
Sandholm 2014), students to schools (Budish and Cantillon
2012), assets to individuals in a divorce, jobs to machines,
and tasks to cloud computing nodes (Manlove 2013). Understanding the properties of the underlying algorithms is an
important aspect to ensuring that all participating agents are
happy with their allocations and do not attempt to misrepresent their preferences; a key area of study for computational
social choice (Brandt et al. 2016).
An area that is near to many academics’ hearts is the problem of allocating papers to referees for peer review. Grant,
journal, and conference reviewing has signiﬁcant impact on
the careers of scientists. Ensuring that papers and proposals
are reviewed by the most qualiﬁed/interested referees is part
of ensuring that objects are treated properly and all participants support the outcome of the processes. The importance
of and methods for improving peer review have been proposed across the sciences (Merriﬁeld and Saari 2009).

1 This is technically unsubstantiated as when the authors contacted EasyChair to understand the assignment process we were
told, “We do not provide information on how paper assignment in
EasyChair is implemented. The information in Garg et.al. may be
incorrect or out of date - none of the authors worked for EasyChair,
they also had no access to the EasyChair code.”

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1138

