The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Bayesian Robust Attributed Graph Clustering:
Joint Learning of Partial Anomalies and Group Structure
Aleksandar Bojchevski, Stephan Günnemann
Technical University of Munich, Germany
{a.bojchevski, guennemann}@in.tum.de

Abstract
We study the problem of robust attributed graph clustering.
In real data, the clustering structure is often obfuscated due to
anomalies or corruptions. While robust methods have been recently introduced that handle anomalies as part of the clustering process, they all fail to account for one core aspect: Since
attributed graphs consist of two views (network structure and
attributes) anomalies might materialize only partially, i.e. instances might be corrupted in one view but perfectly ﬁt in
the other. In this case, we can still derive meaningful cluster
assignments. Existing works only consider complete anomalies. In this paper, we present a novel probabilistic generative model (PAICAN) that explicitly models partial anomalies
by generalizing ideas of Degree Corrected Stochastic Block
Models and Bernoulli Mixture Models. We provide a highly
scalable variational inference approach with runtime complexity linear in the number of edges. The robustness of our
model w.r.t. anomalies is demonstrated by our experimental
study, outperforming state-of-the-art competitors.

3

 Partial anomaly w.r.t. the attributes
 Partial anomaly w.r.t. the graph
 Complete anomaly

2

1

Figure 1: Three types of anomalies in attributed graphs.

for many other tasks such as regression (Rousseeuw and
Leroy 2005), PCA (Wright et al. 2009; Candès et al. 2011),
matrix factorization (Xiong, Chen, and Schneider 2011),
and autoregression (Günnemann, Günnemann, and Faloutsos 2014). The big challenge – not sufﬁciently captured by
the existing works – is that anomalies in attributed graphs
materialize in different ways. Speciﬁcally one has to take
into account challenging camouﬂage behavior: A user in a
social network for example might show corrupted attributes
(to, e.g., hide its identity) but still their friendship relations
are normal. That is, the user is corrupted in only one of the
views – we call this a partial anomaly. Another example of
a partial anomaly is a paper in a citation network, where the
content of the paper ﬁts well in some cluster, but the relevant citations are missing. This can especially happen in a
new and emerging subﬁeld where not everyone is yet aware
of the latest literature. Fig. 1 illustrates this principle in general. Node 1 ﬁts nicely into the network structure but has
completely different attributes compared to the other nodes
in its group. On the other hand, node 2 perfectly ﬁts the assigned cluster if we only look at its attributes, but it is obviously an anomaly with regards to the network structure. The
crucial observation is that we can still identify the partial
anomalies’ latent cluster since two sources of information
are given. In the social network example, despite the users’
corrupted attributes we are still able to derive their cluster,
thus, enabling downstream tasks such as e.g. targeted marketing. We observed such partial anomalies in a variety of

Introduction
Clustering of attributed graphs – a special type of multiview data – has become an important research ﬁeld (Bothorel et al. 2015), with application domains from social
networks, over e-commerce, to gene analysis. By simultaneously utilizing both network structure and attribute information clustering results can be improved. In real life
scenarios, these datasets are often polluted by rare occurrences, anomalies or corruptions. A spammer, for example, might be trying to connect to as many nodes as
possible, inducing spurious edges and thus obscuring the
real group structure in the data. Another source of anomalies are for example users on a social network obfuscating some of their attributes (age, political afﬁliation) on
purpose due to privacy concerns. Since these anomalies
hinder the cluster detection, robust attributed graph clustering methods have been proposed (Perozzi et al. 2014;
Gao et al. 2010). Instead of ﬁrst applying anomaly detection for attributed graphs (Akoglu, Tong, and Koutra 2015),
followed by the actual clustering on the remaining data,
anomaly detection and clustering are performed simultaneously. Such joint learning has shown high performance
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2738

