The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Neural Transition-Based Approach for
Semantic Dependency Graph Parsing
Yuxuan Wang, Wanxiang Che,∗ Jiang Guo, Ting Liu
Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
{yxwang, car, jguo, tliu}@ir.hit.edu.cn

Most existing parsing algorithms were proposed exclusively for tree structures, and the problem of dependency graph parsing (more generally, DAG parsing) remains
under-explored. Developing elegant, efﬁcient and effective
algorithms for DAG parsing is still an important challenge
of great signiﬁcance. One recent success towards this goal
is the model of Peng, Thomson, and Smith (2017), which
achieves state-of-the-art performance in the SemEval-2015
Task 18 dataset. Their model is a graph-based one and decodes with the AD3 algorithm (Martins et al. 2011). Ding et
al. (2014) instead uses a two-stage approach, by ﬁrst producing a semantic dependency tree with a structured prediction
model, followed with a classiﬁcation procedure to recover
the non-local dependencies (Sun et al. 2014) (i.e. arcs pointing to words with multiple heads). A related approach was
studied by Sagae and Tsujii (2008), which projectivize the
dependency graphs ﬁrst, and then learn a projective dependency graph parser. This kind of approaches, however, require either elaborately-designed linguistic rules or complex
pre- and post-processing, and suffer from error propagation.
In this paper, we propose a neural transition-based alternative for parsing semantic dependency graphs. We introduce a novel transition algorithm which is a variant of
the list-based arc-eager algorithm described originally for
non-projective tree parsing (Choi and McCallum 2013). We
show how the algorithm can be effectively adapted to parsing DAG structures. Furthermore, the main challenge for a
transition-based parsing system to success is the representation of parsing states (i.e. conﬁgurations), based on which
the transition actions are predicted. To cope with this challenge, we borrow the successful idea from the Stack-LSTM
neural parsing model (Dyer et al. 2015), and present two
non-trivial improvements, namely Bi-LSTM Subtraction and
Incremental Tree-LSTM, to better capture the semantics of
the segments (i.e. spans) and the partially derived sub-graph
structures.
We use SemEval-2016 Task 9: Chinese Semantic Dependency Parsing (Che et al. 2016)1 (Chinese) and SemEval2015 Task 18: Broad-Coverage Semantic Dependency Parsing (Oepen et al. 2015)2 (English) as our testbed. Experimental results are promising on both datasets. For Chinese,

Abstract
Semantic dependency graph has been recently proposed as an
extension of tree-structured syntactic or semantic representation for natural language sentences. It particularly features
the structural property of multi-head, which allows nodes to
have multiple heads, resulting in a directed acyclic graph
(DAG) parsing problem. Yet most statistical parsers focused
exclusively on shallow bi-lexical tree structures, DAG parsing
remains under-explored. In this paper, we propose a neural
transition-based parser, using a variant of list-based arc-eager
transition algorithm for dependency graph parsing. Particularly, two non-trivial improvements are proposed for representing the key components of the transition system, to better capture the semantics of segments and internal sub-graph
structures. We test our parser on the SemEval-2016 Task 9
dataset (Chinese) and the SemEval-2015 Task 18 dataset (English). On both benchmark datasets, we obtain superior or
comparable results to the best performing systems. Our parser
can be further improved with a simple ensemble mechanism,
resulting in the state-of-the-art performance.

Introduction
Tree-structured bi-lexical dependencies, either syntactic or
semantic, have been extensively studied in the past decade.
Various algorithms have been proposed for parsing natural language sentences into such tree structures and obtained great success, especially when equipped with deep
neural models. However, tree structures become inadequate
when moving from syntactic or shallow semantic level to
deep semantic level. In the deep semantic representation, a
word can be the argument of multiple predicates, and vacuous words might be unattached, which results in a directed
acyclic graph (DAG) structure, where a node may have multiple or no incoming arcs. To cope with these challenges,
several semantic-oriented dependencies have been recently
proposed, typically including the Chinese Semantic Dependency Graph (Che et al. 2016) and the Broad-Coverage Semantic Dependency Graph with three kinds of formalisms
(Oepen et al. 2015), which will be our main focus in this
paper.
∗

Email corresponding
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
2

5561

alt.qcri.org/semeval2016/task9/
alt.qcri.org/semeval2015/task18/

