The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Provable Approach for Double-Sparse Coding
Thanh V. Nguyen

Raymond K. W. Wong

Chinmay Hegde ∗

ECE Department
Iowa State University
thanhng@iastate.edu

Statistics Department
Texas A&M University
raywong@tamu.edu

ECE Department
Iowa State University
chinmay@iastate.edu

vectors X = [x(1) , x(2) , . . . , x(p) ] ∈ Rm×p such that the
representation DX ﬁts the data samples as well as possible.
The typical approach is to pose the dictionary (and codes) as
the solution to the constrained optimization problem:

Abstract
Sparse coding is a crucial subroutine in algorithms for various
signal processing, deep learning, and other machine learning applications. The central goal is to learn an overcomplete dictionary that can sparsely represent a given dataset.
However, storage, transmission, and processing of the learned
dictionary can be untenably high if the data dimension is
high. In this paper, we consider the double-sparsity model introduced by Rubinstein, Zibulevsky, and Elad (2010) where
the dictionary itself is the product of a ﬁxed, known basis and a data-adaptive sparse component. First, we introduce a simple algorithm for double-sparse coding that can
be amenable to efﬁcient implementation via neural architectures. Second, we theoretically analyze its performance and
demonstrate asymptotic sample complexity and running time
beneﬁts over existing (provable) approaches for sparse coding. To our knowledge, our work introduces the ﬁrst computationally efﬁcient algorithm for double-sparse coding that
enjoys rigorous statistical guarantees. Finally, we support our
analysis via several numerical experiments on simulated data,
conﬁrming that our method can indeed be useful in problem
sizes encountered in practical applications.

p

min L(D, X) =
D,X

s.t.

1  (j)
y − Dx(j) 22 ,
2 j=1

p


S(x

(j)

(1)

) ≤ S,

j=1

where S(·) is some sparsity-inducing penalty function, such
as the 1 -norm. However, even a cursory attempt at solving
(1) reveals several conceptual obstacles:
Theoretical challenges. The constrained optimization
problem (1) involves a non-convex (bilinear) objective function, as well as potentially non-convex constraints depending on the function S. Therefore, design and analysis of
provably correct algorithms for this problem can be difﬁcult.
Indeed, the vast majority of practical approaches for sparse
coding are based on heuristics; barring a few recent papers
from the learning theory community (Spielman, Wang, and
Wright 2012; Agarwal et al. 2014; Arora et al. 2015; Sun,
Qu, and Wright 2015), very few methods come equipped
with global correctness guarantees.
Challenges in applications. Even if we ignore theoretical correctness issues and somehow are able to learn good
enough sparse codes, we often ﬁnd that applications using
such learned sparse codes encounter memory and runningtime issues. Indeed, in the overcomplete case, merely storing the learned dictionary D incurs mn = Ω(n2 ) memory
cost, which is prohibitive when n is large. In practical applications such as image analysis, one typically resorts to
chopping the data into smaller blocks (e.g., partitioning image data into patches) to make the problem manageable.
An approach used to resolve those practical computational difﬁculties is to assume some type of structure in the
(learned) dictionary D; e.g., the dictionary is assumed to be
either separable, or obey a convolutional structure. One such
variant is double-sparse coding (Rubinstein, Zibulevsky, and
Elad 2010; Sulam et al. 2016) where the dictionary D itself
exhibits a sparse structure. More precisely,

Introduction
We consider the problem of dictionary learning (also known
as sparse coding), a common and powerful technique in unsupervised feature learning. The high-level idea of sparse
coding is to represent a set of data vectors in terms of sparse
linear combinations of atoms from a learned basis (or dictionary). Sparse coding has a rich history in diverse ﬁelds
such as image processing, machine learning, and neuroscience (Krim et al. 1999; Elad and Aharon 2006; Rubinstein, Bruckstein, and Elad 2010; Mairal et al. 2009). Sparse
coding forms a core component of several neural learning
systems, both biological (Olshausen and Field 1997) and
artiﬁcial (Gregor and LeCun 2010; Boureau et al. 2010;
Mazumdar and Rawat 2017).
Formally, suppose we are given p data samples Y =
[y (1) , y (2) , . . . , y (p) ] ∈ Rn×p . We wish to ﬁnd a dictionary
D ∈ Rn×m (with n < m) and corresponding sparse code
∗
This work is supported in part by the National Science Foundation under the grants CCF-1566281 and DMS-1612985.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

D = ΦA,

3852

