The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Informed Non-Convex Robust Principal
Component Analysis with Features
Niannan Xue,1 Jiankang Deng,1 Yannis Panagakis,12 Stefanos Zafeiriou13
1

Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
Department of Computer Science, Middlesex University, UK
3
Center for Machine Vision and Signal Analysis, University of Oulu, Finland
{n.xue15, j.deng16, i.panagakis, s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk
2

in-the-wild, when fed into an image congealing procedure, can help produce more correct ﬁttings (Sagonas et
al. 2014).

Abstract
We revisit the problem of robust principal component analysis with features acting as prior side information. To this
aim, a novel, elegant, non-convex optimization approach is
proposed to decompose a given observation matrix into a
low-rank core and the corresponding sparse residual. Rigorous theoretical analysis of the proposed algorithm results in
exact recovery guarantees with low computational complexity. Aptly designed synthetic experiments demonstrate that
our method is the ﬁrst to wholly harness the power of nonconvexity over convexity in terms of both recoverability and
speed. That is, the proposed non-convex approach is more accurate and faster compared to the best available algorithms
for the problem under study. Two real-world applications,
namely image classiﬁcation and face denoising further exemplify the practical superiority of the proposed method.

It is thus reasonable to investigate whether it is propitious
for RPCA to exploit the available side information by incorporating features. Indeed, recent results (Liu, Liu, and
Li 2017), indicate that in case of union of multiple subspaces where RPCA degrades due to the increasing rowcoherence (when the number of subspaces grows), the use
of features as side information allow accurate low-rank recovery by removing its dependency on the row-coherence.
Despite the theoretical and practical merits of convex variants of RPCA with features, such as LRR (Liu, Lin, and Yu
2010) and PCPF (Chiang, Hsieh, and Dhillon 2016), convex
relaxations of the rank function and l0 -norm result into algorithm weakening (Chandrasekarana and Jordan 2013).
On a separate note, recent advances in non-convex optimization algorithms continue to undermine their convex
counterparts (Gong et al. 2013; Ge, Lee, and Ma 2016;
Kohler and Lucchi 2017). In particular, non-convex RPCA
algorithms such as fast RPCA (Yi et al. 2016) and AltProj
(Netrapalli et al. 2014) exhibit better properties than the convex formulation. Most recently, (Niranjan, Rajkumar, and
Tulabandhula 2017) embedded features into a non-convex
RPCA framework known as IRPCA-IHT with faster speed.
However, it remains unclear, how to exploit side information
in non-convex RPCA and whether it facilitates provably correct, fast, and more accurate algorithms.
In this work, we give positive answers to the above questions by proposing a novel, non-convex scheme that fully
leverages side information (features) regarding row and column subspaces of the low-rank matrix. Even though the proposed algorithm is inspired by the recently proposed fast
RPCA (Yi et al. 2016), our contributions are by no means
trivial, especially from a theoretical perspective. First, fast
RPCA cannot be easily extended to consistently take account of features. Second, as we show in this paper, incoherence assumptions on the observation matrix and features
play a decisive role in determining the corruption bound and
the computational complexity of the non-convex algorithm.
Third, fast RPCA is limited to a corruption rate of 50% due
to their choice of the hard threshold, whereas our algorithm
ups this rate to 90%. Fourth, we prove that the costly projection onto factorized spaces is entirely optional when fea-

Introduction
Several machine learning and signal processing tasks involve the separation of a data matrix into a low-rank matrix and a matrix with sparse support (i.e., a sparse matrix) containing entries of arbitrary magnitude. Robust principal component analysis (RPCA) (Candes et al. 2011;
Chandrasekaran et al. 2011) offers a provably correct and
convenient way to solve this matrix separation problem,
when certain incoherence conditions on the data hold. In
fact, RPCA solves a convex relaxation of the natural rank
minimization problem which is regularized by the sparsity
promoting 0 -(quasi) norm.
Nevertheless, prior side information, oftentimes in the
form of features, may also be present in practice. For instance, features are available for the following tasks:
– Collaborative ﬁltering: apart from ratings of an item by
other users, the proﬁle of the user and the description of
the item can also be exploited in making recommendations (Chiang, Hseih, and Dhillon 2015);
– Relationship prediction: user behaviours and message exchanges can assist in ﬁnding missing links on social media
networks (Xu, Jin, and Zhou 2013);
– Person-speciﬁc facial deformable models: an orthonormal
subspace learnt from manually annotated data captured
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4343

