The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Style Transfer in Text: Exploration and Evaluation
Zhenxin Fu,1 Xiaoye Tan,1 Nanyun Peng,2 Dongyan Zhao,1,3 Rui Yan1,3∗
1
2

Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
Information Science Institute, University of Southern California, California, USA
3
Beijing Institute of Big Data Research, Beijing, China
{fuzhenxin, txye, zhaodongyan, ruiyan}@pku.edu.cn, npeng@isi.edu

Sequence to sequence (seq2seq) neural network models
(Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014) have demonstrated great
success in many generation tasks, such as machine translation, dialog system and image caption, with the requirement
of a large amount of parallel data. However, it is hard to get
parallel data for tasks such as style transfer. For instance,
there is only a small number of academic news reports which
have corresponding papers. Therefore, we need algorithms
that perform style transfer without parallel data.
Another major challenge of style transfer is to separate
style from the content. In computer vision, Li et al. (2017)
proposes an expression to distinguish style and content of a
picture. However, this is under-explored in the NLP community. How to separate content from style in text remains an
open research problem in text style transfer.
Evaluation is also a key challenge in style transfer. In machine translation and summarization, researchers use BLEU
(Papineni et al. 2002) and ROUGE (Lin 2004) to compute
the similarity between model outputs and the ground truth.
However, we lack parallel data for style transfer to provide
ground truth references for evaluation. The same problem
also exists in style transfer in computer vision. To solve this
problem, we propose a general evaluation metric for style
transfer in natural language processing. There are two aspects of the evaluation metric; one is transfer strength and
the other is content preservation.
In this paper, we explore two models for text style transfer, to approach the aforementioned problems of 1) lacking parallel training data and 2) hard to separate the style
from the content. The models achieve the goals by multi-task
learning (Caruana 1998) and adversarial training (Goodfellow et al. 2014) of deep neural network. The ﬁrst model implements a multi-decoder seq2seq proposed by Sutskever,
Vinyals, and Le (2014), where the encoder is used to capture
the content c of the input X, and the multi-decoder contains
n(n ≥ 2) decoders to generate outputs in different styles.
The second model uses the same encoding strategy, but introduces style embeddings that are jointly trained with the
model. The style embeddings are used to augment the encoded representations, so that only one decoder needs to be
learned to generate outputs in different styles.
The experiments on two tasks: paper-news title transfer
and positive-negative review transfer showed that each of
the proposed model has its own strength and can be used in

Abstract
The ability to transfer styles of texts or images, is an important measurement of the advancement of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). However, the progress in language style transfer is lagged behind other domains, such as computer vision,
mainly because of the lack of parallel data and reliable evaluation metrics. In response to the challenge of lacking parallel data, we explore learning style transfer from non-parallel
data. We propose two models to achieve this goal. The key
idea behind the proposed models is to learn separate content representations and style representations using adversarial networks. Considering the problem of lacking principle
evaluation metrics, we propose two novel evaluation metrics
that measure two aspects of style transfer: transfer strength
and content preservation. We benchmark our models and the
evaluation metrics on two style transfer tasks: paper-news
title transfer, and positive-negative review transfer. Results
show that the proposed content preservation metric is highly
correlate to human judgments, and the proposed models are
able to generate sentences with similar content preservation
score but higher style transfer strength comparing to autoencoder.

Introduction
Style transfer is an important problem in many subﬁelds of
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), such as natural language processing (NLP) and computer vision (Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge
2016; Gatys et al. 2016; Zhu et al. 2017; Li et al. 2017), as it
reﬂects the ability of intelligence systems to generate novel
contents. Speciﬁcally, style transfer of natural language texts
is an important component of natural language generation.
It facilitates many NLP applications, such as automatic conversion of paper title to news title, which reduces the human effort in academic news report. For tasks like poetry
generation (Yan et al. 2013; Yan 2016; Ghazvininejad et al.
2016), style transfer can be applied to generate poetry in different styles. Nevertheless, the progress in style transfer of
language is lagged behind other domains such as computer
vision, largely because of the lack of parallel corpus and reliable evaluation metrics.
∗

Corresponding author: Rui Yan (ruiyan@pku.edu.cn)
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

663

