The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Structural Deep Embedding for Hyper-Networks
Ke Tu,1 Peng Cui,1 Xiao Wang,1 Fei Wang,2 Wenwu Zhu1
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Healthcare Policy and Research, Cornell University
tuke1993@gmail.com, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn, wangxiao007@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
feiwang03@gmail.com,wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

order node relationships is usually referred to as a hypernetwork.
A typical way to analyze hyper-network is to expand them
into conventional pairwise networks and then apply the analytical algorithms developed on pairwise networks. Clique
expansion (Sun, Ji, and Ye 2008) (Figure 1 (c)) and star expansion (Agarwal, Branson, and Belongie 2006) (Figure 1
(d)) are two representative techniques to achieve such a goal.
In clique expansion, each hyperedge is expanded as a clique.
In star expansion, a hypergraph is transformed into a bipartite graph where each hyperedge is represented by an instance node which links to the original nodes it contains.
These methods assume that the hyperedges are decomposable either explicitly or implicitly. That is to say, if we treat
a hyperedge as a set of nodes, then any subset of nodes in
this hyperedge can form another hyperedge. In a homogeneous hyper-network, this assumption is reasonable, as the
formation of hyperedges are, in most cases, caused by the latent similarity among the involved objects such as common
labels. However, when learning the heterogeneous hypernetwork embedding, we need to address the following new
requirements.

Abstract
Network embedding has recently attracted lots of attentions
in data mining. Existing network embedding methods mainly
focus on networks with pairwise relationships. In real world,
however, the relationships among data points could go beyond pairwise, i.e., three or more objects are involved in
each relationship represented by a hyperedge, thus forming
hyper-networks. These hyper-networks pose great challenges
to existing network embedding methods when the hyperedges
are indecomposable, that is to say, any subset of nodes in
a hyperedge cannot form another hyperedge. These indecomposable hyperedges are especially common in heterogeneous networks. In this paper, we propose a novel Deep
Hyper-Network Embedding (DHNE) model to embed hypernetworks with indecomposable hyperedges. More speciﬁcally, we theoretically prove that any linear similarity metric in embedding space commonly used in existing methods cannot maintain the indecomposibility property in hypernetworks, and thus propose a new deep model to realize
a non-linear tuplewise similarity function while preserving
both local and global proximities in the formed embedding
space. We conduct extensive experiments on four different
types of hyper-networks, including a GPS network, an online social network, a drug network and a semantic network.
The empirical results demonstrate that our method can significantly and consistently outperform the state-of-the-art algorithms.

1. Indecomposablity: The hyperedges in heterogeneous
hyper-networks are usually indecomposable. In this case,
a set of nodes in a hyperedge has a strong relationship,
while the nodes in its subset does not necessarily have a
strong relationship. For example, in the recommendation
system with user, movie, tag relationships, the user,
tag relationships are not typically strong. This means that
we cannot simply decompose hyperedges using those traditional expansion methods.

Introduction
Nowadays, networks are widely used to represent the rich
relationships of data objects in various domains, forming social networks, biology networks, brain networks, etc. Many
methods are proposed for network analysis, among which
network embedding methods (Tang et al. 2015; Wang, Cui,
and Zhu 2016; Deng et al. 2016; Ou et al. 2015) arouse
more and more interests in recent years. Most of the existing
network embedding methods are designed for conventional
pairwise networks, where each edge links only a pair of
nodes. However, in real world applications, the relationships
among data objects are much more complicated and they
typically go beyond pairwise. For example, John purchasing a shirt with cotton material forms a high-order relationship John, shirt, cotton. The network capturing those high-

2. Structure Preserving: The local structures are preserved
by the observed relationships in network embedding.
However, due to the sparsity of networks, many existing relationships are not observed. It is not sufﬁcient for
preserving hyper-network structure using only local structures. And global structures, e.g. the neighborhood structure, are required to address the sparsity problem. How to
capture and preserve both local and global structures simultaneously in a hyper-network is still an unsolved problem.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

To address Indecomposablity issue, we design an indecomposable tuplewise similarity function. The function is

426

