The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

How Many Properties Do
We Need for Gradual Argumentation?
Pietro Baroni

Antonio Rago, Francesca Toni

Dip.to di Ingegneria dell’Informazione
Università degli Studi di Brescia, Italy
pietro.baroni@unibs.it

Dept. of Computing
Imperial College London, UK
{a.rago15,ft}@imperial.ac.uk

‘weighting’ in (Amgoud and Ben-Naim 2016b)) reﬂecting e.g. the authoritativeness of their source or, as in (Leite
and Martins 2011), votes they have received.

Abstract
The study of properties of gradual evaluation methods in
argumentation has received increasing attention in recent
years, with studies devoted to various classes of frameworks/methods leading to conceptually similar but formally
distinct properties in different contexts. In this paper we provide a systematic analysis for this research landscape by making three main contributions. First, we identify groups of conceptually related properties in the literature, which can be regarded as based on common patterns and, using these patterns, we evidence that many further properties can be considered. Then, we provide a simplifying and unifying perspective for these properties by showing that they are all implied
by the parametric principles of (either strict or non-strict) balance and monotonicity. Finally, we show that (instances of)
these principles are satisﬁed by several quantitative argumentation formalisms in the literature, thus conﬁrming their general validity and their utility to support a compact, yet comprehensive, analysis of properties of gradual argumentation.

1

Given the variety of gradual evaluation methods possible,
several works include (e.g. (Matt and Toni 2008; Leite and
Martins 2011)) or are completely devoted to (e.g. (Bonzon et
al. 2016; Amgoud and Ben-Naim 2016a)) the deﬁnition and
study of properties that these methods (should) satisfy. This
has given rise to a relatively large and varied body of properties, which may share basic intuitions but are presented in
technically different contexts. This multiplication of studies,
while potentially fruitful, carries the risk of concealing underlying common roots and possible overlappings.
We take a step towards the uniﬁcation of efforts within
this research trend, by analyzing properties in the context
of generic Quantitative Bipolar Argumentation Frameworks
(QBAFs) where each argument has a (possibly empty) set of
attackers, a (possibly empty) set of supporters, and an initial evaluation (possibly the same for all arguments) on a
chosen scale, all contributing to a ﬁnal argument evaluation,
provided by a strength function. QBAFs encompass other
frameworks as special cases, including AFs, Bipolar Argumentation Frameworks (Amgoud et al. 2008), Social AFs
(Leite and Martins 2011), Weighted Argumentation Graphs
(Amgoud et al. 2017), Quantitative Argumentation Debate
frameworks (Baroni et al. 2015), and Support Argumentation Frameworks (Amgoud and Ben-Naim 2016b).
The paper is organised as follows. After some preliminaries in Section 2, in Section 3 we gather literature properties
in groups, each group being based on a basic idea which can
give rise to many variants, several of which have not been
explicitly considered in the literature. Then in Section 4 we
introduce the principles of (strict and non-strict) balance and
monotonicity and show that they imply the group properties considered in Section 3 and thus have the potential to
support a greatly simpliﬁed analysis of actual formalisms.
Section 5 conﬁrms this potential since suitable instances of
these principles are satisﬁed by a variety of existing gradual
argumentation formalisms. Section 6 concludes.

Introduction

Abstract Argumentation Frameworks (AFs) (Dung 1995)
are a well-known formalism to represent and resolve conﬂicts, expressed as a binary relation of attack amongst arguments. While AFs have proven useful to study conﬂict
management, some of their underlying assumptions may be
rather restrictive in some settings. As a result, several extensions or modiﬁcations of AFs and their semantics have been
proposed, including the following, all relevant to this paper:
• a support relation can be considered alongside (or instead of) the attack relation (e.g. see (Amgoud et al. 2008;
Baroni et al. 2015; Amgoud and Ben-Naim 2016b));
• while traditional semantics (Dung 1995) produce simple
assessments of argument acceptance, ﬁner gradual evaluation methods, based on numerical scales or rankings,
can be used (e.g. see (Matt and Toni 2008; Leite and Martins 2011; Gabbay 2012; Amgoud and Ben-Naim 2013;
Baroni et al. 2015; Amgoud et al. 2016));
• while arguments are considered a-priori equal in AFs,
they can be equipped with an initial evaluation (e.g. called

2

Preliminaries

Let I be a set equipped with a preorder ≤ where, as usual,
a < b denotes a ≤ b and b ≰ a. We allow, but do not impose,

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1736

