The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Data Poisoning Attacks on
Multi-Task Relationship Learning
Mengchen Zhao, Bo An, Yaodong Yu, Sulin Liu, Sinno Jialin Pan
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798
zhao0204@e.ntu.edu.sg, {boan,ydyu,liusl,sinnopan}@ntu.edu.sg

environment, which is critical for improving the robustness
of real-world machine learning systems.
In this paper, we formally analyze optimal poisoning attacks on multi-task learning (MTL) models, where multiple
tasks are learned jointly to achieve better performance than
single-task learning (Zhang and Yang 2017). Speciﬁcally,
we focus on multi-task relationship learning (MTRL) models, a popular subclass of MTL models where task relationships are quantized and are learned directly from training
data (Zhang and Yeung 2010; Liu, Pan, and Ho 2017). Many
MTL-based machine systems collect training data from individual users to provide personalized services, including
collaborative spam ﬁltering and personalized recommendations, which makes them vulnerable to poisoning attacks
launched by cyber criminals. For example, in an MTL-based
recommender system, attackers can control a considerable
number of user accounts either by hacking existing user accounts or creating ﬁctitious user accounts.
Previous works on poisoning attacks focus on single-task
learning (STL) models, including support vector machines
(Biggio, Nelson, and Laskov 2012), autoregressive models
(Alfeld, Zhu, and Barford 2016) and factorization-based collaborative ﬁlterings (Li et al. 2016). However, none of them
studies poisoning attacks on MTL models. Computing optimal poisoning attacks on MTL models can be much more
challenging than on STL models, because MTL tasks are
related with each other and an attack on one task might potentially inﬂuence other tasks. This also opens a door for
the attacker to attack some accessible tasks and indirectly
inﬂuence the unaccessible target tasks, which cannot be addressed by existing methods on poisoning STL models.
The major contributions of our work are threefold. First,
we formulate the optimal poisoning attack problem on
MTRL as a bilevel program that is adaptive to any choice
of target tasks and attacking tasks. Second, we develop a
stochastic gradient ascent based algorithm called PATOM
for solving the optimal attack problem, where the gradients are computed based on the optimality conditions of the
convex subproblem of MTRL. Third, we demonstrate experimentally that MTRL is very sensitive to data poisoning
attacks. The attacker can signiﬁcantly degrade the performance of target tasks, by either directly poisoning the target tasks or indirectly poisoning the related tasks. Moreover,
we study the change of task relationships under attacks and

Abstract
Multi-task learning (MTL) is a machine learning paradigm
that improves the performance of each task by exploiting
useful information contained in multiple related tasks. However, the relatedness of tasks can be exploited by attackers to
launch data poisoning attacks, which has been demonstrated
a big threat to single-task learning. In this paper, we provide
the ﬁrst study on the vulnerability of MTL. Speciﬁcally, we
focus on multi-task relationship learning (MTRL) models, a
popular subclass of MTL models where task relationships are
quantized and are learned directly from training data. We formulate the problem of computing optimal poisoning attacks
on MTRL as a bilevel program that is adaptive to arbitrary
choice of target tasks and attacking tasks. We propose an efﬁcient algorithm called PATOM for computing optimal attack
strategies. PATOM leverages the optimality conditions of the
subproblem of MTRL to compute the implicit gradients of the
upper level objective function. Experimental results on realworld datasets show that MTRL models are very sensitive to
poisoning attacks and the attacker can signiﬁcantly degrade
the performance of target tasks, by either directly poisoning
the target tasks or indirectly poisoning the related tasks exploiting the task relatedness. We also found that the tasks being attacked are always strongly correlated, which provides a
clue for defending against such attacks.

Introduction
The security of machine learning algorithms has become a
great concern in many real-world applications involving adversaries. The threats to machine learning systems can be
classiﬁed as two kinds: exploratory attacks where attackers modify test examples in order to make machine learning algorithms produce erroneous outputs (Li and Vorobeychik 2014; Biggio et al. 2013), and causative attacks (a.k.a
poisoning attacks) where attackers manipulate training examples to subvert the learned model (Barreno et al. 2010;
Biggio, Nelson, and Laskov 2012; Xiao et al. 2015). Poisoning attacks usually occur when training data is collected
from public sources (e.g., Internet users) and can be very
harmful due to its long-lasting effect on the learned model.
Studying poisoning attacks provides deep understanding of
how well machine learning performs in adversarial training
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2628

