The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Proposition Entailment in Educational
Applications Using Deep Neural Networks
Florin Bulgarov, Rodney Nielsen
University of North Texas
1155 Union Circle, Denton, Texas, 76203, USA
FlorinBulgarov@my.unt.edu
Rodney.Nielsen@unt.edu
learning process by improving the feedback given to students (Heffernan and Heffernan 2014), assessing students’
understanding of a concept (Leacock and Chodorow 2003;
Sukkarieh and Stoyanchev 2009), increasing classroom engagement (Paiva et al. 2014), facilitating self-guided learning and liberating instructors from doing repetitive tasks
such as grading answers (Horbach, Palmer, and Pinkal
2013).
Among the ﬁrst types of educational technology were
the assessment systems (Mitchell et al. 2002; Leacock
and Chodorow 2003; Nielsen, Ward, and Martin 2009;
Sukkarieh and Stoyanchev 2009). Such systems usually
quantify the similarity between a student response and a reference answer provided by the teacher or a content matter
expert. The result is a score, or a grade, which is communicated to the student or the instructor.
Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITSs) focus on the students
by offering them personalized feedback (VanLehn 2011;
D’Mello et al. 2012; Heffernan and Heffernan 2014; Kulik
and Fletcher 2016). ITSs need to be able to analyze student responses and, in most cases, compare them against a
correct answer. The feedback given by such systems needs
to be more meaningful than simply saying whether the response is correct or not. The drawback of most ITSs is that
they still require a signiﬁcant amount of human labor for every new question added to the system.
Recently, a new type of technology has emerged which
has as its purpose increasing the interaction between teachers and students. Classroom Engagement Systems (CESs)
allow all students to answer free response questions in classrooms, thus engaging all students at once. Comprehension
SEEDING was introduced by Paiva et al. (2014) and has
three primary goals: Self Explanation, Enhanced Discussion
and INquiry Generation. These goals all work together to increase student engagement in classrooms. While CESs considers teacher and student feedback an important piece of the
puzzle, the main focus is on the bigger picture of creating an
environment where students are encouraged to participate in
classroom discussions. Nevertheless, the system described
by Paiva et al. (2014) adopts an over-simpliﬁed approach
to the problem of formative assessment, using only lexical
information to compare and organize responses before presenting them to the teacher.
Existing educational applications are often weak in at

Abstract
The next generation of educational applications need to signiﬁcantly improve the way feedback is offered to both teachers and students. Simply determining coarse-grained entailment relations between the teacher’s reference answer as a
whole and a student response will not be sufﬁcient. A ﬁnergrained analysis is needed to determine which aspects of the
reference answer have been understood and which have not.
To this end, we propose an approach that splits the reference
answer into its constituent propositions and two methods for
detecting entailment relations between each reference answer
proposition and a student response. Both methods, one using hand-crafted features and an SVM and the other using
word embeddings and deep neural networks, achieve signiﬁcant improvements over a state-of-the-art system and two alternative approaches.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in machine learning have started to
put their mark on educational technology. Although the
vast majority of the classrooms around the world look essentially the same as they have for several decades, many
teachers and students have started to embrace the advantages
that technology can bring to the learning process. This paper focuses on increasing the learning gains in classrooms
through technology that enhances the analysis between the
teacher’s reference answer, a student’s response, and the
relations between them. We contribute by proposing two
ﬁne-grained approaches that predict entailment relations between a student’s response and each proposition or clause
from the teacher’s answer. Both methods, one that uses neural networks with word embeddings and the other an SVM
model with hand-crafted features, reach similar average F1 scores, signiﬁcantly outperforming a state-of-the-art system
and two alternative approaches.
Intelligent educational applications haven’t replaced humans, but they can deﬁnitely disrupt the way students have
been acquiring knowledge. Several types of such systems
have been developed in the recent years. Groups of researchers have come up with smart algorithms and applications that attempt to maximize the effectiveness of the
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5045

