The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Deep Learning from Crowds
Filipe Rodrigues, Francisco C. Pereira
Dept. of Management Engineering, Technical University of Denmark
Bygning 116B, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
rodr@dtu.dk, camara@dtu.dk

efﬁcient and cost-effective way for obtaining labeled data
(Snow et al. 2008; Buhrmester, Kwang, and Gosling 2011),
especially for the kind of human-like tasks, such as vision,
speech and natural language understanding, for which deep
learning methods have been shown to excel. Even in ﬁelds
like medical imaging, crowdsourcing is being used to collect the large sets of labeled data that modern data-savvy
deep learning methods enjoy (Greenspan, van Ginneken,
and Summers 2016; Albarqouni et al. 2016; Guan et al.
2017). However, while crowdsourcing is scalable enough
to allow labeling datasets that would otherwise be impractical for a single annotator to handle, it is well known that
the noise associated with the labels provided by the various
annotators can compromise practical applications that make
use of such type of data (Sheng, Provost, and Ipeirotis 2008;
Donmez and Carbonell 2008). Thus, it is not surprising that
a large body of the recent machine learning literature is dedicated to mitigating the effects of the noise and biases inherent to such heterogeneous sources of data (e.g. Yan et al.
(2014); Albarqouni et al. (2016); Guan et al. (2017)).
When learning deep neural networks from the labels of
multiple annotators, typical approaches rely on some sort of
label aggregation mechanisms prior to training. In classiﬁcation settings, the simplest and most common approach is
to use majority voting, which naively assumes that all annotators are equally reliable. More advanced approaches, such
as the one proposed in (Dawid and Skene 1979) and other
variants (e.g. Ipeirotis, Provost, and Wang (2010); Whitehill
et al. (2009)) jointly model the unknown biases of the annotators and their answers as noisy versions of some latent
ground truth. Despite their improved ground truth estimates
over majority voting, recent works have shown that jointly
learning the classiﬁer model and the annotators noise model
using EM-style algorithms generally leads to improved results (Raykar et al. 2010; Albarqouni et al. 2016).
In this paper, we begin by describing an EM algorithm for
learning deep neural networks from crowds in multi-class
classiﬁcation settings, highlighting its limitations. Then, a
novel crowd layer is proposed, which allows us to train neural networks end-to-end, directly from the noisy labels of
multiple annotators, using only backpropagation. This alternative approach not only allows us to avoid the additional
computational overhead of EM, but also leads to a generalpurpose framework that generalizes trivially beyond classi-

Abstract
Over the last few years, deep learning has revolutionized the
ﬁeld of machine learning by dramatically improving the stateof-the-art in various domains. However, as the size of supervised artiﬁcial neural networks grows, typically so does the
need for larger labeled datasets. Recently, crowdsourcing has
established itself as an efﬁcient and cost-effective solution for
labeling large sets of data in a scalable manner, but it often
requires aggregating labels from multiple noisy contributors
with different levels of expertise. In this paper, we address the
problem of learning deep neural networks from crowds. We
begin by describing an EM algorithm for jointly learning the
parameters of the network and the reliabilities of the annotators. Then, a novel general-purpose crowd layer is proposed,
which allows us to train deep neural networks end-to-end, directly from the noisy labels of multiple annotators, using only
backpropagation. We empirically show that the proposed approach is able to internally capture the reliability and biases of
different annotators and achieve new state-of-the-art results
for various crowdsourced datasets across different settings,
namely classiﬁcation, regression and sequence labeling.

Introduction
In the last decade, deep learning has made major advances in
solving artiﬁcial intelligence problems in different domains
such as speech recognition, visual object recognition, object
detection and machine translation (Schmidhuber 2015). This
success is often attributed to its ability to discover intricate
structures in high-dimensional data (LeCun, Bengio, and
Hinton 2015), thereby making it particularly well suited for
tackling complex tasks that are often regarded as characteristic of humans, such as vision, speech and natural language
understanding. However, typically, a key requirement for
learning deep representations of complex high-dimensional
data is large sets of labeled data. Unfortunately, in many situations this data is not readily available, and humans are required to manually label large collections of data.
On the other hand, in recent years, crowdsourcing has established itself as a reliable solution to annotate large collections of data. Indeed, crowdsourcing platforms like Amazon
Mechanical Turk1 and Crowdﬂower2 have proven to be an
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://www.mturk.com
2
http://crowdﬂower.com

1611

