The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Linguistic Properties Matter for Implicit Discourse Relation Recognition:
Combining Semantic Interaction, Topic Continuity and Attribution
Wenqiang Lei,1 Yuanxin Xiang,1 Yuwei Wang,3
Qian Zhong,4 Meichun Liu,4 Min-Yen Kan1,2 ∗
1

National University of Singapore 2 Smart Systems Institute
3
University of Utah 4 City University of Hong Kong
{wenqiang, yuanxin, knmnyn}@comp.nus.edu.sg,
ywang@cs.utah.edu,{qzhong5-c,meichliu}@cityu.edu.hk

implicit discourse relation. We argue that such a general approach is insufﬁcient to address the unique properties of the
scenario. Our solution to address these problems can be applied to other tasks such as natural language inference (MacCartney 2009) and text similarity (Agirre et al. 2016).
We recognize that each discourse relation type has its own
unique properties, having individual semantic characteristics. For example, Comparisons often use negation to highlight the contradictory part of two arguments. A typical case
is when one argument’s predicate is a negated expression
of the opposing argument. Topic continuity is also an integral device for cohesion (Halliday 1976). It works together
with a relation’s semantic characteristics to license the discourse relation between two arguments. For example, the
arguments for a contradiction (a subtype of the Comparison discourse relation in the PDTB) must refer to the same
topic. Interestingly, our analyses reveals that topic continuity
is manifested differently depending on relation’s semantic
characteristics. Finally, our analyses also reveal that attribution – the source of an argument (cf Section 2.1) – is another
important but often overlooked cohesion device. As a cohesion device, it provides background context for arguments,
providing necessary information for discourse relation. Our
analyses show that the collaboration between relations’ semantic characteristics and the two cohesion devices of topic
continuity and attribution are a hallmark of discourse relationships.
Our study contributes towards the understanding of discourse relations with the goal of improving their automatic
recognition. We make the following contributions:

Abstract
Modern solutions for implicit discourse relation recognition
largely build universal models to classify all of the different types of discourse relations. In contrast to such learning
models, we build our model from ﬁrst principles, analyzing
the linguistic properties of the individual top-level Penn Discourse Treebank (PDTB) styled implicit discourse relations:
Comparison, Contingency and Expansion. We ﬁnd semantic
characteristics of each relation type and two cohesion devices
– topic continuity and attribution – work together to contribute such linguistic properties. We encode those properties
as complex features and feed them into a Naı̈ve Bayes classiﬁer, bettering baselines (including deep neural network ones)
to achieve a new state-of-the-art performance level. Over a
strong, feature-based baseline, our system outperforms oneversus-other binary classiﬁcation by 4.83% for Comparison
relation, 3.94% for Contingency and 2.22% for four-way classiﬁcation.

1

Introduction

Sentences do not stand alone in text; they must be cohesive
by employing some rhetorical device, such as topic continuity and discourse relations. The inventories of discourse relations vary with the particular modeling assumptions adopted
in each framework, such as in Rhetorical Structure Theory Treebank (RST) (Carlson, Okurowski, and Marcu 2002)
and in the Penn Discourse Treebank (PDTB) (Prasad et al.
2007). In this work, we adopt those of the PDTB, and follow
its terminologies (cf Section 2.1). A key challenge in computational discourse analysis is the automatic recognition
of implicit (i.e., relations unmarked by explicit discourse
markers) discourse relations (Liu and Li 2016).
Existing solutions focus on creating good universal models, largely ignoring the properties of individual relation
types. Some neural network approaches treat the task as a
simple classiﬁcation problem where the input is a pair of
sentences (arguments). While this is beneﬁcial in terms of
modeling, these models do nothing to advance our understanding to the detailed linguistic properties of each type of

• Through corpus study, we uncover typical patterns in the
PDTB that demonstrate the cooperation of discourse relations’ semantic characteristics and the two cohesion
devices of topic continuity and attribution. By encoding those patterns as complex features, we obtain signiﬁcant improvement over a strong baseline, achieving a new
state-of-the-art level of performance.
• We assert the importance of two speciﬁc devices that establish cohesion: topic continuity and attribution. These
two cohesion devices are what distinguish implicit discourse relation recognition from other tasks such as natural language inference and text similarity, and we believe
their integral role in the implicit discourse recognition has

∗

This research is supported in part by the National Research
Foundation, Prime Minister’s Ofﬁce, Singapore under its International Research Centres in Singapore Funding Initiative, and by
NVIDIA Corporation for their donation of a Titan X GPU.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4848

