The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Finite Sample Analyses for TD(0) with Function Approximation
Gal Dalal∗

Balázs Szörényi∗

Gugan Thoppe∗

Shie Mannor

gald@campus.technion.ac.il

szorenyi.balazs@gmail.com

gugan.thoppe@gmail.com

shie@ee.technion.ac.il

Two types of convergence rate results exist in literature:
in expectation and with high probability. We stress that no
results of either type exist for the actual, commonly used,
TD(0) algorithm with linear FA; our work is the ﬁrst to provide such results. In fact, it is the ﬁrst work to give a convergence rate for an unaltered online TD algorithm of any
type. We emphasize that TD(0) with linear FA is formulated and used with non-problem-speciﬁc stepsizes. Also, it
does not require a projection step to keep θ in a ‘nice’ set.
In contrast, the few recent works that managed to provide
convergence rates for TD(0) analyzed only altered versions
of them. These modiﬁcations include a projection step and
eigenvalue-dependent stepsizes, or they apply only to the average of iterates; we expand on this in the coming section.

Abstract
TD(0) is one of the most commonly used algorithms in reinforcement learning. Despite this, there is no existing ﬁnite
sample analysis for TD(0) with function approximation, even
for the linear case. Our work is the ﬁrst to provide such results. Works that managed to obtain convergence rates for online Temporal Difference (TD) methods analyzed somewhat
modiﬁed versions of them that include projections and stepsize dependent on unknown problem parameters. Our analysis obviates these artiﬁcial alterations by exploiting strong
properties of TD(0). We provide convergence rates both in
expectation and with high-probability. Both are based on relatively unknown, recently developed stochastic approximation
techniques.

1

Existing Literature

Introduction

The ﬁrst TD(0) convergence result was obtained by (Tsitsiklis, Van Roy, and others 1997) for both ﬁnite and inﬁnite state-spaces. Following that, a key result by (Borkar
and Meyn 2000) paved the path to a uniﬁed and convenient tool for convergence analyses of Stochastic Approximation (SA), and hence of TD algorithms. This tool is
based on the Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) method.
Essentially, that work showed that under the right conditions, the SA trajectory follows the solution of a suitable
ODE, often referred to as its limiting ODE; thus, it eventually converges to the solution of the limiting ODE. Several usages of this tool in RL literature can be found in
(Sutton, Maei, and Szepesvári 2009; Sutton et al. 2009;
Sutton, Mahmood, and White 2015).
As opposed to the case of asymptotic convergence analysis of TD algorithms, very little is known about their ﬁnite
sample behavior. We now brieﬂy discuss the few existing results on this topic. In (Borkar 2008), a concentration bound
is given for generic SA algorithms. Recent works (Kamal
2010; Thoppe and Borkar 2015) obtain better concentration bounds via tighter analyses. The results in these works
are conditioned on the event that the n0 −th iterate lies in
some a-priori chosen bounded region containing the desired
equilibria; this, therefore, is the caveat in applying them to
TD(0).
In (Korda and Prashanth 2015), convergence rates for
TD(0) with mixing-time consideration have been given. We
note that even though doubts were recently raised regard-

Temporal Difference (TD) algorithms lie at the core of Reinforcement Learning (RL), dominated by the celebrated
TD(0) algorithm. The term has been coined in (Sutton and
Barto 1998), describing an iterative process of updating an
estimate of a value function V π (s) with respect to a given
policy π based on temporally-successive samples. The classical version of the algorithm uses a tabular representation, i.e., entry-wise storage of the value estimate per each
state s ∈ S. However, in many problems, the state-space
S is too large for such a vanilla approach. The common
practice to mitigate this caveat is to approximate the value
function using some parameterized family. Often, linear regression is used, i.e., V π (s) ≈ θ φ(s). This allows for
an efﬁcient implementation of TD(0) even on large statespaces and has shown to perform well in a variety of problems (Tesauro 1995; Powell 2007). More recently, TD(0)
has become prominent in many state-of-the-art RL solutions
when combined with deep neural network architectures, as
an integral part of ﬁtted value iteration (Mnih et al. 2015;
Silver et al. 2016). In this work we focus on the former
case of linear Function Approximation (FA); nevertheless,
we consider this work as a preliminary milestone in route to
achieving theoretical guarantees for non-linear RL architectures.
∗

Equal contribution
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6144

