The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Utilitarians Without Utilities: Maximizing Social Welfare
for Graph Problems Using Only Ordinal Preferences
Ben Abramowitz

Elliot Anshelevich

Department of Computer Science
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
abramb@rpi.edu

Department of Computer Science
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
eanshel@cs.rpi.edu

In fact, ordinal algorithms often perform almost as well as
omniscient mechanisms which know the true underlying numerical utilities, instead of just the ordinal preferences induced by these utilities.
In this work we consider a relatively general network formation setting. All problems considered herein are modeled
by an undirected complete graph G = (N , E), where the
(symmetric) weight w(x, y) of each edge (x, y) ∈ E represents the hidden utility of connecting agents x, y ∈ N . The
goal is to form a maximum-weight (i.e., maximum utility)
graph which obeys some given constraints. For example,
constraints may include bounds on the maximum degree,
on component size, and many others. This framework includes such problems as matching, group formation, TSP,
and many others as special cases; see Section 2 for example
constraints and how they lead to different important settings.
In many settings we may not have access to the true edge
weights w(x, y). Instead, each agent x ∈ N reports a strict
preference ordering over the other agents N − {x} with
whom it can connect. We assume this ordering to be consistent with the latent weights, so that w(x, y) > w(x, z)
implies that x prefers y to z. While it is clearly impossible to
form an optimal (i.e., maximum-utility) solution without direct knowledge of the edge weights, we show how to design
good approximation algorithms for selecting a maximum
weight subgraph of G, subject to a large set of constraints.
As usual in this line of work, the measure of performance
is simply the sum of the agent utilities. Our paper provides good approximations for a broad class of ordinal analogues to graph optimization problems representing utility
maximization for multi-agent systems. Note that unlike all
previous work mentioned here, we do not make additional
assumptions about the structure of the edge weights: we
do not assume either that the agent utilities are normalized
(as in (Boutilier et al. 2015; Brandt et al. 2016; Caragiannis
et al. 2017; Caragiannis and Procaccia 2011; Christodoulou
et al. 2016)), nor that they form a metric space (as in
(Anshelevich, Bhardwaj, and Postl 2015; Anshelevich and
Postl 2017; Anshelevich and Sekar 2016a; 2016b; Caragiannis et al. 2016; Goel, Krishnaswamy, and Munagala 2017;
Gross, Anshelevich, and Xia 2017; Skowron and Elkind
2017)). Thus, our results demonstrate how well one can
perform using only ordinal information without additional
assumptions.

Abstract
We consider ordinal approximation algorithms for a broad
class of utility maximization problems for multi-agent systems. In these problems, agents have utilities for connecting to each other, and the goal is to compute a maximumutility solution subject to a set of constraints. We represent
these as a class of graph optimization problems, including
matching, spanning tree problems, TSP, maximum weight
planar subgraph, and many others. We study these problems in the ordinal setting: latent numerical utilities exist,
but we only have access to ordinal preference information,
i.e., every agent speciﬁes an ordering over the other agents
by preference. We prove that for the large class of graph
problems we identify, ordinal information is enough to compute solutions which are close to optimal, thus demonstrating there is no need to know the underlying numerical utilities. For example, for problems in this class with bounded
degree b a simple ordinal greedy algorithm always produces
a (b + 1)-approximation; we also quantify how the quality
of ordinal approximation depends on the sparsity of the resulting graphs. In particular, our results imply that ordinal
information is enough to obtain a 2-approximation for Maximum Spanning Tree; a 4-approximation for Max Weight
Planar Subgraph; a 2-approximation for Max-TSP; and a 2approximation for various Matching problems.

1

Introduction

Human beings are terrible at expressing their feelings quantitatively. For example, when forming collaborations people
may be able to order their peers from “best to collaborate
with” to worst, but would have a difﬁcult time assigning exact numeric values to the acuteness of these preferences. In
other words, even when numerical (possibly latent) utilities
exist, in many settings it is much more reasonable to assume
that we only know ordinal preferences: every agent speciﬁes the order of their preferences over the alternatives, instead of a numerical value for each alternative. Recently
there has been a lot of work using such an implicit utilitarian approach, especially for matching and social choice (see
Related Work), in situations where obtaining true numerical
utilities may be difﬁcult. Amazingly, as this line of work
shows, it is often possible to design algorithms and mechanisms which perform well using only ordinal information.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

894

