The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Latent Discriminant Subspace Representations
for Multi-View Outlier Detection
†

Kai Li,† Sheng Li, Zhengming Ding,† Weidong Zhang, Yun Fu†‡

Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, USA

Adobe Research, USA

AI & Big Data Division, JD.COM American Technologies Corporation, USA
‡
College of Computer & Information Science, Northeastern University, Boston, USA
kaili@ece.neu.edu, sheli@adobe.com, allanding@ece.neu.edu, weidong.zhang@jd.com, yunfu@ece.neu.edu
tures represent the same instance from different perspectives, thereby providing complementary information for the
instance. Taking advantages of these complementary information across various views, multi-view based algorithms
often reach better performances than their single-view counterparts (Ding and Fu 2014; 2016). However, detecting outliers from multi-view data remains challenging, due to the
complex distributions and inconsistent behaviors of multiview data samples.
A number of multi-view outlier detection methods have
been proposed to detect outliers that have abnormal behaviors in each view (Muller et al. 2012; Das et al. 2010)
or have inconsistent behaviors across different views (Gao
et al. 2011; Liu and Lam 2012; Iwata and Yamada 2016;
Li, Shao, and Fu 2015; Zhao and Fu 2015). These methods
usually compose of two parts: multi-view model formulation and outlier score deﬁnition. In the multi-view model
formulation stage, the goal is to exploit the consensus nature of multi-view data and uncover the subtle cross-view
differences. The outlier score deﬁnition stage is to deﬁne
some outlier measurements based on the cross-view differences revealed in the previous stage. In both stages, existing
methods only consider pairwise relationship between views,
making them hard to be extended into three or more views.
Two types of multi-view outliers have been addressed by
existing methods. They are attribute outliers and class outliers, following the terminology in (Zhao and Fu 2015). Attribute outliers are samples which have abnormal behaviors
in each view, and they will be considered as outliers in every view. The red triangles in Figure 1 represent this type
of outliers. Class outliers are the data samples which exhibit inconsistent characteristics (mainly referring to cluster
memberships) across different views. When considered in
each view individually, this kind of samples would not be
identiﬁed as outliers because they have normal characteristics as other samples within each view. But when considering their mutual behaviors across views, we will identify
them as anomalies because they do not behave consistently
across views, not like the inlier samples. The green circles
in Figure 1 illustrate this type of outliers. It is easy to ﬁnd
that there is a third type of outliers neglected by existing
methods. It is a mix of the above two types of outliers: the
samples exhibit class outlier characteristics in some views,
while shows attribute outlier properties in the other views.

Abstract
Identifying multi-view outliers is challenging because of the
complex data distributions across different views. Existing
methods cope this problem by exploiting pairwise constraints
across different views to obtain new feature representations,
based on which certain outlier score measurements are deﬁned. Due to the use of pairwise constraint, it is complicated
and time-consuming for existing methods to detect outliers
from three or more views. In this paper, we propose a novel
method capable of detecting outliers from any number of data
views. Our method ﬁrst learns latent discriminant representations for all view data and deﬁnes a novel outlier score function based on the latent discriminant representations. Speciﬁcally, we represent multi-view data by a global low-rank representation shared by all views and residual representations
speciﬁc to each view. Through analyzing the view-speciﬁc
residual representations of all views, we can get the outlier
score for every sample. Moreover, we raise the problem of detecting a third type of multi-view outliers which are neglected
by existing methods. Experiments on six datasets show our
method outperforms the existing ones in identifying all types
of multi-view outliers, often by large margins.

Introduction
Outlier detection, or anomaly detection, is a basic data analysis technique which aims to identify the abnormal objects
in a dataset. It is widely applied in many ﬁelds, such as web
spam detection (Spirin and Han 2012), information disparity management (Duh et al. 2013), network failure detection (Ding et al. 2012). Many outlier detection methods have
been proposed over the past decades (Zhou, Yang, and Yu
2012; Schubert, Zimek, and Kriegel 2014). These methods
ﬁrst analyze the distribution of a dataset, and then deﬁne certain criteria to identify outliers within it. However, it is worthy to notice that these methods are targeted for data of only
one source, i.e., single-view data.
On the other hand, in numerous practical scenarios, data
are from various sources or acquired by different feature
extractors and shows heterogeneous characteristics. For example, a person can be uniquely identiﬁed by his or her
face, ﬁngerprint, iris or signature; while an image could
be described by the color or texture. These multi-view feac 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3522

