The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Sequence-to-Point Learning with Neural
Networks for Non-Intrusive Load Monitoring
Chaoyun Zhang,1∗ Mingjun Zhong,2† Zongzuo Wang,1 Nigel Goddard,1 Charles Sutton1
1

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
{chaoyun.zhang,nigel.goddard,c.sutton}@ed.ac.uk
2
School of Computer Science, University of Lincoln, United Kingdom
mzhong@lincoln.ac.uk
of sources of uncertainty in the prediction problem, including noise in the data, lack of knowledge of the true power
usage for every appliance in a given household, multiple
devices exhibiting similar power consumption, and simultaneous switching on/off of multiple devices. Therefore energy disaggregation has been an active area for the application of artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning techniques. Popular approaches have been based on factorial
hidden Markov models (FHMM) (Kolter and Jaakkola 2012;
Parson et al. 2012; Zhong, Goddard, and Sutton 2013; 2014;
2015; Lange and Bergés 2016) and signal processing methods (Pattem 2012; Zhao, Stankovic, and Stankovic 2015;
2016; Batra, Singh, and Whitehouse 2016; Tabatabaei, Dick,
and Xu 2017).
Recently, it has been shown that single-channel BSS
could be modelled by using sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq)
learning with neural networks (Grais, Sen, and Erdogan
2014; Huang et al. 2014; Du et al. 2016). In particular, it has
been applied to energy disaggregation (Kelly and Knottenbelt 2015a) —both convolutional (CNN) and recurrent neural networks (RNN) were employed. The idea of sequenceto-sequence learning is to train a deep network to map between an input sequence, such as the mains power readings
in the NILM problem, and an output sequence, such as the
power readings of a single appliance.
A difﬁculty immediately arises when applying seq2seq in
signal processing applications such as BSS. In these applications, the input and output sequences can be long, for example, in one of our data sets, the input and output sequences
are 14,400 time steps. Such long sequences can make training both computationally difﬁcult, both because of memory
limitations in current graphics processing units (GPUs) and,
with RNNs, because of the vanishing gradient problem. A
common way to avoid these problems is a sliding window
approach, that is, training the network to map a window of
the input signal to the corresponding window of the output signal. However, this approach has several difﬁculties,
in that each element of the output signal is predicted many
times, once for each sliding window; an average of multiple
predictions is naturally used, which consequently smooths
the edges. Further, we expect that some of the sliding windows will provide a better prediction of a single element than
others, particularly those windows where the element is near
the midpoint of the window rather than the edges, so that the

Abstract
Energy disaggregation (a.k.a nonintrusive load monitoring,
NILM), a single-channel blind source separation problem,
aims to decompose the mains which records the whole house
electricity consumption into appliance-wise readings. This
problem is difﬁcult because it is inherently unidentiﬁable.
Recent approaches have shown that the identiﬁability problem could be reduced by introducing domain knowledge into
the model. Deep neural networks have been shown to be a
promising approach for these problems, but sliding windows
are necessary to handle the long sequences which arise in signal processing problems, which raises issues about how to
combine predictions from different sliding windows. In this
paper, we propose sequence-to-point learning, where the input is a window of the mains and the output is a single point of
the target appliance. We use convolutional neural networks to
train the model. Interestingly, we systematically show that the
convolutional neural networks can inherently learn the signatures of the target appliances, which are automatically added
into the model to reduce the identiﬁability problem. We applied the proposed neural network approaches to real-world
household energy data, and show that the methods achieve
state-of-the-art performance, improving two standard error
measures by 84% and 92%.

Energy disaggregation (Hart 1992) is a single-channel blind
source separation (BSS) problem that aims to decompose the
whole energy consumption of a dwelling into the energy usage of individual appliances. The purpose is to help households reduce their energy consumption by helping them to
understand what is causing them to use energy, and it has
been shown that disaggregated information can help householders reduce energy consumption by as much as 5 − 15%
(Fischer 2008). However, current electricity meters can only
report the whole-home consumption data. This triggers the
demand of machine-learning tools to infer the appliancespeciﬁc consumption.
Energy disaggregation is unidentiﬁable and thus a difﬁcult prediction problem because it is a single-channel BSS
problem; we want to extract more than one source from a
single observation. Additionally, there are a large number
∗

equal contribution
equal contribution
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

2604

