The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

DarkRank: Accelerating Deep Metric Learning
via Cross Sample Similarities Transfer
Yuntao Chen,1,5 Naiyan Wang,2 Zhaoxiang Zhang1,3,4,5,∗

1

Research Center for Brain-inspired Intelligence, CASIA 2 TuSimple
3
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
4
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
5
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{chenyuntao2016, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn winsty@gmail.com
To mitigate this problem, many model acceleration methods have been proposed. They can be roughly categorized
into three types: network pruning(?; ?), model quantization(?;
?) and knowledge transfer(?; ?; ?). Network pruning iteratively removes the neurons or weights that are less important
to the ﬁnal prediction; model quantization decreases the representation precision of weights and activations in a network,
and thus increases computation throughput; knowledge transfer directly trains a smaller student network guided by a
larger and more powerful teacher. Among these methods,
knowledge transfer based methods are the most practical.
Compared with other methods that mostly need tailor made
hardwares or implementations, they can archive considerable
acceleration without bells and whistles.
Knowledge Distill (KD)(?) and its variants(?; ?) are the
dominant approaches among knowledge transfer based methods. Though they utilize different forms of knowledges, these
knowledges are still limited within a single sample. Namely,
these methods provide more precise supervision for each
sample from teacher networks at either classiﬁer or intermediate feature level. However, all these methods miss another valuable treasure – the relationships (similarities or
distances) across different samples. This kind of knowledge
also encodes the structure of the embedded space of teacher
networks. Moreover, it naturally ﬁts the objective of metric
learning since it usually utilizes similar instance level supervision. We elaborate our motivation in the sequel, and depict
our method in Fig. ??. The upper right corner shows that the
student better captures the similarity of images after transferring. The digit 0 which are more similar to 6 than 3, 4, 5 are
now ranked higher.
To summarize, the contributions of this paper are three
folds:

Abstract
We have witnessed rapid evolution of deep neural network
architecture design in the past years. These latest progresses
greatly facilitate the developments in various areas such as
computer vision and natural language processing. However,
along with the extraordinary performance, these state-of-theart models also bring in expensive computational cost. Directly deploying these models into applications with real-time
requirement is still infeasible. Recently, Hinton et al. (?) have
shown that the dark knowledge within a powerful teacher
model can signiﬁcantly help the training of a smaller and
faster student network. These knowledge are vastly beneﬁcial
to improve the generalization ability of the student model. Inspired by their work, we introduce a new type of knowledge
– cross sample similarities for model compression and acceleration. This knowledge can be naturally derived from deep
metric learning model. To transfer them, we bring the “learning to rank” technique into deep metric learning formulation.
We test our proposed DarkRank method on various metric
learning tasks including pedestrian re-identiﬁcation, image retrieval and image clustering. The results are quite encouraging.
Our method can improve over the baseline method by a large
margin. Moreover, it is fully compatible with other existing
methods. When combined, the performance can be further
boosted.

Introduction
Metric learning is the basis for many computer vision
tasks, including face veriﬁcation(?; ?) and pedestrian reidentiﬁcation(?; ?). In recent years, end-to-end deep metric
learning method which learns feature representation by the
guide of metric based losses has achieved great success(?;
?; ?). A key factor for the success of these deep metric
learning methods is the powerful network architectures(?;
?; ?). Nevertheless, along with more powerful features, these
deeper and wider networks also bring in heavier computation
burden. In many real-world applications like autonomous
driving, the system is latency critical with limited hardware
resources. To ensure safety, it requires (more than) real-time
responses. This constraint prevents us from beneﬁting from
the latest developments in network design.

• We introduce a new type of knowledge – cross sample
similarities for knowledge transfer in deep metric learning.
• We formalize it as a rank matching problem between
teacher and student networks, and modify classical listwise learning to rank methods(?; ?) to solve it.
• We test our proposed method on various metric learning
tasks. Our method can signiﬁcantly improve the performance of student networks. And it can be applied jointly
with existing methods for a better transferring performance.

∗

corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2852

