The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Parameter-Free Centralized Multi-Task Learning for Characterizing
Developmental Sex Differences in Resting State Functional Connectivity
Xiaofeng Zhu, Hongming Li, Yong Fan∗†
Department of Radiology
Perelman School of Medicine
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA

ropsychiatric disorders typically begin in adolescence and
are linked to aberrations in neurodevelopment (Di Martino et
al. 2014). Recently, neuroimaging measures, including both
structural and functional neuroimaging measures, have been
adopted as surrogate neural variables for exploring neural
origins of the developmental sex differences (Ingalhalikar et
al. 2014; Alarcón et al. 2015). Particularly, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a widely used technique for sex differences analysis (Gur and Gur 2016). Several studies on sex
differences via analyzing gray matter (GM) and white matter
(WM) of the brain MRI data have reported that females have
smaller brain volume and cerebral spinal ﬂuid (CSF) volume
than males, and CSF volume changes faster in males than in
females (Blakemore, Burnett, and Dahl 2010).
Resting state functional MRI (rs-fMRI) provides taskindependent and relatively reproducible biomarkers of functional coherence of activity in different brain regions (Fox
and Raichle 2007). Using resting state functional connectivity (RSFC) analytic techniques, we are able to investigate the
brain functional organization of both typical brain development and neuropsychiatric disorders (Fox and Raichle 2007;
Di Martino et al. 2014) and we can also characterize the
brain state at an individual subject level based on the
RSFC measures using pattern recognition techniques (Fan
and Davatzikos 2017). Recent studies have demonstrated
that RSFC measures are more accurate than cognitive proﬁles for both sex classiﬁcation and sex differences characterization, and males exhibit weaker nucleus accumbens
functional connectivity than females in adolescent brains
(Müller-Oehring et al. 2017).
Since brain development differs between males and females across adolescence (Ingalhalikar et al. 2014; Alarcón
et al. 2015), the interaction of age and sex on RSFC has been
investigated using analysis of variance (ANOVA) or equivalently multiple linear regression for exploring neural origins of sex differences in the developing brain (Alarcón et
al. 2015). However, such analytic tools are typically adopted
in a univariate statistical analysis, not equipped to characterize multivariable relationships, such as the interaction of age
and sex on the functional brain network which is typically
characterized by a set of edgewise RSFC measures (Alarcón
et al. 2015).
In order to robustly characterize the interaction of sex
and age on the RSFC measures in a multivariate analy-

Abstract
In contrast to most existing studies that typically characterize the developmental sex differences using analysis of variance or equivalently multiple linear regression, we present
a parameter-free centralized multi-task learning method to
identify sex speciﬁc and common resting state functional
connectivity (RSFC) patterns underlying the brain development based on resting state functional MRI (rs-fMRI) data.
Speciﬁcally, we design a novel multi-task learning model to
characterize sex speciﬁc and common RSFC patterns in an
age prediction framework by regarding the age prediction
for males and females as separate tasks. Moreover, the importance of each task and the balance of these two patterns,
respectively, are automatically learned in order to make the
multi-task learning robust as well as free of tunable parameters, i.e., parameter-free for short. Our experimental results
on synthetic datasets veriﬁed the effectiveness of our method
with respect to prediction performance, and experimental results on rs-fMRI scans of 1041 subjects (651 males) of the
Philadelphia Neurodevelopmental Cohort (PNC) showed that
our method could improve the age prediction on average by
5.82% with statistical signiﬁcance than the best alternative
methods under comparison, in addition to characterizing the
developmental sex differences in RSFC patterns.

Introduction
Adolescence is the developmental period during which functional brain maturation interacts with sexual divergence in
social, behavior, and biological changes (Kochhann et al.
2017). Particularly, sex differences are prominent in behavior and have been studying for a long time (Hardee et al.
2017; Qian et al. 2015a). For instance, females are superior at social cognition and recognition memory than males,
while males perform better in visuospatial and motor tasks
than females (Gur and Gur 2016).
It is of great importance to understand the neural origins
of the developmental sex differences in behavior as both
sex differences and brain structure/function are shaped during adolescence to support the brain development and neu∗

Corresponding author: yong.fan@uphs.upenn.edu.
This work was supported in part by National Institutes
of Health grants (Nos. EB022573, CA189523, MH107703,
DA039215, and DA039002).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

2660

