The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Action Branching Architectures
for Deep Reinforcement Learning
Arash Tavakoli, Fabio Pardo, Petar Kormushev
Imperial College London
London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom
{a.tavakoli, f.pardo, p.kormushev}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract

Action dimension 1

Discrete-action algorithms have been central to numerous
recent successes of deep reinforcement learning. However,
applying these algorithms to high-dimensional action tasks
requires tackling the combinatorial increase of the number
of possible actions with the number of action dimensions.
This problem is further exacerbated for continuous-action
tasks that require ﬁne control of actions via discretization.
In this paper, we propose a novel neural architecture featuring a shared decision module followed by several network branches, one for each action dimension. This approach
achieves a linear increase of the number of network outputs
with the number of degrees of freedom by allowing a level of
independence for each individual action dimension. To illustrate the approach, we present a novel agent, called Branching Dueling Q-Network (BDQ), as a branching variant of
the Dueling Double Deep Q-Network (Dueling DDQN). We
evaluate the performance of our agent on a set of challenging continuous control tasks. The empirical results show that
the proposed agent scales gracefully to environments with increasing action dimensionality and indicate the signiﬁcance
of the shared decision module in coordination of the distributed action branches. Furthermore, we show that the proposed agent performs competitively against a state-of-theart continuous control algorithm, Deep Deterministic Policy
Gradient (DDPG).

State

Shared
representation

Action dimension 2
...

Action dimension N

Figure 1: A conceptual illustration of the proposed action
branching network architecture. The shared network module
computes a latent representation of the input state that is then
passed forward to the several action branches. Each action
branch is responsible for controlling an individual degree of
freedom and the concatenation of the selected sub-actions
results in a joint-action tuple.

these methods to high-dimensional, discrete action spaces
remains to suffer from the same issues as in tabular reinforcement learning—that is, the number of actions that
need to be explicitly represented grows exponentially with
increasing action dimensionality. Formally, for an environment with an N -dimensional action space and nd discrete sub-actions for each dimension d, using the existing
N
discrete-action algorithms, a total of d=1 nd possible actions need to be considered. This can rapidly render the
application of discrete-action reinforcement learning algorithms intractable to domains with multidimensional action
spaces, as such large action spaces are difﬁcult to explore
efﬁciently (Lillicrap et al. 2016). This limitation is a signiﬁcant one as there are numerous efﬁcient discrete-action
algorithms whose applications are currently restricted to domains with relatively small discrete action spaces. For instance, Q-learning (Watkins and Dayan 1992) is a powerful
discrete-action algorithm, with many extensions (Hessel et
al. 2017), which due to its off-policy nature can, in principle, achieve better sample efﬁciency than policy gradient
methods by reusing transitions from a replay memory of past
experience transitions or demonstrations (Gu et al. 2016;
2017).
Given the potential of discrete-action reinforcement learning algorithms and their current limited application, in this
paper we introduce a novel neural architecture that enables
the use of discrete-action algorithms in deep reinforcement
learning for domains with high-dimensional discrete or con-

Introduction
Combining the recent advances in deep learning techniques
(LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015; Schmidhuber 2015;
Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016) with reinforcement learning algorithms (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis 1996;
Sutton and Barto 1998; Szepesvari 2010) has proven to be
effective in many domains. Notable examples include the
Deep Q-Network (DQN) (Mnih et al. 2013; 2015) and AlphaGo (Silver et al. 2016; 2017). The main advantage of
using artiﬁcial neural networks as function approximators
in reinforcement learning is their ability to deal with highdimensional input data by modeling complex hierarchical or
compositional data abstractions and features.
Despite these successes, which have enabled the use of
reinforcement learning algorithms in domains with unprocessed, high-dimensional sensory input, the application of
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4131

