The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Early Prediction of Diabetes Complications from Electronic
Health Records: A Multi-Task Survival Analysis Approach
Bin Liu, Ying Li, Zhaonan Sun, Soumya Ghosh, Kenney Ng
Center for Computational Health, IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center
bin.liu1@ibm.com, liying@us.ibm.com, zsun@us.ibm.com, ghoshso@us.ibm.com, kenney.ng@us.ibm.com

paper, we study the early prediction of T2DM complications
from historical EHR records: When will a patient develop
complications after the initial T2DM diagnosis? Given the
EHR records of two patients, which patient is more likely
to develop complications? In the literature, EHRs have been
applied to disease onset prediction (Ng et al. 2016; Razavian et al. 2015), patient stratiﬁcation (Wang et al. 2015;
Chen et al. 2016), readmission prediction (He et al. 2014),
and mortality prediction (Tabak et al. 2013). However, there
are unique characteristics and challenges to the problem of
T2DM complications time-to-event prediction.
One of the main challenges for such time-to-event prediction problems is the existence of censored data in which
events of interest are unobserved. Events of interest may not
be observed due to the limited duration of the study period
or due to losing track of patients during the observation period. As such, predictive models based on standard machine
learning approaches, which usually optimize a loss function,
cannot be directly applied to analyze censored longitudinal
data. Survival analysis (Cox 1972; Miller Jr 2011) is a class
of widely used statistical tools to model time-to-event censored data and thus can be adapted to model T2DM complication events. However, traditional survival analysis models
suffer from several limitations. The popular Cox model (Cox
1972) does not directly model event probability; instead,
it maximizes a partial likelihood objective, which depends
only on the relative ordering of the survival time of individuals, not on their actual values. Parametric survival models (Lawless 1998; Mittal et al. 2013) provide another popular alternative. These methods assume that the baseline hazard function follows some distribution, such as Exponential,
Weibull or Log-normal. However, the distribution may not
be ﬂexible enough to capture the complex event patterns
observed in practice. A second challenge stems from the
need to effectively capture the correlations between multiple
T2DM complications. Considering that the different complications are manifestations of a common underlying condition — hyperglycemia, modeling complications as independent of one another will lead to suboptimal models.
To address these challenges, we present a data-driven approach to predict when a patient will develop complication(s) after the initial T2DM diagnosis. Our contributions
include a novel survival analysis approach, RankSvx, to
model time-to-event of T2DM complications. RankSvx si-

Abstract
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a chronic disease that
usually results in multiple complications. Early identiﬁcation
of individuals at risk for complications after being diagnosed
with T2DM is of signiﬁcant clinical value. In this paper, we
present a new data-driven predictive approach to predict when
a patient will develop complications after the initial T2DM
diagnosis. We propose a novel survival analysis method to
model the time-to-event of T2DM complications designed
to simultaneously achieve two important metrics: 1) accurate
prediction of event times, and 2) good ranking of the relative
risks of two patients. Moreover, to better capture the correlations of time-to-events of the multiple complications, we further develop a multi-task version of the survival model. To assess the performance of these approaches, we perform extensive experiments on patient level data extracted from a large
electronic health record claims database. The results show
that our new proposed survival analysis approach consistently
outperforms traditional survival models and demonstrate the
effectiveness of the multi-task framework over modeling each
complication independently.

Introduction
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a chronic disease
that affects almost half a billion people around the
globe (World Health Organization 2016). It is characterized by hyperglycemia— abnormally elevated blood glucose (blood sugar) levels, and is almost always associated
with a number of complications (Forbes and Cooper 2013).
Over time, the chronic elevation of blood glucose levels
caused by T2DM leads to blood vessel damage which in
turn leads to associated complications, including kidney
failure, blindness, stroke, heart attack, and in severe cases
even death. T2DM management requires continuous medical care with multifactorial risk-reduction strategies beyond
glycemic control (American Diabetes Association and others 2013). Early prediction of T2DM complications is critical for healthcare professionals to appropriately adapt treatment plans for patients.
The recent abundance of the electronic health records
(EHRs) has provided an unprecedented opportunity to apply
predictive analytics to improve T2DM management. In this
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

101

