The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Control Argumentation Frameworks
Yannis Dimopoulos

Jean-Guy Mailly

Pavlos Moraitis

Department of Computer Science
University of Cyprus
yannis@cs.ucy.ac.cy

LIPADE
Paris Descartes University, France
jean-guy.mailly@parisdescartes.fr

LIPADE
Paris Descartes University, France
pavlos@mi.parisdescartes.fr

that can reach certain states (e.g. a set of arguments to be
skeptically or credulously accepted that may support goals,
decisions, actions, beliefs, etc.) regardless of the different
unpredicted threats that they may face when operating in dynamic environments. These threats can be modeled through
the different possible changes already studied in the literature that might affect argumentation systems namely addition/removal of arguments, and addition/removal of attacks.
So, while most works on argumentation dynamics consist
in deﬁning methods which modify an argumentation framework, the aim of CAFs is different. Indeed, the goal of our
work is to deﬁne a framework which can resists to any future change that could occur, while maintaining some desired properties of the system.

Abstract
Dynamics of argumentation is the family of techniques concerned with the evolution of an argumentation framework
(AF), for instance to guarantee that a given set of arguments is
accepted. This work proposes Control Argumentation Frameworks (CAFs), a new approach that generalizes existing techniques, namely normal extension enforcement, by accommodating the possibility of uncertainty in dynamic scenarios. A
CAF is able to deal with situations where the exact set of
arguments is unknown and subject to evolution, and the existence (or direction) of some attacks is also unknown. It can
be used by an agent to ensure that a set of arguments is part of
one (or every) extension whatever the actual set of arguments
and attacks. A QBF encoding of reasoning with CAFs provides a computational mechanism for determining whether
and how this goal can be reached. We also provide some results concerning soundness and completeness of the proposed
encoding as well as complexity issues.

As noted above, in the majority of the previous works,
and especially in those proposing computational methods
(see e.g. (Coste-Marquis et al. 2015; Wallner, Niskanen, and
Järvisalo 2016)), complete knowledge about the structure of
the argumentation theories is assumed. That is, all the arguments of a theory as well as the existence (or not) and
the direction of the attacks between those arguments are assumed to be known. In reality however, agents need to reason by taking into account aspects of the world that are completely outside their control and may evolve constantly. For
instance a decision making/aiding investment banking agent
that builds an argument that supports investing in savings accounts, which is meaningful when interest rates are high but
less so when rates plunge. The problem for an investment
agent that aims at generating secure portfolios is that interest rates are a highly uncertain uncontrollable variable. More
generally, arguments supporting particular investments decisions depend on uncertain factors such as market ﬂuctuations, expectations, political developments, etc. It is desirable that agents are able to reach conclusions under incomplete information, or even reach long-lasting conclusion, i.e.
that remain valid regardless of how the world evolves. This
work provides a computational framework that supports reasoning with uncertainty regarding the presence of arguments
and the attacks between them. The problem of devising languages that are expressive enough to accommodate such uncertainty has been addressed in some works (see e.g. (Dupin
de Saint-Cyr et al. 2016)), without however providing associated computational methods. Indeed, to the best of our
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work that proposes an argumen-

Introduction
Argumentation is an important domain in the ﬁeld of Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Accumulated over more than two decades,
there is nowadays a vast literature on various aspects of argumentation, such as abstract argumentation frameworks and
their semantics (see e.g. (Dung 1995; Baroni, Caminada,
and Giacomin 2011)), structured argumentation frameworks
(see e.g. (Besnard and Hunter 2008; Dung, Kowalski, and
Toni 2009; Kakas and Moraitis 2003)) and more recently
on a particular topic called argumentation dynamics (see
e.g. (Cayrol, de Saint-Cyr, and Lagasquie-Schiex 2010;
Booth et al. 2013; Doutre, Herzig, and Perrussel 2014;
Coste-Marquis et al. 2014; Baumann and Brewka 2010)). In
this paper we propose a new family of abstract argumentation frameworks, called control argumentation frameworks,
abbreviated as CAFs. A CAF integrates in a uniﬁed computational framework different notions proposed in the literature on argumentation dynamics, while simultaneously
relaxes the basic assumption of complete knowledge, implicit in the majority of past works. The computational methods that are presented in this work are based on Quantiﬁed
Boolean Formulas (QBFs) (Pulina 2016) solving technology. The aim is to build effective argumentation systems
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4678

