The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Rainbow: Combining Improvements
in Deep Reinforcement Learning
Matteo Hessel, Joseph Modayil, Hado van Hasselt, Tom Schaul,
Georg Ostrovski, Will Dabney, Dan Horgan, Bilal Piot,
Mohammad Azar, David Silver
DeepMind

Abstract
The deep reinforcement learning community has made several independent improvements to the DQN algorithm. However, it is unclear which of these extensions are complementary and can be fruitfully combined. This paper examines
six extensions to the DQN algorithm and empirically studies
their combination. Our experiments show that the combination provides state-of-the-art performance on the Atari 2600
benchmark, both in terms of data efﬁciency and ﬁnal performance. We also provide results from a detailed ablation study
that shows the contribution of each component to overall performance.

Introduction
The many recent successes in scaling reinforcement learning (RL) to complex sequential decision-making problems
were kick-started by the Deep Q-Networks algorithm (DQN;
Mnih et al. 2013, 2015). Its combination of Q-learning with
convolutional neural networks and experience replay enabled it to learn, from raw pixels, how to play many Atari
games at human-level performance. Since then, many extensions have been proposed that enhance its speed or stability.
Double DQN (DDQN; van Hasselt, Guez, and Silver
2016) addresses an overestimation bias of Q-learning (van
Hasselt 2010), by decoupling selection and evaluation of
the bootstrap action. Prioritized experience replay (Schaul
et al. 2015) improves data efﬁciency, by replaying more often transitions from which there is more to learn. The dueling network architecture (Wang et al. 2016) helps to generalize across actions by separately representing state values and action advantages. Learning from multi-step bootstrap targets (Sutton 1988; Sutton and Barto 1998), as used
in A3C (Mnih et al. 2016), shifts the bias-variance tradeoff and helps to propagate newly observed rewards faster to
earlier visited states. Distributional Q-learning (Bellemare,
Dabney, and Munos 2017) learns a categorical distribution
of discounted returns, instead of estimating the mean. Noisy
DQN (Fortunato et al. 2017) uses stochastic network layers
for exploration. This list is, of course, far from exhaustive.
Each of these algorithms enables substantial performance
improvements in isolation. Since they address radically different issues, and since they build on a shared framework,

Figure 1: Median human-normalized performance across 57
Atari games. We compare Rainbow (rainbow-colored) to
DQN and six published baselines. We match DQN’s best
performance after 7M frames, surpass any baseline in 44M
frames, reaching substantially improved ﬁnal performance.
Curves are smoothed with a moving average of 5 points.

they could plausibly be combined. In some cases this has
been done: Prioritized DDQN and Dueling DDQN both use
double Q-learning, and Dueling DDQN was also combined
with prioritized replay. In this paper we propose to study an
agent that combines all the aforementioned ingredients. We
show how these different ideas can be integrated, and that
they are indeed complementary. In fact, their combination
results in new state-of-the-art results on the benchmark suite
of 57 Atari 2600 games from the Arcade Learning Environment (Bellemare et al. 2013), both in terms of data efﬁciency
and of ﬁnal performance. Finally, we show results from ablation studies to help understand the contributions of the individual components.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3215

