The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Reinforcement Learning in POMDPs with Memoryless
Options and Option-Observation Initiation Sets
Denis Steckelmacher,1 Diederik M. Roijers,1 Anna Harutyunyan,1
Peter Vrancx,v2 Hélène Plisnier,1 Ann Nowé1
1

2

Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussels, Belgium
PROWLER.io, 66-68 Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 1LA, United Kingdom; work conducted while afﬁliated to the VUB

In planning, options are already used to increase the planning horizon under uncertainty (He, Brunskill, and Roy
2011; Lim, Hsu, and Lee 2011) and to construct policies
robust to partial observability (Omidshaﬁei et al. 2017),
but learning algorithms for hierarchical partially observable tasks are not yet ideal. HQ-Learning decomposes a
task into a sequence of fully-observable subtasks (Wiering and Schmidhuber 1997), which precludes cyclic tasks
from being solved. Using recurrent neural networks in options and for the top-level policy (Sridharan, Wyatt, and
Dearden 2010) addresses both challenges, but brings in
the design complexity of RNNs (Józefowicz, Zaremba, and
Sutskever 2015; Angeline, Saunders, and Pollack 1994;
Mikolov et al. 2014). RNNs also have limitations regarding long time horizons, as their memory decays over time
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997).
In her PhD thesis, Precup (2000, page 126) suggests that
options may already be close to addressing partial observability, thus removing the need for more complicated solutions. In this paper, we prove this intuition correct by:

Abstract
Many real-world reinforcement learning problems have a hierarchical nature, and often exhibit some degree of partial
observability. While hierarchy and partial observability are
usually tackled separately (for instance by combining recurrent neural networks and options), we show that addressing both problems simultaneously is simpler and more efﬁcient in many cases. More speciﬁcally, we make the initiation set of options conditional on the previously-executed
option, and show that options with such Option-Observation
Initiation Sets (OOIs) are at least as expressive as Finite State
Controllers (FSCs), a state-of-the-art approach for learning in
POMDPs. OOIs are easy to design based on an intuitive description of the task, lead to explainable policies and keep the
top-level and option policies memoryless. Our experiments
show that OOIs allow agents to learn optimal policies in challenging POMDPs, while being much more sample-efﬁcient
than a recurrent neural network over options.

1

Introduction

Real-world applications of reinforcement learning (RL) face
two main challenges: complex long-running tasks and partial observability. Options, the particular instance of Hierarchical RL we focus on, addresses the ﬁrst challenge by
factoring a complex task into simpler sub-tasks (Barto and
Mahadevan 2003; Roy, Gordon, and Thrun 2006; Tessler et
al. 2016). Instead of learning what action to perform depending on an observation, the agent learns a top-level policy that repeatedly selects options, that in turn execute sequences of actions before returning (Sutton, Precup, and
Singh 1999). The second challenge, partial observability, is
addressed by maintaining a belief of what the agent thinks
the full state is (Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra ’ 1998;
Cassandra, Kaelbling, and Littman 1994), reasoning about
possible future observations (Littman, Sutton, and Singh
2001; Boots, Siddiqi, and Gordon 2011), storing information
in an external memory for later reuse (Peshkin, Meuleau,
and Kaelbling 1999; Zaremba and Sutskever 2015; Graves
et al. 2016), or using recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to
allow information to ﬂow between time-steps (Bakker 2001;
Mnih et al. 2016).

1. Showing that standard options do not sufﬁce in POMDPs;
2. Introducing Option-Observation Initiation Sets (OOIs),
that make the initiation sets of options conditional on the
previously-executed option;
3. Proving that OOIs make options at least as expressive as
Finite State Controllers (Section 3.2), thus able to tackle
challenging POMDPs.
In contrast to existing HRL algorithms for POMDPs (Wiering and Schmidhuber 1997; Theocharous 2002; Sridharan,
Wyatt, and Dearden 2010), OOIs handle repetitive tasks, do
not restrict the action set available to sub-tasks, and keep the
top-level and option policies memoryless. A wide range of
robotic and simulated experiments in Section 4 conﬁrm that
OOIs allow partially observable tasks to be solved optimally,
demonstrate that OOIs are much more sample-efﬁcient than
a recurrent neural network over options, and illustrate the
ﬂexibility of OOIs regarding the amount of domain knowledge available at design time. In Section 4.5, we demonstrate
the robustness of OOIs to sub-optimal option sets. While it
is generally accepted that the designer provides the options
and their initiation sets, we show in Section 4.4 that random initiation sets, combined with learned option policies

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4099

