The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Action Prediction from Videos via
Memorizing Hard-to-Predict Samples
†

Yu Kong,†∗ Shangqian Gao,‡∗ Bin Sun,† Yun Fu†§
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA
‡
College of Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA
§
College of Computer & Information Science, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA
{yukong,yunfu}@ece.neu.edu, {gao.sh,sun.bi}@husky.neu.edu

3DUWLDO2EVHUYDWLRQ

Abstract

%DVNHWEDOO"

Action prediction based on video is an important problem in
computer vision ﬁeld with many applications, such as preventing accidents and criminal activities. It’s challenging to
predict actions at the early stage because of the large variations between early observed videos and complete ones. Besides, intra-class variations cause confusions to the predictors
as well. In this paper, we propose a mem-LSTM model to
predict actions in the early stage, in which a memory module is introduced to record several “hard-to-predict” samples
and a variety of early observations. Our method uses Convolution Neural Network (CNN) and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) to model partial observed video input. We augment LSTM with a memory module to remember challenging
video instances. With the memory module, our mem-LSTM
model not only achieves impressive performance in the early
stage but also makes predictions without the prior knowledge
of observation ratio. Information in future frames is also utilized using a bi-directional layer of LSTM. Experiments on
UCF-101 and Sports-1M datasets show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

%DVNHWEDOO
GXQN"

Figure 1: Actions may have very similar appearance in the
beginning few frames, for example, “basketball” and “basketball dunk” in UCF-101 dataset, thereby fail action prediction approaches.

ﬁnd the correct classiﬁcation boundaries, and thus prediction
approaches would fail. As shown in Figure 1, actions such
as “basketball” and “basketball dunk” have the extremely
similar appearance at their early stage. It is essential to discover discriminative information for prediction at an early
stage. Recent work in (Kong, Tao, and Fu 2017) show that
prediction performance usually becomes stable when only
half length of videos are observed. This indicates that rich
discriminative information is often seen in the middle of
a video, thereby limiting the prediction performance at the
early stage of videos.
Existing work (Kong, Tao, and Fu 2017) enhances the discriminative power of features by transferring future information from full videos to partial videos. MTSSVM in (Kong
and Fu 2016) characterizes action evolution and creates a
nonlinear prediction model using kernels. MSSC method
proposed in (Cao et al. 2013a) learns a new feature representation by enforcing sparse constraints on the features. Still,
their prediction performance at the early stage of videos (for
example, only 10% − 20% of the frames are observed) is
still relatively low even though the discriminative power of
the features from these frames is already enhanced. In addition, these approaches are impractical as they require to
know the observation ratio of a testing video.
We introduce mem-LSTM to solve aforementioned problems. We propose to use memory to store hard-to-predict
training samples in order to improve the prediction performance at early stage. The memory module used in this work
measures the predictability of each training sample, and will
store those challenging ones. Given a testing partial video
(a query sample), the memory computes the similarity be-

Action prediction is receiving increasing interests in recent
years due to its broad and important applications in realworld scenarios, such as visual surveillance and trafﬁc accident avoidance. Different from action recognition, in action prediction, the action label needs to be inferred before
the entire action execution has been observed. More importantly, it is crucial that a prediction algorithm can make accurate predictions at the very beginning stage of a video, for
example, when only few frames of a video are observed.
Although action recognition approaches (Karpathy et al.
2014; Tran et al. 2015) have made great success, action prediction is still a relatively new research topic and it still has
several problems that need to be addressed. In recent years,
various attempts have been made in action prediction (Ryoo
2011a; Cao et al. 2013b; Lan, Chen, and Savarese 2014a;
Kong and Fu 2016; Kong, Tao, and Fu 2017), but misprediction remains. One major reason is that, in some actions, features from the beginning few frames are not discriminative
enough to be classiﬁed due to visual similarity. Therefore,
a classiﬁer learned using these features may not be able to
∗

Equal contributions.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7000

