The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Representation Learning for Scale-Free Networks
Rui Feng∗ Yang Yang,†∗ Wenjie Hu, Fei Wu, Yueting Zhuang
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
†
Corresponding author: yangya@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Network embedding aims to learn the low-dimensional representations of vertexes in a network, while structure and inherent properties of the network is preserved. Existing network
embedding works primarily focus on preserving the microscopic structure, such as the ﬁrst- and second-order proximity of vertexes, while the macroscopic scale-free property is
largely ignored. Scale-free property depicts the fact that vertex degrees follow a heavy-tailed distribution (i.e., only a few
vertexes have high degrees) and is a critical property of realworld networks, such as social networks. In this paper, we
study the problem of learning representations for scale-free
networks. We ﬁrst theoretically analyze the difﬁculty of embedding and reconstructing a scale-free network in the Euclidean space, by converting our problem to the sphere packing problem. Then, we propose the “degree penalty” principle
for designing scale-free property preserving network embedding algorithm: punishing the proximity between high-degree
vertexes. We introduce two implementations of our principle
by utilizing the spectral techniques and a skip-gram model
respectively. Extensive experiments on six datasets show that
our algorithms are able to not only reconstruct heavy-tailed
distributed degree distribution, but also outperform state-ofthe-art embedding models in various network mining tasks,
such as vertex classiﬁcation and link prediction.

1

(a) Original

(b) LE

(c) DP-Walker

Figure 1: Scale-free property of real-world networks. (a)
is the degree distribution of an academic network. (b) and
(c) are respectively the degree distribution of of the network reconstructed based on vertex representations learned
by Laplacian Eigenmap (LE) and our proposed method (DPWalker).

tent space, and represent each vertex by a vector in that
space. For example, a number of recent works apply advances in natural language processing (NLP), most notably
models known as word2vec (Mikolov et al. 2013), to network embedding and propose word2vec-based algorithms,
such as DeepWalk (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014) and
node2vec (Grover and Leskovec 2016). Besides, researchers
also consider network embedding as part of dimensionality reduction techniques. For instance, Laplacian Eigenmap (LE) (Belkin and Niyogi 2003) aims to learn the lowdimensional representation to expand the manifold where
the data lie.
Essentially, these methods mainly focus on preserving microscopic structure of network, like pairwise relationship
between vertexes. Nevertheless, scale-free property, one of
the most fundamental macroscopic properties of networks,
is largely ignored.
Scale-free property depicts that the vertex degrees follow a power-law distribution, which is a common knowledge for many real-world networks. We take an academic
network as the example, where each edge indicates if a vertex (researcher) has cited at least one publication of another vertex (researcher). Figure 1(a) demonstrates the degree distribution of this network. The linearity on log-log
scale suggests a power-law distribution: the probability decreases when the vertex degree grows, with a long tail
tending to zero (Faloutsos, Faloutsos, and Faloutsos 1999;

Introduction

Network analysis has attracted considerable research efforts
in many areas of artiﬁcial intelligence, as networks are able
to encode rich and complex data, such as human relationships and interactions. One major challenge of network analysis is how to represent network properly so that the network
structure can be preserved. The most straightforward way
is to represent the network by its adjacency matrix. However, it suffers from the data sparsity. Other traditional network representation relies on handcrafted network feature
design (e.g., clustering coefﬁcient), which is inﬂexible, nonscalable, and requires hard human labor.
In recent years, network representation learning, also
known as network embedding, has been proposed and
aroused considerable research interest. It aims to automatically project a given network into a low-dimensional la∗

Equal contribution. Ordering determined by dice rolling.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

282

