The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Transferable Contextual Bandit
for Cross-Domain Recommendation
Bo Liu,† Ying Wei,† Yu Zhang,† Zhixian Yan,‡ Qiang Yang†
†

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
‡
Cheetah Mobile USA
bliuab@cse.ust.hk, yweiad@cse.ust.hk, yuzhangcse@ust.hk
zhixian.yan@cmcm.com, qyang@cse.ust.hk
Compromising between the two conﬂicting objectives is well
known as the exploitation-exploration dilemma in RecSys.
Recently, the contextual bandit has been introduced to formulate the exploitation-exploration dilemma and achieved
great success (Li et al. 2010). In a contextual bandit problem,
the agent observes K arms a1 , · · · , aK (e.g., K candidate
articles) and their context xa1 , . . . , xaK (e.g., user proﬁle,
article content, etc.). In step τ , the agent decides to pull an
arm aτ among all arms (e.g., recommending one article)
and observes the corresponding reward raτ (e.g., click or
not). The reward depends on the context but is noisy, i.e.,
raτ = f (xaτ ) + . According to N historical observations
{(xaτ , raτ )}τ =1...N , a contextual bandit policy adaptatively
decides which arm to pull in each step and learns the uncertain reward function. The process is illustrated in the left of
Fig. 1. To maximize the cumulative reward, the agent should
pull the arms with the larger predicted reward. Because only
the stochastic reward of the pulled arms are observed, the
agent is also expected to pull the arms which accelerate the
exploration of the uncertain reward function (Zhou 2015).
Therefore, the contextual bandit policy can well balance the
exploitation and exploration trade-off, and maximize the cumulative reward in the long run (Chu et al. 2011).

Abstract
Traditional recommendation systems (RecSys) suffer from
two problems: the exploitation-exploration dilemma and the
cold-start problem. One solution to solving the exploitationexploration dilemma is the contextual bandit policy, which
adaptively exploits and explores user interests. As a result,
the contextual bandit policy achieves increased rewards in the
long run. The contextual bandit policy, however, may cause
the system to explore more than needed in the cold-start situations, which can lead to worse short-term rewards. Crossdomain RecSys methods adopt transfer learning to leverage
prior knowledge in a source RecSys domain to jump start
the cold-start target RecSys. To solve the two problems together, in this paper, we propose the ﬁrst applicable transferable contextual bandit (TCB) policy for the cross-domain
recommendation. TCB not only beneﬁts the exploitation but
also accelerates the exploration in the target RecSys. TCB’s
exploration, in turn, helps to learn how to transfer between
different domains. TCB is a general algorithm for both homogeneous and heterogeneous domains. We perform both
theoretical regret analysis and empirical experiments. The empirical results show that TCB outperforms the state-of-the-art
algorithms over time.

Introduction
Target Domain
Article RecSys

Source Domain
App RecSys

Cold-start

A personalized recommendation system (RecSys) is a vital
component for online interactive services. According to user
interests, an online service provider recommends items including movies, apps, articles, to achieve more user feedbacks
including watches, installations, and clicks accordingly. Accurately inferring user interests and providing corresponding
recommendations not only improve user satisfaction but also
increase commercial revenue signiﬁcantly. The exploitationexploration dilemma and the cold-start problem are two major
obstacles to the successful deployment of a RecSys (Schein
et al. 2002; Li et al. 2010).
The primary objective of a RecSys is to maximize the cumulative amount of feedback which depends on user interests.
The feedback, however, has high uncertainty and noise. A
successful RecSys is supposed to balance between exploiting
predicted user interests upon historical feedbacks and exploring uncertain user interests via recommending diverse items.

translation

correspond

uncertain and
noisy
observations
uncertain
parameters to
explore

recommend
click

RecSys Agent
(TCB)

install

Figure 1: The process of cross-domain RecSys using TCB. In
terms of contextual bandit, TCB sequentially and adaptatively
recommends articles based on noisy feedbacks. In terms
of transfer learning, TCB adopts the translation to leverage
both source and target observations. TCB suffers from noisy
observations in blue and explores uncertain parameters in
green accordingly.
Unfortunately, the contextual bandit policies suffer from
the cold-start problem which refers to that there exists few

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3619

