The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

An Experimental Study of Advice in
Sequential Decision-Making under Uncertainty
Florian Benavent, Bruno Zanuttini
Normandie Univ,
UNICAEN, ENSICAEN, CNRS, GREYC,
14000 Caen, France

contingent plan taking into account, not only the intended,
optimal path to destination, but also alternative paths (because of, e.g., unforeseen trafﬁc jams, blocked roads, etc.).
It is well-known that the optimal policy for a given MDP
is highly dependent on the precise reward function. However, it is typically difﬁcult for a user to give precise numerical values for rewarding states or transitions between states.
Hence many authors have studied MDPs with Imprecise Reward functions, that is, with a set of candidate reward functions rather than a single one. Approaches encompass inverse reinforcement learning and learning from demonstrations, preference-based reinforcement learning, ordinal reward MDPs, minimax regret policies, etc. (see related work).
At the heart of most approaches is some notion of information communicated by the user to the agent: demonstrated
(portions of) trajectories, preferences between trajectories,
etc. Such information can be obtained by observing the user,
or by actively querying her whenever more information is
needed for solving the task. Orthogonally, the information
can consist of (near-)optimal actions to take at given states,
to information about the real reward function, etc.
We are interested in what information is given by the user
to the agent, which we call advice. We give a uniﬁed view
of the most important notions in the literature, focusing on
notions which, we argue, are natural for a user to give. We
introduce a new, natural notion, formalising a user giving the
action to take in a given state and telling what outcome made
her choose this action. We extend known algorithms for incorporating such advice in the computation of a minimax
regret policy. We ﬁnally report on an experimental study on
random MDPs with different structures, in which we compare the various notions with different interaction scenarios.

Abstract
We consider sequential decision making problems under uncertainty, in which a user has a general idea of the task to
achieve, and gives advice to an agent in charge of computing an optimal policy. Many different notions of advice have
been proposed in somewhat different settings, especially in
the ﬁeld of inverse reinforcement learning and for resolution
of Markov Decision Problems with Imprecise Rewards.
Two key questions are whether the advice required by a speciﬁc method is natural for the user to give, and how much
advice is needed for the agent to compute a good policy, as
evaluated by the user. We give a uniﬁed view of a number of
proposals made in the literature, and propose a new notion of
advice, which corresponds to a user telling why she would
take a given action in a given state. For all these notions, we
discuss their naturalness for a user and the integration of advice. We then report on an experimental study of the amount
of advice needed for the agent to compute a good policy. Our
study shows in particular that continual interaction between
the user and the agent is worthwhile, and sheds light on the
pros and cons of each type of advice.

Introduction
We consider sequential decision making under uncertainty,
by an autonomous agent solving tasks on behalf of a user.
Such situations arise naturally in practice, for instance, GPS
navigation devices compute optimal routes for the driver. We
are especially interested in applications where the agent has
information about the dynamics of the task to achieve, but
lacks information about the precise goal, or preferences, of
the user. In the case of a GPS, this corresponds to the device
having all information about the roads and trafﬁc (dynamics)
and some information about the goal (starting place and destination), but lacking information about whether the driver
wants to, e.g., avoid going though such place, or keep close
to others (like rest areas when driving with young kids). We
refer the reader to Azaria et al. (2016) for more examples.
We assume that the task to be solved is modelled as a
Markov Decision Problem (MDP), thus taking into account
uncertainty in the outcome of actions at execution time. In
that setting, natural solutions are policies rather than plans.
In the GPS example, this means that the device computes a

Related Work
It has long been observed that a drawback of MDPs, as a
framework for modelling sequential decision making tasks,
is that a numerical reward function must be deﬁned, and that
the optimal policies are quite sensitive to its precise values.
A typical setting where this is problematic is in medical decision support, where one would need to give a numerical
cost to the death of a patient, implying possible tradeoffs
with many other being cured of a simple cold, for instance.
The point is that under very reasonable postulates, there is
indeed a numerical reward function which captures exactly

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6319

