The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Spatio-Temporal Graph Convolution for
Skeleton Based Action Recognition
Chaolong Li,∗ Zhen Cui,∗ Wenming Zheng, Chunyan Xu, Jian Yang
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
School of Biological Science & Medical Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
{zhen.cui, cyx, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn; {lichaolong, wenming zheng}@seu.edu.cn

(body part). The statistic model (Xia, Chen, and Aggarwal
2012), shape model (Chaudhry et al. 2013), and geometric
model (Vemulapalli, Arrate, and Chellappa 2014) are often used to characterize the motion trajectories. With the
thriving of representation learning, the learning based methods, such as Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) (Xia, Chen,
and Aggarwal 2012) and recursive models (long-short term
memory, LSTM) (Liu et al. 2016; 2017; Song et al. 2017),
become predominant in the dynamic representation of skeletal joints, because they dedicate more promising results on
those public skeleton datasets.
Recently graph as a tool is used to represent skeletons (Wang et al. 2016a), although graph is popular to model
various structured objects. Nevertheless, the graph based
method (Wang et al. 2016a) still takes the conventional
technique line of graph kernel matching. In fact, in the research ﬁelds of graph classiﬁcation/matching, the graph representation (e.g., the statistic on graphlet (Pržulj 2007)) and
graph metric (e.g., graph kernel (Vishwanathan et al. 2010))
have been historically well-studied. With recent successes
of deep learning on various problems, deep representation
of graphs has aroused more attention (Yanardag and Vishwanathan 2015; Seo et al. 2016; Li et al. 2017). But the most
crucial problem is the deﬁnition/identiﬁcation of homogeneous graphs because the same responses should be produced from those homogeneous graphs. To this end, Niepert
et al. (Niepert, Ahmed, and Kutzkov 2016) used a greedy
strategy of sorting those nodes within a local neighbor region and then performed convolution-like ﬁltering on the
sorted nodes. Instead of this explicit spatial deﬁnition way,
Defferrard et al. (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst
2016) introduced a deep graph method based on spectral
ﬁltering, inspired by the recent signal processing theory on
graph (Shuman et al. 2013). Li et al. (Li et al. 2017) introduced attention mechanism into graph convolution model.
But those methods intrinsically belong to still-graph deep
learning.
For dynamic graphs, some variants of recurrent neural
network (RNN) are developed recently based on the traverse way of spatio-temporal graph. Jain et al. (Jain et al.
2016) proposed a structural-RNN by casting spatio-temporal
graph as a RNN mixture for the task of action prediction.
Li et al. (Li et al. 2015) proposed gated graph sequential
neural network for the basic logical reasoning task. Seo et

Abstract
Variations of human body skeletons may be considered as dynamic graphs, which are generic data representation for numerous real-world applications. In this paper, we propose a
spatio-temporal graph convolution (STGC) approach for assembling the successes of local convolutional ﬁltering and
sequence learning ability of autoregressive moving average.
To encode dynamic graphs, the constructed multi-scale local
graph convolution ﬁlters, consisting of matrices of local receptive ﬁelds and signal mappings, are recursively performed
on structured graph data of temporal and spatial domain. The
proposed model is generic and principled as it can be generalized into other dynamic models. We theoretically prove
the stability of STGC and provide an upper-bound of the
signal transformation to be learnt. Further, the proposed recursive model can be stacked into a multi-layer architecture.
To evaluate our model, we conduct extensive experiments on
four benchmark skeleton-based action datasets, including the
large-scale challenging NTU RGB+D. The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed model
and the improvement over the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Human action recognition is one of the most active research topics due to its wide applications to video surveillance, robot vision, human computer interaction, etc. Since
human body itself can be viewed as an articulated system of rigid bones connected by hinged joints, the actions
of human body are essentially embodied in skeletal motions in the 3D space (Ye et al. 2013). Thereby, various
skeleton based action recognition methods (Liu et al. 2017;
Shahroudy et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2017) are springing up
in recent years, accompanying with the progress of more accessible deep sensors.
Different from grid-shaped structures of images/videos,
human skeleton, consisting of a series of joints and bones,
has an irregular geometric structure. Human action may be
regarded as a consecutive dynamic sequence of such irregular structures. Considering the motion complexity of the
entire body skeleton, the sophisticated strategy is to separately model the trajectory of each joint or clique of joints
∗

Chaolong Li and Zhen Cui have equal contributions.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3482

