The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Joint Learning of Set Cardinality and State Distribution
S. Hamid Rezatoﬁghi,1 Anton Milan,2∗ Qinfeng Shi,1 Anthony Dick,1 Ian Reid1
1

School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Australia
2
Amazon Development Center, Germany
ﬁrstname.lastname@adelaide.edu.au

Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014;
Szegedy et al. 2014; He et al. 2016). The ﬁnal output layer
is a ﬁxed-sized vector with the length corresponding to the
number of categories in the dataset (e.g. 1000 in the case
of the ILSVR Challenge (Russakovsky et al. 2015)). Each
element in this vector is a score or probability for one particular category such that the ﬁnal prediction corresponds
to a probability distribution over all classes. The difﬁculty
arises when the number of classes is unknown in advance
and in particular varies for each example. Then, the ﬁnal
output is generated heuristically by a discretization process
such as choosing the k highest scores (Gong et al. 2013a;
Wang et al. 2016), which is not part of the learning process.
This shortcoming concerns not only image tagging but also
other problems like detection or graph optimization, where
connectivity and graph size can be arbitrary.
We argue that such problems can be naturally expressed
with sets rather than vectors. As opposed to a vector, the
size of a set is not ﬁxed in advance, and it is invariant to the
ordering of entities within it. Therefore, learning approaches
built on conventional statistics cannot be the right choice
for these problems. In this paper, we propose a learning
approach based on point processes and ﬁnite set statistics to
deal with sets in a principled manner. More speciﬁcally, in the
presented model, we assume that the input (the observation)
is still structured, but the output is modelled as a set. Our
approach is inspired by a recent work on set learning using
deep neural networks (Rezatoﬁghi et al. 2017). The main
limitation of that work, however, is that the approach employs
two sets of independent weights (two independent networks)
to generate the cardinality and state distributions of the output
set. In addition, to generate the ﬁnal output as a set, sequential
inference has to be applied instead of joint inference. In this
paper, we derive a principled formulation for performing both
learning and inference steps jointly. The main contribution
of the paper is summarised as follows:

Abstract
We present a novel approach for learning to predict sets using
deep learning. In recent years, deep neural networks have
shown remarkable results in computer vision, natural language
processing and other related problems. Despite their success,
traditional architectures suffer from a serious limitation in that
they are built to deal with structured input and output data,
i.e. vectors or matrices. Many real-world problems, however,
are naturally described as sets, rather than vectors. Existing
techniques that allow for sequential data, such as recurrent
neural networks, typically heavily depend on the input and
output order and do not guarantee a valid solution. Here, we
derive in a principled way, a mathematical formulation for
set prediction where the output is permutation invariant. In
particular, our approach jointly learns both the cardinality
and the state distribution of the target set. We demonstrate
the validity of our method on the task of multi-label image
classiﬁcation and achieve a new state of the art on the PASCAL
VOC and MS COCO datasets.

Introduction
Recently, deep structured networks such as deep convolutional (CNN) and recurrent (RNN) neural networks have
become increasingly popular in artiﬁcial intelligence, showing remarkable performance on many real-world problems,
including scene classiﬁcation (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012), speech recognition (Hinton et al. 2012), gaming (Mnih et al. 2013; 2015), semantic segmentation (Papandreou et al. 2015), and image captioning (Johnson, Karpathy,
and Fei-Fei 2016). However, like most machine learning
techniques, current deep learning approaches are based on
conventional statistics and require the problem to be formulated in a structured way. In particular, they are designed to
learn a model for a distribution (or a function) that maps a
structured input, typically a vector, a matrix, or a tensor, to a
structured output.
Consider the task of image classiﬁcation as an example.
The goal here is to predict a label (or a category) of a given
image. The most successful approaches address this task with
CNNs, i.e. by applying a series of convolutional layers followed by a number of fully connected layers (Krizhevsky,

1. We present a novel way to learn both cardinality and state
distributions jointly within a single deep network. Our
model is learned end-to-end to generate the output set.
2. We perform the inference step both jointly and optimally.
We show how we can generate the most likely (the optimal)
set using MAP inference for our given model.
3. Our approach outperforms existing solutions and achieves

∗

The work was carried out at the University of Adelaide.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3968

