The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Exploiting Emotion on Reviews
for Recommender Systems
1

Xuying Meng,1,2 Suhang Wang,3 Huan Liu,3 Yujun Zhang1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
Computer Science and Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, 85281, USA
{mengxuying, zhmj}@ict.ac.cn, {suhang.wang, huan.liu}@asu.edu
Abstract

Review history is widely used by recommender systems to
infer users’ preferences and help ﬁnd the potential interests
from the huge volumes of data, whereas it also brings in great
concerns on the sparsity and cold-start problems due to its inadequacy. Psychology and sociology research has shown that
emotion information is a strong indicator for users’ preferences. Meanwhile, with the fast development of online services, users are willing to express their emotion on others’
reviews, which makes the emotion information pervasively
available. Besides, recent research shows that the number of
emotion on reviews is always much larger than the number
of reviews. Therefore incorporating emotion on reviews may
help to alleviate the data sparsity and cold-start problems for
recommender systems. In this paper, we provide a principled
and mathematical way to exploit both positive and negative
emotion on reviews, and propose a novel framework MIRROR, exploiting eMotIon on Reviews for RecOmmendeR
systems from both global and local perspectives. Empirical
results on real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of our proposed framework and further experiments are conducted to understand how emotion on reviews works for the
proposed framework.

Figure 1: An example of emotion on reviews.

Recommender systems have become an imperative part to
tackle the information overload problem by suggesting online users with products of potential interests (Wang et
al. 2015; Shu et al. 2018). The majority of existing recommender systems mainly rely on users’ historical ratings
or reviews to conduct recommendation (Koren, Bell, and
Volinsky 2009; Beutel et al. 2017). However, these recommender systems usually suffer from data sparsity and coldstart problems because compared to the great amount of
items, a user only gives ratings to few items especially at
the start. Therefore, online user-generated data, which can
help to infer users’ preferences, has become a key complementary source for recommender systems to alleviate
the data sparsity and cold-start problems (Tang et al. 2016;
Wang et al. 2017c). For example, social recommendation,
which exploits user-user relationships guided by the homophily theory that two friends are more likely to have sim-

ilar preferences, has shown to be effective for recommender
systems (Wang et al. 2016).
In real word, product review websites also provide various ways for users to express their emotion toward other
users’ reviews, which leaves abundant emotion information
that has potential to improve recommendation performance.
For example, Amazon users can indicate their emotion via
commenting and replying posts under others’ reviews; eBay
users can give thumb up or down to express their emotion on reviews; and some commercial platforms like Ciao
and Epinions provide rating mechanisms for emotion expression. In other words, emotion information is pervasively
available. According to the sociologists and psychologists,
users’ emotion is a strong indicator of agreement or disagreement (Dunn and Schweitzer 2005; Bewsell 2012). For
example, positive emotion such as appreciation and satisfaction indicates agreement, negative emotion such as antipathy and anger indicates disagreement (Wang et al. 2017b;
2017a). Therefore, emotion information can be used to infer
a user’s preference towards a product though the user has
not given a rating to the product. For example, in Figure 11 ,
heliamphora43 submitted a review on Mac Monitor with a
rating 4 and a user Tracy gave a thumb up to this review.
From this, we can infer that Tracy’s rating on Mac Monitor
will be close to 4 even if Tracy hasn’t given her own rating. Furthermore, from real world data analysis, we ﬁnd that
the number of emotion on reviews is much larger than the
number of reviews, which means that we have more abundant resource, i.e., emotion information, to help infer users’
potential preferences. Therefore, exploiting emotion on reviews has great potential to help alleviate data sparsity and
cold-start problems and improve the recommendation performance. The majority of existing work mainly focus on

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
https://www.ebay.com/urw/Apple-Cinema-A1083-30Widescreen-LCD-Monitor/product-reviews/82049072

Introduction

3788

