The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

InspireMe: Learning Sequence Models for Stories
Vincent Fortuin

Romann M. Weber

Disney Research Zürich, ETH Zürich
fortuin@inf.ethz.ch

Disney Research Zürich
romann.weber@disneyresearch.com

Sasha Schriber

Diana Wotruba

Markus Gross

Disney Research Zürich

Disney Research Zürich

Disney Research Zürich, ETH Zürich

logical condition in which the writer experiences an inhibition in creativity and lack of new ideas while writing a
story. Although some computational methods have been developed to assist writers in this condition by suggesting what
to write next (Roemmele and Gordon 2015), the use of deep
learning for this purpose has only been proposed but never
successfully tested (Roemmele 2016).
Previous work that constitutes the current state of the art
only regards the very last written sentence as a context for
its suggestion and only suggests whole sentences that already exist in its database of stories (Roemmele and Gordon
2015). Our work improves on this method by conditioning
on the whole written story and sampling the proposed continuations from a learned generative model. It is therefore
able in principle to extract more relevant information from
the input and capable of producing more creative and interesting novel outputs.
The lack of inspiration in writer’s block can often be
caused by a perceived mental restriction to certain ideas and
storylines, which is why common techniques to overcome
the condition include free association methods and brainstorming (Clark 2011). In order to support this process with
a software tool, it is therefore critical to generate suggestions
that are open and vague enough to not increase the feeling of
restriction. We allow for this by not generating whole storylines, but rather only suggesting loose connections between
characters, places and actions. Furthermore, we generate statistical summaries of the existing story in a visual form in
order to facilitate contemplation on the current state of the
work.
Our main contributions are the following:

Abstract
We present a novel approach to modeling stories using recurrent neural networks. Different story features are extracted
using natural language processing techniques and used to encode the stories as sequences. These sequences can be learned
by deep neural networks, in order to predict the next story
events. The predictions can be used as an inspiration for writers who experience a writer’s block. We further assist writers
in their creative process by generating visualizations of the
character interactions in the story. We show that suggestions
from our model are rated as highly as the real scenes from
a set of ﬁlms and that our visualizations can help people in
gaining deeper story understanding.

Introduction
Many avenues in natural language processing (NLP)
have recently beneﬁtted from the application of deep
neural networks (Goldberg 2016). Recurrent neural networks (RNNs), such as long short-term memory networks
(LSTMs) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) have been
especially successful when used to learn language models
(Graves 2013) and have yielded impressive results on generating different styles of text (Karpathy 2015). However,
RNNs have not yet been applied to the speciﬁc ﬁeld of
story generation and narrative artiﬁcial intelligence, where
the main task is not to predict single words or characters but
rather consistent sequences of story scenes or events.
In the ﬁeld of automatic story generation, early approaches have been based on predeﬁned formal rules and
grammars (Klein, Aeschlimann, and Balsiger 1973). Recently there have also been approaches to learning certain
story rules from data in an unsupervised fashion (Chambers and Jurafsky 2009) and learning to generate rule-based
story graphs in certain domains (Li et al. 2013). However,
these systems were always designed to generate stories from
scratch, without regarding potential preexisting story parts.
Moreover, they sample from a highly constrained space of
potential storylines, thereby ensuring consistency in story
logic but arguably restricting creativity.
A common problem in the creative-writing-community is
the so-called writer’s block (Clark 2011). This is a psycho-

• We develop a novel representation for stories, especially
movies, as sequences of encoded events and scenes using
natural language processing techniques.
• We train a neural sequence model on these representations
and generate suggestions for the next scenes, conditioned
on a whole or partially written story, with the results rated
by users as highly as real scenes from actual ﬁlms.
• We visualize character interactions in a novel way in order
to help people gain a deeper story understanding.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7747

