The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Efﬁciently Monitoring Small Data Modiﬁcation Effect
for Large-Scale Learning in Changing Environment
Hiroyuki Hanada,1 Atsushi Shibagaki,1 Jun Sakuma,2 3 4 Ichiro Takeuchi1 4 5
1

Department of Computer Science, Nagoya Institute of Technology, Gokiso-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya, 466-8555, Japan
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, 305-8577, Japan
3
Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST), Japan Science and Technology Agency,
4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi, 332-0012, Japan
4
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, 1-4-1 Nihonbashi, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, 103-0027, Japan
5
Center for Materials Research by Information Integration, National Institute for Materials Science,
1-2-1 Sengen, Tsukuba, 305-0047, Japan
hanada.hiroyuki@nitech.ac.jp, shibagaki.a.mllab.nit@gmail.com, jun@cs.tsukuba.ac.jp, takeuchi.ichiro@nitech.ac.jp
entire dataset. The bounds obtained by the proposed method
can be used for various tasks in classiﬁcation problems.
Concretely, consider a linear binary classiﬁcation problem
with n instances and d features, and write the data matrix as
X ∈ Rn×d . Denoting the set of modiﬁed elements in X as
M, we are particularly interested in the situation in which
only a small part of X is modiﬁed, i.e., |M| is much smaller
than nd. Let w∗old ∈ Rd and w∗new ∈ Rd be the linear model parameters of the old and the new classiﬁers, respectively. The main contribution in this paper is to develop
a method called optimal solution bounding (OSB) method,
which can efﬁciently compute a lower bound L[wj∗new ] and
an upper bound U [wj∗new ] of unknown wj∗new such that

Abstract
We study large-scale machine learning problems in changing
environments where a small part of the dataset is modiﬁed,
and the effect of the data modiﬁcation must be monitored in
order to know how much the modiﬁcation changes the optimal model. When the entire dataset is large, even if the
amount of the data modiﬁcation is fairly small, the computational cost for re-training the model would be prohibitively
large. In this paper, we propose a novel method, called the
optimal solution bounding (OSB), for monitoring such a data
modiﬁcation effect on the optimal model by efﬁciently evaluating (without actually re-training) it. The proposed method
provides bounds on the unknown optimal model with the cost
proportional only to the size of the data modiﬁcation.

L[wj∗new ] ≤ wj∗new ≤ U [wj∗new ] for each j ∈ [d]

1
1.1

∗new

Introduction

(1)

rather than computing exact w
, in the cost proportional
only to the number of modiﬁed elements |M|. This is much
smaller than the cost of computing exact wj∗new , which requires at least O(nd) time since we need to go through the
entire data matrix X at least once.
Figure 1 illustrates the motivation of this study as well as
three scenarios of data modiﬁcations considered in this paper. Let us consider a database whose values are frequently
updated by users, for example, a database for evaluating
movies by users (e.g., MovieLens dataset (Harper and Konstan 2015)). Let us regard users as instances, movies as features, and the values in X as evaluations for movies by users.
In the ﬁgure, scenario (a) illustrates a situation in which
users newly evaluated movies, i.e., the values in X are modiﬁed (spot modiﬁcations). Scenario (b) illustrates a situation
in which a user joined the service, i.e., the values in the row
in X representing the user are modiﬁed (instance modiﬁcation). Scenario (c) illustrates a situation in which a new
movie is released, i.e., the values in the column representing
the movie are modiﬁed (feature modiﬁcation).
In these scenarios, it is impractical to update the classiﬁer every time there is a modiﬁcation in X. Therefore, it is
important to identify the degree to which the data modiﬁcation can change the classiﬁer without actually re-training it.
Figure 2 illustrates the problem setup and the difference between conventional incremental learning approach and the

Problem Overview

In this paper we study the problem of training a classiﬁer
such as support vector machine (SVM) with a large-scale
dataset. When a trained classiﬁer is used in a changing environment where small part of the dataset is constantly modiﬁed, we need to update the classiﬁer accordingly in order to incorporate the effect of the data modiﬁcation. However, when the entire dataset is large, even if the amount of
the data modiﬁcation is fairly small, the computational cost
of re-training the classiﬁer, e.g. by an incremental learning
method, would be prohibitively large.
In this paper, we propose a novel method for efﬁciently
evaluating the effect of the data modiﬁcation on the classiﬁer without actually re-training it. In this paper, for a class
of problems training binary classiﬁers such as SVM, we propose a novel method for efﬁciently evaluating the effect of
the data modiﬁcation on the optimal model (e.g. classiﬁer)
without actually re-training it. The proposed method provides bounds on the new classiﬁer with the cost proportional only to the size of the data modiﬁcation. This computational advantage is particularly beneﬁcial when the size
of the data modiﬁcation is much smaller than the size of the
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1314

