The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Voting-Based System for Ethical Decision Making
Ritesh Noothigattu

Snehalkumar ‘Neil’ S. Gaikwad

Machine Learning Dept.
Carnegie Mellon University

Edmond Awad

The Media Lab
The Media Lab
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Sohan Dsouza

Iyad Rahwan

Pradeep Ravikumar

Ariel D. Procaccia

The Media Lab
MIT

The Media Lab
MIT

Machine Learning Dept.
CMU

Computer Science Dept.
CMU

We submit that decision making can, in fact, be automated, even in the absence of such ground-truth principles,
by aggregating people’s opinions on ethical dilemmas. This
view is foreshadowed by recent position papers by Greene
et al. (2016) and Conitzer et al. (2017), who suggest that
the ﬁeld of computational social choice (Brandt et al. 2016),
which deals with algorithms for aggregating individual preferences towards collective decisions, may provide tools for
ethical decision making. In particular, Conitzer et al. raise
the possibility of “letting our models of multiple people’s
moral values vote over the relevant alternatives.”
We take these ideas a step further by proposing and implementing a concrete approach for ethical decision making
based on computational social choice, which, we believe, is
quite practical. In addition to serving as a foundation for incorporating future ground-truth ethical and legal principles,
it could even provide crucial preliminary guidance on some
of the questions faced by ethicists. Our approach consists of
four steps:

Abstract
We present a general approach to automating ethical decisions, drawing on machine learning and computational social
choice. In a nutshell, we propose to learn a model of societal
preferences, and, when faced with a speciﬁc ethical dilemma
at runtime, efﬁciently aggregate those preferences to identify
a desirable choice. We provide a concrete algorithm that instantiates our approach; some of its crucial steps are informed
by a new theory of swap-dominance efﬁcient voting rules. Finally, we implement and evaluate a system for ethical decision making in the autonomous vehicle domain, using preference data collected from 1.3 million people through the Moral
Machine website.

1

Introduction

The problem of ethical decision making, which has long
been a grand challenge for AI (Wallach and Allen 2008),
has recently caught the public imagination. Perhaps its bestknown manifestation is a modern variant of the classic trolley problem (Jarvis Thomson 1985): An autonomous vehicle
has a brake failure, leading to an accident with inevitably
tragic consequences; due to the vehicle’s superior perception and computation capabilities, it can make an informed
decision. Should it stay its course and hit a wall, killing its
three passengers, one of whom is a young girl? Or swerve
and kill a male athlete and his dog, who are crossing the
street on a red light? A notable paper by Bonnefon, Shariff,
and Rahwan (2016) has shed some light on how people address such questions, and even former US President Barack
Obama has weighed in.1
Arguably the main obstacle to automating ethical decisions is the lack of a formal speciﬁcation of ground-truth
ethical principles, which have been the subject of debate
for centuries among ethicists and moral philosophers (Rawls
1971; Williams 1986). In their work on fairness in machine
learning, Dwork et al. (2012) concede that, when groundtruth ethical principles are not available, we must use an “approximation as agreed upon by society.” But how can society
agree on the ground truth — or an approximation thereof —
when even ethicists cannot?
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.wired.com/2016/10/president-obama-mit-joi-itointerview/

I Data collection: Ask human voters to compare pairs of alternatives (say a few dozen per voter). In the autonomous
vehicle domain, an alternative is determined by a vector
of features such as the number of victims and their gender,
age, health — even species!
II Learning: Use the pairwise comparisons to learn a model
of the preferences of each voter over all possible alternatives.
III Summarization: Combine the individual models into a
single model, which approximately captures the collective preferences of all voters over all possible alternatives.
IV Aggregation: At runtime, when encountering an ethical
dilemma involving a speciﬁc subset of alternatives, use
the summary model to deduce the preferences of all voters over this particular subset, and apply a voting rule to
aggregate these preferences into a collective decision. In
the autonomous vehicle domain, the selected alternative
is the outcome that society (as represented by the voters
whose preferences were elicited in Step I) views as the
least catastrophic among the grim options the vehicle currently faces. Note that this step is only applied when all
other options have been exhausted, i.e., all technical ways
of avoiding the dilemma in the ﬁrst place have failed, and

1587

