The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Investigating the Role of Ensemble Learning in High-Value Wine Identiﬁcation
Luigi Portinale

Monica Locatelli

Computer Science Institute, DiSIT
Università del Piemonte Orientale
Alessandria, Italy

Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Università del Piemonte Orientale
Novara, Italy

systems or QR codes only partially address the problem
of wine authenticity. For these reasons, several attempts
have been performed, in order to exploit standard analytical chemistry procedures to describe a wine proof-ofidentity (Arvanitoyannis et al. 1999; Versari et al. 2014;
Marini et al. 2006). Recently, also machine learning techniques have gained attention, due to the fact that classiﬁcation methodologies can be applied to learn models from
samples described through features derived and measured by
means of standard chemical analyses (Acevedo et al. 2013;
Gòmez-Meire et al. 2014).
In a previous work, we discussed how well-established
state-of-the-art supervised machine learning methods can
be suitably adopted to fullﬁll the task of controlling speciﬁc wine adulterations (Arlorio et al. 2015). In particular, we referred to the framework of the TRAQUAS WINE
(TRAceability, QUAlity and Safety of wine) project1 , having as a major goal the authenticity assessment and the protection against fake versions of some of the highest quality (and often top priced) nebbiolo-based Italian wines like
Barolo, Barbaresco and Gattinara. We evaluated the application of several classiﬁers to this task, by considering different datasets. The interpretation of the results suggests an
effective role of classiﬁcation techniques, based on standard
chemical proﬁling, with the emergence of three main models: a Bayesian Network Classiﬁer (BNC), a Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) and a kernel-based classiﬁer, based on the
Sequential Minimal Optimization algorithm (SMO). Given
the results obtained using the above “base” learners, a natural question arising is whether the introduction of an ensemble learning approach could increase the performance
of such base learners, and to provide better results for the
target application. In the present paper, we will discuss the
results of such an introduction. All the reported experiments
have been performed by using the W EKA tool (Hall et al.
2009).

Abstract
We tackle the problem of authenticating high value Italian
wines through machine learning classiﬁcation. The problem
is a seriuos one, since protection of high quality wines from
forgeries is worth several million of Euros each year. In a
previous work we have identiﬁed some base models (in particular classiﬁers based on Bayesian network (BNC), multilayer perceptron (MLP) and sequential minimal optimization
(SMO)) that well behave using unexpensive chemical analyses of the interested wines. In the present paper, we investigate the role of esemble learning in the construction of
more robust classiﬁers; results suggest that, while bagging
and boosting may signiﬁcantly improve both BNC and MLP,
the SMO model is already very robust and efﬁcient as a base
learner. We report on results concerning both cross validation
on two different datasets, as well as experiments with models
trained with the above datasets and tested with a dataset of potentially fake wines; this has been synthesized from a generative probabilistic model learned from real samples and expert
knowledge. Results open new opportunities in the wine fraud
detection activity, which is of primary importance in the ﬁgth
against the destabilization of the wine market worldwide.

Introduction
The quality and safety proﬁles of ﬁne wines represent a
speciﬁc case of the notion of food integrity, because of the
very high value of a single bottle, and because of the complex chemical proﬁle, requiring speciﬁc and robust methods for their univocal authentication. Although speciﬁc regulations exist in this matter, quality wines are highly subjected to adulteration. This triggers destabilization of the
wine market, with an estimated impact of about 7% of the
whole market value, and causing an economical impact estimated to be several million of Euros (Holmberg 2010;
Wajsman, Burgos, and Davies 2016). The detection of adulterations is an ofﬁcial task of wine quality control and
consumer protection. Specialized analytical methods, based
on nuclear magnetic resonance or isotope ratio mass spectrometry exist. However, they are both time consuming
and very expensive to undertake; moreover, these methods require high level of specialization and very large data
sets. Non analytical approaches like olograms, trasponder

Datasets Production
We collected wine samples (commercial wines) from nine
different wineries in Piedmont, Italy with certiﬁed wine’s
1

Funded by the European Union, Italian Economy and Finance Ministry, and Regione Piemonte (POR685 FESR 2007/2013
grants).

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7799

