The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Discovering and Distinguishing Multiple Visual Senses for Polysemous Words
Yazhou Yao,†,‡ Jian Zhang,† Fumin Shen,§,♦∗ Wankou Yang, Pu Huang, Zhenmin Tang‡
†

University of Technology Sydney, Australia, ‡ Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
§
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,  Southeast University, China

Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China, ♦ Tencent AI Lab, China

Abstract
To reduce the dependence on labeled data, there have been increasing research efforts on learning visual classiﬁers by exploiting web images. One issue that limits their performance
is the problem of polysemy. To solve this problem, in this
work, we present a novel framework that solves the problem
of polysemy by allowing sense-speciﬁc diversity in search results. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst discover a list of possible semantic
senses to retrieve sense-speciﬁc images. Then we merge visual similar semantic senses and prune noises by using the retrieved images. Finally, we train a visual classiﬁer for each selected semantic sense and use the learned sense-speciﬁc classiﬁers to distinguish multiple visual senses. Extensive experiments on classifying images into sense-speciﬁc categories
and re-ranking search results demonstrate the superiority of
our proposed approach.

Figure 1: Visual polysemy. For example, the query “mouse”
returns multiple visual senses on the ﬁrst page of results.
The retrieved web images suffer from the low precision of
any particular visual sense.

Introduction
In the past few years, labeled images have played a critical role in high-level image understanding (Guo et al. 2017;
Shen et al. 2017). For example, ImageNet (Deng et al.
2009) has acted as one of the most important factors in the
recent advance of developing and deploying visual representation learning models (e.g., deep CNN). However, the
process of constructing ImageNet is both time-consuming
and labour-intensive. To reduce the cost of manual annotation, learning directly from the web images has attracted broad attention (Schroff et al. 2011; Yao et al. 2016;
2017; Guo et al. 2017). Compared to manual-labelled image
datasets, web images are a rich and free resource.
For arbitrary categories, the potential training data can be
easily obtained from the image search engines like Google
or Bing. Unfortunately, due to the error index of image
search engine, the precision of the returned images from
image search engine is still unsatisfactory. For example,
method (Schroff et al. 2011) reports the average precision
of the top 1000 images from Google Image Search engine
is only 32%. One of the most important reasons for the
noisy results is the inherent ambiguity in the user query. As
shown in Fig. 1, when we submit the query “mouse” into the

Google Image Search engine, the returned results can refer
to the animal “mouse”, or the electronic product “mouse”.
Visual polysemy means that a word has several semantic senses that are visually distinct. The traditional way to
handle polysemy is to leverage the expert knowledge WordNet (Miller et al. 1995) or Wikipedia (Mihalcea et al. 2007).
These human-developed knowledge suffer from the problem
of missing information (Prakash et al. 2007). For example,
WordNet has a large coverage of NOUN category, it contains
very few entities (e.g., organizations, locations). Wikipedia
can help to bridge this gap, but a great deal of information
is still missing (Chen et al. 2015). What’s more, both of the
WordNet and Wikipedia have no information about the visual senses and still need manual annotation to bridge the
semantic and visual senses.
Since the semantic and visual senses of a given query
are highly related, recent works also concentrated on jointly
clustering text and images (Loeff et al. 2006; Wan et al.
2009; Saenko et al. 2009). Most of these methods assume
that there exists a one-to-one mapping between semantic and
visual sense towards to the given query. This assumption is
not always true in the practice. To deal with the multiple
visual senses, Chen et al.(Chen et al. 2015) adopt a oneto-many mapping between semantic and visual spaces. This

∗

Corresponding author: Fumin Shen
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

523

