The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Direct Hashing without Pseudo-Labels
Feng Zheng, Heng Huang∗
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh
3700 O’Hara Street, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 15261
{feng.zheng, heng.huang}@pitt.edu

when the length of codes is large and, in practice, some relaxation tricks are inevitably needed. Moreover, the originally preserved properties are likely to be ruined after the
two separated steps of relaxation and approximation, since
the codes were learned without knowledge of functions. Secondly, to improve the two-step hashing, several works (Gong
et al. 2013b) consider to optimize the codes and the functions, alternatively. In fact, beside the NP hard problem, iterative optimization between codes and functions is computationally expensive. More importantly, once the model generates a bad results in one step, then the effect of decreasing
would be ampliﬁed in another step, due to the second optimum is the one which ﬁts the ﬁrst results mostly. Thirdly,
some constraints, such as hinge loss (Rastegari et al. 2013),
are introduced to learn functions to avoid that F (x) is close
to zero, when F (x) is directly used. However, the hinge loss
needs that the codes should be given in advance and thus, an
alternative optimization is also required.
In addition to the above essential problems, a common inferior trait is that, before learning the hash function, the certain binary codes H(x) need to be given in advance. Then,
learning hash functions could be considered as training a set
of binary classiﬁers, which regard H(x) as the ground-truth
label. However, the tasks of hashing and classiﬁcation are
fundamental different and the codes between them have varied practical signiﬁcance as well. Roughly speaking, the loss
in classiﬁcation is used to measure the difference between
F (x) and a ﬁxed label (one of them 1 or −1) but the loss
in hashing only needs to measure the difference between
F (x) and either of them (1 or −1). For example, to improve
the measurement consistency, F (x) in hashing could freely
jump from −1 to 1 and vice versa, whilst for classiﬁcation,
it will make a big classiﬁcation loss.
Can we learn a set of hash functions as training classiﬁers for classiﬁcation but without introducing the surrogate ground-truth labels? The answer is deﬁnitely yes. In
this paper, we propose a novel general framework to directly learn a set of hash functions without the ground-truth
labels, which can minimize the quantization loss and the
measurement distortion, simultaneously. More signiﬁcantly,
a new W-Shape Loss (WSL) function is developed so that
the quantization loss between F (x) and the binary codes
could be directly minimized and the most important feature of W-shape loss having the two equal minimums at 1

Abstract
Recently, binary hashing has been widely applied to data
compression, ranking and nearest-neighbor search. Although
some promising results have been achieved, effectively optimizing sign function related objectives is still highly challenging and thus pseudo-labels are inevitably used. In this
paper, we propose a novel general framework to simultaneously minimize the measurement distortion and the quantization loss, which enable to learn hash functions directly without requiring the pseudo-labels. More signiﬁcantly, a novel
W-Shape Loss (WSL) is speciﬁcally developed for hashing
so that both the two separate steps of relaxation and the NPhard discrete optimization are successfully discarded. The experimental results demonstrate that the retrieval performance
both in uni-modal and cross-modal settings can be improved.

Introduction
Actually, almost all existing methods of binary embedding
(hashing) choose H(x) = sign(F (x)) ∈ {1, −1}K as the
hash function to binarize samples x ∈ X, where F captures
some speciﬁc properties, X is a sample set and K is the
length of codes. Generally, a minimization problem to keep
the measurement consistency of relationships between the
original and learned Hamming spaces can be written as:
H ∗ = arg min R(H, X),
H

(1)


where R(H, X) = i,j M(S(H(xi ), H(xj )), S(xi , xj )).
S describes the relationships between any pair of samples
in the corresponding space and M is used to measure the
difference between the two measurements of relationship.
However, the immediate challenging is how to optimize
sign related ideal objective functions, because the step function sign is non-differentiable at 0 in the ordinary sense.
To overcome the problems induced by sign function, recently, three strategies are normally used. Firstly, the discrete codes H(x) can be obtained from the objective by discrete optimization and, then, the best hash functions would
be the ones approach to these codes mostly (Lin et al. 2013).
Nevertheless, discrete optimization is an NP hard problem
∗

To whom all correspondence should be addressed.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4539

