The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Transferring Decomposed Tensors for
Scalable Energy Breakdown across Regions
Nipun Batra, Yiling Jia, Hongning Wang, Kamin Whitehouse
University of Virginia

In contrast, since the 1980s a novel technique called nonintrusive load monitoring (NILM) has been proposed, which
uses statistical techniques to break down the energy measured at the home meter level (Hart 1992). However, even
NILM would require installing a sensor (such as a smart
meter) and would thus cost up to $500 per home, limiting
the scalability. Recently, there have been works (Batra et al.
2017; Batra, Singh, and Whitehouse 2016) on providing an
energy breakdown without any hardware installation. These
approaches can provide an energy breakdown just using the
monthly electricity bills and a few homes in the region which
already have an energy breakdown. The approaches promise
considerable improvement in scalability, but they impose
strong assumptions about the problem: the training homes
are similar to the testing homes (i.e., all homes are identical
and independently distributed). As the set of training homes
grows and begins to span multiple climate zones and varied
homes (old v/s new, well v/s poorly insulated, studio v/s 3
BHK, etc.), the error will inevitably increase.
In this paper, we present a novel region independent energy
breakdown method. Our key insight is that the heterogeneity in homes and weather across different regions most signiﬁcantly impacts the energy consumption across regions;
and if we can factor out the weather and homes, we can
learn region independent models or the homogeneous energy
breakdown components for the appliances. As previously
shown (Batra et al. 2017; Batra, Singh, and Whitehouse
2017), the heterogeneity across homes (e.g., well-insulated
v/s poorly insulated homes) can be captured using a low dimension representation. Intuitively, homes form clusters in
this low dimension space. Similarly, the energy dependence
of different appliances concerning weather (e.g., the cooling
load may be directly proportional to temperature, fridge energy may be season independent, etc.) can also be encoded
using a low-dimensional representation. Once we account
for the heterogeneity, we can learn homogeneous or regionindependent factors about the appliances, which capture the
interaction between homes and weather. An example of such
a factor would be the direct relationship of cooling on home
insulation and external temperature. Another example could
be the weak relation between fridge energy and home insulation and external temperature.
Our approach thus boils down to learning the heterogeneous home and season/weather factors, referred to as H

Abstract
Homes constitute roughly one-third of the total energy usage
worldwide. Providing an energy breakdown – energy consumption per appliance, can help save up to 15% energy.
Given the vast differences in energy consumption patterns
across different regions, existing energy breakdown solutions
require instrumentation and model training for each geographical region, which is prohibitively expensive and limits the scalability. In this paper, we propose a novel region
independent energy breakdown model via statistical transfer
learning. Our key intuition is that the heterogeneity in homes
and weather across different regions most signiﬁcantly impacts the energy consumption across regions; and if we can
factor out such heterogeneity, we can learn region independent models or the homogeneous energy breakdown components for each individual appliance. Thus, the model learnt
in one region can be transferred to another region. We evaluate our approach on two U.S. cities having distinct weather
from a publicly available dataset. We ﬁnd that our approach
gives better energy breakdown estimates requiring the least
amount of instrumented homes from the target region, when
compared to the state-of-the-art.

Introduction
Homes account for roughly one-third of the total energy
consumption worldwide (Pérez-Lombard, Ortiz, and Pout
2008). Previous research has demonstrated that providing an
energy breakdown: itemising total energy into individual appliances, such as lighting, heating, etc., can help occupants
save up to 15% energy (Darby 2006; Armel et al. 2013). Previous research has also discussed various other beneﬁts of
energy breakdown, such as load forecasting, understanding
appliance usage for improved design, policy making, among
others (Armel et al. 2013; Batra, Singh, and Whitehouse
2015).
Various methods for providing an energy breakdown have
been studied. The most intuitive way to get an energy breakdown involves instrumenting each appliance with a sensor.
Various sensing systems have been proposed in the past (DeBruin et al. 2015; Jiang et al. 2009). However, these sensing systems require extensive installation and are thus prohibitively expensive to scale across a large number of homes.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

740

