The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Statistical Inference Using SGD
Tianyang Li

Liu Liu

The University of Texas at Austin
lty@cs.utexas.edu

The University of Texas at Austin
liuliu@utexas.edu

Anastasios Kyrillidis

Constantine Caramanis

IBM T.J. Watson Research Center,
Yorktown Heights
anastasios.kyrillidis@ibm.com

The University of Texas at Austin
constantine@utexas.edu

is well-established that ﬁxed step-size SGD is by and large
the dominant method used for large scale data analysis. We
prove, and also demonstrate empirically, that the average of
SGD sequences, obtained by minimizing RFs, can also be
used for statistical inference. Unlike the Bootstrap, our approach does not require creating many large-size subsamples
from the data, neither re-running SGD from scratch for each
of these subsamples. Our method only uses ﬁrst order information from gradient computations, and does not require
any second order information. Both of these are important
for large scale problems, where re-sampling many times, or
computing Hessians, may be computationally prohibitive.

Abstract
We present a novel method for frequentist statistical inference
in M -estimation problems, based on stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with a ﬁxed step size: we demonstrate that the
average of such SGD sequences can be used for statistical inference, after proper scaling. An intuitive analysis using the
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process suggests that such averages are
asymptotically normal. To show the merits of our scheme, we
apply it to both synthetic and real data sets, and demonstrate
that its accuracy is comparable to classical statistical methods, while requiring potentially far less computation.

1

Introduction
Outline and main contributions: This paper studies and
analyzes a simple, ﬁxed step size1 , SGD-based algorithm
for inference in M -estimation problems. Our algorithm produces samples, whose covariance converges to the covariance of the M -estimate, without relying on bootstrap-based
schemes, and also avoiding direct and costly computation of
second order information. Much work has been done on the
asymptotic normality of SGD, as well as on the Stochastic
Gradient Langevin Dynamics (and variants) in the Bayesian
setting. As we discuss in detail in Section 4, this is the ﬁrst
work to provide ﬁnite sample inference results, using ﬁxed
step size, and without imposing overly restrictive assumptions on the convergence of ﬁxed step size SGD.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In
the next section, we deﬁne the inference problem for M estimation, and recall basic results of asymptotic normality
and how these are used. Section 3 is the main body of the
paper: we provide the algorithm for creating bootstrap-like
samples, and also provide the main theorem of this work. As
the details are involved, we provide an intuitive analysis of
our algorithm and explanation of our main results, using an
asymptotic Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process approximation for
the SGD process (Kushner and Huang 1981; Pﬂug 1986;

In M -estimation, the minimization of empirical risk functions (RFs) provides point estimates of the model parameters. Statistical inference then seeks to assess the quality
of these estimates; e.g., by obtaining conﬁdence intervals or
solving hypothesis testing problems. Within this context, a
classical result in statistics states that the asymptotic distribution of the empirical RF’s minimizer is normal, centered
around the population RF’s minimizer (van der Vaart 2000).
Thus, given the mean and covariance of this normal distribution, we can infer a range of values, along with probabilities,
that allows us to quantify the probability that this interval includes the true minimizer.
The Bootstrap (Efron 1982; Efron and Tibshirani 1994)
is a classical tool for obtaining estimates of the mean
and covariance of this distribution. The Bootstrap operates by generating samples from this distribution (usually,
by re-sampling with or without replacement from the entire data set) and repeating the estimation procedure over
these different re-samplings. As parameter dimensionality
and data size grow, the Bootstrap becomes increasingly –
even prohibitively– expensive.
In this context, we follow a different path: we show
that inference can also be accomplished by directly using
stochastic gradient descent (SGD), both for point estimates
and inference, with a ﬁxed step size over the data set. It

1
Fixed step size means we use the same step size every iteration,
but the step size is smaller with more total number of iterations. In
contrast, constant step size means the step size is constant no matter
how many iterations taken.

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3571

