The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Generating Image Captions in Arabic Using Root-Word Based
Recurrent Neural Networks and Deep Neural Networks
Vasu Jindal
University of Texas at Dallas, Texas, USA
vasu.jindal@utdallas.edu

Abstract
Automatic caption generation of an image requires both computer vision and natural language processing techniques. Despite of advanced research in English caption generation, research on generating Arabic descriptions of an image is extremely limited. Semitic languages like Arabic are heavily inﬂuenced by root-words. We leverage this critical dependency
of Arabic and in this paper are the ﬁrst to generate captions
of an image directly in Arabic using root-word based Recurrent Neural Networks and Deep Neural Networks. We report
the ﬁrst BLEU score for direct Arabic caption generation. Experimental results conﬁrm that generating image captions using root-words directly in Arabic signiﬁcantly outperforms
the English-Arabic translated captions using state-of-the-art
methods.

‫ﺑﺳم ﷲ‬
ِ‫ﺑِﺳْمِ ﷲ‬

ِ‫اﻟرﱠ ﺣْ ﻣٰ ن‬

With the increase in number of devices with cameras, there
is a widespread interest in generating automatic captions
from images and videos. Automatic generation of image descriptions is a widely researched problem. It has huge impact in the ﬁelds of information retrieval, accessibility for
the vision impaired, categorization of images etc. Most visual recognition models and approaches in the image caption
generation community are focused on Western languages,
ignoring Semitic and Middle-Eastern languages like Arabic.
This is primarily due to two major reasons: i) Lack of existing image corpora in languages other than English ii) the
signiﬁcant dialects between different forms of Arabic and
the challenges in translating images to natural sounding sentences. Given the high inﬂuence of Arabic in current political settings, it is necessary for a robust approach for Arabic
caption generation.
Semitic languages like Arabic are signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced
by their original root-word. We leverage this critical aspect
of Arabic to formalize a three stage approach to generate
Arabic captions. Our main contribution in this paper is threefold:

‫أﻛﺑر‬

‫ﷲ‬

Figure 1: Overview of Our Approach
• Finally, using dependency tree relations of these obtained
words to check order in sentences in Arabic.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work that
leverage root words to generate captions in Arabic. We also
report the ﬁrst BLEU scores for Arabic caption generation. Additionally, this opens a new ﬁeld of research to use
root-words to generate captions from images in Semitic languages.
Figure 1 gives a brief overview of our approach. In Stage
1, we map image fragments onto root words in Arabic. We
apply the approach (Jia et al. 2014) to detect objects in
every image with a Region Convolutional Neural Network
(RCNN). It should be noted that the output of the convolutional neural network are Arabic root-words. To achieve
this, at any given time when English labels of objects were
used in the training of convolution neural networks, Arabic
root-words of the object were also provided as input in the
training phase. A transducer based algorithm for Arabic root
extraction (Yaseen and Hmeidi 2014) is used to extract rootwords from an Arabic word in the training stage.
In Stage 2, we used root word based Recurrent Neural
Networks with LSTM memory cell to generate the most appropriate words for an image in Modern Standard Arabic

• Mapping of image fragments onto root words in Arabic
rather than actual sentences or words/fragments of sentences as suggested in previously proposed approaches.
• Finding most appropriate words for an image by using a
root-word based Recurrent Neural Networks.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8093

