The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Distant-Supervision of Heterogeneous Multitask Learning
for Social Event Forecasting with Multilingual Indicators
Liang Zhao

Junxiang Wang

Xiaojie Guo

George Mason University
lzhao9@gmu.edu

George Mason University
jwang40@gmu.edu

George Mason University
xguo7@gmu.edu

broadcast their observations and sentiments on a wide range
of topics in many different languages. Although around 50%
of Twitter messages are in English, many other languages are
commonly used for tweets (Hong, Convertino, and Chi 2011).
Even within the same country, Twitter messages may be in
multiple languages. For instance, in Brazil 73% of Twitter
messages are in Portuguese, 15% are in English, and 10% are
in Spanish, with the remaining 2% being in other languages.
Tweets in different languages typically represent the voices
of different subgroups of the population, which cannot be
ignored. The collection of these observations and sentiments
could provide a useful window into emerging social trends.

Abstract
Open-source indicators such as social media can be very effective precursors for forecasting future societal events. As events
are often preceded by social indicators generated by groups of
people speaking many different languages, multiple languages
need to be considered to ensure comprehensive event forecasting. However, this leads to several technical challenges for traditional models: 1) high dimension, sparsity, and redundancy
of features; 2) translation correlation among the multilingual
features. and 3) lack of language-wise supervision. In order
to simultaneously address these issues, we present a novel
model capable of distant-supervision of heterogeneous multitask learning (DHML) for multilingual spatial social event
forecasting. This model maps the multilingual heterogeneous
features into several latent semantic spaces and then enforces
a similar sparsity pattern across them all, using distant supervision across all the languages involved. Optimizing this model
creates a difﬁcult problem that is nonconvex and nonsmooth
that can then be decomposed into simpler subproblems using
the Alternative Direction Multiplier of Methods (ADMM).
A novel dynamic programming-based algorithm is proposed
to solve one challenging subproblem efﬁciently. Theoretical
properties of the proposed algorithm are analyzed. The results of extensive experiments on multiple real-world datasets
are presented to demonstrate the effectiveness, efﬁciency, and
interpretability of the proposed approach.

A considerable amount of work has been proposed for
detecting historical or ongoing social events using social
media (Zhang, Yuan, and Han ). In addition, in order to foresee future events, a number of models for event forecasting
have also been developed (Zhao et al. 2016b). Current research on social event forecasting via social media tends
to share essentially similar workﬂows that basically learn
a mapping from the observed semantic content (typically
keyword frequencies) in various languages to the occurrence
of future events using supervised learning techniques such
as sparse learning (Zhao et al. 2015b), deep learning (Zhao
et al. 2015a), or causality learning (Radinsky and Horvitz
2013). Multilingual issues in social media have generally
been considered primarily for retrospective research like sentiment analysis (Bügel and Zielinski 2013; Lo et al. 2016;
Becker, Moreira, and dos Santos 2017) and topic analysis
(Lo, Chiong, and Cornforth 2017; Ren et al. 2016). However,
due to the more challenging problem of predictive modeling,
existing considerations of multilingual issues for social event
forecasting remain few and problematic. For event forecasting, some works (Ramakrishnan et al. 2014) consider only the
dominant language, thus losing substantial signals from the
tweets in other languages. Other works simply merge all the
keyword features from different languages into a single feature set for the model (Zhao et al. 2015b). These approaches
suffer from several challenges. 1) High dimension, sparsity,
and semantic-redundancy of the features. The number of features linearly increases with the number of languages, while
most of the features are zeros because a message is typically in a single language. Moreover, the large feature set
is highly redundant in semantic meaning due to the many
words with same meaning across different languages. 2) Ig-

Introduction
Signiﬁcant social events like disease outbreaks and violent
riots have a tremendous inﬂuence on the society. For instance,
seasonal inﬂuenza alone is estimated to result in around 4
million cases of severe illness and hundreds of thousands of
deaths each year (WHO ). In the Middle East, the majority
of the instabilities arise from extremism, terrorism, and civil
unrest, usually resulting in major social issues with economic
losses in the billions of dollars and creating millions of unemployed people. The motivation for this research is thus
to mitigate these impacts by forecasting their occurrence in
advance, which is now becoming feasible due to the rapid
growth of web 2.0. For example, social media like Twitter
have become popular platforms that serve as real-time “sensors" for social trends and incidents (Ramakrishnan et al.
2014). Every day millions of Twitter users around the globe
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4498

