The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

On Data-Dependent Random Features for
Improved Generalization in Supervised Learning
Shahin Shahrampour, Ahmad Beirami, Vahid Tarokh
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University
Cambridge, MA, 02138 USA

functions used by random Fourier features (Rahimi and Recht
2009) are sampled from a distribution that is independent of
the training set, and hence, a large number of random features
may be needed to learn the data subspace. Therefore, one
can ask whether data-dependent sampling can improve the
prediction accuracy in supervised learning.
Recently, (Sinha and Duchi 2016) proposed a datadependent sampling scheme using an optimization perspective that can reduce the number of random features needed for
effective learning. The generalization performance of their
method, however, relies on the regularization parameter of
the optimization problem, which requires an extra level of
tuning (e.g., using cross-validation).
In this paper, within the framework of supervised learning, we develop a data-dependent sampling method, called
Energy-based Exploration of Random Features (EERF), with
the goal of better generalizability. Our algorithm operates
based on a score function that is deﬁned with respect to (a
subsample of) the training samples. The algorithm explores
the domain of random features, evaluates the score function
in different regions, and outputs the promising random features for generalization. We prove that the score function
mimics the spectrum of the best ﬁt within the model class
with high probability. We further apply our results to practical datasets, where we observe that our algorithm learns the
subspace faster than the state-of-the-art as a function of the
number of random features. Notably, our algorithm does not
require additional parameter tuning.
Related literature on random features: Some previous
works on random features have focused on kernel approximation as well as prediction in a supervised manner. It has
been shown that a wide variety of kernels can be approximated efﬁciently using random features. Examples include
shift-invariant kernels using Monte Carlo (Rahimi and Recht
2007) and Quasi Monte Carlo (Yang et al. 2014a) sampling,
polynomial kernels (Kar and Karnick 2012), additive kernels
(Vedaldi and Zisserman 2012), and many more. In particular,
Gaussian kernel has received considerable attention (see e.g.
(Felix et al. 2016) for a recent study on efﬁcient Gaussian kernel approximation), and the error of random Fourier features
has been analyzed in the context of kernel approximation
(Sutherland and Schneider 2015). Additionally, the generalization property of the randomized-feature approach has
been theoretically studied from the statistical learning theory

Abstract
The randomized-feature approach has been successfully employed in large-scale kernel approximation and supervised
learning. The distribution from which the random features
are drawn impacts the number of features required to efﬁciently perform a learning task. Recently, it has been shown
that employing data-dependent randomization improves the
performance in terms of the required number of random features. In this paper, we are concerned with the randomizedfeature approach in supervised learning for good generalizability. We propose the Energy-based Exploration of Random
Features (EERF) algorithm based on a data-dependent score
function that explores the set of possible features and exploits
the promising regions. We prove that the proposed score function with high probability recovers the spectrum of the best ﬁt
within the model class. Our empirical results on several benchmark datasets further verify that our method requires smaller
number of random features to achieve a certain generalization
error compared to the state-of-the-art while introducing negligible pre-processing overhead. EERF can be implemented in a
few lines of code and requires no additional tuning parameters.

Introduction
At the heart of many machine learning problems, kernel methods (such as Support Vector Machine (SVM) (Cristianini and
Shawe-Taylor 2000)) describe the nonlinear representation
of data via mapping the features to a high-dimensional feature space. Even without access to the explicit form of the
feature maps, one can still compute their inner products inexpensively using a kernel function, an idea known as the
“kernel trick”. However, unfortunately, methods using kernel
matrices are not applicable to large-scale machine learning
as they incur a prohibitive computational cost scaling at least
quadratically with data. This observation motivated (Rahimi
and Recht 2007) to consider kernel approximation using random features, and extend the idea to train shallow architectures (Rahimi and Recht 2009). Replacing the optimization
of nonlinearities by randomization, randomized shallow networks efﬁciently approximate the function describing the
input-output relationship via random features. Nevertheless,
a natural concern is the stochastic oracle from which the features are sampled. As noted in (Yang et al. 2012), the basis
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4026

