The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Interpretable Graph-Based
Semi-Supervised Learning via Flows
Raif M. Rustamov, James T. Klosowski
AT&T Labs Research

the prediction process would require visualizing the underlying graph, which becomes too complex for even moderately
sized graphs. Second, we do not have the luxury of trading
prediction accuracy for interpretability: HF/LR have been
superseded by newer methods and we cannot afford falling
too far behind the current state of the art in terms of the
prediction accuracy. Finally, HF and LR possess useful properties such as linearity and maximum principle that are worth
preserving.
In this paper, we introduce a novel ﬂow-based semisupervised learning framework that subsumes HF and LR
as special cases, and overcomes all of these challenges. The
key idea is to set up a ﬂow optimization problem for each
unlabeled node, whereby the ﬂow sources are the labeled
nodes, and there is a single ﬂow destination—the unlabeled
node under consideration. The source nodes can produce as
much out-ﬂow as needed; the destination node requires a
unit in-ﬂow. Under these constraints, the ﬂow optimizing a
certain objective is computed, and the amount of ﬂow drawn
from each of the labeled nodes gives the prediction weights.
The objective function contains an 1 -norm like term, whose
strength allows controlling the sparsity of the ﬂow and, as a
result, its spread over the graph. When this term is dropped,
we prove that this scheme can be made equivalent to either
the HF or LR method.
This approach was chosen for several reasons. First, the
language of ﬂows provides a detailed, transparent, and easily understood expression of the learning process which facilitates accountability and trust. Second, the sparsity term
results in ﬂows that concentrate on smaller subgraphs; additionally, the ﬂows induce directionality on these subgraphs.
Smaller size and directedness allow using more intuitive
graph layouts (Gansner and North 2000). As a result, one
can visualize and interactively explore the precise subgraph
along which the information from labeled nodes ﬂows to
an unlabeled node of interest. Third, the sparsity term injects locality into prediction weights, which helps to avoid
ﬂat, unstable solutions observed with pure HF/LR in highdimensional settings (Nadler, Srebro, and Zhou 2009). Thus,
not only do we avoid trading accuracy for interpretability, but
in fact we gain in terms of the prediction accuracy. Fourth, by
construction, the ﬂow-based framework is linear and results
in solutions that obey the maximum principle, guaranteeing
that the predicted values will stay within the range of the

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the interpretability of the foundational Laplacian-based semi-supervised learning approaches
on graphs. We introduce a novel ﬂow-based learning framework that subsumes the foundational approaches and additionally provides a detailed, transparent, and easily understood
expression of the learning process in terms of graph ﬂows.
As a result, one can visualize and interactively explore the
precise subgraph along which the information from labeled
nodes ﬂows to an unlabeled node of interest. Surprisingly, the
proposed framework avoids trading accuracy for interpretability, but in fact leads to improved prediction accuracy, which
is supported both by theoretical considerations and empirical
results. The ﬂow-based framework guarantees the maximum
principle by construction and can handle directed graphs in an
out-of-the-box manner.

1

Introduction

Classiﬁcation and regression problems on networks and
data clouds can often beneﬁt from leveraging the underlying connectivity structure. One way of taking advantage of
connectivity is provided by graph-based semi-supervised
learning approaches, whereby the labels, or values, known
on a subset of nodes, are propagated to the rest of the
graph. Laplacian-based approaches such as Harmonic Functions (Zhu, Ghahramani, and Lafferty 2003) and Laplacian
Regularization (Belkin, Niyogi, and Sindhwani 2006) epitomize this class of methods. Although a variety of improvements and extensions have been proposed (Zhu 2008;
Belkin, Niyogi, and Sindhwani 2006; Zhou and Belkin 2011;
Wu et al. 2012; Solomon et al. 2014), the interpretability of
these learning algorithms has not received much attention
and remains limited to the analysis of the obtained prediction weights. In order to promote accountability and trust,
it is desirable to have a more transparent representation of
the prediction process that can be visualized, interactively
examined, and thoroughly understood.
Despite the label propagation intuition behind these algorithms, devising interpretable versions of Harmonic Functions (HF) or Laplacian Regularization (LR) is challenging
for a number of reasons. First, since these algorithms operate
on graphs in a global manner, any interactive examination of
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3976

