The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Bayesian Optimization Meets Search Based Optimization:
A Hybrid Approach for Multi-Fidelity Optimization
Ellis Hoag

Janardhan Rao Doppa

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801

Washington State University
Pullman, WA 99163

SO methods partition the domain into hyper-rectangles called
nodes that are evaluated at their centers. The algorithm decides which nodes contain promising regions and divides
them into smaller nodes. The LOGO algorithm is an excellent example of SO (Kawaguchi, Maruyama, and Zheng
2016). These two families of algorithms can be combined
into a Single-ﬁdelity Hybrid (SF-Hybrid) algorithm which
has the same structure as a SO framework but employs a GP
to prevent querying unfavorable regions. One such example
is BaMSOO, which yields better regrets than both BO and
SO (Wang et al. 2014).
Multi-ﬁdelity BO (MF-BO) extends BO by using lowﬁdelity approximations of f to efﬁciently gain information
(Kandasamy et al. 2016). It maintains a GP for each ﬁdelity
to effectively use lower ﬁdelities to gain information in regions that may be unfavorable and use high ﬁdelities for more
promising regions. MF-BO relies heavily on GPs which may
perform poorly if the user makes invalid assumptions about
f , e.g., the user chooses a bad kernel.
We develop a novel Multi-ﬁdelity Hybrid (MF-Hybrid) algorithm referred as MF-BaMLOGO that combines elements
from MF-BO with SF-Hybrid to create a global optimization algorithm that improves upon both. MF-BaMLOGO
maintains a GP for each ﬁdelity, estimates and updates the
error of different ﬁdelities, and employs the GPs to choose
an appropriate ﬁdelity for a given point; all of which come
from MF-BO. MF-BaMLOGO selects points to query with
the LOGO algorithm, which allows MF-BaMLOGO to be
less dependent on GPs. MF-BaMLOGO was tested against
several other optimization algorithms on diverse benchmark
functions. Our algorithm converges to the optima with lesser
cost than state-of-the-art optimization algorithms.

Abstract
Many real-life problems require optimizing functions with expensive evaluations. Bayesian Optimization (BO) and Searchbased Optimization (SO) are two broad families of algorithms
that try to ﬁnd the global optima of a function with the goal of
minimizing the number of function evaluations. A large body
of existing work deals with the single-ﬁdelity setting, where
function evaluations are very expensive but accurate. However, in many applications, we have access to multiple-ﬁdelity
functions that vary in their cost and accuracy of evaluation. In
this paper, we propose a novel approach called Multi-ﬁdelity
Hybrid (MF-Hybrid) that combines the best attributes of both
BO and SO methods to discover the global optima of a blackbox function with minimal cost. Our experiments on multiple
benchmark functions show that the MF-Hybrid algorithm outperforms existing single-ﬁdelity and multi-ﬁdelity optimization algorithms.

Introduction
We consider the problem of ﬁnding the global optima of a
potentially expensive black-box function, f , without access
to its derivative. Furthermore, we assume the existence of
one or more lower ﬁdelity functions with successively lower
costs but higher errors (e.g., evaluating hyper-parameters of a
learning algorithm using subsets of validation data). Cost in
this context refers to any resource consumed while evaluating
f , e.g., the computational time to evaluate a query. Evaluating
these functions can be very costly in terms of the resources
consumed.
There are two kinds of expensive function optimization
approaches in the literature: 1) Bayesian Optimization (BO)
methods typically employ a Gaussian Process (GP) to gain
information about f . A GP is a statistical model that takes
evaluated points as input and produces a normal distribution for where the function may be at every point in the
domain. Standard BO algorithms employ a GP to select a
point to query that trades off exploitation (selecting the most
promising point) and exploration (selecting a point for information gain) (Shahriari et al. 2016) ; and 2) Search-based
Optimization (SO) is a family of algorithms that simultaneously searches the domain at a local-scale and a global-scale.

Problem Setup
We want to maximize a d dimensional black-box function f :
X → R, where X = [0, 1]d without loss of generality. Let
x∗ = arg maxx∈X f (x) be the true maximum of f . We do
not have access to derivatives of f and we are only allowed to
query f at some x ∈ X. We also have access to M −1 successively lower ﬁdelity functions f = f (M ) , f (M −1) , . . . , f (1) .
Each ﬁdelity has an associated error 0 = (M ) < (M −1) <
· · · < (1) , where |f (M ) − f (i) | = (i) and associated costs
λ(M ) > λ(M −1) > . . . > λ(1) > 0. We deﬁne threshold

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8085

