The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Beyond Link Prediction: Predicting
Hyperlinks in Adjacency Space
Muhan Zhang, Zhicheng Cui, Shali Jiang, Yixin Chen
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis
{muhan, z.cui, jiang.s}@wustl.edu, chen@cse.wustl.edu

metabolic networks, each reaction can be regarded as a hyperlink among its component metabolites. In citation networks, a hyperlink is a paper connecting all its authors. Due
to the ability to model higher-order interactions between objects, hypernetworks have gained more and more popularity in application domains such as electronics (Karypis et
al. 1999), ﬁnance (Bautu et al. 2009), and bioinformatics
(Oyetunde et al. 2016).
Despite the popularity and importance of hypernetworks,
there is still limited research on hyperlink prediction, i.e.,
to predict if a set of nodes is likely to be a hyperlink. One
great challenge lies in the variable cardinality of hyperlinks.
Existing supervised link prediction models are based on a
ﬁxed number of input features (features of the two target
vertices). However, the number of vertices in a hyperlink is
variable, making existing methods infeasible. On the other
hand, link prediction methods based on topological features,
such as common neighbors, cannot be applied to hyperlink
prediction either, since these measures are deﬁned for pairs
of nodes instead of hyperlinks. As we will see in our experiments, a few naive generalizations of these measures have
poor performance.
The variable cardinality problem not only prevents us
from using traditional link prediction techniques, but also
results in much larger inference space for hyperlink prediction. For a network with n vertices, the total number of potential links is only O(n2 ). As a regular procedure in link
prediction, we can list all the potential links and compute a
score for each one. The ones with the highest scores are selected as predicted links. However, in hyperlink prediction,
for the same network, the total number of potential hyperlinks is O(2n ). The exponential number of potential hyperlinks makes it impractical to list all the hyperlinks and give
a score to each one of them.
Fortunately, in most cases we do not need to really consider all the potential hyperlinks, as most of them can be easily ﬁltered out in particular problem settings. For example,
in the task of ﬁnding missing metabolic reactions, we do not
need to consider all 2n possible reactions since most of them
do not contain biological meanings. Instead, we can restrict
the candidate hyperlinks to be the set of all actually feasible
reactions. Also, in some problems, people may be interested
only in hyperlinks with cardinalities less than a small number. For instance, in citation networks of computer science,

Abstract
This paper addresses the hyperlink prediction problem in
hypernetworks. Different from the traditional link prediction problem where only pairwise relations are considered
as links, our task here is to predict the linkage of multiple
nodes, i.e., hyperlink. Each hyperlink is a set of an arbitrary
number of nodes which together form a multiway relationship. Hyperlink prediction is challenging – since the cardinality of a hyperlink is variable, existing classiﬁers based on
a ﬁxed number of input features become infeasible. Heuristic methods, such as the common neighbors and Katz index,
do not work for hyperlink prediction, since they are restricted
to pairwise similarities. In this paper, we formally deﬁne the
hyperlink prediction problem, and propose a new algorithm
called Coordinated Matrix Minimization (C MM), which alternately performs nonnegative matrix factorization and least
square matching in the vertex adjacency space of the hypernetwork, in order to infer a subset of candidate hyperlinks that
are most suitable to ﬁll the training hypernetwork. We evaluate C MM on two novel tasks: predicting recipes of Chinese
food, and ﬁnding missing reactions of metabolic networks.
Experimental results demonstrate the superior performance
of our method over many seemingly promising baselines.

Introduction
Link prediction (Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg 2007; Lü and
Zhou 2011) has been studied broadly in recent years (Chen
et al. 2015; Song, Meyer, and Tao 2015; Wu et al. 2016;
Zhang and Chen 2017). Existing methods can be grouped
into two types: topological feature-based approaches and latent feature-based approaches. Popular approaches include
heuristic methods based on common neighbors, Jaccard
coefﬁcient, Katz index etc. (Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg
2007), and latent feature models (Miller, Jordan, and Grifﬁths 2009; Menon and Elkan 2011). These approaches, however, are restricted to predicting pairwise relations. None of
them is directly applicable to predicting hyperlinks. A hyperlink relaxes the restriction that only two nodes can form
a link. Instead, an arbitrary number of nodes are allowed to
jointly form a hyperlink. A network made up of hyperlinks
is called a hypernetwork or hypergraph.
Hypernetworks exist everywhere in our life. Examples include metabolic networks and citation networks. In
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4430

