The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Randomized Clustered Nyström for Large-Scale Kernel Machines
Farhad Pourkamali-Anaraki

Stephen Becker

Michael B. Wakin

University of Colorado Boulder
farhad.pourkamali@colorado.edu

University of Colorado Boulder
stephen.becker@colorado.edu

Colorado School of Mines
mwakin@mines.edu

semideﬁnite (SPSD) kernel matrix K ∈ Rn×n . However, it
takes O(n2 ) memory to store the full kernel matrix and subsequent processing of the kernel matrix within the learning
process is often computationally quite expensive.
A well-studied approach to tackle these challenges is to
use a low-rank approximation of the kernel matrix, where
the best rank-r approximation K(r) = Ur Λr UTr is computed via the eigenvalue decomposition (EVD) for r ≤
rank(K). The diagonal matrix Λr ∈ Rr×r contains the r
leading eigenvalues, and the columns of Ur ∈ Rn×r span
the top r-dimensional eigenspace of K. Since K is SPSD,
we have a low-rank approximation in the form of:

Abstract
The Nyström method is a popular technique for generating low-rank approximations of kernel matrices that arise in
many machine learning problems. The approximation quality of the Nyström method depends crucially on the number
of selected landmark points and the selection procedure. In
this paper, we introduce a randomized algorithm for generating landmark points that is scalable to large high-dimensional
data sets. The proposed method performs K-means clustering
on low-dimensional random projections of a data set and thus
leads to signiﬁcant savings for high-dimensional data sets.
Our theoretical results characterize the tradeoffs between accuracy and efﬁciency of the proposed method. Moreover, numerical experiments on classiﬁcation and regression tasks
demonstrate the superior performance and efﬁciency of our
proposed method compared with existing approaches.

∈ Rn×r .
K ≈ K(r) = LLT , L = Ur Λ1/2
r

(2)

When the target rank r is small and chosen independently of
n, the beneﬁts of this low-rank approximation are twofold.
First, the complexity of storing the matrix L is O(nr), which
is only linear in the data set size n. The reduction of memory requirements from quadratic to linear results in signiﬁcant memory savings. Second, the low-rank approximation
leads to substantial computational savings within the learning process. In this paper, we focus on two important problems, namely KPCA and KRR, and explain the beneﬁts of
the low-rank approximation of the kernel matrix.

Introduction
Kernel methods have been widely used in various learning
problems such as classiﬁcation and regression. Well-known
examples include support vector machines (SVM) (Cortes
and Vapnik 1995; Suykens and Vandewalle 1999), kernel
principal component analysis (KPCA) (Schölkopf, Smola,
and Müller 1998), and kernel ridge regression (KRR) (Saunders, Gammerman, and Vovk 1998). The main idea behind
kernel-based learning is to map the input data points into a
feature space, where all pairwise inner products can be computed via a nonlinear kernel function that satisﬁes Mercer’s
condition (Schölkopf and Smola 2001). The lifted representation of the input data points may lead to better performance
on learning problems (Yan and Sarkar 2016).
To be formal, let X = [x1 , . . . , xn ] ∈ Rp×n be a data
matrix that contains n data points in Rp as its columns. The
inner products in feature space are calculated using a nonlinear kernel function κ (·, ·):

Problem 1: KPCA for feature extraction A key component of many learning tasks is the preprocessing step in
which a concise set of low-dimensional features are constructed to facilitate their analysis. For example, let us
consider a classiﬁcation task with n training data points
x1 , . . . , xn and a testing data point x in Rp . To extract features via KPCA, the kernel matrix K ∈ Rn×n of training
data and its best rank-r approximation are computed ac j ) ∈ Rr
cording to (2), i.e., K ≈ K(r) = LLT . Let Φ(x
T
r×n
denote the j-th column of L ∈ R
and observe that
the low-rank approximation linearizes K because Kij ≈

Φ(xi ), 
Φ(xj ). Thus, 
Φ(xj ) can be viewed as a mapping of
the input data xj to an r-dimensional feature space (Zhang
et al. 2012; Pourkamali-Anaraki and Becker 2016):

def

Kij = κ (xi , xj ) = Φ(xi ), Φ(xj ), i, j = 1, . . . , n, (1)
where Φ : x → Φ(x) is the kernel-induced feature map. A
popular
 choice is the Gaussian kernel function κ (xi , xj ) =
exp −xi − xj 22 /c , with the parameter c > 0. The pairwise inner products are stored in the symmetric positive

−1/2 T
T

Φ(xj ) =Λ1/2
Ur Kej
r U r ej = Λ r

=Λ−1/2
UTr [κ(x1 , xj ), κ(x2 , xj ), . . . , κ(xn , xj )]T ,
r
(3)

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3960

