The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Alternating Optimisation and Quadrature for Robust Control
Supratik Paul,1 Konstantinos Chatzilygeroudis,2 Kamil Ciosek,1
Jean-Baptiste Mouret,2 Michael A. Osborne,3 Shimon Whiteson1
1

2

Department of Computer Science, 3 Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
Inria, Villers-lès-Nancy, France; CNRS/Université de Lorraine, Loria, UMR 7503, Vandœuvre-lès-Nancy, France
1
{supratik.paul,kamil.ciosek,shimon.whiteson}@cs.ox.ac.uk
2
{konstantinos.chatzilygeroudis,jean-baptiste.mouret}@inria.fr
3
mosb@robots.ox.ac.uk
A naı̈ve approach would be to randomly sample values
for the environment variables in each trial, so as to estimate
expected performance. However, this approach (1) often requires testing each policy in a prohibitively large number
of scenarios, and (2) is not robust to signiﬁcant rare events
(SREs), i.e., it fails any time there are rare events that substantially affect expected performance. For example, rare localisation errors may mean that a robot is much nearer to
an obstacle than expected, increasing the risk of a collision.
Since collisions are so catastrophic, avoiding them is key
to maximising expected performance, even though the factors contributing to the collision occur only rarely. In such
cases, the naı̈ve approach will not see such rare events often
enough to learn an appropriate response.
Instead, we propose a new approach called alternating
optimisation and quadrature (ALOQ) speciﬁcally aimed towards learning policies that are robust to these rare events
while being as sample efﬁcient as possible. The main idea
is to actively select the environment variables (instead of
sampling them) in a simulator thanks to a Gaussian Process
(GP) that models returns as a function of both the policy and
the environment variables and then, at each time-step, to use
BO and Bayesian Quadrature (BQ) in turn to select a policy
and environment setting, respectively, to evaluate.
We apply ALOQ to a number of problems and our results
demonstrate that ALOQ learns better and faster than multiple baselines. We also demonstrate that the policy learnt by
ALOQ in a simulated hexapod transfers successfully to the
real robot.

Abstract
Bayesian optimisation has been successfully applied to a variety of reinforcement learning problems. However, the traditional approach for learning optimal policies in simulators
does not utilise the opportunity to improve learning by adjusting certain environment variables: state features that are
unobservable and randomly determined by the environment
in a physical setting but are controllable in a simulator. This
paper considers the problem of ﬁnding a robust policy while
taking into account the impact of environment variables. We
present Alternating Optimisation and Quadrature (ALOQ),
which uses Bayesian optimisation and Bayesian quadrature to
address such settings. ALOQ is robust to the presence of signiﬁcant rare events, which may not be observable under random sampling, but play a substantial role in determining the
optimal policy. Experimental results across different domains
show that ALOQ can learn more efﬁciently and robustly than
existing methods.

1

Introduction

A key consideration when applying reinforcement learning
(RL) to a physical setting is the risk and expense of running
trials, e.g., while learning the optimal policy for a robot. Another consideration is the robustness of the learned policies.
Since it is typically infeasible to test a policy in all contexts,
it is difﬁcult to ensure it works as broadly as intended. Fortunately, policies can often be tested in a simulator that exposes key environment variables – state features that are unobserved and randomly determined by the environment in
a physical setting but are controllable in the simulator. This
paper considers how to use environment variables to help
learn robust policies.
Although running trials in a simulator is cheaper and
safer than running physical trials, the computational cost of
each simulated trial can still be quite high. The challenge
then is to develop algorithms that are sample efﬁcient, i.e.,
that minimise the number of such trials. In such settings,
Bayesian Optimisation (BO) (Brochu, Cora, and de Freitas
2010) is a sample-efﬁcient approach that has been successfully applied to RL in multiple domains (Lizotte et al. 2007;
Martinez-Cantin et al. 2007; 2009; Cully et al. 2015; Calandra et al. 2015).

2

Related Work

Frank, Mannor, and Precup (2008) also consider the problems posed by SREs. In particular, they propose an approach
based on importance sampling (IS) for efﬁciently evaluating
policies whose expected value may be substantially affected
by rare events. While their approach is based on temporal
difference (TD) methods, we take a BO-based policy search
approach. Unlike TD methods, BO is well suited to settings in which sample efﬁciency is paramount and/or where
assumptions (e.g., the Markov property) that underlie TD
methods cannot be veriﬁed. More importantly, they assume
prior knowledge of the SREs, such that they can directly
alter the probability of such events during policy evaluation. By contrast, a key strength of ALOQ is that it requires

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3925

