The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Exploring Temporal Preservation Networks
for Precise Temporal Action Localization
Ke Yang, Peng Qiao, Dongsheng Li, Shaohe Lv, Yong Dou
National Laboratory for Parallel and Distributed Processing,
National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, China
{yangke13,pengqiao,dongshengli,shaohelv,yongdou}@nudt.edu.cn
Recently, it is claimed that action prediction at a ﬁne granularity is important for achieving precise action localization (Shou et al. 2017). There exist some techniques can
be adapted to achieve this goal: (1) classifying each frame
using 2D CNN without consideration of temporal information; (2) using Recurrent Neural Network to model the temporal structure; (3) 3D CNN. 3D CNN is preferred because
it can explicitly model the spatio-temporal information in
raw videos. 3D CNN crushes the video in order to classify
it. To perform frame-level predictions, one needs to upsample the output of 3D CNN in temporal domain. In (Shou
et al. 2017), a Convolutional-De-Convolutional (CDC) layer
is proposed to upsample the temporal resolution. By stacking CDC layers on top of 3D ConvNets, the resulting networks are able to make frame-level predictions. CDC network achieves promising performance in both action predictions at the frame granularity and segment-level action localization. However, directly upsampling the output of the
classiﬁcation networks cannot recover the degraded temporal information by downsampling, which harms precise temporal localization.

Abstract
Temporal action localization is an important task of computer
vision. Though a variety of methods have been proposed,
it still remains an open question how to predict the temporal boundaries of action segments precisely. Most works
use segment-level classiﬁers to select video segments predetermined by action proposal or dense sliding windows.
However, in order to achieve more precise action boundaries,
a temporal localization system should make dense predictions at a ﬁne granularity. A newly proposed work exploits
Convolutional-Deconvolutional-Convolutional (CDC) ﬁlters
to upsample the predictions of 3D ConvNets, making it possible to perform per-frame action predictions and achieving
promising performance in terms of temporal action localization. However, CDC network loses temporal information partially due to the temporal downsampling operation. In this
paper, we propose an elegant and powerful Temporal Preservation Convolutional (TPC) Network that equips 3D ConvNets with TPC ﬁlters. TPC network can fully preserve temporal resolution and downsample the spatial resolution simultaneously, enabling frame-level granularity action localization with minimal loss of time information. TPC network
can be trained in an end-to-end manner. Experiment results
on public datasets show that TPC network achieves significant improvement in both per-frame action prediction and
segment-level temporal action localization.

Therefore, we believe no-downsampling architectures are
better than downsampling-upsampling architectures. The
most intuitive solution to omit the downsampling is reducing the temporal pooling stride to 1. However, this operation
changes the temporal receptive ﬁeld of convolutional ﬁlters
after the modiﬁed pooling layers. This reduces the amount
of temporal context that can inform the prediction produced
by each unit and also prevents us from using pre-trained
models. In order to preserve the temporal receptive ﬁeld of
subsequent layers and take advantage of pre-trained weights
rather than train networks from scratch, we replace standard
3D convolutional ﬁlters with Temporal Preservation Convolutional (TPC) ﬁlters. TPC ﬁlters can easily and explicitly
control the temporal receptive ﬁeld of convolutional ﬁlters
when using the same kernel size as original convolutional
ﬁlters. Therefore, TPC can enlarge the temporal resolution
of neural network feature responses to cooperate with pooling layers with a stride of 1 to preserve temporal length of
videos and make use of pre-trained weights. With TPC, C3D
is upgraded to form our TPC network, which can model
spatio-temporal information with minimal temporal information loss to make ﬁne-grained action predictions that can
be used to reﬁne boundaries of action proposals to precisely

In recent years, temporal action localization has became a
very important part of computer vision applications. Many
works have been proposed to solve this problem (Escorcia et
al. 2016; Jiang et al. 2014; Idrees et al. 2017; Caba Heilbron,
Carlos Niebles, and Ghanem 2016; Rohrbach et al. 2012;
Oneata, Verbeek, and Schmid 2014; Richard and Gall 2016;
Shou, Wang, and Chang 2016; Singh and Cuzzolin 2016;
Wang, Qiao, and Tang 2014; Wang and Tao 2016; Yeung et
al. 2016; Shou et al. 2017; Qin and Shelton 2017), but how
to perform temporal action localization precisely is still an
open question.The purpose of temporal action localization is
to determine the boundaries and classes of action segments
in untrimmed videos. Most works extract various features
on action segments pre-determined by action proposals or
sliding windows and use them to train segment-level action
classiﬁers.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7477

