The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Probabilistic Ensemble of Collaborative Filters∗
Zhiyu Min

Dahua Lin

Alibaba Group
zhiyu.mzy@alibaba-inc.com

Department of Information Engineering,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
dhlin@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

On the other hand, despite the extensive studies devoted
to improving collaborative ﬁlters, the performances of current collaborative ﬁltering techniques remain unsatisfactory
in a number of practical applications. A key challenge lies
in the diversity of the real-world data. Take the books sold
on Amazon for example. Different customers may purchase
a book for different reasons – some may ﬁnd the story interesting while others are perhaps just attracted by the authors.
In collaborative ﬁltering, each item is encoded by a ﬁxed
vector, and so is each user. Such a formulation may not be
able to provide the needed capacity to capture the diverse
ways in which users may evaluate an item.
A natural idea to improve the capability of handling diverse data is to construct an ensemble, which can combine
multiple predictors specialized in different kinds of data.
Ensemble methods, as an important family of techniques
in machine learning, have been extensively studied (Dietterich 2000; Friedman 2001), and shown to be very effective for a number of tasks (Friedman et al. 2000; Bühlmann
and Yu 2003). However, the use of ensemble methods for
recommendation remains relatively limited. Most of the approaches (Wu et al. 2016; Lee et al. 2013) just work in a
vanilla weighted-sum fashion.
With these challenges in mind, we develop a new method
for constructing a collaborative ﬁlter ensemble. Unlike existing methods for this task (Lee et al. 2013), our method is
based on a probabilistic generative model, in which the latent embeddings for both items and users are generated from
a prior distribution, and the predictions are then derived from
a distribution conditioned on the given embeddings. With
this setting, an ensemble can thus be formalized as a mixture
model, of which each component is a probabilistic predictor.
On top of this formulation, we further derive a progressive
construction algorithm. This algorithm begins with a basic
collaborative ﬁlter. Then in each iteration, it tries to obtain a
new one that is complementary to the current ensemble by
learning from a re-weighted set. The new predictor will then
be incorporated into the ensemble. It is worth noting that using this progressive method, one need not prescribe the size
of the ensemble, i.e. the number of component ﬁlters. The
algorithm can proceed until the performance saturates or the
ensemble reaches the maximum allowed size.
We evaluated the proposed method on three large datasets,
MovieLens (Harper and Konstan 2016), CiteULike (Wang

Abstract
Collaborative ﬁltering is an important technique for recommendation. Whereas it has been repeatedly shown to be effective in previous work, its performance remains unsatisfactory in many real-world applications, especially those where
the items or users are highly diverse. In this paper, we explore
an ensemble-based framework to enhance the capability of a
recommender in handling diverse data. Speciﬁcally, we formulate a probabilistic model which integrates the items, the
users, as well as the associations between them into a generative process. On top of this formulation, we further derive
a progressive algorithm to construct an ensemble of collaborative ﬁlters. In each iteration, a new ﬁlter is derived from
re-weighted entries and incorporated into the ensemble. It is
noteworthy that while the algorithmic procedure of our algorithm is apparently similar to boosting, it is derived from
an essentially different formulation and thus differs in several key technical aspects. We tested the proposed method
on three large datasets, and observed substantial improvement over the state of the art, including L2 Boost, an effective
method based on boosting.

Introduction
Over the past decades, recommender systems have become
an inherent part of e-commerce and many online sharing services. It was shown in previous study (Rendle et al. 2009)
that targeted recommendation is an effective way to inﬂuence cunsumers and promote business. The key to a successful recommender system is the relevance of the recommendations. However, identifying products that are relevant
to a user’s interest has never been a trivial task.
From a technical perspective, recommendations are usually produced by either content-based fashion or collaborative ﬁltering. The former relies on comparing the features of
an item and those rated by a given user; while the latter infers the preferences of a user based on those from other users
with similar histories. In real-world applications, collaborative ﬁltering has shown great effectiveness (Hu, Koren, and
Volinsky 2008) and its success has been exempliﬁed on the
Netﬂix Prize (Bennett, Lanning, and others 2007).
∗
This work was done when Min was a research assistant with
Lin.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2371

