The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Groupwise Maximin Fair Allocation of Indivisible Goods
Siddharth Barman

Arpita Biswas

Indian Institute of Science
barman@iisc.ac.in

Indian Institute of Science
arpitab@iisc.ac.in

Sanath Kumar Krishnamurthy Yadati Narahari
Chennai Mathematical Institute
sanathkumar9@cmi.ac.in

Indian Institute of Science
narahari@iisc.ac.in

In recent years, the topic of fair division of indivisible goods
has received signiﬁcant attention in the computer science,
mathematics, and economics communities, see, for instance,
Chapter 12 in (Brandt et al. 2016). A central motivation behind this thread of research is the fact that classical notions
of fairness—such as envy freeness (EF)1 and proportional-

ity2 —which were developed for divisible goods (that can be
fractionally allocated), do not translate well to the indivisible case. For instance, if there is a single indivisible good
and two agents, then no allocation can guarantee EF or proportionality. But, given that a number of real-world settings
(such as budgeted course allocations (Budish 2011), division
of inheritance, and partitioning resources in a cloud computing environment) entail allocation of discrete/indivisible
goods, it is essential to deﬁne and study solution concepts
which are applicable for a fair division of indivisible goods.
Classically, the applicability of solution concepts is studied via existence results. Understanding if and when a
solution concept is guaranteed to exist is of fundamental importance in microeconomics and other related ﬁelds.
Such existence results have been notably complemented
by research—in algorithmic game theory and artiﬁcial
intelligence—that has focused on computational issues surrounding the underlying solution concepts. Broadly, our results contribute to these key themes by establishing both existential and algorithmic results for a new notion of fairness.
In the context of fair division, the focus on developing efﬁcient algorithms is motivated, in part, by websites such as
Spliddit3 (Goldman and Procaccia 2015) and Adjusted Winner4 (Brams and King 2005), which offer fair solutions for
dividing goods. Spliddit has attracted more than ﬁfty thousand users and, among other services, it computes allocations which are fair with respect to the standard notions of
fairness. One of the solution concepts considered by Spliddit
is the maximin share guarantee (MMS).
The MMS solution concept was deﬁned in the notable
work of (Budish 2011), and it deems an allocation to be fair
if each agent gets a bundle of value greater than or equal
to an agent-speciﬁc threshold, called the maximin share of
the agent. Speciﬁcally, the maximin share of an agent corresponds to the maximum value that the agent can attain for
herself if she is hypothetically asked to partition the set of
goods into n bundles and, then, the remaining (n − 1) agents
pick their bundles adversarially. Hence, a risk-averse agent i
would partition the goods (into n bundles) such that value of

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
An allocation is called envy free if every agent values her bundle at least as much she values any other agent’s bundle (Foley
1967; Varian 1974; Stromquist 1980).

2
An allocation, among n agents, is called proportionally fair if
every agent’s value for her share is at least 1/n times the total value
of all the goods (Steinhaus 1948).
3
www.spliddit.org
4
http://www.nyu.edu/projects/adjustedwinner/

Abstract
We study the problem of allocating indivisible goods among
n agents in a fair manner. For this problem, maximin share
(MMS) is a well-studied solution concept which provides a
fairness threshold. Speciﬁcally, maximin share is deﬁned as
the minimum utility that an agent can guarantee for herself
when asked to partition the set of goods into n bundles such
that the remaining (n − 1) agents pick their bundles adversarially. An allocation is deemed to be fair if every agent gets a
bundle whose valuation is at least her maximin share.
Even though maximin shares provide a natural benchmark for
fairness, it has its own drawbacks and, in particular, it is not
sufﬁcient to rule out unsatisfactory allocations. Motivated by
these considerations, in this work we deﬁne a stronger notion of fairness, called groupwise maximin share guarantee
(GMMS). In GMMS, we require that the maximin share
guarantee is achieved not just with respect to the grand bundle, but also among all the subgroups of agents. Hence, this
solution concept strengthens MMS and provides an ex-post
fairness guarantee. We show that in speciﬁc settings, GMMS
allocations always exist. We also establish the existence of
approximate GMMS allocations under additive valuations,
and develop a polynomial-time algorithm to ﬁnd such allocations. Moreover, we establish a scale of fairness wherein we
show that GMMS implies approximate envy freeness.
Finally, we empirically demonstrate the existence of GMMS
allocations in a large set of randomly generated instances. For
the same set of instances, we additionally show that our algorithm achieves an approximation factor better than the established, worst-case bound.

1

Introduction

917

