The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Counting Linear Extensions in Practice: MCMC versus Exponential Monte Carlo
Topi Talvitie

Kustaa Kangas

Teppo Niinimäki

Mikko Koivisto

Dept. of Computer Science
University of Helsinki
topi.talvitie@helsinki.ﬁ

Dept. of Computer Science
Aalto University
juho-kustaa.kangas@aalto.ﬁ

Dept. of Computer Science
Aalto University
teppo.niinimaki@aalto.ﬁ

Dept. of Computer Science
University of Helsinki
mikko.koivisto@helsinki.ﬁ

diagram (Kangas et al. 2016), or the treewidth of the incomparability graph (Eiben et al. 2016).
If an approximation with given probability is sufﬁcient,
the problem admits a polynomial-time solution for all posets
using Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods. The
ﬁrst fully-polynomial time approximation scheme of this
kind for was based on algorithms for approximating the volumes of convex bodies (Dyer, Frieze, and Kannan 1991).
The later improvements were based on rapidly mixing
Markov chains in the set of linear extensions (Karzanov
and Khachiyan 1991; Bubley and Dyer 1999) combined
with Monte Carlo counting schemes (Brightwell and Winkler 1991; Banks et al. 2017). The mixing times of the
Markov chains were recently studied empirically by Talvitie,
Niinimäki and Koivisto (2017) and found to be often much
better than the worst-case bounds. However, when approximation guarantees are desired, the degrees of the polynomial
worst-case bounds can be prohibitively high. It is thus currently unclear to what extent the MCMC-based schemes are
usable in practical applications, especially in comparison to
the recent improvements in exact counting.
In this work we investigate the feasibility of approximate counting of linear extensions in practice by presenting what is to our knowledge the ﬁrst empirical evaluation
of the state-of-the-art approximation schemes. In addition to
this empirical review, we present two algorithmic contributions: First, we propose practical amendments to improve
the performance of certain MCMC-based schemes. Second,
we extend the exact exponential-time algorithms to approximate counting via a suitable relaxation of the problem, combined with a Monte Carlo approach. As a result, we obtain
a novel approximation scheme, adaptive relaxation Monte
Carlo (ARMC). Through the empirical evaluation, we show
that approximate counting is feasible on posets up to a few
hundred elements. We also demonstrate that within this feasible region our ARMC scheme vastly outperforms the other
approximation schemes.
We introduce some central concepts of partially ordered
sets in Section 2. In Section 3 we review the state-of-the-art
MCMC schemes and present our practical improvements. In
Section 4 we review the exact exponential-time algorithms
and present our ARMC scheme that leverages them for approximate counting. Section 5 presents an empirical evaluation of the schemes described in Sections 3 and 4.

Abstract
Counting the linear extensions of a given partial order is a
#P-complete problem that arises in numerous applications.
For polynomial-time approximation, several Markov chain
Monte Carlo schemes have been proposed; however, little is
known of their efﬁciency in practice. This work presents an
empirical evaluation of the state-of-the-art schemes and investigates a number of ideas to enhance their performance. In
addition, we introduce a novel approximation scheme, adaptive relaxation Monte Carlo (ARMC), that leverages exact
exponential-time counting algorithms. We show that approximate counting is feasible up to a few hundred elements on
various classes of partial orders, and within this range ARMC
typically outperforms the other schemes.

1

Introduction

A partially ordered set or poset is a set of elements coupled
with a binary relation that deﬁnes the mutual order between
some pairs of elements while leaving other pairs incomparable. A fundamental property of a poset is the set of its linear
extensions, the possible ways to extend the poset into a linear order, where all pairs of elements are comparable. This
paper concerns the problem of counting the linear extensions
of a given poset, which arises in various applications such
as sorting (Peczarski 2004), sequence analysis (Mannila and
Meek 2000), convex rank tests (Morton et al. 2009), preference reasoning (Lukasiewicz, Martinez, and Simari 2014),
partial order plans (Muise, Beck, and McIlraith 2016), and
learning graphical models (Wallace, Korb, and Dai 1996;
Niinimäki, Parviainen, and Koivisto 2016).
Computing the number of linear extensions of a given
poset is #P-complete (Brightwell and Winkler 1991) and
thus likely to be intractable in the general case. The fastest
known algorithms are based on dynamic programming and
require exponential time and space (De Loof, De Meyer, and
De Baets 2006; Kangas et al. 2016). Polynomial-time algorithms are known for certain notable special cases such as
when the poset is series-parallel (Möhring 1989), when its
Hasse diagram is a tree (Atkinson 1990), or when a certain
structural parameter is bounded, such as the width (De Loof,
De Meyer, and De Baets 2006), the treewidth of the Hasse
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1431

