The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Engineering Pro-Sociality with Autonomous Agents
Ana Paiva, Fernando P. Santos, Francisco C. Santos
INESC-ID and Instituto Superior Técnico, University of Lisbon
Av. Prof. Cavaco Silva, Tagus Park, 2744-016 Porto Salvo,
Portugal

One can question if the advent of autonomous technology is in itself contributing to the adverse situations that we
are witnessing. It is undeniable that the rise of technological
giants has promoted a society that is less equal, and more
divided (Stockhammer 2015). Perhaps the perception of autonomy and intelligence in current systems is also a factor
leading to a decrease in our sense of responsibility towards
others and thus, make us, humans, less humane. It is hard
to know what role increasingly autonomous technology will
play in this new society. However, since we are on the brink
of an ”autonomy” revolution (the named fourth industrial
revolution), with autonomous cars already in our streets and
drones at our doorsteps, we must address these questions.
Social psychology and behavioral economics have been researching how constructs, such as altruism or empathy, affect decision-making and cooperation. Findings in these areas have rarely been taken into consideration by computer
scientists, engineers and technology developers in general.
In fact, the dominant view of human decision making is
based on the homo economicus principle of utility maximization, and this is already the backbone of several approaches to model behavior in autonomous machines.
Despite the negative examples and the predictions of
mainstream economic models, humans often act in ways
that beneﬁt others: people behave pro-socially when giving money to charity, donating blood, sharing food, offering
one’s seat in the bus, helping a co-worker with some problem or informing an outsider about the direction to a city
location. Beyond small gestures, cooperation is the building block of complex social behavior and it underlies the
evolutionary origins of human societies. It is thereby fundamental to understand – and engineer – the contexts that prevent selﬁshness and conﬂict, while allowing pro-sociality to
be sustained (or induced, when absent). It is not by chance
that the evolution of cooperation has been identiﬁed by Science’s invited panel of scientists as one the major scientiﬁc
challenges of our century (Pennisi 2005).
In this context, we would like to ask how autonomous
agents can be used to nurture or nudge (Thaler and Sunstein 2008) cooperation and pro-sociality in a society of humans and machines. How can we design autonomous agents
which, immersed within humans, can promote collective action in situations where it may not naturally arise? How can
we foster cooperation in organizations, help people to ad-

Abstract
This paper envisions a future where autonomous agents are
used to foster and support pro-social behavior in a hybrid society of humans and machines. Pro-social behavior occurs
when people and agents perform costly actions that beneﬁt
others. Acts such as helping others voluntarily, donating to
charity, providing informations or sharing resources, are all
forms of pro-social behavior. We discuss two questions that
challenge a purely utilitarian view of human decision making
and contextualize its role in hybrid societies: i) What are the
conditions and mechanisms that lead societies of agents and
humans to be more pro-social? ii) How can we engineer autonomous entities (agents and robots) that lead to more altruistic and cooperative behaviors in a hybrid society? We propose using social simulations, game theory, population dynamics, and studies with people in virtual or real environments (with robots) where both agents and humans interact.
This research will constitute the basis for establishing the
foundations for the new ﬁeld of Pro-social Computing, aiming at understanding, predicting and promoting pro-sociality
among humans, through artiﬁcial agents and multiagent systems.

Introduction
Everyday we are inundated with reports of situations that
challenge our belief in humanity. The aim of moving towards more humane and fair societies appears to have been
forgotten, as anti-social behavior dominates the headlines.
According to analysts, journalists and even some politicians,
the world seems to be lacking empathy, compassion and caring1 . When famous and inﬂuential people exhibit clear signs
of not esteeming others, acting without conscience or guilt
over the unearned privileges they often enjoy, we should indeed be worried. They are our society’s role models. Similar concerns occur when established social norms (Nyborg
and others 2016) are unable to provide escape to Hardin’s
tragedy of the commons (Hardin 1968), resulting in undesirable situations such as antibiotic resistance, climate change,
or overexploitation of natural resources (Levin 2006; Nyborg and others 2016).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/jan/04/barackobama-empathy-deﬁcit

7994

