The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Chinese LIWC Lexicon Expansion via Hierarchical
Classiﬁcation of Word Embeddings with Sememe Attention
Xiangkai Zeng,∗‡ Cheng Yang,§ Cunchao Tu,§ Zhiyuan Liu,†§¶ Maosong Sun§¶
‡

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
§
Department of Computer Science and Technology,
State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems,
National Lab for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
¶
Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center for Language Ability, Jiangsu Normal University, Xuzhou, China

Abstract

lyze Chinese text. Fortunately, Chinese LIWC (Huang et al.
2012) has been released to ﬁll the vacancy. In this paper, we
mainly focus on Chinese LIWC and use LIWC to stand for
Chinese LIWC if not otherwise speciﬁed.
While LIWC has been used in a variety of ﬁelds, its lexicon only contains less than 7,000 words. This is insufﬁcient
because according to (Li and others 2008), there are at least
56,008 common words in Chinese. Moreover, LIWC lexicon does not consider the emerging words and phrases on
the Internet. Therefore, it is reasonable and necessary to expand the LIWC lexicon so that it is more accurate and comprehensive for scientiﬁc research. One way to expand LIWC
lexicon is to annotate the new words manually. However, it
is too time-consuming and often requires language expertise
to add new words. Hence, we propose to automatically expand LIWC lexicon. To the best of our knowledge, we are
the ﬁrst to expand LIWC lexicon automatically.
Automatically LIWC lexicon expansion faces the problems of polysemy and indistinctness. Polysemy means
words and phrases have multiple meanings and are thereby
classiﬁed into multiple irrelevant categories. Indistinctness
means many categories in LIWC are ﬁne-grained, and thus
making it more difﬁcult to distinguish them.
One important feature in LIWC lexicon is that categories
form a tree structure hierarchy. Therefore, hierarchical classiﬁcation algorithms such as Hierarchical SVM (Support
Vector Machine) (Chen, Crawford, and Ghosh 2004), can be
easily applied to LIWC lexicon expansion. However, these
methods are often too generic, without considering the polysemy property of words and LIWC lexicon and indistinctness property of LIWC categories.
To address these issues, we propose to incorporate external annotated word information when expanding the lexicon.
In linguistics, each word has one or more senses, and each
sense consists of one or more sememes, which are deﬁned as
the smallest semantic language unit of meaning (Bloomﬁeld
1926). In this paper, we use HowNet (Dong and Dong 2003)
where words are annotated with relevant sememes. For polysemy problem, sememes can explicitly express different
meanings of a word and make it possible to assign multiple labels. For indistinctness problem, sememe is also helpful in differentiating ﬁne-grained categories since we have
more detailed semantic information about the word meanings. Moreover, sememes should be given different weights

Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) is a word counting software tool which has been used for quantitative text
analysis in many ﬁelds. Due to its success and popularity,
the core lexicon has been translated into Chinese and many
other languages. However, the lexicon only contains several
thousand of words, which is deﬁcient compared with the
number of common words in Chinese. Current approaches
often require manually expanding the lexicon, but it often
takes too much time and requires linguistic experts to extend the lexicon. To address this issue, we propose to expand the LIWC lexicon automatically. Speciﬁcally, we consider it as a hierarchical classiﬁcation problem and utilize
the Sequence-to-Sequence model to classify words in the
lexicon. Moreover, we use the sememe information with
the attention mechanism to capture the exact meanings of
a word, so that we can expand a more precise and comprehensive lexicon. The experimental results show that our
model has a better understanding of word meanings with
the help of sememes and achieves signiﬁcant and consistent improvements compared with the state-of-the-art methods. The source code of this paper can be obtained from
https://github.com/thunlp/Auto CLIWC.

Introduction
Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (Pennebaker, Booth, and
Francis 2007, LIWC) has been widely used for computerized text analysis in social science. LIWC groups words
into manually-deﬁned coarse-to-ﬁne grained categories, and
it was originally developed to address content analytic issues in experimental psychology. Nowadays, there is an increasing number of applications across ﬁelds such as computational linguistics (Grimmer and Stewart 2013), demographics (Newman et al. 2008), health diagnostics (Bucci
and Maskit 2005), social relationship (Kacewicz et al. 2014),
etc.
Chinese is the most spoken language in the world (Lewis
et al. 2009), but we cannot use the original LIWC to ana∗
This work was done when the ﬁrst author was visiting Tsinghua University.
†
Corresponding author: Zhiyuan Liu (liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5650

