The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Stackelberg Planning:
Towards Effective Leader-Follower State Space Search
Patrick Speicher, Marcel Steinmetz, Michael Backes,
Jörg Hoffmann, Robert Künnemann
CISPA, Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus
Saarbrücken, Germany
{patrick.speicher,robert.kuennemann}@cispa.saarland, backes@mpi-sws.org,
{steinmetz,hoffmann}@cs.uni-saarland.de
can be used in various applications beyond simulated pentesting as a way to measure robustness against worst-case
perturbances. For example, in transportation, the “leader”
may be a saboteur, or a malicious environment, planning
to disrupt the road network, while the “follower” may be
the agent that plans transportation in a (damaged) network.
Optimal leader behavior then captures minimal damage to
the road network causing maximum transportation efﬁcacy
loss, thus measuring the road network’s robustness against
damage given the desired transportation objectives. Similar analyses can make sense, e. g., for warehouse robotics,
Mars rovers, airport ground trafﬁc, power supply networks,
pipeline networks, greenhouse conveyor belts, etc. Interest
in domains like these is amply reﬂected in the International
Planning Competition (IPC) benchmarks. We thus focus on
the case where the leader’s strategy is pure and can be observed by the follower.
In our Stackelberg planning formalization, the leader and
follower control different actions in a classical planning task
with non-negative action costs. The follower has a goal; the
leader does not have a goal, and instead pursues the objective
to maximize the follower’s plan cost. Hence an equilibrium
is a pair of leader/defender plans where the leader cannot
decrease own cost without also decreasing optimal followerplan cost. We aim at producing all such equilibria (akin to
a Pareto frontier). We believe this is useful – compared to
aggregating leader and follower costs into a single utility –
as it exhibits the actual trade-off (software updates vs. data
loss; damaged road segments vs. transportation cost; etc).
Different variants of Stackelberg planning may, of course,
be useful too and are left for future research.
Our framework per se is somewhat novel in that prior
work on planning games considered general self-interested
planning agents each pursueing an own goal (Bowling,
Jensen, and Veloso 2003; Larbi, Konieczny, and Marquis
2007; Brafman et al. 2009).1 Our main contribution is on the
algorithmic and experimental side, however, tackling leaderfollower move combinations where each “move” is a planning problem in its own right. We design leader-follower

Abstract
Inspired by work on Stackelberg security games, we introduce Stackelberg planning, where a leader player in a classical planning task chooses a minimum-cost action sequence
aimed at maximizing the plan cost of a follower player in
the same task. Such Stackelberg planning can provide useful analyses not only in planning-based security applications
like network penetration testing, but also to measure robustness against perturbances in more traditional planning applications (e. g. with a leader sabotaging road network connections in transportation-type domains). To identify all equilibria – exhibiting the leader’s own-cost-vs.-follower-cost tradeoff – we design leader-follower search, a state space search
at the leader level which calls in each state an optimal planner at the follower level. We devise simple heuristic guidance,
branch-and-bound style pruning, and partial-order reduction
techniques for this setting. We run experiments on Stackelberg variants of IPC and pentesting benchmarks. In several
domains, Stackelberg planning is quite feasible in practice.

Introduction
Stackelberg security games have been extremely successful in the formalization and solution of defensive tasks regarding physical infrastructures, such as patrolling an airport (Tambe 2011). In such games, the leader (the defender) moves ﬁrst, followed by the follower (the attacker).
A solution (a Stackelberg equilibirum) is a leader/follower
move pair that minimizes the defender’s loss given optimal attacker play. The same principle has recently been applied to planning-based network security penetration testing, short pentesting (e. g. (Boddy et al. 2005; Lucangeli, Sarraute, and Richarte 2010; Durkota and Lisý 2014;
Hoffmann 2015)): the defender chooses the placement of
honeypots (fake hosts), in a way minimizing the expected
reward of an attacker whose attack is thwarted in case it runs
into a honeypot (Durkota et al. 2015b; 2015a; 2016). In scenarios like these, the leader may beneﬁt from randomizing
his strategy.
Here, we introduce Stackelberg planning games, where
each of the two players is modelled as a full-scale classical planning agent. We conjecture that Stackelberg planning

1

General game playing (e. g. (Genesereth, Love, and Pell 2005;
Love, Hinrichs, and Genesereth 2008; Thielscher 2010; Haufe,
Schiffel, and Thielscher 2012)) is also related, but more remotely
still due to the modelling differences between planning vs. the
logic-pogramming based Game Description Language.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6286

