The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

“Did I Say Something Wrong?”:
Towards a Safe Collaborative Chatbot
Merav Chkroun, Amos Azaria
Department of Computer Science,
Ariel University, Israel

Unfortunately, some people try to exploit such collaborative systems. Although being a small minority, these malicious users may shatter large amounts of effort put in by
the developers of these systems as well as other users. A
quintessential example is the case of Microsoft’s Tay (Neff
and Nagy 2016), which had to be shutdown within 24 hours
of operation. In 2015, DARPA ran a challenge with an attempt to detect malicious bots on Twitter (Subrahmanian et
al. 2016)
Wikipedia detects incidents such as offensive edits, deliberate deceptions, or adding nonsense in the entries of the
encyclopedia by humans and bots. Wikipedia’s bots automatically detect and revert any malicious content, and warn
the vandal himself in real time. However, most patrol actions
are performed by individual registered editors who monitor
pages that they have created or edited, or have an interest in,
and get notiﬁed whenever something goes wrong.

Abstract
Chatbots have been a core measure of AI since Turing has
presented his test for intelligence, and are also widely used
for entertainment purposes. In this paper we present a platform that enables users to collaboratively teach a chatbot responses, using natural language. We present a method of collectively detecting malicious users and using the commands
taught by these users to further mitigate activity of future malicious users.

Introduction & Related Work
Over half a century ago, Weizenbaum has developed a
simple, yet powerful chatbot called ELIZA (Weizenbaum
1966). ELIZA was mostly based on predeﬁned templates
and merely reﬂected back to the user the statement the user
has just said. Since then chatbots continue to be a source of
entertainment and are used in many computer games (Spierling 2008). An annual contest, Loebner prize (Mauldin
1994), intends to determine which is most human like chatbot (a Turing-like test), and which chatbot can hold the most
interesting conversations. In the last few years, Amazon
has announced the ’Alexa Prize Challenge’, which gives an
award to college students for researching and developing a
natural and engaging chatbot system (Farber 2016).
Nowadays, most chatbots either rely on tedious work by
their developers at deﬁning their responses (e.g. AIML
(Wallace 2003)) or rely on data mined from different sources
For example, using online discussion forums to enrich the
statement-response data of the chatbot (Huang, Zhou, and
Yang 2007).
One of the most important ideas inﬂuencing the information age, which could assist in the composition of a chatbot,
is the concept of the wisdom of the crowd (Giles 2005). According to this concept a group of people may be smarter
than each of its individuals, and when collaborating, a group
of people can achieve better results (both quantitative and
qualitative) than several individuals working alone. This
concept is the keystone of many websites such as Wikipedia,
Stack Exchange and Yahoo! answers and different platforms
(Huang, Azaria, and Bigham 2016).

Safebot
Safebot is a collaborative chatbot that learns its responses
directly from its users and allows them to detect responses
injected by malicious users. Safebot uses data from users
tagged as malicious to improve its likelihood to detect malicious users in future interactions. Before learning a new response Safebot checks response against malicious data and
won’t add any response that similar to the malicious data set
that already exist.

Experimental Evaluation
We recruited four subjects, each with a different role. The
ﬁrst subject got an empty version of Safebot and his task was
to teach Safebot several new responsesThe next subject was
asked to play the role of a malicious user and turn Safebot
into an impolite and very rude chatbot. The third subject
was asked to interact with Safebot without any special instructions, just ask questions and get answers from Safebot.
The user was informed that she may encounter inappropriate
comments. The last subject was asked to chat with Safebot
and teach it some new responses. The subject was asked to
try and teach a few inappropriate responses as well.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8067

