The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

When Waiting Is Not an Option:
Learning Options with a Deliberation Cost
Jean Harb,∗ Pierre-Luc Bacon,∗ Martin Klissarov, Doina Precup
Reasoning and Learning Lab, McGill University
{jharb,pbacon,mklissa,dprecup}@cs.mcgill.ca

of the agent, which is assumed to have access to a lot of
data and computation time. Indeed, options help agents overcome such limitations, by allowing policies to be computed
faster (Dietterich 1998; Precup 2000). However, from the
point of view of absolute optimality, temporal abstractions
are not necessary: the optimal policy is achieved by primitive actions. Therefore, it has been difﬁcult to formalize
in what precise theoretical sense temporally abstract actions
are helpful.
Bounded rationality is an important framework for understanding rationality in both natural and artiﬁcial systems. In
this paper, we propose bounded rationality as a lens through
which we can describe the desiderata for constructing temporal abstractions, as their goal is mainly to help agents
which are restricted in terms of computation time. This perspective helps us to formulate more precisely what objective
criteria should be fulﬁlled during option construction. We
propose that good options are those which allow an agent to
learn and plan faster, and provide an optimization objective
for learning options based on this idea. We implement the
optimization using the option-critic framework (Bacon et al.
2017) and illustrate its usefulness with experiments in Atari
games.

Abstract
Recent work has shown that temporally extended actions (options) can be learned fully end-to-end as opposed to being
speciﬁed in advance. While the problem of how to learn options is increasingly well understood, the question of what
good options should be has remained elusive. We formulate
our answer to what good options should be in the bounded rationality framework (Simon, 1957) through the notion of deliberation cost. We then derive practical gradient-based learning algorithms to implement this objective. Our results in the
Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) show increased performance and interpretability.

Introduction
Temporal abstraction has a rich history in AI (Minsky 1961;
Fikes et al. 1972; Kuipers 1979; Korf 1983; Iba 1989;
Drescher 1991; Dayan and Hinton 1992; Kaelbling 1993;
Thrun and Schwartz 1995; Parr and Russell 1998; Dietterich
1998) and has been presented as a useful mechanism for
a variety of problems that affect AI systems in may settings, including to: generate shorter plans, speed up planning, improve generalization, yield better exploration, increase robustness against model mis-speciﬁcation or partial
observability. In reinforcement learning, options (Sutton et
al. 1999b) provide a framework to represent, learn and plan
with temporally extended actions. Interest in temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning has increased substantially in the last couple of years, due to a series of success in
constructing such abstractions automatically from data, e.g.
(Bacon et al. 2017; Kulkarni et al. 2016; Daniel et al. 2016;
Mankowitz et al. 2016; Machado et al. 2017). However,
deﬁning what constitutes a good set of options remains an
open problem.
In this paper, we aim to leverage the bounded rationality framework (Simon 1957) in order to explain what
would make good temporal abstractions for an RL system.
A lot of existing reinforcement learning work has focused
on Markov Decision Processes, where optimal policies can
be obtained under certain assumptions. However, optimality does not take into account possible resource limitations

Preliminaries
A ﬁnite discounted Markov Decision Process M is a tuple M ˙
=(S, A, γ, r, P ) where S and A denote the state and
action set respectively, and γ ∈ [0, 1) is a discount factor. The reward function r is often assumed to be a deterministic function of the state and actions, but can also
map to a distribution, r : S × A → Dist(R) (a perspective which we use in our formulation). The transition matrix
P : S × A → Dist(S) is a conditional distribution over next
states given that an action a ∈ A is taken under a certain
state s ∈ S. The interaction of a randomized stationary policy π : S → Dist(A) or a deterministic policy π : S → A
with an MDP M induces a Markov process over states, actions and rewards over which
 is deﬁned the expected dis=Eπ [ t=0 γ t r(St , At )|S0 = s]. The
counted return Vπ (s) ˙
value function Vπ of a policy π satisﬁes the Bellman equations :






π (a|s) r(s, a) + γ
P (s |s, a) Vπ (s ) .
Vπ (s) =

∗

Indicates equal contribution.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

a

3165

s

