The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

COSINE: Community-Preserving Social Network
Embedding from Information Diffusion Cascades
Yuan Zhang, Tianshu Lyu, Yan Zhang
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE)
Department of Machine Intelligence
Peking University, Beijing, China
{yuan.z, lyutianshu}@pku.edu.cn, zhy@cis.pku.edu.cn
retweeting and clicking like) but the structural connectivity is unknown (Gomez-Rodriguez, Balduzzi, and Schölkopf
2011). Besides, network structures, sometimes even when
observed, only provide partial information about social dynamics. For instance, we cannot tell the interaction intensity
between two users only from a who-follow-who network; a
user might seldom contact some of her followees while interacting actively with others.
Bourigault et. al. (2014) ﬁrst propose to learn social network embeddings from information diffusion cascades instead of network structures via a learning-to-rank approach.
Later work (Kurashima et al. 2014; Bourigault, Lamprier,
and Gallinari 2016) attempts to preserve temporal dynamics of information diffusion in social embeddings. Although
they raise meaningful problems and provide inspiring preliminary solutions, most existing work fails to consider
a very important notion in social networks, communities,
meaning tightly knitted user clusters (Girvan and Newman
2002). The lack of consideration on communities may render it difﬁcult to accurately deal with noisy social interaction logs involving highly volatile user behaviors (Hu et al.
2015).
More importantly, community structures in networks actually reﬂect the high-order proximities. Users in a same
community often share similar opinions and behaviors due
to fast social contagion within that community, and should
therefore be considered to have close relationships.
In this paper, we propose a probabilistic generative model,
COSINE (COmmunity-preserving SocIal Network Embeddings), to learn social network representations directly from
more easily observed information diffusion cascades than
network structures. As shown in Section 2, the nature of the
diffusion process along with community structure regularization allows our approach to exploit not only the ﬁrst-order
and second-order proximities, but also, more generally, the
high-order proximities between users. Leveraging COSINE,
we are able to discover underlying social communities and
predict temporal dynamics of social contagion.
Our approach jointly conducts metric learning (e.g., NetInf (Gomez Rodriguez, Leskovec, and Krause 2010), NetRate (Gomez-Rodriguez, Balduzzi, and Schölkopf 2011))
and multidimensional scaling (e.g., classic MDS (Cox
and Cox 2001), LLE (Roweis and Saul 2000)). Zhou et.
al. (2013) exploit l1 and nuclear norm regularizations to

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of social network embedding
without relying on network structures that are usually not observed in many cases. We address that the information diffusion process across networks naturally reﬂects rich proximity relationships between users. Meanwhile, social networks
contain multiple communities regularizing communication
pathways for information propagation. Based on the above
observations, we propose a probabilistic generative model,
called COSINE, to learn community-preserving social network embeddings from the recurrent and time-stamped social contagion logs, namely information diffusion cascades.
The learned embeddings therefore capture the high-order
user proximities in social networks. Leveraging COSINE,
we are able to discover underlying social communities and
predict temporal dynamics of social contagion. Experimental results on both synthetic and real-world datasets show that
our proposed model signiﬁcantly outperforms the existing approaches.

Introduction
Network analysis has become an increasingly popular research area in the past decades with the emergence of online
social media and social network sites. Network embedding
is a fundamental problem in this area, aiming to learn a continuous representation of networks that can be used as input
features for such downstream applications as visualization,
node classiﬁcation and link prediction (Tang et al. 2015).
Recent advances start from DeepWalk (Perozzi, AlRfou, and Skiena 2014) which uses random walks to generate node sequences as “sentences” and then exploits
word2vec (Mikolov et al. 2013) developed in language modeling to obtain network embeddings. Tang et. al. (2015) argue that DeepWalk only captures the second-order proximity and further incorporate the ﬁrst-order proximity into their
proposed model LINE. Grover and Leskovec (2016) extend
DeepWalk in another aspect, suggesting that a second-order
random walk approach generates better learning samples.
All of these approaches require prior knowledge of network
structures. In many cases, however, we only observe when
a node propagates information or becomes infected (e.g.,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2620

