The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Interactive Machine Learning at Scale with CHISSL

1

Dustin Arendt,1 Emily Grace,2 Svitlana Volkova2

Visual Analytics, 2 Data Science and Analytics, Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory
902 Battelle Blvd, Richland, WA 99354

transductive learning by allowing the user to explore and organize large amounts of unlabeled instances into groups that
need not be deﬁned a priori. In future work, we plan to allow the user to export their grouping as a training set for a
classiﬁcation model to facilitate inductive learning.
There are several approaches for human-in-the-loop transductive learning including spatialization, interactive clustering, and active learning. Spatialization is a visual analytics technique where the user’s mental model of a dataset is
learned and projected into a two dimensional space. Brown
et al. 2012 pioneered variants of this approach where model
parameters were learned directly from user interactions e.g.,
dragging an instance on the screen. A disadvantage of these
techniques is that they require the user to interpret groups
from a 2-D projection of the data, and such projections
can be misleading (Chuang et al. 2012). Interactive clustering addresses a similar problem by allowing a user to
guide a clustering algorithm with rejection (Srivastava, Zou,
and Sutton 2016) or providing linkage constraints (Bilenko,
Basu, and Mooney 2004). Likewise, supervised and semisupervised learning has been implemented in systems that
elicit user feedback and perform label induction or transduction to update predicted labels (Kulesza et al. 2014). Furthermore, instances are usually represented abstractly in statistical plots, making it unclear about what instances may be
in need of correction. Finally, the above techniques are not
scalable because they require too much time to incorporate
user feedback or they show all instances on the screen, overwhelming the user.

Abstract
We demonstrate CHISSL a scalable client-server system for
real-time interactive machine learning. Our system is capable of incorporating user feedback incrementally and immediately without a pre-deﬁned prediction task. Computation is
partitioned between a lightweight web-client and a heavyweight server. The server relies on representation learning
and off-the-shelf agglomerative clustering to ﬁnd a dendrogram, which we use to quickly approximate distances in the
representation space. The client, using only this dendrogram,
incorporates user feedback via transduction. Distances and
predictions for each unlabeled instance are updated incrementally and deterministically, with O(n) space and time
complexity. Our algorithm is implemented in a functional
prototype, designed to be easy to use by non-experts. The
prototype organizes the large amounts of data into recommendations. This allows the user to interact with actual instances
by dragging and dropping to provide feedback in an intuitive
manner. We applied CHISSL to several domains including
cyber, social media, and geo-temporal analysis.

Motivation and Background
Often analysts are handed huge piles of data such as news
articles, images, or social media posts that need to be summarized, organized, or triaged. Machine learning can help
with this task, but only when quality labeled training data is
available. Such data can be difﬁcult to obtain – labeling cannot be crowdsourced, for example, if expertise is limited to a
few individuals. Experienced data scientists know that realworld systems require a human-in-the-loop to provide labels
for instances and to correct prediction errors (Amershi, Fogarty, and Weld 2012). However, current human-in-the-loop
systems have scalability limitations for both machine and
human components, e.g., they are slow to incorporate user
feedback and overwhelm the user by showing all the data as
points in abstract statistical visualizations.
Our contributions in this paper are performance and design improvements for CHISSL (Arendt, Komurlu, and
Blaha 2017), a framework for Computer-Human Interaction
for Semi-Supervised Learning. These contributions allow
CHISSL to overcome the aforementioned scalability issues.
The primary task we support with CHISSL is to perform

Approach
CHISSL is designed for non-experts, allowing users to drag
and drop instances to organize their data into groups. While
CHISSL scales to large amounts of data, we keep the user interface simple by limiting what the user sees to a few recommendations of similar instances for each group. The model
updates after each user interaction, ﬁnding new recommendations and allowing the user to correct classiﬁcation errors.
This is made possible with our implementation of a novel
transductive learning algorithm, which was motivated by
the limitations experienced using existing semi-supervised
learning techniques, speciﬁcally label propagation (Delalleau, Bengio, and Le Roux 2005). While this algorithm is
described as “efﬁcient,” it can to take several seconds to re-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8194

