The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Integrated Holism-Landmark Representations
for Long-Term Loop Closure Detection
Fei Han, Hua Wang, Hao Zhang
Department of Computer Science, Colorado School of Mines, Golden, CO 80401
fhan@mines.edu, huawangcs@gmail.com, hzhang@mines.edu

Abstract

Semantic landmarks X‫א‬Rd×n by HOG

W=g(X) ‫א‬Rd×r

Learning the
projection W
from a set of
n landmarks

Loop closure detection is a critical component of large-scale
simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) in loopy environments. This capability is challenging to achieve in longterm SLAM, when the environment appearance exhibits signiﬁcant long-term variations across various time of the day,
months, and even seasons. In this paper, we introduce a novel
formulation to learn an integrated long-term representation
based upon both holistic and landmark information, which
integrates two previous insights under a uniﬁed framework:
(1) holistic representations outperform keypoint-based representations, and (2) landmarks as an intermediate representation provide informative cues to detect challenging locations.
Our new approach learns the representation by projecting input visual data into a low-dimensional space, which preserves
both the global consistency (to minimize representation error)
and the local consistency (to preserve landmarks’ pairwise
relationship) of the input data. To solve the formulated optimization problem, a new algorithm is developed with theoretically guaranteed convergence. Extensive experiments have
been conducted using two large-scale public benchmark data
sets, in which the promising performances have demonstrated
the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

...

Applying the
projection W
Holistic representation
by HOG descriptor x ‫א‬Rd

Final representation
y = WTx ‫א‬Rr

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed method to learn a representation that integrates holistic information and landmark
relationship for improved long-term loop closure detection.
Our new representation is constructed by unsupervisedly
learning a projection that encodes both global and local
consistencies, where the global consistency is used to preserve similar distribution of data points during the projection, and the local consistency is developed to preserve the
relationship of landmarks. In this illustration, the red bounding boxes denote the landmarks, which are represented by a
collection of landmark descriptors X = [x1 , . . . , xn ]. The
holistic feature vector of the entire frame is described by another holistic descriptor x. A projection parameterized by
W is learned from X to project x into a lower-dimensional
subspace by computing y = WT x, which thereby integrates both holistic cues and landmarks of an input frame.

Introduction
Loop closure detection, also referred to as place recognition,
has been an active research ﬁeld over the past decades in simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) (Sünderhauf
and Protzel 2011; Zhang, Han, and Wang 2016; Latif et al.
2017; Zhang, Lilly, and Vela 2016) and structure from motion (Lynen, Bosse, and Siegwart 2016; Cao and Snavely
2014). The purpose of loop closure detection is to identify a
previously visited location, where the matched locations can
be used later to eliminate or reduce the uncertainty and ambiguity in the constructed map, thus improving positioning
and mapping performance.
In recent several years, motivated by autonomous driving,
long-term place recognition has been attracting a signiﬁcant
attention to improve accuracy and reliability of outdoor localization during long-term operations (Lowry et al. 2016;
Labbe and Michaud 2013). Consider the scenario when a
self-driving vehicle operates during the whole year. In this

long-term autonomy, the same location can look very differently at various time of the day (e.g., caused by illumination
changes) and different months and seasons because of longterm appearance changes such as vegetation changes (e.g.,
trees with or without leaves) and long-term weather changes
(e.g., a place covered by snow in winter or not in summer).
The long-term appearance change is widely recognized as
one of the biggest challenge to enable long-term loop closure detection.
Given its signiﬁcance, the problem of long-term loop closure detection has been actively studied (Lowry et al. 2016;
Sünderhauf, Neubert, and Protzel 2013; Han et al. 2017;
Linegar, Churchill, and Newman 2016). A well received insight obtained in the previous research is that representations
based upon keypoints, such as SIFT (Lowe 2004), generally
cannot work well when the environment exhibits long-term

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6501

