The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Action Recognition from Skeleton Data via
Analogical Generalization over Qualitative Representations
Kezhen Chen, Kenneth D. Forbus
Northwestern University
KezhenChen2021@u.northwestern.edu

This paper draws on research in qualitative spatial reasoning and cognitive simulation of visual problem-solving and
analogy to provide a new approach with high accuracy and
a novel explanation ability to recognize human actions from
Kinect skeleton data. Instead of computing frame-based features (Wang et al. 2016; Li, Chen, and Sun. 2016), the video
stream is divided into sketch graphs, consisting of multiple
sequences of snapshots. Each snapshot is like a panel in a
comic strip: It consists of a motion segment described by a
single qualitative state, which might correspond to many
frames. Each body point has its own sequence of such states.
The trajectories within these states and relationships across
these states are described qualitatively, using automatically
constructed visual representations. The sketch graphs for
each instance of a behavior type are combined via analogical
generalization, to automatically construct probabilistic relational schemas (plus outliers) characterizing that behavior
type. To categorize a new behavior, a set of sketch graph
representations is computed for it, and analogical retrieval
is used across the entire set of trained behavior models to
retrieve the closest schema (or outlier). We begin by summarizing the work we build on, including CogSketch and
analogical processing. We then describe the learning pipeline and how classification works. We show how explanation sketches enable understanding recognition decisions
made via analogy. Results on three public Kinect action datasets are described, and we close with related and future
work.

Abstract
Human action recognition remains a difficult problem for AI.
Traditional machine learning techniques can have high
recognition accuracy, but they are typically black boxes
whose internal models are not inspectable and whose results
are not explainable. This paper describes a new pipeline for
recognizing human actions from skeleton data via analogical
generalization. Specifically, starting with Kinect data, we
segment each human action by temporal regions where the
motion is qualitatively uniform, creating a sketch graph that
provides a form of qualitative representation of the behavior
that is easy to visualize. Models are learned from sketch
graphs via analogical generalization, which are then used for
classification via analogical retrieval. The retrieval process
also produces links between the new example and components of the model that provide explanations. To improve
recognition accuracy, we implement dynamic feature selection to pick reasonable relational features. We show the explanation advantage of our approach by example, and results
on three public datasets illustrate its utility.

Introduction
Human action recognition is an important but difficult problem. Traditional machine learning relies on extracting large
numbers of features and using techniques such as deep
learning (Baccouche et al. 2011). However, these techniques
have some disadvantages. A key problem is that they are
black boxes: They can produce results, but do not provide
explanations for their answers. This makes their results difficult to trust and to debug (Lowd and Meek 2005). When
people perform recognition, even for visual tasks, they often
can describe the reasons for their classification. There is evidence that relational representations are important in human cognition (Marr 1982; Palmer 1999). By working with
human-inspired relational representations, we provide evidence that analogical models can produce high accuracy
while providing explanations.

Background
Our approach combines ideas from sketch understanding
and analogical processing. We discuss each in turn.

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

638

