The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multi-Scale Face Restoration with
Sequential Gating Ensemble Network
Jianxin Lin, Tiankuang Zhou, Zhibo Chen
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
{linjx, zhoutk}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Restoring face images from distortions is important in face
recognition applications and is challenged by multiple scale
issues, which is still not well-solved in research area. In this
paper, we present a Sequential Gating Ensemble Network
(SGEN) for multi-scale face restoration issue. We ﬁrst employ the principle of ensemble learning into SGEN architecture design to reinforce predictive performance of the network. The SGEN aggregates multi-level base-encoders and
base-decoders into the network, which enables the network to
contain multiple scales of receptive ﬁeld. Instead of combining these base-en/decoders directly with non-sequential operations, the SGEN takes base-en/decoders from different levels as sequential data. Speciﬁcally, the SGEN learns to sequentially extract high level information from base-encoders
in bottom-up manner and restore low level information from
base-decoders in top-down manner. Besides, we propose to
realize bottom-up and top-down information combination
and selection with Sequential Gating Unit (SGU). The SGU
sequentially takes two inputs from different levels and decides the output based on one active input. Experiment results demonstrate that our SGEN is more effective at multiscale human face restoration with more image details and less
noise than state-of-the-art image restoration models. By using adversarial training, SGEN also produces more visually
preferred results than other models through subjective evaluation.

1

Figure 1: Illustration of our SGEN on multi-scale face
restoration. The multi-scale noise corrupted LR face images
are up-sampled to the size of ground truth before being fed
into network.

Since face restoration has great potential in real applications, numerous face restoration algorithms have been proposed in recent years. Some algorithms focus on solving
face restoration from low-resolution (LR) problem, such as
works in (Wang and Tang 2005; Ma, Zhang, and Qi 2010;
Wang et al. 2014; Yu and Porikli 2016). Other algorithms
also take the noise corruption into consideration during face
super resolution, such as works in (Jiang et al. 2014; 2016).
We observe that most existing face restoration methods omit
one vital characteristic of real-world images, namely images
in real applications always contain faces of different scales.
Also, when the images are corrupted with serious distortions, it’s hard to extract the faces in the distorted images for
face restoration since face detection methods may not work
well under this situation. Therefore, in this paper, we focus
on solving face restoration close to real-world situation as
illustrated in Figure 1. Our proposed model can effectively
restore face images with details from noise corrupted LR
face images without scale limitation.
Face restoration can be considered as an image-to-image
translation problem that transfers one image domain to an-

Introduction

In the past decades, facial analysis techniques, such as face
recognition and face detection, have achieved great progress.
Meanwhile, thanks to the rapid development of surveillance
system, facial analysis techniques have been employed to
various applications, such as criminal investigation. However, the performance of most facial analysis techniques may
degrade rapidly when given low quality face images. In real
surveillance systems, the quality of the surveillance face images are affected by many factors including low resolution,
blur and noise. Therefore, how to restore a high quality face
from a low quality face is a challenge. Face restoration technique provides a viable way to improve performance of facial analysis techniques on low quality face images.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7122

