The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Adaptive Co-Attention Network
for Named Entity Recognition in Tweets
Qi Zhang, Jinlan Fu, Xiaoyu Liu, Xuanjing Huang
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
825 Zhangheng Road, Shanghai, P.R. China
{qz, fujl16, liuxiaoyu16, xjhuang}@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract
In this study, we investigate the problem of named entity
recognition for tweets. Named entity recognition is an important task in natural language processing and has been carefully studied in recent decades. Previous named entity recognition methods usually only used the textual content when
processing tweets. However, many tweets contain not only
textual content, but also images. Such visual information is
also valuable in the name entity recognition task. To make
full use of textual and visual information, this paper proposes a novel method to process tweets that contain multimodal information. We extend a bi-directional long short
term memory network with conditional random ﬁelds and an
adaptive co-attention network to achieve this task. To evaluate
the proposed methods, we constructed a large scale labeled
dataset that contained multimodal tweets. Experimental results demonstrated that the proposed method could achieve a
better performance than the previous methods in most cases.

Figure 1: An example of multimodal tweets. In this tweet,
“Rocky” is the name of the dog.

Named entity recognition (NER) tries to identify the named
entities in text. Named entities fall into pre-deﬁned categories such as the names of persons, organizations, and locations. Along with the rapid development of social media
(e.g., Twitter, Facebook), tweets have become important resources for various applications such as breaking news aggregation (Ritter et al. 2012; Cui et al. 2012), the identiﬁcation of cyber-attacks (Ritter et al. 2015) or natural disasters (Neubig et al. 2011; Bruns and Liang 2012), and mining
disease outbreaks (Paul and Dredze 2011). Hence, locating
and classifying named entities from tweets has become one
of the indispensable tasks of these applications.
Previous methods have studied the NER problem from
different aspects. Various supervised methods with manually constructed features have been proposed to perform
this task. Zhou and Su (2002) proposed the use of an
HMM-based chunk tagger. Chieu et al. (2002) introduced a
maximum entropy approach with global information. Support vector machines have also been used on the NER
task (Isozaki and Kazawa 2002). Because knowledge plays
an important role in the NER task, different kinds of resources have also been taken into consideration (Borthwick

et al. 1998; GuoDong and Jian 2004; Kazama and Torisawa
2007). Numerous methods have been introduced(Ritter et al.
2011; Liu et al. 2011; Li et al. 2012; de Oliveira et al. 2013;
Li et al. 2015) to process the content posted by users on social media sites. Ritter et al. (2011) treated the classiﬁcation
and segmentation of named entities as separate tasks. Large
scale open-domain ontology is included for classiﬁcation. Li
et al. (2015) introduced an iterative method to split tweets
into meaningful segments and evaluated the method on the
NER task. Because of the characteristics of social media, the
performances of methods on the tweets are much lower than
the performances on newswire domain.
We can see that most of the previous methods only considered the textual content. However, many tweets contain
not only textual content, but also images. Figure 1 gives a
multimodal tweet example. If we only have the tweet content “Rocky is ready for snow season,” “Rocky” is usually
recognized as the name of a person by humans and the previous methods. However, in this tweet, “Rocky” should be labeled as belonging to the category of animal names. Without
taking visual information into consideration, various tweets
cannot be easily recognized. Moreover, according to a statistic, more than 42% of tweets contain more than one image1 .
Hence, processing these multimodal tweets has become an

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
https://thenextweb.com/socialmedia/2015/11/03/whatanalyzing-1-million-tweets-taught-us/

Introduction

5674

