The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

An Adversarial Hierarchical Hidden Markov
Model for Human Pose Modeling and Generation
Rui Zhao, Qiang Ji
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy NY, USA
{zhaor,jiq}@rpi.edu

LDS assumes the underlying dynamics can be described by a
linear model, which may not be sufﬁcient for case like human
motion data. On the other hand, more complex model such
as recurrent neural networks (RNN) based deep models often
has exceedingly large number of parameters. Without sufﬁciently large amount of data or careful regularization, training
such model is prone to overﬁt. In addition, the model is deterministic. Simply reducing the model complexity compromises the capability of capturing randomness and variation
presented in data. We instead propose a hierarchical HMM
(HHMM), which extends the shallow HMM leveraging on
Bayesian framework. The proposed HHMM allows model
parameters vary as random variables among data instances.
Given the same amount of parameters, HHMM has a much
larger capacity compared to HMM. Besides, HHMM retains
the inference method available in HMM, allowing us to do
various inference tasks efﬁciently. Finally, as a probabilistic
generative model, HHMM can capture spatio-temporal dependencies in dynamic process and modeling variations in a
principled way.

Abstract
We propose a hierarchical extension to hidden Markov model
(HMM) under the Bayesian framework to overcome its limited
model capacity. The model parameters are treated as random
variables whose distributions are governed by hyperparameters. Therefore the variation in data can be modeled at both
instance level and distribution level. We derive a novel learning method for estimating the parameters and hyperparameters
of our model based on adversarial learning framework, which
has shown promising results in generating photorealistic images and videos. We demonstrate the beneﬁt of the proposed
method on human motion capture data through comparison
with both state-of-the-art methods and the same model that
is learned by maximizing likelihood. The ﬁrst experiment on
reconstruction shows the model’s capability of generalizing to
novel testing data. The second experiment on synthesis shows
the model’s capability of generating realistic and diverse data.

Introduction
In recent years, generative dynamic model has attracted a
lot of attention due to its potential of learning representation
from unlabeled sequential data as well as its capability of
data generation. (Gan et al. 2015; Srivastava, Mansimov, and
Salakhudinov 2015; Mittelman et al. 2014; Xue et al. 2016;
Walker et al. 2016). Sequential data introduce additional
challenge for modeling due to temporal dependencies and
signiﬁcant intra-class variation. Consider human action as
an example. Even though the underlying dynamic pattern
remains similar for the same type of action, the actual pose
and speed vary for different people. Even if the same person
performs the action repeatedly, there will be noticeable difference. This motivates us to design a probabilistic dynamic
model that not only can capture the consistent dynamic pattern across different data instances, but also can accommodate
the variation therein.
Widely used dynamic model like HMM models dynamic
process through transition among different discrete states.
In order to encode N bits of information, HMM needs 2N
number of states. Therefore, the model complexity increases
exponentially with the model capacity. Linear dynamic system (LDS) uses continuous states to capture dynamics, which
avoids exponential increase of model complexity. However,

As for model learning, maximum likelihood estimate
(MLE) has been the de facto learning objective for probabilistic generative models. Despite its wide adoption, MLE
tends to ﬁt a diffused distribution on data (Theis, Oord, and
Bethge 2015). For static image synthesis, the results often
look blurred. Recently, adversarial learning has emerged
to be a popular learning criteria for learning generative
models. Variants of generative adversarial networks (GAN)
(Goodfellow et al. 2014; Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2015;
Reed et al. 2016; Nowozin, Cseke, and Tomioka 2016;
Nguyen et al. 2017) show promising results in generating
both sharp and realistic-looking images of face, object and
indoor/outdoor scene. There is also an increasing interest in
extending the framework for dynamic data (Vondrick, Pirsiavash, and Torralba 2016; Saito, Matsumoto, and Saito 2017;
Tulyakov et al. 2017). In this work, we explore the idea
of training the proposed HHMM using adversarial objective,
which has two major beneﬁts. First, it bypasses the intractable
objective of MLE in hierarchical model where the integration
over parameters introduces additional dependencies among
random variables. Second, it aims at learning a model that
can generate realistic-looking data. Following the adversarial
learning framework, we introduce a separate discriminative
dynamic model to guide the learning of HHMM, which serves

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2636

