The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Beyond Sparsity: Tree Regularization of
Deep Models for Interpretability
Mike Wu,1 Michael C. Hughes,2 Sonali Parbhoo,3
Maurizio Zazzi,4 Volker Roth,3 Finale Doshi-Velez2
1

2

Stanford University, wumike@cs.stanford.edu
Harvard University SEAS, mike@michaelchughes.com, ﬁnale@seas.harvard.edu
3
University of Basel, {sonali.parbhoo,volker.roth}@unibas.ch
4
University of Siena, maurizio.zazzi@unisi.it
(Chen and Asch 2017). Simulatability allows clinicians to
audit predictions easily. They can manually inspect changes
to outputs under slightly-perturbed inputs, check substeps
against their expert knowledge, and identify when predictions are made due to systemic bias in the data rather than
real causes. Similar needs for simulatability exist in many
decision-critical domains such as disaster response or recidivism prediction.
To address this need for interpretability, a number of
works have been developed to assist in the interpretation
of already-trained models. Craven and Shavlik (1996) train
decision trees that mimic the predictions of a ﬁxed, pretrained neural network, but do not train the network itself
to be simpler. Other post-hoc interpretations typically typically evaluate the sensitivity of predictions to local perturbations of inputs or the input gradient (Ribeiro, Singh,
and Guestrin 2016; Selvaraju et al. 2017; Adler et al. 2016;
Lundberg and Lee 2016; Erhan et al. 2009). In parallel, research efforts have emphasized that simple lists of (perhaps
locally) important features are not sufﬁcient: Singh, Ribeiro,
and Guestrin (2016) provide explanations in the form of programs; Lakkaraju, Bach, and Leskovec (2016) learn decision
sets and show beneﬁts over other rule-based methods.
These techniques focus on understanding already learned
models, rather than ﬁnding models that are more interpretable. However, it is well-known that deep models often
have multiple optima of similar predictive accuracy (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016), and thus one might
hope to ﬁnd more interpretable models with equal predictive
accuracy. However, the ﬁeld of optimizing deep models for
interpretability remains nascent. Ross, Hughes, and DoshiVelez (2017) penalize input sensitivity to features marked as
less relevant. Lei, Barzilay, and Jaakkola (2016) train deep
models that make predictions from text and simultaneously
highlight contiguous subsets of words, called a “rationale,”
to justify each prediction. While both works optimize their
deep models to expose relevant features, lists of features are
not sufﬁcient to simulate the prediction.

Abstract
The lack of interpretability remains a key barrier to the adoption of deep models in many applications. In this work,
we explicitly regularize deep models so human users might
step through the process behind their predictions in little
time. Speciﬁcally, we train deep time-series models so their
class-probability predictions have high accuracy while being
closely modeled by decision trees with few nodes. Using intuitive toy examples as well as medical tasks for treating sepsis and HIV, we demonstrate that this new tree regularization
yields models that are easier for humans to simulate than simpler L1 or L2 penalties without sacriﬁcing predictive power.

Introduction
Deep models have become the de-facto approach for prediction in a variety of applications such as image classiﬁcation (e.g. (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012)) and
machine translation (e.g. (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014;
Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014)). However, many practitioners are reluctant to adopt deep models because their predictions are difﬁcult to interpret. In this work, we seek a speciﬁc form of interpretability known as human-simulability.
A human-simulatable model is one in which a human user
can “take in input data together with the parameters of the
model and in reasonable time step through every calculation
required to produce a prediction” (Lipton 2016). For example, small decision trees with only a few nodes are easy for
humans to simulate and thus understand. In contrast, even
simple deep models like multi-layer perceptrons with a few
dozen units can have far too many parameters and connections for a human to easily step through. Deep models for sequences are even more challenging. Of course, decision trees
with too many nodes are also hard to simulate. Our key research question is: can we create deep models that are wellapproximated by compact, human-simulatable models?
The question of creating accurate yet human-simulatable
models is an important one, because in many domains simulatability is paramount. For example, despite advances in
deep learning for clinical decision support (e.g. (Miotto et
al. 2016; Choi et al. 2016; Che et al. 2015)), the clinical
community remains skeptical of machine learning systems

Contributions. In this work, we take steps toward optimizing deep models for human-simulatability via a new
model complexity penalty function we call tree regularization. Tree regularization favors models whose decision
boundaries can be well-approximated by small decision-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1670

