The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Horizontal Scaling with a Framework for Providing
AI Solutions within a Game Company
John F. Kolen, Mohsen Sardari, Marwan Mattar, Nick Peterson, Meng Wu
EADP Intelligent Systems
Electronic Arts
209 Redwood Shores Parkway
Redwood City, California 94069
{jkolen,msardari,mmattar,npeterson,mewu}@ea.com
is slowly shrinking, with some sides arguing that NPC AI
is almost solved (Nareyek 2007). Player experience modeling employs AI techniques to capture predictive models
of player behaviors in a variety of situations. These behaviors include in-game purchases, game mode changes, and
skill scores. Procedural content generation attempts to alleviate the enormous cost and effort associated with feeding
the content furnace as well as providing a tailored experience for the player (Togelius et al. 2011). Game data mining
is critical to large game operations, providing insight into
the game ecosystem. For instance, understanding how players spend their time in a game is important for tuning the
current game and designing the next.
Another important area of AI research is decision support
and autonomy. Decision support systems (DSS) are used
by management, operations, and planners to make decisions
in unstructured or semistructured environments. Expert systems, underlying knowledge-driven DSS, have been a core
AI task for nearly as long as gaming (Jackson 1998). It can,
however, be very simple to turn a decision support tool into
an autonomous agent (Fox and Khan 2014).
The intersection of these disparate AI ﬁelds is the subject of this paper. The interactive entertainment industry,
or more succinctly, game companies, employ a wide range
of AI knowledge and technologies to deliver their products. Animators, game engineers, and data scientists rely on
constraint satisfaction, path ﬁnding, machine learning, and
many other traditional AI techniques. Game companies, like
most other industries, deﬁne task-speciﬁc work roles. Animators work with other animators who are attached to teams
tasked with delivering a game. Often, the only time animators, engineers, and scientists ﬁnd themselves in the same
room is for the company all-hands.
Imagine what happens when a highly virulent technology
meme infects a cross section of game company employees.
As the meme takes hold in a team, they are compelled to race
after tools that promise solutions to long standing problems.
Take a company with hundreds of such teams each trying to
implement, deploy, and maintain their own meme-inspired
solutions. Tool proliferation leads to problems with interoperability as well as knowledge acquisition and transfer.
Today, the AI and deep learning memes have spread
throughout many companies, including Electronic Arts
(EA). The focus is on the wonderful promises of individual

Abstract
Games have been a major focus of AI since the ﬁeld formed
seventy years ago. Recently, video games have replaced chess
and go as the current “Mt. Everest Problem”. This paper looks
beyond the video games themselves to the application of AI
techniques within the ecosystems that produce them. Electronic Arts (EA) must deal with AI at scale across many game
studios as it develops many AAA games each year, and not
a single, AI-based, ﬂagship application. EA has adopted a
horizontal scaling strategy in response to this challenge and
built a platform for delivering AI artifacts anywhere within
EA’s software universe. By combining a data warehouse for
player history, an Agent Store for capturing processes acquired through machine learning, and a recommendation engine as an action layer, EA has been delivering a wide range
of AI solutions throughout the company during the last two
years. These solutions, such as dynamic difﬁculty adjustment,
in-game content and activity recommendations, matchmaking, and game balancing, have had major impact on engagement, revenue, and development resources within EA.

Introduction
Game playing has a long history within the AI community. Chess and checkers were the focus of early foundational work (e.g. (Turing 1953) and (Samuel 1959)) and
have become, along with Jeopardy! (Ferrucci et al. 2013)
and Go (Silver et al. 2016), historical mile markers of this
ﬁeld’s progress as game playing agents have surpassed human grandmaster performance. Recently, video games have
garnered the attention of researchers. Learning to play Atari
2600 games (Mnih et al. 2013) and Doom (Lample and
Chaplot 2017) from pixels and controllers represents the latest efforts to build super-human game playing agents.
While game playing receives a lot of attention, the games
themselves have been the subject of research as well, historically focusing on non-player character (NPC) behaviors,
player experience modeling, procedural content generation,
and massive scale data mining (Yannakakis 2012). AI academics and game engineers once found themselves separated by a sophistication gap: high-potential academic techniques on one side, and scripting (and other scalable, practical engineering techniques) on the other. This gap, however,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7680

