The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Anti-Makeup: Learning A Bi-Level Adversarial
Network for Makeup-Invariant Face Veriﬁcation
Yi Li, Lingxiao Song, Xiang Wu, Ran He,∗ Tieniu Tan
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, CASIA
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
yi.li@cripac.ia.ac.cn, {lingxiao.song, rhe, tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, alfredxiangwu@gmail.com
Abstract
Makeup is widely used to improve facial attractiveness and is
well accepted by the public. However, different makeup styles
will result in signiﬁcant facial appearance changes. It remains
a challenging problem to match makeup and non-makeup
face images. This paper proposes a learning from generation
approach for makeup-invariant face veriﬁcation by introducing a bi-level adversarial network (BLAN). To alleviate the
negative effects from makeup, we ﬁrst generate non-makeup
images from makeup ones, and then use the synthesized nonmakeup images for further veriﬁcation. Two adversarial networks in BLAN are integrated in an end-to-end deep network, with the one on pixel level for reconstructing appealing facial images and the other on feature level for preserving identity information. These two networks jointly reduce
the sensing gap between makeup and non-makeup images.
Moreover, we make the generator well constrained by incorporating multiple perceptual losses. Experimental results on
three benchmark makeup face datasets demonstrate that our
method achieves state-of-the-art veriﬁcation accuracy across
makeup status and can produce photo-realistic non-makeup
face images.

Figure 1: Samples of facial images with (the ﬁrst and the
third columns) and without (the second and the fourth
columns) the application of cosmetics. The signiﬁcant discrepancy of the same identity can be observed.
The history of cosmetics can be traced back to at least
ancient Egypt (Burlando et al. 2010). Nowadays wearing
makeup is well accepted in the daily life, and is even regarded as a basic courtesy on many important occasions.
With appropriate cosmetic products, one can easily smooth
skin, alter lip colour, change the shape of eyebrows, and accentuate eye regions. All these operations are often used
to hide facial ﬂaws and improve perceived attractiveness.
But in the meanwhile, they also bring about remarkable facial appearance changes as exhibited in Figure 1, resulting
in both global and local appearance discrepancies between
the images with and without makeup. Most of the existing
face veriﬁcation methods rely much on the various cues and
information captured by the effective appearance features.
These methods inherently lack robustness over the application of makeup that is non-permanent as well as miscellaneous. Recent study in (Dantcheva, Chen, and Ross 2012)
has claimed that the application of facial cosmetics decreases the performance of both commercial and academic
face veriﬁcation approaches signiﬁcantly.
In contrast to the mentioned schemes, we consider from a
new perspective and propose to settle the makeup-invariant
face veriﬁcation problem via a learning from generation framework. This framework simultaneously considers
makeup removal and face veriﬁcation, and is implemented

Introduction
Face veriﬁcation focuses on the problem of making machines automatically determine whether a pair of face images refer to the same identity. As a fundamental research
task, its development beneﬁts various real-world applications, ranging from security surveillance to credit investigation. Over the past decades, massive face veriﬁcation
methods have achieved signiﬁcant progress (Sun, Wang,
and Tang 2013; Taigman et al. 2014; Sun et al. 2014;
Jing et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2016; He et al. 2017; Huang et
al. 2017), especially the ones proﬁting by the recently raised
deep networks. Nevertheless, there are still challenges remaining as bottlenecks in the real-world applications, such
as pose (Huang et al. 2017), NIR-VIS (He et al. 2017) and
makeup changes, which are often summarized as heterogeneous tasks. Due to the wide applications of facial cosmetics, the veriﬁcation task of face images before and after
makeup has drawn much attention in the computer vision
society.
∗

Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7057

