The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Semantic Understanding for Contextual In-Video Advertising
Rishi Madhok
Delhi Technological University, India
rishi bt2k14@dtu.ac.in, +91-9811481780

Shashank Mujumdar,
Nitin Gupta, Sameep Mehta
IBM Research, India
{shamujum, ngupta47, sameepmehta}@in.ibm.com

crime etc.). A given video can be segmented into meaningful
chunks with standard scene detection methods. In this paper,
we propose a new method which uses multi-modal information to semantically understand the video content, and recommend/insert ads in a video such that the inserted ads are
context-aware and do not interrupt the user experience.
The problem of inserting context-aware ads in videos has
been explored extensively in literature. (Mei, Hua, and Li
2009) proposed a framework to insert ads in videos based
on global textual relevance gathered from video meta data
and local visual-aural relevance through low-level image
and audio features. Similar approach is utilized by (Xiang,
Nguyen, and Kankanhalli 2015) where the context is established through textual meta data and visual saliency is
maintained through high-level features extracted from deep
neural networks. (Sengamedu, Sawant, and Wadhwa 2007)
propose a method to identify appropriate ad-insertion points
within a video and take into account face/object detection to
associate context relevant ads.
The major limitation of the methods in prior art is the
lack of analysis of the video content to identify the context
for inserting better ads. A semantic understanding obtained
through multi-modal analysis of the textual meta data and
the video content is necessary to recommend/insert the most
relevant ads for a non-intrusive user experience and to the
best of our knowledge it has not been addressed in prior art.

Abstract
With the increasing consumer base of online video content,
it is important for advertisers to understand the video context when targeting video ads to consumers. To improve the
consumer experience and quality of ads, key factors need to
be considered such as (i) ad relevance to video content (ii)
where and how video ads are placed, and (iii) non-intrusive
user experience. We propose a framework to semantically understand the video content for better ad recommendation that
ensure these criteria.

Introduction
More often than not, while watching a video online, viewers
may be interrupted by untimely as well as irrelevant advertisements that hamper their viewing experience. To account
for this problem, different methods to recommend contextaware ads have been proposed (Mei, Hua, and Li 2009).
However, “context” is generally inferred through text associated with the video or w.r.t pre-deﬁned concepts (Car,
Food, etc.) identiﬁed in the video. Other methods to recommend video ads based on biddings (Zhang, Yuan, and Wang
2014), sentiments (Vedula et al. 2017), and user’s past history (De Bock and Van den Poel 2010) have also been explored. However, such information is not sufﬁcient nor necessary to insert context aware ads in videos.
We deﬁne context to be the semantic understanding of the
different events in the video through analysis of the video
frames, text extracted from speech and associated meta data,
and audio extracted from the video. Given a video of a person driving a car that meets an accident, a semantic understanding of the event would suggest a car/life insurance ad
as opposed to a generic advertisement of a car. At the same
time, semantic understanding of the video also helps to decide where and how an ad is inserted in the video to ensure
a non-intrusive user experience.
We consider the following three scenarios to understand
the context in videos and recommend/insert relevant ads:
(a) concept identiﬁcation - identify the central entity (object, celebrity, location etc.) in the video scene, (b) concept
+ event understanding - identify the event associated with
the central concept, and (c) theme understanding - identify the theme of the video scene (happy, adventure, death,

Approach
In order to identify the semantic meaning from different
sources of information associated with the video, we extract
the following features from the video (a) video concepts detect salient objects in a video, (b) video clip summarization - to understand context/event of a video, (c) speech to
text - to understand the theme of a video, and (d) embedded
text and other meta data - to augment the feature set.
For the video, we use the pre-trained darknet imagenet model for object detection. We identify meaningful clips through the video using the standard python library pyscenedetect. We extract key frames from each of
the clips and generate captions (Karpathy and Fei-Fei 2015)
which are fed into the sequence-to-sequence learning model
(Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014) to generate the text summary of the clip. Relevant keywords are extracted using
Rapid Automatic Keyword Extraction algorithm (concepts,

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8115

