The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

TipMaster: A Knowledge Base of Authoritative
Local News Sources on Social Media
Xin Shuai, Xiaomo Liu, Armineh Nourbakhsh, Sameena Shah, Tonya Custis
Research and Development
Thomson Reuters
{xin.shuai, xiaomo.liu, armineh.nourbakhsh, sameena.shah, tonya.custis}@thomsonreuters.com

of Twitter accounts are most likely to originate local breaking news. The results show that two types of local accounts
are favored by most journalists. One type is media accounts
associated with news agencies, TV channels and radio stations etc., which focus on reporting local news and events
(e.g., @KTLA). The other type is government accounts associated with local government organizations, which mainly
announce news related to social and public life within a jurisdiction (e.g., @NYPD). Generally, both media and government accounts belong to organization accounts, which are
typically operated by an organization (or a person representating the organization). By contrast, personal accounts are
usually operated by individuals and used for personal status
updates and communications.
Figure 1 shows an example in which a local government
account broke a news story ahead of traditional media. When
the San Bernardino shooting happened at 10:59am PST on
Dec. 2, 2015, the Fire Department of San Bernardino responded immediately and notiﬁed the public through Twitter at 11:14am PST. This was the ﬁrst public piece of information about the shooting, earlier than any news media.
After 5 minutes, a local news channel (KTLA) picked it up
and produced the ﬁrst news report about it. The tragedy was
then broadcast country-wide and worldwide by Reuters and
CNN, at 11:28am and 11:32am respectively.
In this paper, we present TipMaster, a knowledge base
consisting of local government and media Twitter accounts.
TipMaster derives its name from “tip,” a word used by journalists to describe early indicators of an event. The system
tips the journalists about breaking stories by focusing on accounts that are likely to break news at the local level.
We describe the algorithms that power TipMaster, and
demonstrate its capability for detecting local breaking news
and debunking emergent rumors. Speciﬁcally, we propose
a three-step classiﬁcation pipeline to integrate information
from both Twitter accounts and external data resources (e.g.
Census index and Facebook page). Furthermore, we demonstrate how TipMaster works as a real-time monitoring platform of breaking news, dynamic local trends and other related information. Our contributions include: (1) a systematic methodology consisting of information retrieval and
classiﬁcation to automatically distinguish government and
media Twitter accounts by leveraging both account features
and external data resources; (2) a news monitoring platform

Abstract
Twitter has become an important online source for realtime news dissemination. Especially, ofﬁcial accounts of local government and media outlets have provided newsworthy and authoritative information, revealing local trends and
breaking news. In this paper, we describe TipMaster, an automatically constructed knowledge base of Twitter accounts
that are likely to report local news, from government agencies
to local media outlets. First, we implement classiﬁers for detecting these accounts by integrating heterogeneous information from the accounts’ textual metadata, proﬁle images, and
their tweet messages. Next, we demonstrate two use cases for
TipMaster: 1) as a platform that monitors real-time social media messages for local breaking news, and 2) as an authoritative source for verifying nascent rumors. Experimental results
show that our account classiﬁcation algorithms achieve both
high precision and recall (around 90%). The demonstrated
case studies prove that our platform is able to detect local
breaking news or debunk emergent rumors faster than mainstream media sources.

Introduction
Social media has become a prominent source for spreading and consumption of information and news (Kwak et
al. 2010). It often provides faster access to breaking news
than traditional news agencies (Laird 2012). Nowadays, it
is common practice of journalists to monitor social media,
especially Twitter in identifying breaking news stories (Vis
2013). However, the large and ever-changing amount of
noisy and imprecise content on Twitter makes it difﬁcult
for journalists to sift through all the irrelevant tweets to ﬁnd
valuable news stories, especially since most journalists rely
on manually selected user accounts and keyword searches to
ﬁlter for newsworthy content (Nourbakhsh et al. 2017). As
one of the largest media companies in the world, Thomson
Reuters invests in new social mining technologies that assist
journalists in identifying local breaking news.
In this paper, we propose an automated method for identifying the accounts on Twitter that are most likely to notify
journalists of local breaking news in the fastest way. We conducted a survey among Reuters journalists as to which types
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7825

