The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Playing SNES Games with NeuroEvolution of Augmenting Topologies
Son Pham, Keyi Zhang, Tung Phan, Jasper Ding, Christopher L. Dancy
Department of Computer Science, Bucknell University, Lewisburg, PA 17837
{son.pham, keyi.zhang, tung.phan, cd032, christopher.dancy}@bucknell.edu

Abstract

Interfacing with SNES Environment

Teaching a computer to play video games has generally been
seen as a reasonable benchmark for developing new AI techniques. In recent years, extensive research has been completed to develop reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms to
play various Atari 2600 games, resulting in new applications
of algorithms such as Deep Q-Learning or Policy Gradient
that outperform humans. However, games from Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES) are far more complicated than Atari 2600 games as many of these state-of-the-art
algorithms still struggle to perform on this platform. In this
paper, we present a new platform to research algorithms on
SNES games and investigate NeuroEvolution of Augmenting
Topologies (NEAT) as a possible approach to develop algorithms that outperform humans in SNES games.

We used BizHawk Emulator (TASVideos 2017), an
open-sourced SNES emulator as the foundation for our environment. BizHawk contains many supporting features
such as save-playback and speed up that are very helpful for
setting up training environment. It also stores the entire
RAM map, meaning that we can search for specific information of the game such as score, distance and ranking in
real time.

Introduction
Video games that require some strategy and with reasonably
sized state spaces are great platforms for RL research. Traditionally, games used in RL research has been limited to
board games like Chess, Checkers or more recently Go and
Poker because they tend to have well-defined representation. Recently, RL research has used more visual games
such as Atari 2600 games because these games have a fairly
large state-space and encourage an approach that can generalize representation of visual inputs.
Algorithms like Deep Q-Network (Mnih et al. 2015) have
been able to outperform humans in Atari 2600 games, but
still struggle to perform well on SNES games due to the environment being far more complicated (Bhonker et al.
2016). In this extended abstract, we present two early contributions with following work:
• Introducing an environment to interface SNES games so
that researchers can train RL algorithms on these games.
• Investigating NeuroEvolution of Augmenting Topologies
(NEAT) (Stanley and Miikkulainen 2001) as a possible approach to develop RL algorithms for SNES games by creating a NEAT agent to play the game Top Gear (1997).

Figure 1: Architecture of the RL platform.
We modified the source code so that it became a perception module. This module queries a Config file that contains
all memory locations of specific game information such as
score or distance. The module then constantly streams the
visual input and these additional information through a TCP
server. The TCP server then sends all input information to a
control module, which then returns buttons pressed that can
be fed back directly to BizHawk emulator.
This setup allows one to add a new game to the platform
(by simply writing a Config file for each available game
ROM) without writing new specific supporting code. The
TCP server alternates the request between the two modules,
meaning that the game will only proceed if it receives button
output from the latest input, effectively eliminating any input delay problem. Separating the control and perception
module also makes the task of writing the training mechanism in the learning module much easier.

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8129

