The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Constructive Preference Elicitation
over Hybrid Combinatorial Spaces
Paolo Dragone∗

Stefano Teso†

Andrea Passerini

University of Trento, Italy
TIM-SKIL, Trento, Italy
paolo.dragone@unitn.it

KU Leuven, Belgium
stefano.teso@cs.kuleuven.be

University of Trento, Italy
andrea.passerini@unitn.it

reﬁning an estimate of the preference model from the received feedback. The ultimate goal is to produce good recommendations with minimal user effort. Here we focus on
choice queries, an interaction protocol consisting in recommending a set of products; the user is invited to indicate the
most preferred item in the set (Viappiani and Boutilier 2011;
Louviere, Hensher, and Swait 2000). Elicitation techniques
based on choice set queries rely on some strategy to select the next query set to show to the user. Successful query
selection strategies must balance between the estimated informativeness of the recommendations (so to minimize the
number of elicitation rounds) and their quality (to maximize
the chance of the user buying the product and to keep her engaged). By generalizing pairwise ranking feedback, choice
queries over larger sets of items allow ﬁner control over
informativeness, diversity and quality (Pu and Chen 2009;
Bollen et al. 2010).
Most existing preference elicitation methods are not designed for constructive tasks (Viappiani and Boutilier 2011;
Teso, Passerini, and Viappiani 2016). Regret-based methods (Viappiani and Boutilier 2009) rely on perfectly rational user responses, while Bayesian approaches do not scale
to combinatorial product spaces (Viappiani and Boutilier
2010), as discussed in the related work section. A notable
exception is the approach of Teso et al. (Teso, Passerini,
and Viappiani 2016), which avoids the enumeration of the
product space by encoding it through mixed-integer linear
constraints. Alas, it requires conﬁgurations to be encoded
with binary variables (in one-hot format), which can be very
costly from a computational perspective, and comes with no
formal performance guarantees.
In this paper we present several contributions. First, we
propose an iterative algorithm, dubbed Choice Perceptron,
that generalizes the structured Perceptron (Collins 2002;
Shivaswamy and Joachims 2015) to interactive preference
elicitation from pairwise and set-wise choice feedback. The
query selection strategy is implemented as an optimization
problem over the combinatorial space of products. In contrast to previous constructive approaches (Teso, Passerini,
and Viappiani 2016), our algorithm handles general linear
utilities over arbitrary feature spaces, including combinatorial and numerical attributes and features. Second, we prove
that under a very general assumption (implied by many existing user response models), the expected average regret

Abstract
Peference elicitation is the task of suggesting a highly preferred conﬁguration to a decision maker. The preferences are
typically learned by querying the user for choice feedback
over pairs or sets of objects. In its constructive variant, new
objects are synthesized “from scratch” by maximizing an estimate of the user utility over a combinatorial (possibly inﬁnite) space of candidates. In the constructive setting, most
existing elicitation techniques fail because they rely on exhaustive enumeration of the candidates. A previous solution
explicitly designed for constructive tasks comes with no formal performance guarantees, and can be very expensive in (or
unapplicable to) problems with non-Boolean attributes. We
propose the Choice Perceptron, a Perceptron-like algorithm
for learning user preferences from set-wise choice feedback
over constructive domains and hybrid Boolean-numeric feature spaces. We provide a theoretical analysis on the attained
regret that holds for a large class of query selection strategies, and devise a heuristic strategy that aims at optimizing
the regret in practice. Finally, we demonstrate its effectiveness by empirical evaluation against existing competitors on
constructive scenarios of increasing complexity.

Introduction
Constructive preference elicitation is the task of recommending structured objects, i.e. conﬁgurations of several
components, assembled on the basis of the user preferences (Teso, Passerini, and Viappiani 2016; Dragone et al.
2016). In this setting, the space of possible conﬁgurations
grows exponentially in the number of components. Examples include conﬁgurable products, such as personal computers or mobile phone plans, and complex preference-based
decision problems, such as customized travel planning or
personalized activity scheduling.
The suggested conﬁgurations should reﬂect the preferences of the user, which are unobserved and must be
estimated. As in standard preference elicitation (Pigozzi,
Tsoukiàs, and Viappiani 2016), preferences can be learned
by iteratively suggesting candidate products to the user, and
∗
PD is a fellow of TIM-SKIL Trento and is supported by a TIM
scholarship.
†
ST is supported by the ERC Advanced Grant SYNTH – Synthesising inductive data models.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2943

