The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

HCVRD: A Benchmark for Large-Scale
Human-Centered Visual Relationship Detection
Bohan Zhuang,∗ Qi Wu,∗† Chunhua Shen, Ian Reid, Anton van den Hengel
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision,
The University of Adelaide, Australia

Abstract

Frequency

Visual relationship detection aims to capture interactions between pairs of objects in images. Relationships between objects and humans represent a particularly important subset
of this problem, with implications for challenges such as
understanding human behavior, and identifying affordances,
amongst others. In addressing this problem we ﬁrst construct a
large-scale human-centric visual relationship detection dataset
(HCVRD), which provides many more types of relationship
annotations (nearly 10K categories) than the previous released
datasets. This large label space better reﬂects the reality of
human-object interactions, but gives rise to a long-tail distribution problem, which in turn demands a zero-shot approach
to labels appearing only in the test set. This is the ﬁrst time
this issue has been addressed. We propose a webly-supervised
approach to these problems and demonstrate that the proposed
model provides a strong baseline on our HCVRD dataset.

woman playing with frisbee;
woman standing on grass;
woman on pants

man jumping on skateboard;
man near steps;
man jumping off ground

girl wearing blue visor;
girl wearing jacket;
girl playing with kite;
girl standing in sand;
girl wearing shorts

Relationship categories

Figure 1: The long-tail label distribution of our HCVRD
dataset. We only show the top-2000 relationships because the
tail is too long. Three example images are also shown, with
our webly-supervised model detected results. The color of
human and objects in the phrases correspond to the color of
the bounding boxes. The arrows indicate the ‘location’ of the
relationship in the label distribution. As we can see, most of
the relationships lie in the tail. Some of them such as ‘girl
wearing blue visor’ is not even in the top-2000.

Introduction
The challenge in visual relationship detection (Li, Ouyang,
and Wang 2017; Liang, Lee, and P. Xing 2017; Lu et al.
2016) is to capture interactions between pairs of objects in an
image. In this paper, rather than detect interactions between
arbitrary objects, we focus on capturing the relationships
between a human and an object. Recognising human-object
relationships is a problem of signiﬁcant practical import,
and a subtly different challenge to the more general case.
Humans have a far wider variety of modes of interaction than
general objects, and they have agency, meaning that more
can be drawn from human-object interactions than from other
interactions. For example, a human can interact with a bicycle
in multiple ways (such as carry, hold, ride, park, push etc. ),
but the relationships between bicycles and other objects are
far simpler. The human interactions also imply intent, and
possibly provide information about the past or future that is
typically lacking from object-object relationships. Previous
work (Chao et al. 2017; 2015) has similarly recognised that
human-object interactions of particular interest, and have
proposed several datasets.

As in so many problems of practical interest, the label
space of realistic human-centric visual relationship detection
(HCVRD) exhibits a long tail distribution, meaning that there
are very few, to zero, training examples for the vast majority
of labels. This is a fundamental problem for the standard deep
learning approach, which relies on large numbers of examples for each class. If deep learning is to progress from easy,
and often artiﬁcially simpliﬁed problems for which copious
training data is available, datasets will need to better reﬂect
the practical reality of the majority of problems. The main
contribution of this paper is a large-scale human-centric visual relationship detection (HCVRD) dataset that accurately
depicts the long-tail label distribution of the problem, thus
necessitating zero-shot recognition.
We formulate the human-centric visual relationship detection problem as that of detecting relationship triplets
human, predicate, object in the image, with bounding
boxes on the human subject and object. The HCVRD dataset
is constructed based on the Visual Genome (Krishna et al.
2017). Compared to previous human-object interaction works
(Chao et al. 2017; 2015), there are several differences. First,

∗

First two authors contributed equally to this work.
Qi Wu is the corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

7631

