The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Order-Planning Neural Text Generation From Structured Data
Lei Sha,† Lili Mou,‡ Tianyu Liu,† Pascal Poupart,‡ Sujian Li,† Baobao Chang,† Zhifang Sui†
†

Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Ministry of Education; School of EECS, Peking Univeristy
‡
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo
†
{shalei, tianyu0421, lisujian, chbb, szf}@pku.edu.cn
‡
doublepower.mou@gmail.com, ppoupart@uwaterloo.ca

Table:

Abstract

ID
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Generating texts from structured data (e.g., a table) is important for various natural language processing tasks such as
question answering and dialog systems. In recent studies, researchers use neural language models and encoder-decoder
frameworks for table-to-text generation. However, these neural network-based approaches typically do not model the order of content during text generation. When a human writes
a summary based on a given table, he or she would probably consider the content order before wording. In this paper,
we propose an order-planning text generation model, where
order information is explicitly captured by link-based attention. Then a self-adaptive gate combines the link-based attention with traditional content-based attention. We conducted
experiments on the W IKI B IO dataset and achieve higher performance than previous methods in terms of BLEU, ROUGE,
and NIST scores; we also performed ablation tests to analyze
each component of our model.1

Field
Name
Born
Died
Occupation
Nationality
Alma mater
Genre
Notable work

Content
Arthur Ignatius Conan Doyle
22 May 1859 Edinburgh, Scotland
7 July 1930 (aged 71) Crowborough, England
Author, writer, physician
British
University of Edinburgh Medical School
Detective ﬁction fantasy
Stories of Sherlock Homes

Text: Sir Arthur Ignatius Conan Doyle (22 May 1859 – 7 July
1930) was a British writer best known for his detective ﬁction featuring the character Sherlock Holmes.
Table 1: An example of a Wikipedia infobox and a reference
text.
or less “shortsighted” and differs from how humans write.
As suggested in the book The Elements of Style,
A basic structural design underlies every kind of writing . . . in most cases, planning must be a deliberate prelude to writing. (William and White 1999)

Introduction
Generating texts from structured data (e.g., a table) is important for various natural language processing tasks such
as question answering and dialog systems. Table 1 shows an
example of a Wikipedia infobox (containing ﬁelds and values) and a text summary.
In early years, text generation was usually accomplished
by human-designed rules and templates (Green 2006;
Turner, Sripada, and Reiter 2010), and hence the generated
texts were not ﬂexible. Recently, researchers applied neural networks to generate texts from structured data (Lebret,
Grangier, and Auli 2016), where a neural encoder captures
table information and a recurrent neural network (RNN) decodes this information into a natural language sentence.
Although such neural network-based approaches are capable of capturing complicated language and can be trained
in an end-to-end fashion, they lack explicit modeling of content order during text generation. That is to say, an RNN
generates a word at a time step conditioned on previously
generated words as well as table information, which is more

This motivates order planning for neural text generation. In
other words, a neural network should model not only word
order (as has been well captured by RNNs), but also the order of content, i.e., ﬁelds in a table.
From real summaries, we also observe that table ﬁelds
by themselves provide illuminating clues and constraints for
text generation. In the biography domain, for example, the
nationality of a person is typically mentioned before the occupation. This could beneﬁt from explicit planning of content order during neural text generation.
In this paper, we propose an order-planning method
for table-to-text generation. Our model is built upon the
encoder-decoder framework and uses RNNs for text synthesis with attention to table entries. Different from existing
neural models, we design a table ﬁeld linking mechanism,
inspired by temporal memory linkage in the Differentiable
Neural Computer (Graves et al. 2016, DNC). Our ﬁeld linking mechanism explicitly models the relationship between
different ﬁelds, enabling our neural network to better plan
what to say ﬁrst and what next. Further, we incorporate a
copy mechanism (Gu et al. 2016) into our model to cope
with rare words.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code
is
available
at
https://sites.google.com/site/
orderplanningnlg/

5414

