The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Interpreting CNN Knowledge
via An Explanatory Graph
Quanshi Zhang, Ruiming Cao, Feng Shi,
Ying Nian Wu, Song-Chun Zhu
University of California, Los Angeles

濛濸濴濷澳
瀃濴瀇瀇濸瀅瀁

Abstract

瀖

This paper learns a graphical model, namely an explanatory
graph, which reveals the knowledge hierarchy hidden inside
a pre-trained CNN. Considering that each ﬁlter1 in a convlayer of a pre-trained CNN usually represents a mixture of
object parts, we propose a simple yet efﬁcient method to automatically disentangles different part patterns from each ﬁlter, and construct an explanatory graph. In the explanatory
graph, each node represents a part pattern, and each edge encodes co-activation relationships and spatial relationships between patterns. More importantly, we learn the explanatory
graph for a pre-trained CNN in an unsupervised manner, i.e.
without a need of annotating object parts. Experiments show
that each graph node consistently represents the same object
part through different images. We transfer part patterns in the
explanatory graph to the task of part localization, and our
method signiﬁcantly outperforms other approaches.

濡濸濶濾澳
瀃濴瀇瀇濸瀅瀁

濜瀁瀃瀈瀇澳
濼瀀濴濺濸

濙濸濴瀇瀈瀅濸澳瀀濴瀃瀆澳 濘瀋瀃濿濴瀁濴瀇瀂瀅瀌澳 濣濴瀅瀇瀆澳濶瀂瀅瀅濸瀆瀃瀂瀁濷濼瀁濺澳瀇瀂澳
瀂濹澳濷濼濹濹濸瀅濸瀁瀇澳
濺瀅濴瀃濻
濸濴濶濻澳濺瀅濴瀃濻澳瀁瀂濷濸
濶瀂瀁瀉激濿濴瀌濸瀅瀆

Figure 1: An explanatory graph represents knowledge hierarchy hidden in conv-layers of a CNN. Each ﬁlter in a pretrained CNN may be activated by different object parts. Our
method disentangles part patterns from each ﬁlter in an unsupervised manner, thereby clarifying the knowledge representation.

Introduction

organize these patterns in an explanatory graph in an unsupervised manner. As shown in Fig. 1, the explanatory graph
explains the knowledge hierarchy hidden inside the CNN.
The explanatory graph disentangles the mixture of part patterns in each ﬁlter’s feature map1 of a conv-layer, and uses
each graph node to represent a part.
• Representing knowledge hierarchy: The explanatory
graph has multiple layers, which correspond to different
conv-layers of the CNN. Each graph layer has many nodes.
We use these graph nodes to summarize the knowledge hidden in chaotic feature maps of the corresponding conv-layer.
Because each ﬁlter in the conv-layer may potentially represent multiple parts of the object, we use graph nodes to represent patterns of all candidate parts. A graph edge connects
two nodes in adjacent layers to encode co-activation logics
and spatial relationships between them.
Note that we do not ﬁx the location of each pattern (node)
to a certain neural unit of a conv-layer’s output. Instead,
given different input images, a part pattern may appear on
various positions of a ﬁlter’s feature maps1 . For example,
the horse face pattern and the horse ear pattern in Fig. 1 can
appear on different positions of different images, as long as
they are co-activated and keep certain spatial relationships.
• Disentangling object parts from a single ﬁlter: As
shown in Fig. 1, each ﬁlter in a conv-layer may be activated

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al. 1998;
Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016;
Li et al. 2015) have achieved superior performance in object classiﬁcation and detection. However, the end-to-end
learning strategy makes the entire CNN a black box. When
a CNN is trained for object classiﬁcation, we believe that
its conv-layers have encoded rich implicit patterns (e.g. patterns of object parts and patterns of textures). Therefore, in
this research, we aim to provide a global view of how visual knowledge is organized in a pre-trained CNN, which
presents considerable challenges. For example,
1 How many types of patterns are memorized by each convolutional ﬁlter of the CNN (here, a pattern may describe
a speciﬁc object part or a certain texture)?
2 Which patterns are co-activated to describe an object part?
3 What is the spatial relationship between two patterns?
In this study, given a pre-trained CNN, we propose to
mine mid-level object part patterns from conv-layers, and we
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The output of a conv-layer is called the feature map of a convlayer. Each channel of this feature map is produced by a ﬁlter, so
we call a channel the feature map of a ﬁlter.

4454

