The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Large Scale Constrained Linear Regression
Revisited: Faster Algorithms via Preconditioning∗
Di Wang

Jinhui Xu

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
State University of New York at Buffalo

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
State University of New York at Buffalo

techniques to reduce the time complexity. This includes low
rank approximation (Musco and Musco 2015), SVM (Paul
et al. 2013), column subset selection (Boutsidis, Drineas,
and Magdon-Ismail 2014) and lp regression (for p ∈ [1, 2])
(Dasgupta et al. 2009). Thus it is very tempting to combine these two types of techniques to develop faster methods
with theoretical or statistical guarantee for more constrained
optimization problems. Recently, quite a number of works
have successfully combined the two types of techniques.
For example, (Gonen, Orabona, and Shalev-Shwartz 2016;
Gonen and Shalev-Shwartz 2015) proposed faster methods
for Ridge Regression and Empirical Risk Minimization, respectively, by using SVRG, Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD) and low rank approximation. (Zhang et al. 2013)
achieved guarantee for Empirical Risk Minimization by using random projection in dual problem.
In this paper, we revisit the preconditioning method for
solving large-scale constrained linear regression problem,
and propose faster algorithms for both the low ( ≈ 10−1 ∼
10−4 ) and high ( ≤ 10−8 ) precision cases by combining it
with some recent developments in sketching and optimization. Our main contributions can be summarized as follows.

Abstract
In this paper, we revisit the large-scale constrained linear regression problem and propose faster methods based on some
recent developments in sketching and optimization. Our algorithms combine (accelerated) mini-batch SGD with a new
method called two-step preconditioning to achieve an approximate solution with a time complexity lower than that of the
state-of-the-art techniques for the low precision case. Our
idea can also be extended to the high precision case, which
gives an alternative implementation to the Iterative Hessian
Sketch (IHS) method with signiﬁcantly improved time complexity. Experiments on benchmark and synthetic datasets
suggest that our methods indeed outperform existing ones
considerably in both the low and high precision cases.

Introduction
Since many problems in compressed sensing and machine
learning can be formulated as a constrained linear regression problem, such as SVM, LASSO, signal recovery (Pilanci and Wainwright 2015), large scale linear regression
with constraints now becomes one of the most popular and
basic models in Machine Learning and has received a great
deal of attentions from both the Machine Learning and Theoretical Computer Science communities. Formally, the problem can be deﬁned as follows,

• For the low precision case, we ﬁrst propose a novel algorithm called HDpwBatchSGD (i.e., Algorithm 2) by
combining a new method called two step preconditioning with mini-batch SGD. Mini-batch SGD is a popular
way for improving the efﬁciency of SGD. It uses several samples, instead of one, in each iteration and runs
the method on all these samples (simultaneously). Ideally, we would hope for a factor of r speed-up on the
convergence if using a batch of size r. However, this is
not always possible for general case. Actually in some
cases, there is even no speed-up at all when a largesize batch is used (Takác et al. 2013; Byrd et al. 2012;
Dekel et al. 2012). A unique feature of our method is its
optimal speeding-up with respect to the batch size, i.e. the
iteration complexity will decrease by a factor of b if we increase the batch size by a factor of b. To further improve
the running time, we also use the Multi-epoch Stochastic Accelerated mini-batch SGD (Ghadimi and Lan 2013)
to obtain another slightly different algorithm called HDpwAccBatchSGD, which has a time complexity lower than
that of the state-of-the-art technique (Yang et al. 2016).

min f (x) = Ax − b22 ,

x∈W

where A is a matrix in Rn×d with ed > n > d and W is a
closed convex set. The goal is to ﬁnd an x ∈ W such that
f (x) ≤ (1 + ) minx∈W f (x) or f (x) − minx∈W f (x) ≤ .
On one hand, recent developments on ﬁrst-order stochastic methods, such as Stochastic Dual Coordinate Ascent
(SDCA) (Shalev-Shwartz and Zhang 2013) and Stochastic
Variance Reduced Gradient (SVRG) (Johnson and Zhang
2013), have made signiﬁcant improvements on the convergence speed of large scale optimization problems in practice. On the other hand, random projection and sampling are
commonly used theoretical tools in many optimization problems as preconditioner, dimension reduction or sampling
∗
This research was supported in part by NSF through grants
IIS-1422591, CCF-1422324, and CCF-1716400
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1439

