The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Placing Objects in Gesture Space:
Toward Incremental Interpretation of Multimodal Spatial Descriptions
Ting Han,1 Casey Kennington,2 David Schlangen1
1

Dialogue Systems Group // CITEC, Bielefeld University, 2 Boise State University
{ting.han, david.schlangen}@uni-bielefeld.de, caseykennington@boisestate.edu

(1)

Abstract
When describing routes not in the current environment, a
common strategy is to anchor the description in conﬁgurations of salient landmarks, complementing the verbal descriptions by “placing” the non-visible landmarks in the gesture
space. Understanding such multimodal descriptions and later
locating the landmarks from real world is a challenging task
for the hearer, who must interpret speech and gestures in parallel, fuse information from both modalities, build a mental
representation of the description, and ground the knowledge
to real world landmarks. In this paper, we model the hearer’s
task, using a multimodal spatial description corpus we collected. To reduce the variability of verbal descriptions, we
simpliﬁed the setup to use simple objects as landmarks. We
describe a real-time system to evaluate the separate and joint
contributions of the modalities. We show that gestures not
only help to improve the overall system performance, even
if to a large extent they encode redundant information, but
also result in earlier ﬁnal correct interpretations. Being able
to build and apply representations incrementally will be of
use in more dialogical settings, we argue, where it can enable
immediate clariﬁcation in cases of mismatch.

Here[deixis] is the bus stop, a bit left of it[deixis] is a
church and right in front of that[deixis] is the hotel.

Figure 1: Providing a multimodal description (left) of a
scene (right).
The deictic gestures map the spatial layout of the landmarks from the speaker’s mental image to the shared gesture
space (McNeill 1992). Together with the verbal descriptions,
a listener can build a mental representation of the landmarks,
later navigating itself by comparing the mental representation with real-world landmarks.
While the verbal descriptions provide important information about the denoted objects (e.g., entity name: the bus
stop, relative position: a bit left of ), the deictic gestures
complement the verbal content with spatial information (i.e.,
points with coordinates in the gesture space, standing in for
the real locations of the referents, and indicating their spatial relation). Only together do gestures and words receive
a deﬁnite meaning (e.g., how much left is a bit left, relative
to below). Hence, the resolution task in this setting goes beyond previous works in which gestures can be grounded to
objects present in the environment (Stiefelhagen et al. 2004).
Psycholinguistic studies show that humans process gestures and speech jointly and incrementally (Campana et al.
2005). While descriptions unfold, listeners immediately integrate information from co-occurring speech and gestures.
Moreover, to apply they interpretation later, it’s essential to
form a hypothesis in mind, making it a very demanding cognitive, language-related tasks (Schneider and Taylor 1999).
In this paper, we model the joint and incremental interpretation of multimodal spatial descriptions, using a simpliﬁed
spatial description task. Speciﬁcally, we address following
questions: 1) to what degree can deictic gestures improve the
interpretation accuracy; 2) how gestures beneﬁt the interpretation of spatial descriptions on the incremental level. We
collected a multimodal spatial description corpus which was
elicited with a simpliﬁed scene description task (see details
in Data collection). The corpus includes hand motion and

Introduction
Navigating robots with natural route descriptions is a goal
researchers have long aspired to. While good performances
have been achieved on interpreting pure language navigations (e.g., “near the second door on your right”) and
multimodal commands in the shared space (e.g., “go over
there+[hand pointing to the destination]”) (Kollar et al.
2010; Skubic et al. 2004; Williams et al. 2016), not much
attention has been paid to the scenario of understanding multimodal route descriptions when the described route is not in
current view.
In such cases, anchoring the destination in conﬁgurations
of landmarks and indicating their relative spatial layout with
deictic gestures pointing into the empty gestural space is
a common practice (Emmorey, Tversky, and Taylor 2000;
Alibali 2005; Cassell et al. 2007). For example, to help the
listener identify a hotel in a busy town centre, a speaker
might produce a multimodal description like the following:
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5157

