The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Goal Recognition in Incomplete Domain Models
Ramon Fraga Pereira, Felipe Meneguzzi
Pontiﬁcal Catholic University of Rio Grande do Sul (PUCRS), Brazil
Postgraduate Programme in Computer Science, School of Informatics (FACIN)
Porto Alegre, RS, Av. Ipiranga 668, CEP: 90619-900
ramon.pereira@acad.pucrs.br
felipe.meneguzzi@pucrs.br
+55 51 3553 8622
We develop a goal recognition approach that can cope
with incomplete planning domain models (Nguyen, Sreedharan, and Kambhampati 2017). This paper has four main
contributions. First, we formalize goal recognition in incomplete domains by combining the standard formalization of
Ramı́rez and Geffner (2009; 2010) for plan recognition and
that of Nguyen, Sreedharan, and Kambhampati (2017). Second, we develop an algorithm, adapted from (Hoffmann,
Porteous, and Sebastia 2004), that extracts possible landmarks in incomplete domain models. Third, we develop a
notion of overlooked landmarks that we can extract online
as we process (on the ﬂy) observations. Fourth, we develop
a heuristic to recognize goals that accounts for the various
types of landmark as evidence.

Abstract
Recent approaches to goal recognition have progressively relaxed the assumptions about the amount and correctness of
domain knowledge and available observations, yielding accurate and efﬁcient algorithms. These approaches, however,
assume completeness and correctness of the domain theory
against which their algorithms match observations: this is too
strong for most real-world domains. In this work, we develop
a goal recognition technique capable of recognizing goals using incomplete (and possibly incorrect) domain theories.

1

Introduction

Goal recognition is the problem of recognizing the correct
goal intended by an observed agent, given a sequence of observations as evidence of its behavior in an environment and
a domain model describing how the observed agent generates such behavior. Approaches to solve this problem vary
on the amount and type of domain knowledge used in the
agents’ behavior (or plan generation) However, all recent
planning-based approaches assume that the domain model
is correct and complete (Ramı́rez and Geffner 2009; 2010;
Keren, Gal, and Karpas 2014; E.-Martı́n, R.-Moreno, and
Smith 2015; Sohrabi, Riabov, and Udrea 2016; Pereira and
Meneguzzi 2016; Pereira, Oren, and Meneguzzi 2017), preventing its application to realistic scenarios in which the domain modeler either has an incomplete or incorrect model of
the behavior under observation. Speciﬁcally, real world domains have two potential sources of uncertainty: (1) ambiguity in how actions performed by agents are realized; and
(2) ambiguity from how imperfect sensor data reports features of the world. The former stems from an incomplete
understanding of the action being modeled and requires a
domain modeler to specify a number of alternate versions of
the same action to cover the possibilities. For example, an
action to turn on the gas burner in a cooker may or may not
require the observed agent to press a spark button. The latter stems from imperfections in the way actions themselves
may be interpreted from real-world noisy data, e.g., if one
uses machine learning algorithms to classify objects to be
used as features (e.g., logical facts) of the observations, certain features may not be recognizable reliably, so it is useful
to model them as optional.

2

Goal Recognition in Incomplete Domains

Our goal recognition approach assumes that the observer has
an incomplete domain model while the observed agent is
planning and acting with a complete domain model. To account for such uncertainty, the model available to the observer contains possible preconditions and effects, much
like the incomplete domain models from previous planning
approaches (Weber and Bryce 2011; Nguyen, Sreedharan,
and Kambhampati 2017). We formalize the goal recognition
problem over incomplete domain models in Deﬁnition 1.
Deﬁnition 1 (Goal Recognition Problem) A goal recognition problem with an incomplete domain model is a 5-tuple
 Z, I, G, O, where: D
 = R, O
 is an incomplete
T = D,
domain model, in which R is a set of predicates with typed
 is a set of incomplete operators with posvariables, and O
sible preconditions and effects; Z is the set of typed objects,
in which F is the set instantiated predicates from R with objects from Z, and A is the set of incomplete instantiated ac with objects from Z; I ∈ F is the initial state;
tions from O
G is the set of possible goals, including the correct hidden
goal G (G ∈ G); and O = o1 , o2 , ..., on  is an observation
sequence of executed actions, with each observation oi ∈ A
(incomplete action with possible preconditions and effects).
O is a plan that achieves the correct hidden goal G in a

complete domain in D.
A solution for such a goal recognition problem T is the
correct hidden goal G ∈ G that the observation sequence O
of a plan execution achieves.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8127

