The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Beyond Distributive Fairness in Algorithmic Decision Making:
Feature Selection for Procedurally Fair Learning
Nina Grgić-Hlača,1 Muhammad Bilal Zafar,1 Krishna P. Gummadi,1 Adrian Weller2,3,4∗
1

Max Planck Institute for Software Systems (MPI-SWS), Germany
2
University of Cambridge, UK
3
Alan Turing Institute, UK
4
Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence, UK
{nghlaca, mzafar, gummadi}@mpi-sws.org, adrian.weller@eng.cam.ac.uk
that fairness concerns about decision making are multidimensional. Speciﬁcally, we leverage the rich literature on
organizational justice (Greenberg 1987) to distinguish between two primary categories (types) of fairness concerns,
namely distributive and procedural fairness. Distributive
fairness refers to the fairness of the outcomes (ends) of decision making, while procedural fairness refers to the fairness
of the decision making processes (means) that lead to the
outcomes. In the rest of this paper, we use “distributive fairness” and “outcome fairness” interchangeably. We similarly
use the terms “procedural fairness” and “process fairness”
interchangeably.
To date, most works on fair learning have focused on
achieving a fair distribution of decision outcomes, with little
attention to the decision processes generating the outcomes.
These works are inspired by various anti-discrimination
laws that focus on the relationships between certain sensitive
attributes (e.g., gender or race) and decision outcomes (Civil
Rights Act 1964; Barocas and Selbst 2016). For instance, the
notions of “individual fairness” (Dwork et al. 2012), “situational testing” (Luong, Ruggieri, and Turini 2011), and
“disparate treatment” (Zafar et al. 2017b) consider individuals who belong to different sensitive attribute groups (e.g.,
males and females), yet share similar non-sensitive features
(qualiﬁcations), and require them to receive similar decision
outcomes. Similarly, the notions of “group fairness” (Zemel
et al. 2013) and “disparate impact” (Zafar et al. 2017b) are
based on requiring that different sensitive attribute groups
receive beneﬁcial decision outcomes in similar proportions.
Finally, the notions of “disparate mistreatment” (Zafar et al.
2017a) and “equal opportunity” (Hardt, Price, and Srebro
2016) aim to achieve similar rates of errors in decision outcomes for different sensitive attribute groups.
In this paper, we propose notions of procedural (rather
than distributive) fairness, based on which input features are
used in the decision process and how including or excluding the features would affect outcomes. While existing fair
learning mechanisms can efﬁciently leverage input features
and their correlations with the sensitive attributes in order
to resolve indirect discrimination and achieve distributively
fair outcomes, they overlook several important considerations which are addressed by procedural fairness. For example, these considerations include whether or not the perceived fairness of using an individual’s feature in the deci-

Abstract
With widespread use of machine learning methods in numerous domains involving humans, several studies have raised
questions about the potential for unfairness towards certain
individuals or groups. A number of recent works have proposed methods to measure and eliminate unfairness from machine learning models. However, most of this work has focused on only one dimension of fair decision making: distributive fairness, i.e., the fairness of the decision outcomes.
In this work, we leverage the rich literature on organizational
justice and focus on another dimension of fair decision making: procedural fairness, i.e., the fairness of the decision making process. We propose measures for procedural fairness that
consider the input features used in the decision process, and
evaluate the moral judgments of humans regarding the use
of these features. We operationalize these measures on two
real world datasets using human surveys on the Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) platform, demonstrating that our measures capture important properties of procedurally fair decision making. We provide fast submodular mechanisms to optimize the tradeoff between procedural fairness and prediction accuracy. On our datasets, we observe empirically that
procedural fairness may be achieved with little cost to outcome fairness, but that some loss of accuracy is unavoidable.

1

Introduction

As machine learning methods are increasingly being used
in decision making scenarios that affect human lives (such
as credit risk assessments and recidivism risk prediction),
there are growing concerns about the fairness of such decision making. These concerns have spawned much recent
research on detecting and avoiding unfairness in decision
making (Dwork et al. 2012; Feldman et al. 2015; Kamiran and Calders 2010; Luong, Ruggieri, and Turini 2011;
Pedreschi, Ruggieri, and Turini 2008; Zafar et al. 2017b;
Zemel et al. 2013).
In this work, we revisit the foundational notions of fairness that underlie these studies. We begin by observing
∗
Adrian Weller acknowledges the support of the David MacKay
Newton research fellowship at Darwin College, the Alan Turing
Institute under EPSRC grant EP/N510129/1, and the Leverhulme
Trust via the CFI.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

51

