The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Training Autoencoders in Sparse Domain
Biswarup Bhattacharya

Arna Ghosh∗

Somnath Basu Roy Chowdhury∗

University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089. USA.
Email: bbhattac@usc.edu

McGill University
Montreal, QC H3A 0G4. Canada.
Email: arna.ghosh@mail.mcgill.ca

Indian Institute of Technology
Kharagpur, WB 721302. India.
Email: brcsomnath@ee.iitkgp.ernet.in

Autoencoders are essential in learning representation of
large data (like images) for dimensionality reduction. (Hinton and Salakhutdinov 2006) described an effective way of
initializing the weights that allows deep autoencoder networks to learn low-dimensional codes that work much better
than principal components analysis (PCA). In this paper, we
convert the input images to a sparse domain using transforms
like Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) or Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT). Fourier analysis converts a signal from its original domain (usually time or space) to a representation in the
frequency domain (and vice versa). A Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) rapidly computes such transformations by factorizing the Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) matrix into a
product of sparse factors, thereby, reducing the complexity
of computing the DFT.
In our case, the images (originally in spatial domain) are
converted to frequency domain using the transform techniques. Dominant spatial frequencies (which deﬁne main
structure or edges) are located in the center of the transformed image while frequencies away from the center contain ﬁner details of the image. Using autoencoder if we are
able to capture the central spatial frequencies it would aid
in reducing loss to a signiﬁcant amount, without having to
consider the entire image. This reduces data samples the autoencoder needs to process to learn an embedding in reduced
space. We are able to show enhanced performance of autoencoders in sparse domain for images.

Abstract
Autoencoders (AE) are essential in learning representation
of large data (like images) for dimensionality reduction. Images are converted to sparse domain using transforms like
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) or Discrete Cosine Transform
(DCT) where information that requires encoding is minimal.
By optimally selecting the feature-rich frequencies, we are
able to learn the latent vectors more robustly. We successfully show enhanced performance of autoencoders in sparse
domain for images.

Introduction
Autoencoders play an important role in machine learning.
They are simple learning models which aim to transform inputs into outputs with the least possible amount of distortion. Autoencoders were ﬁrst introduced by (Rumelhart et
al. 1988) to address the problem of “backpropagation without a teacher”, by using the input data as the teacher. The
biological essence of AEs lies in the fact that AEs are a
proxy for addressing the mystery of how synaptic changes
induced by local biochemical events can be coordinated in a
self-organized manner to produce global learning and intelligent behavior. More recently, AEs have gained prominence
due to the applicability of deep architectures in their design
which has led to state-of-the-art results.
In neural net language, a variational autoencoder consists
of an encoder, a decoder, and a loss function. A typical autoencoder can usually encode and decode data very well
with low reconstruction error, but the latent code does not
learn the probability distribution of the data. Therefore, if we
are interested in generating more data, a typical autoencoder
generally do not seem to work as well. Another version
of autoencoders, called “variational autoencoder (VAE)”,
is used to solve this problem since they explicitly deﬁne
a probability distribution on the latent code. Even though
the actual neural network architecture is very similar to a
regular autoencoder, the difference is that the hidden code
comes from a probability distribution that is learned during
the training. VAEs were deﬁned by (Kingma and Welling
2013) and (Rezende, Mohamed, and Wierstra 2014).

Motivation
Autoencoders use neural networks to encode and decode
data distributions. It is often observed that autoencoders end
up memorizing data points and are not able to learn an efﬁcient latent vector of the data. Autoencoder architectures
with high number of parameters, map individual data points
to discrete points completely ignoring the correlation among
them. This phenomenon makes the performance of an autoencoder heavily dependent on the power (number of layers) of the decoder. Researchers are trying to ﬁgure out an
autoencoder with a robust decoder. We use our autoencoder
module to map the FFT of closely linked images - alike images from same distribution to map to similar distribution.
This is inspired by the fact that motion cues or temporal
cues act as weak supervisory signals for object detection
(Agrawal, Carreira, and Malik 2015), (Goroshin et al. 2015).

∗

Equal contribution
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8049

