The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Neural Machine Translation
with Gumbel-Greedy Decoding
Jiatao Gu,† Daniel Jiwoong Im,♦ Victor O.K. Li†
†

†

The University of Hong Kong
{jiataogu, wangyong, vli}@eee.hku.hk
♦
AIFounded Inc.
♦
daniel.im@aifounded.com
node using the Gumbel-Softmax reparameterization (Jang,
Gu, and Poole 2016). Throughout the paper, we named this
new process of generating sequence of words as the Gumbel Greedy-Decoding (GGD). We extensively evaluate the
proposed GGD on a large parallel corpora with different variants of generators and discriminators. The empirical results
demonstrate that GGD improves translation quality.

Abstract
Previous neural machine translation models used some heuristic search algorithms (e.g., beam search) in order to avoid
solving the maximum a posteriori problem over translation
sentences at test phase. In this paper, we propose the GumbelGreedy Decoding which trains a generative network to predict
translation under a trained model. We solve such a problem using the Gumbel-Softmax reparameterization, which makes our
generative network differentiable and trainable through standard stochastic gradient methods. We empirically demonstrate
that our proposed model is effective for generating sequences
of discrete words.

Neural Machine Translation
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) models commonly share
the auto-regressive property as it is the natural way to model
sequential data. More formally, we can deﬁne the distribution
over the translation sentence Y = [y 1 , ..., y T ] given a source
sentence X = [x1 , ..., xT s ] as a conditional language model:

Introduction

T


Neural machine translation (NMT) (Cho et al. 2014;
Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014), as a new territory of machine translation research,
has recently become a method of choice, and is empirically
shown to be superior over traditional translation systems.
The basic scenario of modeling neural machine translation
is to model the conditional probability of the translation, in
which we often train the model that either maximizes the loglikelihood for the ground-truth translation (teacher forcing)
or translations with highest rewards (REINFORCE). Despite
these advances, a key problem that still remains with such
sequential modeling approaches: once the model is trained,
the most probable output which maximizes the log-likelihood
during training cannot be properly found at test time. This is
because, it involves solving the maximum-a-posteriori (MAP)
problem over all possible output sequences. To avoid this
problem, heuristic search algorithms (e.g., greedy decoding,
beam search) are used to approximate the optimal translation.
In this paper, we address this issue by employing a
discriminator-generator framework – we train the discriminator and the generator at training time, but emit translations
with the generator at test time. Instead of relying on a nonoptimal searching algorithm at test time, like greedy search,
we propose to train the generator to predict the search directly.
Such a way would typically suffer from non-differentiablity
of generating discrete words. Here, we address this problem by turning the discrete output node into a differentiable

i)
, and
where softmax(a)i = Kexp(a
exp(a )

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

There are two common ways to train NMT models, which
are teacher forcing (Williams and Zipser 1989; Sutskever,

p(Y |X) =

p(y t |y <t , X).

(1)

t=1

The conditional probability is composed of an encoder et (·)
and a decoder network dt (·) with a softmax layer on top. For
notation, we denote the vocabulary size of the target language
as K and each word y t is assigned to an index k ∈ [1, K]. In
this paper, we use the one-hot representation for each word,
that is, yit = I[i = k], i = 1, ...K. Thus the probability is
computed using softmax:
 
 t
·y
(2)
p(y t |y <t , X) = softmax a z t ; θa
j=1

j

z t = f (z t−1 , y t−1 , et (X; θe ); θd )

(3)

zt is the hidden state of the decoder at step t, and a is
the energy function which maps the hidden state into a
distribution over the vocabulary. The output of the encoder et (X) is a time-dependent feature of the source sentence X. Typically, both the encoder and decoder consist
of deep recurrent neural networks (with the soft attention
mechanism integrated) (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014;
Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015). We use θ = {θa , θd , θe }
to denote the parameters of the NMT model.

Training phase

5125

