The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Mix-and-Match Tuning for
Self-Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Xiaohang Zhan, Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaoou Tang, Chen Change Loy
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{zx017, lz013, pluo, xtang, ccloy}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

semantic image segmentation (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Liu et al. 2015; Zhao et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2017).
The excellent performance, however, comes with a price of
expensive and laborious label annotations. In most existing
pipelines, a network is usually ﬁrst pre-trained on millions
of class-labeled images, e.g., ImageNet (Russakovsky et al.
2015) and MS COCO (Lin et al. 2014), and subsequently
ﬁne-tuned with thousands of pixel-wise annotated images.
Self-supervised learning1 is a new paradigm proposed
for learning deep representations without extensive annotations. This new technique has been applied to the task
of image segmentation (Zhang, Isola, and Efros 2016a;
Larsson, Maire, and Shakhnarovich 2016; 2017). In general,
self-supervised image segmentation can be divided into two
stages: the proxy stage, and the ﬁne-tuning stage. The proxy
stage does not need any labeled data but requires one to design a proxy or pretext task with self-derived supervisory
signals on unlabeled data. For instance, learning by colorization (Larsson, Maire, and Shakhnarovich 2017) utilizes the
fact that a natural image is composed of luminance channel and chrominance channels. The proxy task is formulated
with cross-entropy loss to predict an image chrominance
from the luminance of the same image. In the ﬁne-tuning
stage, the learned representations are utilized to initialize the
target semantic segmentation network. The network is then
ﬁne-tuned with pixel-wise annotations. It has been shown
that without large-scale class-labeled pre-training, semantic image segmentation could still gain encouraging performance over random initialization or from-scratch training.
Though promising, the performance of self-supervised
learning is still far from that achieved by supervised
pre-training. For instance, a VGG-16 network trained
with the self-supervised method of (Larsson, Maire, and
Shakhnarovich 2017) achieves a 56.0% mean Intersection
over Union (mIoU) on PASCAL VOC 2012 segmentation
benchmark (Everingham et al. 2010), higher than a random initialized network that only yields 35.0% mIoU. However, an identical network trained on ImageNet achieves
64.2% mIoU. There exists a considerable gap between selfsupervised and pure supervised pre-training.
We believe that the performance discrepancy is mainly
caused by the semantic gap between the proxy task and the

Abstract
Deep convolutional networks for semantic image segmentation typically require large-scale labeled data, e.g., ImageNet
and MS COCO, for network pre-training. To reduce annotation efforts, self-supervised semantic segmentation is recently proposed to pre-train a network without any humanprovided labels. The key of this new form of learning is to
design a proxy task (e.g., image colorization), from which
a discriminative loss can be formulated on unlabeled data.
Many proxy tasks, however, lack the critical supervision signals that could induce discriminative representation for the
target image segmentation task. Thus self-supervision’s performance is still far from that of supervised pre-training. In
this study, we overcome this limitation by incorporating a
‘mix-and-match’ (M&M) tuning stage in the self-supervision
pipeline. The proposed approach is readily pluggable to many
self-supervision methods and does not use more annotated
samples than the original process. Yet, it is capable of boosting the performance of target image segmentation task to surpass fully-supervised pre-trained counterpart. The improvement is made possible by better harnessing the limited pixelwise annotations in the target dataset. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst
introduce the ‘mix’ stage, which sparsely samples and mixes
patches from the target set to reﬂect rich and diverse local patch statistics of target images. A ‘match’ stage then
forms a class-wise connected graph, which can be used to derive a strong triplet-based discriminative loss for ﬁne-tuning
the network. Our paradigm follows the standard practice
in existing self-supervised studies and no extra data or label is required. With the proposed M&M approach, for the
ﬁrst time, a self-supervision method can achieve comparable
or even better performance compared to its ImageNet pretrained counterpart on both PASCAL VOC2012 dataset and
CityScapes dataset.

Introduction
Semantic image segmentation is a classic computer vision
task that aims at assigning each pixel in an image with
a class label such as “chair”, “person”, and “dog”. It enjoys a wide spectrum of applications, such as scene understanding (Li, Socher, and Fei-Fei 2009; Lin et al. 2014;
Li et al. 2017b) and autonomous driving (Geiger et al. 2013;
Cordts et al. 2016; Li et al. 2017a). Deep convolutional neural network (CNN) is now the state-of-the-art technique for
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

7534

Project page: http://mmlab.ie.cuhk.edu.hk/projects/M&M/

