The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Improved Results for
M INIMUM C ONSTRAINT R EMOVAL
Eduard Eiben

Jonathan Gemmell, Iyad Kanj,
Andrew Youngdahl

Algorithms and Complexity Group,
TU Wien, Vienna, Austria &
Dept. of Informatics, Univ. of Bergen, Norway
eduard.eiben@uib.no

School of Computing,
DePaul University, Chicago, USA,
{jgemmell,ikanj,ayoungda}@cdm.depaul.edu
M INIMUM C ONSTRAINT R EMOVAL
Given: A set I of polygonal obstacles in the plane and two
designated points s and t.
Goal: Compute a subset of obstacles S ⊆ I of minimum
cardinality such that there is an obstacle-free path in the
plane between s and t w.r.t. the obstacles in I\ S.
In addition to its applications in robotics, the problem
has been studied extensively, motivated by applications in
wireless computing, under the name BARRIER C OVER AGE or BARRIER R ESILIENCE . In such applications, we
are given a ﬁeld covered by sensors (assumed to be simple geometric shapes), and the goal is to compute a minimum set of sensors that need to fail so that an entity can
move undetected between two given sites (Alt et al. 2011;
Tseng and Kirkpatrick 2012; Chan and Kirkpatrick 2014;
Kumar, Lai, and Arora 2005; Yang 2012).
The M INIMUM C ONSTRAINT R EMOVAL problem was
also formulated as a graph problem (Chan and Kirkpatrick
2014; Hauser 2014). For an instance I of the problem, the
auxiliary graph of I, GI , is deﬁned as follows. Consider the
plane subdivision whose regions are determined by the intersections of the obstacles in I. For each region, associate a
vertex in GI representing the set of obstacles intersecting at
that region if any, and an empty set otherwise; add an edge
between two vertices iff the corresponding regions share an
edge. See Figure 1. Clearly, GI is a plane graph since it is
the dual graph of a plane subdivision. The problem then reduces to computing a path in GI between the vertices corresponding to s and t, such that the total number of obstacles
represented by the vertices on this path is minimum.
M INIMUM C ONSTRAINT R EMOVAL was studied by
many researchers in Wireless Computing, AI, and Computational Geometry (Alt et al. 2011; Tseng and Kirkpatrick 2012; Chan and Kirkpatrick 2014; Kumar, Lai,
and Arora 2005; Yang 2012; Erickson and LaValle 2013;
Hauser 2014). Alt et al. (Alt et al. 2011) showed that the
problem is NP-hard when the obstacles are line segments
such that no three intersect at the same point. Independently,
Yang (Yang 2012), in his Ph.D. dissertation, showed the NPhardness of the problem when the obstacles are line segments. This result was reﬁned independently by Tseng and
Kirkpatrick (Tseng and Kirkpatrick 2012) who showed that
the problem is NP-hard even when the obstacles are line
segments of unit length. The more general graph problem

Abstract
Given a set of obstacles and two designated points in the
plane, the M INIMUM C ONSTRAINT R EMOVAL problem asks
for a minimum number of obstacles that can be removed so
that a collision-free path exists between the two designated
points. It is a well-studied problem in both robotic motion
planning and wireless computing that has been shown to be
NP-hard in various settings.
In this work, we extend the study of M INIMUM C ONSTRAINT
R EMOVAL. We start by presenting reﬁned NP-hardness reductions for the two cases: (1) when all the obstacles are
axes-parallel rectangles, and (2) when all the obstacles are
line segments such that no three intersect at the same point.
These results improve on existing results in the literature. As
a byproduct of our NP-hardness reductions, we prove that,
unless the Exponential-Time Hypothesis (ETH) fails, M IN IMUM C ONSTRAINT R EMOVAL cannot be solved in subexponential time 2o(n) , where n is the number of obstacles in
the instance. This shows that signiﬁcant improvement on the
brute-force 2O(n) -time algorithm is unlikely.
We then present a subexponential-time algorithm for instances of M INIMUM C ONSTRAINT R EMOVAL in which the
number of obstacles that overlap
at any point is constant; the
√
algorithm runs in time 2O( N ) , where N is the number of the
vertices in the auxiliary graph associated with the instance of
the problem. We show that signiﬁcant improvement on this
algorithm is unlikely by showing that, unless ETH fails, M IN IMUM C ONSTRAINT R EMOVAL with
bounded overlap num√
ber cannot be solved in time 2o( N ) . We describe several
exact algorithms and approximation algorithms that leverage
heuristics and discuss their performance in an extensive empirical simulation.

Introduction
A fundamental problem in robot motion planning is to move
a robot from a starting position to a ﬁnal position while
avoiding collision with a given set of obstacles. This problem is generally referred to as the piano-mover’s problem.
If a collision-free path does not exist, one naturally seeks a
path that collides with the minimum number of obstacles.
In this paper, we study a variant of the piano mover’s problem, referred to as the M INIMUM C ONSTRAINT R EMOVAL
problem, deﬁned as follows:
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6477

