The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

VSE-ens: Visual-Semantic Embeddings
with Efﬁcient Negative Sampling
Guibing Guo,∗ Songlin Zhai∗ Fajie Yuan,†∗ Yuan Liu, Xingwei Wang

Northeastern University, China † University of Glasgow, UK
{guogb,liuyuan,wangxw}@swc.neu.edu.cn, 1771061@stu.neu.edu.cn, f.yuan.1@research.gla.ac.uk

a.k.a. visual-semantic embeddings (VSE) (Weston, Bengio,
and Usunier 2011; Faghri et al. 2017). Since both images
and annotations are represented by the same set of latent
features, their semantic differences can be converged and
computed in the same space. Existing VSE methods are derived in the form of pairwise learning approaches. That is,
for each image, a set of pair-wised (positive, negative) annotations will be retrieved to learn a proper pattern to represent
the image. Due to the large volume of negative candidates, it
is necessary to take sampling strategies in order to form balanced training data. The most frequently adopted strategy,
e.g. in (Weston, Bengio, and Usunier 2011), is to repeatedly
sample negative labels from the dictionary that violates the
ranking order against positive examples. However, the whole
annotation space may need to be traversed until a good negative example is found. In a word, it is time-consuming and
thus cannot be applied to large-scale datasets.
In this paper, we propose a fast adaptive negative sampler for the task of image annotation based on joint visualsemantic embeddings (VSE). It is able to well function in
the problem settings of no ﬁgure pixels available. Instead
of traversing the whole annotation set to get good negative examples, we selectively choose those labels that are
most likely to meet the requirements of violation according to the latent factors of images and annotations. Speciﬁcally, our proposed sampler adopts a rank-invariant normalization to dynamically select the required high-ranked negative labels without conducting the inner product operations
of the embedding vectors. In this way, the running time of
negative sampling can be dramatically reduced. We conduct
extensive experiments on three real datasets (OpenImages1 ,
IAPR-TC122 , NUS-WIDE3 ) to demonstrate the efﬁciency
of our approach. The results show that our method is 5.02
times faster than other state-of-the-art approaches on OpenImages, around 2.5 times on IAPR-TC12 and 2.06 times on
NUS-WIDE at no expense of ranking accuracy.
Our main contributions of this paper are given as follows.

Abstract
Jointing visual-semantic embeddings (VSE) have become a
research hotpot for the task of image annotation, which suffers from the issue of semantic gap, i.e., the gap between images’ visual features (low-level) and labels’ semantic features
(high-level). This issue will be even more challenging if visual features cannot be retrieved from images, that is, when
images are only denoted by numerical IDs as given in some
real datasets. The typical way of existing VSE methods is
to perform a uniform sampling method for negative examples that violate the ranking order against positive examples,
which requires a time-consuming search in the whole label
space. In this paper, we propose a fast adaptive negative sampler that can work well in the settings of no ﬁgure pixels available. Our sampling strategy is to choose the negative examples that are most likely to meet the requirements of violation according to the latent factors of images. In this way, our
approach can linearly scale up to large datasets. The experiments demonstrate that our approach converges 5.02x faster
than the state-of-the-art approaches on OpenImages, 2.5x on
IAPR-TCI2 and 2.06x on NUS-WIDE datasets, as well as
better ranking accuracy across datasets.

Introduction
Automatic image annotation is an important task to index
and search images of interest from the overwhelming volume of images derived from digital devices. It aims to select a small set of appropriate labels or keywords (i.e., annotations) from a given dictionary that can help describe the
content of a target image. However, it is not trivial to handle
the differences between low-level visual features of images
and high-level semantic features of annotations, which has
been well recognized as the problem of semantic gap. This
issue becomes even more challenging if no visual features
can be drawn from ﬁgure pixels, that is, when images are
only represented by numerical IDs rather than pixel values.
This problem setting can be observed in some real datasets,
which is the target scenario of this paper.
A promising way to resolve this issue is to jointly embed
images and annotations into the same latent feature space,

• We propose a fast adaptive sampler to select good negative examples for the task of image annotation. It adopts
a rank-invariant normalization to dynamically choose

∗
These authors contributed equally to this paper and share the
co-ﬁrst authorship.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

https://github.com/openimages/dataset
http://www.imageclef.org/photodata
3
lms.comp.nus.edu.sg/research/NUS-WIDE.htm
2

290

