The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Classical Planning in Deep Latent Space:
Bridging the Subsymbolic-Symbolic Boundary
Masataro Asai, Alex Fukunaga
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences
The University of Tokyo

Abstract
Current domain-independent, classical planners require symbolic models of the problem domain and instance as input,
resulting in a knowledge acquisition bottleneck. Meanwhile,
although deep learning has achieved signiﬁcant success in
many ﬁelds, the knowledge is encoded in a subsymbolic
representation which is incompatible with symbolic systems
such as planners. We propose LatPlan, an unsupervised architecture combining deep learning and classical planning.
Given only an unlabeled set of image pairs showing a subset of transitions allowed in the environment (training inputs),
and a pair of images representing the initial and the goal states
(planning inputs), LatPlan ﬁnds a plan to the goal state in a
symbolic latent space and returns a visualized plan execution. The contribution of this paper is twofold: (1) State Autoencoder, which ﬁnds a propositional state representation of
the environment using a Variational Autoencoder. It generates a discrete latent vector from the images, based on which
a PDDL model can be constructed and then solved by an offthe-shelf planner. (2) Action Autoencoder / Discriminator, a
neural architecture which jointly ﬁnds the action symbols and
the implicit action models (preconditions/effects), and provides a successor function for the implicit graph search. We
evaluate LatPlan using image-based versions of 3 planning
domains: 8-puzzle, Towers of Hanoi and LightsOut.

Figure 1: An image-based 8-puzzle.
a generator, e.g., autonomous spacecraft exploration. In particular this ﬁrst requires generating symbols from raw sensor
input, i.e., the symbol grounding problem (Steels 2008).
Recently, signiﬁcant advances have been made in neural
network (NN) deep learning approaches for perceptuallybased cognitive tasks including image classiﬁcation (Deng
et al. 2009), object recognition (Ren et al. 2015), speech
recognition (Deng, Hinton, and Kingsbury 2013), machine
translation as well as NN-based problem-solving systems
(Mnih et al. 2015; Graves et al. 2016). However, the current
state-of-the-art, pure NN-based systems do not yet provide
guarantees provided by symbolic planning systems, such as
deterministic completeness and solution optimality.
Using a NN-based perceptual system to automatically
provide input models for domain-independent planners
could greatly expand the applicability of planning technology and offer the beneﬁts of both paradigms. We consider
the problem of robustly, automatically bridging the gap between such subsymbolic representations and the symbolic
representations required by domain-independent planners.
Fig. 1 (left) shows a scrambled, 3x3 tiled version of the
photograph on the right, i.e., an image-based instance of the
8-puzzle. Even for humans, this photograph-based task is
arguably more difﬁcult to solve than the standard 8-puzzle
because of the distracting visual aspects. We seek a domainindependent system which, given only a set of unlabeled
images showing the valid moves for this image-based puzzle, ﬁnds an optimal solution to the puzzle. Although the
8-puzzle is trivial for symbolic planners, solving this imagebased problem with a domain-independent system which
(1) has no prior assumptions/knowledge (e.g., “sliding objects”, “tile arrangement”), and (2) must acquire all knowledge from the images, is nontrivial. Such a system should not
make assumptions about the image (e.g., “a grid-like structure”). The only assumption allowed about the nature of the

Note: The extended manuscript on Arxiv contains all details of Latplan, but please cite this AAAI version. Latplan
code is available on Github.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in domain-independent planning have
greatly enhanced their capabilities. However, planning problems need to be provided to the planner in a structured, symbolic representation such as PDDL (McDermott 2000), and
in general, such symbolic models need to be provided by
a human, either directly in a modeling language such as
PDDL, or via a compiler which transforms some other symbolic problem representation into PDDL. This results in the
knowledge-acquisition bottleneck, where the modeling step
is sometimes the bottleneck in the problem-solving cycle. In
addition, the requirement for symbolic input poses a signiﬁcant obstacle to applying planning in new, unforeseen situations where no human is available to create such a model or
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6094

