The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Efﬁcient K-Shot Learning
with Regularized Deep Networks
Donghyun Yoo,1 Haoqi Fan,2 Vishnu Naresh Boddeti,3 Kris M. Kitani1
1

The Robotics Institute, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
2
3
Facebook
Michigan State University
{donghyuy,kkitani}@cs.cmu.edu, haoqifan@fb.com, vishnu@msu.edu

Abstract
Feature representations from pre-trained deep neural networks
have been known to exhibit excellent generalization and utility across a variety of related tasks. Fine-tuning is by far the
simplest and most widely used approach that seeks to exploit and adapt these feature representations to novel tasks
with limited data. Despite the effectiveness of ﬁne-tuning, it
is often sub-optimal and requires very careful optimization
to prevent severe over-ﬁtting to small datasets. The problem
of sub-optimality and over-ﬁtting, is due in part to the large
number of parameters (≈ 106 ) used in a typical deep convolutional neural network. To address these problems, we propose
a simple yet effective regularization method for ﬁne-tuning
pre-trained deep networks for the task of k-shot learning. To
prevent overﬁtting, our key strategy is to cluster the model
parameters while ensuring intra-cluster similarity and intercluster diversity of the parameters, effectively regularizing the
dimensionality of the parameter search space. In particular, we
identify groups of neurons within each layer of a deep network
that share similar activation patterns. When the network is to
be ﬁne-tuned for a classiﬁcation task using only k examples,
we propagate a single gradient to all of the neuron parameters
that belong to the same group. The grouping of neurons is
non-trivial as neuron activations depend on the distribution
of the input data. To efﬁciently search for optimal groupings
conditioned on the input data, we propose a reinforcement
learning search strategy using recurrent networks to learn the
optimal group assignments for each network layer. Experimental results show that our method can be easily applied to
several popular convolutional neural networks and improve
upon other state-of-the-art ﬁne-tuning based k-shot learning
strategies by more than 10% of accuracy.

Figure 1: Convolutional Filters are often highly correlated.
First layer visualization of LeNet. Correlated ﬁlters highlighted in red and blue.
as discussed in (Thorpe, Fize, and Marlot 1996) and (Li et al.
2002). However, k-shot learning still remains a key-challenge
in machine learning.
Fine-tuning methods seek to overcome this limitation by
leveraging networks that have been pre-trained on large scale
data. Starting from such networks and carefully adapting
their parameters have enabled deep neural networks to still
be effective for learning from few samples. This procedure
affords a few advantages: (1) enables us to exploit good
feature representations learned from large scale data, (2) it
is a very efﬁcient process, often involving only a few quick
iterations over the small scale, (3) scales linearly to a large
number of k-shot learning tasks, and (4) is applicable to any
existing pre-trained networks without the need for searching
for optimal architectures or training from scratch.
Unfortunately, ﬁne-tuning can be unstable, especially
when the amount of training data is small. Large deep neural
networks typically are comprised of many redundant parameters, with the parameters within each layer being highly
correlated with each other. For instance consider the ﬁlters,
shown in Fig.1, in the ﬁrst layer of LeNet (LeCun et al. 1998)
that was learned on the MNIST dataset. A number of ﬁlters
are similar to other ﬁlters, i.e., these ﬁlters functionally play
the same role and tend to produce similar activations. The
presence of a large number of correlated ﬁlters can potentially
lead to over-ﬁtting, especially when learning under a small
sample regime.
To stabilize the learning process, we propose a simple yet
effective procedure to regularize ﬁne-tuning based k-shot
learning approaches. The key idea of our approach is to identify the redundancies in the parameters and constrain their
updates during ﬁne-tuning. This is achieved by clustering the
parameters in each layer of the network into multiple groups
based on the similarity of their activations on a speciﬁc k-shot
learning task. The parameters in each group share a common

Introduction
While deep neural networks continue to exhibit excellent
performance on large scale data, they suffer from severe overﬁtting when learning with a small number of samples. The
growing complexity and size of these networks, the main
factor that contributes to their effectiveness in learning from
large scale data, is also the reason for their failure to generalize from limited data. Learning from very few training samples (i.e. k-shot learning), is an important learning paradigm
that is widely believed to be how humans learn new concepts
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4382

