The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Telepath: Understanding Users from a Human Vision
Perspective in Large-Scale Recommender Systems
Yu Wang, Jixing Xu, Aohan Wu, Mantian Li, Yang He, Jinghe Hu, Weipeng P. Yan
Business Growth Division. JD.com
{wangyu5, xujixing, wuaohan1, limantian, landy, hujinghe, paul.yan}@jd.com

this case, there is an urgent need for an efficient way to
model user behaviors. Through lots of statistics and analysis of the behaviors of JD users, we find two key factors
that affect user’s clicks and purchases. The first is the attractiveness of the content. Many outstanding creative
items are often clicked even if the user has never browsed
similar items. From this we can hypothesize that the creative contents of the items bring new interests to user, because the user is vision oriented and usually has a visual
curiosity. The other factor is whether the item matches the
user's interests or purchase intentions. The two factors give
us the directions to model user behaviors. However, in a
typical scene of e-commerce, all signals (appearances and
descriptions of items) the user receives are captured only
through the eyes, and the items browsed by the user directly show her potential interest. So the above factors require
a recommender system to be able to accurately extract the
key visual signals that activate user interest or purchase
intention and fully understand user interests.
(Brewer et al. 1998; Çukur et al. 2013) found that humans are good at finding contents of interest from complex,
colored photographs, and the way that the visual signals
captured from contents of interest attract humans is
through activations in the cerebral cortex. The activations
are processed and memorized by the cortex and affect
functional areas of brain, finally forming conscious or subconscious interest. (Galli and Gorn 2011; Watanabe and
Haruno) showed that both consciousness and subconsciousness affects human behaviors. (Silver et al. 2016;
Taigman et al. 2014) showed that deep learning can reach
human level performance in certain domains of application.
The above research and observations inspired us to build
a ranking engine that extracts visual information like a
human and is intelligent enough to understand users from a
human vision perspective, thus addressing the aforementioned factors that affect user behaviors. Such a ranking
engine needs two modules: a vision extraction module and
an interest understanding module. The former simulates the
human vision system to extract key visual signals from

Abstract
Designing an e-commerce recommender system that serves
hundreds of millions of active users is a daunting challenge.
To our best knowledge, the complex brain activity mechanism behind human shopping activities is never considered
in existing recommender systems. From a human vision
perspective, we found two key factors that affect users’ behaviors: items’ attractiveness and their matching degrees
with users’ interests. This paper proposes Telepath, a visionbased bionic recommender system model, which simulates
human brain activities in decision making of shopping, thus
understanding users from such perspective. The core of Telepath is a complex deep neural network with multiple subnetworks. In practice, the Telepath model has been launched
to JD’s recommender system and advertising system and
outperformed the former state-of-the-art method. For one of
the major item recommendation blocks on the JD app, clickthrough rate (CTR), gross merchandise value (GMV) and
orders have been increased 1.59%, 8.16% and 8.71% respectively by Telepath. For several major ad publishers of
JD demand-side platform, CTR, GMV and return on investment have been increased 6.58%, 61.72% and 65.57%
respectively by the first launch of Telepath, and further increased 2.95%, 41.75% and 41.37% respectively by the second launch.

Introduction
As one of the most popular online retailers in China, JD
serves hundreds of millions of active users, displays a huge
number of items and attains hundreds of billions of dollars
of GMV (gross merchandise value) yearly. However, this
large scale of users and items obey very fat-tailed distributions. It brings great challenges in designing the recommender system, especially when facing billions of query
requests and ranking tasks generated by users daily. These
visits bring huge amounts of click-through log data daily,
all weakly labeled. It indicates that these data can only
provide a weak signal for an effective ranking model. In
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

467

