The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Deep Mars: CNN Classiﬁcation of Mars
Imagery for the PDS Imaging Atlas

1

Kiri L. Wagstaff,1 You Lu,1 Alice Stanboli,1
Kevin Grimes,1 Thamme Gowda,1,2 Jordan Padams1

Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91109, {ﬁrstname.lastname}@jpl.nasa.gov
2
Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California, Marina Del Rey, CA 90292, tg@isi.edu

et al. 2014). However, they tend to require thousands to millions of labeled examples if trained from scratch. A common practical solution is to use transfer learning to adapt
a previously trained network to a new problem. This “ﬁnetuning” approach enables practitioners to train networks for
new problems while leveraging the representation already
inferred by the original network. However, the limits of such
ﬁne-tuning are not known, and we wondered whether a network that was trained on Earth images could successfully be
adapted to operate on images from another planet.
We tackled the problem of content-based image search
for Mars images by adapting a typical Earth-image convolutional neural network to classify the content in images
of Mars. One network, MSLNet, classiﬁes images taken by
the Mars Science Laboratory rover, and the other network,
HiRISENet, classiﬁes regions within large images collected
from Mars orbit. Both networks achieved high performance
in validation and testing, and their predictions have now
been integrated into the PDS Imaging Atlas to enable the
ﬁrst public content-based image search capability for the
Planetary Data System.

Abstract
NASA has acquired more than 22 million images from the
planet Mars. To help users ﬁnd images of interest, we developed a content-based search capability for Mars rover surface
images and Mars orbital images. We started with the AlexNet
convolutional neural network, which was trained on Earth images, and used transfer learning to adapt the network for use
with Mars images. We report on our deployment of these classiﬁers within the PDS Imaging Atlas, a publicly accessible
web interface, to enable the ﬁrst content-based image search
for NASA’s Mars images.

Introduction
The ongoing exploration of Mars by orbiting spacecraft and
surface rovers has generated an enormous amount of data
that continues to grow on a daily basis. A large portion of the
acquired data consists of images, which are stored and made
available to the public by NASA’s Planetary Data System
(PDS). The PDS currently contains more than 31 million
images, of which 22 million are from the planet Mars.
Connecting scientists and other users to images of interest
is a major challenge. The PDS Imaging Atlas allows users to
search by mission, instrument, target, date, and other parameters that ﬁlter the set of images. Previously, the searchable
parameters were all values that were known a priori, i.e., before the image was collected. However, users are often interested in ﬁnding images based on content (e.g., “show me all
images containing craters”), which is known only after acquisition and must be extracted through content analysis.
Content-based searches can help further both science and
mission operations. In images collected by the Mars Science
Laboratory (MSL) rover, engineers are interested in analyzing all images that contain the rover’s wheels so that they
can monitor wheel degradation over time. While some images are purposely aimed at the wheels, and therefore can be
obtained due to knowledge about the intended target of the
image, in other cases the wheel is captured serendipitously
in an image that was targeted at a nearby rock or soil. Using
content-based analysis to ﬁnd all wheel images can greatly
increase the amount of relevant images for analysis.
Convolutional neural networks have achieved high performance on a variety of image classiﬁcation tasks (Razavian

Related Work
Automated image analysis has been used for decades to automatically detect surface features such as craters (Urbach
and Stepinski 2009) and dune ﬁelds (Bandeira et al. 2011)
in orbital images. More recently, the strong performance of
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) on image classiﬁcation tasks (Razavian et al. 2014), as well as their ability to
infer useful features rather than hand-coding them, has led
to their adoption in planetary science as well. For example,
CNNs recently were shown to out-perform a support vector
machine classiﬁer when detecting two Mars surface features
of interest (volcanic rootless cones and transverse aeolian
ridges) in orbital images (Palafox et al. 2017). They have
also been applied to Mars rover images of the surface to classify terrain and inform navigation (Rothrock et al. 2016).

Deep Learning for Mars Images
We employed transfer learning to adapt the AlexNet image classiﬁer (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) to
classify images from Mars. AlexNet was trained on 1.2 million (Earth) images from 1000 classes in the ImageNet data

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7867

