The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Listening to the World Improves
Speech Command Recognition
Brian McMahan, Delip Rao∗
(brian|delip)@r7.ai
R7 Speech Sciences Inc
San Francisco CA USA

learning between two unrelated audio domains – environmental sounds and speech commands. Additionally, we introduce a method for increasing the input resolution of the
networks using a single layer of dilated convolutions at multiple scales. Our experiments are designed to answer questions about model capacity, the effect of multiscale dilated
convolutions, and the quality of feature learning on audio
spectrograms.
In our ﬁrst experiment, we study model capacity of several convolutional network architectures by measuring the
performance at varying depths, with and without multiscale
dilated convolutions as inputs on an environmental sound
classiﬁcation task.
Informed by the ﬁrst experiment, we selected a single
convolutional network architecture in our second experiment to evaluate the effectiveness of transfer learning from
environmental sounds to speech commands. Models that
were pre-trained on environmental sounds and adapted to
speech commands were compared to models trained solely
on speech commands. Additionally, we investigated whether
or not multiscale input through dilated convolutions had a
signiﬁcant impact on the transfer learning. The results of
this experiment strongly suggest that the pre-trained convolutional networks with the multiscale inputs are learning
important properties about audio spectrograms.
Finally, in our third experiment, we repeated the second
experiment of transfer learning from environmental sounds
to speech commands but varied the amount of speech command data used for adapting and training. We observe that
the pre-trained models need far less data to adapt to the
new domain and achieved the much higher accuracy than the
models trained only on the speech command data. We also
report experiments demonstrating that this gain in accuracy
and reduction in training data is additive when multi-scale
input representations are used with pre-training.
We conclude by discussing the implications and scope of
our experiments.

Abstract
We study transfer learning in convolutional network architectures applied to the task of recognizing audio, such as environmental sound events and speech commands. Our key
ﬁnding is that not only is it possible to transfer representations from an unrelated task like environmental sound classiﬁcation to a voice-focused task like speech command recognition, but also that doing so improves accuracies signiﬁcantly. We also investigate the effect of increased model capacity for transfer learning audio, by ﬁrst validating known
results from the ﬁeld of Computer Vision of achieving better accuracies with increasingly deeper networks on two audio datasets: UrbanSound8k and Google Speech Commands.
Then we propose a simple multiscale input representation using dilated convolutions and show that it is able to aggregate
larger contexts and increase classiﬁcation performance. Further, the models trained using a combination of transfer learning and multiscale input representations need only 50% of the
training data to achieve similar accuracies as a freshly trained
model with 100% of the training data. Finally, we demonstrate a positive interaction effect for the multiscale input and
transfer learning, making a case for the joint application of
the two techniques.

Introduction
Detection of everyday sounds, such as sounds originating
from machinery, trafﬁc sounds, animal sounds, and music is essential for building autonomous agents responsive
to their surroundings. This has myriad applications ranging from autonomous vehicles (Chu et al. 2006) to surveillance (Ntalampiras, Potamitis, and Fakotakis 2009) to monitoring noise pollution in cities (Maijala et al. 2018; Salamon,
Jacoby, and Bello 2014). Similarly, Spoken Term Recognition (Miller et al. 2007) has broad applications from conversational agents (Sainath and Parada 2015) to monitoring
news (Parlak and Saraclar 2008). While many approaches
have focused individually on the classiﬁcation of everyday
sounds or recognizing speech, there has been limited investigation into the relationship between models trained on both
tasks.
In this paper, we present a systematic study of modern convolutional neural network architectures and transfer

Related Work
Classifying audio signals has a long and diverse history.
In particular, the classiﬁcation of environmental sounds
has attracted researchers from speech to signal processing to bioacoustics employing a range of approaches, such
as Support Vector Machines (Temko et al. 2006), Random

∗

Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

378

