The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Preliminary Results on Exploration-Driven Satisﬁability Solving
Md Solimul Chowdhury, Martin Müller, Jia-Huai You
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
{mdsolimu, mmueller, jyou}@ualberta.ca

In this abstract, we present expSAT, a novel explorationdriven extension to CDCL SAT solvers. In expSAT, exploration via random walks can potentially uncover valuable
information about variables based on sampling future search
states, as opposed to VSIDS, which utilizes conﬂict information from past search states. We report the empirical evaluation of the expSAT approach on the application instances
from recent SAT competitions.

Abstract
In this abstract, we present our study of exploring the SAT
search space via random-sampling, with the goal of improving Conﬂict Directed Clause Learning (CDCL) SAT solvers.
Our proposed CDCL SAT solving algorithm expSAT uses a
novel branching heuristic expVSIDS. It combines the standard VSIDS scores with heuristic scores derived from exploration. Experiments with application benchmarks from recent
SAT competitions demonstrate the potential of the expSAT
approach for improving CDCL SAT solvers.

Exploration in CDCL SAT
The state of the art CDCL SAT solver Glucose uses an aggressive clause reduction strategy, which is primarily based
on the LBD scores of the learned clauses. Clauses with LBD
score of 2 or less are never deleted in Glucose. The lower the
LBD score of a learned clause, the better is its quality.
Similar to VSIDS, the goal of exploration in expSAT is
to identify branching variables, which quickly lead to conﬂicts. Unlike VSIDS, exploration scores are derived from
sampling future search states, not from the tree search so far.
We reward variables based on the quality of conﬂicts they
generate during sampling, favoring variables that generate
conﬂicts from which high-quality clauses with low LBD are
derived during conﬂicts in sampling.

Introduction
An inherent issue of any heuristic guided search method is
the inaccuracy of heuristic estimation, which may result in
poor search guidance. Exploration can potentially make a
search more robust by mitigating “early mistakes” caused
by inaccurate heuristics (Xie et al. 2014). Examples of exploration methods are Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) and
random walk techniques, which have been successfully applied to deterministic planning (Nakhost and Müller 2009).
Perhaps the best known example, which combines many
of the recent advances in both MCTS and machine-learned
heuristics, is the super-human strength Go-playing program
AlphaGo (Silver et al. 2016).
Complete SAT solvers based on the DPLL framework employ heuristics-guided state space search. Conﬂict Driven
Clause Learning (CDCL) SAT solvers, such as GRASP and
Chaff substantially altered the DPLL framework by adding
conﬂict analysis and clause learning. The key decisionmaking step in a CDCL SAT solver is using a branching
heuristic to select a variable from the current set of unassigned variables, and making a boolean assignment to that
variable. Variable selection has a dramatic effect on search
efﬁciency. The conﬂict-driven Variable State Independent
Dynamic Sum (VSIDS) heuristic and its variants have been
the leading branching heuristics for over 15 years. Their
dominance has recently been challenged by heuristics which
model variable selection as an online Multi-Armed Bandit
problem (Liang et al. 2016), where the propagated assignments are viewed as deterministic exploration in the MAB
framework.

The expSAT Solver
Given a CNF SAT formula F, let vars(F), uV ars(F) and
assign(F) denote the set of variables in F, the set of currently unassigned variables in F and the current partial assignment, respectively. In addition to F, expSAT also accepts ﬁve exploration parameters nW, lW, θstop , pexp and
ω, where 1 ≤ nW, lW ≤ uV ars(F), 0 < θstop , pexp , ω ≤
1. These parameters control the exploration aspects of expSAT.
Given a CDCL SAT solver, expSAT modiﬁes it as follows:
(I) Before each branching decision, if the search-height1
≤ θstop , with probability pexp , expSAT performs an exploration episode, consisting of a ﬁxed number nW of random
walks. Each walk consists of a limited number of random
steps. Each such step consists of (a) the uniform random selection of a currently unassigned step variable and assigning
a boolean value to it using a standard CDCL polarity heuristic, and (b) a followed by Unit Propagation (UP). A walk

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

8069

)|
We deﬁne search-height as follows: |assign(F
.
|vars(F )|

