The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

On Multiset Selection with Size Constraints∗
1

Chao Qian,1 Yibo Zhang,1 Ke Tang,2 Xin Yao,2
Anhui Province Key Lab of Big Data Analysis and Application, School of Computer Science and Technology,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China
2
Shenzhen Key Lab of Computational Intelligence, Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China
chaoqian@ustc.edu.cn, zyb233@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {tangk3, xiny}@sustc.edu.cn

many subset selection problems can be naturally generalized
to this framework. For example, for sensor placement, the
number of times of selecting one sensor can correspond to
the energy level of the sensor (Soma and Yoshida 2015).
Previous studies on multiset selection assumed that the
objective function is submodular. Note that for functions deﬁned over a multiset, submodularity does not imply the diminishing return property, called DR-submodularity (Soma
and Yoshida 2016). The latter is stronger, although they are
equivalent for functions over a subset. Soma et al. (2014)
ﬁrst proved that for monotone DR-submodular objective
functions, the greedy algorithm, which iteratively selects
one item with the largest marginal gain, can achieve a (1 −
1/e)-approximation guarantee. When the objective function
is relaxed to be monotone submodular, Alon et al. (2012)
showed that the generalized greedy algorithm, which can select multiple copies of the same item simultaneously in one
iteration, achieves a (1/2)(1 − 1/e)-approximation guarantee. This can be further improved to (1−1/e) by partial enumerations, but with an impractical computation time (Soma
et al. 2014). Note that the runtime of these algorithms is
polynomial w.r.t. the budget k. In (Soma and Yoshida 2016),
algorithms with runtime polynomial w.r.t. log k were developed, but with a loss  > 0 on the approximation ratio.
Besides size constraints, more complex constraints (e.g.,
knapsack and polymatroid) were also studied in (Soma et
al. 2014; Soma and Yoshida 2016). Recently, multiset selection without constraints has been considered. Gottschalk
and Peis (2015) proposed a (1/3)-approximation algorithm
for maximizing submodular functions; while for maximizing DR-submodular functions, a (1/(2 + ))-approximation
algorithm was provided in (Soma and Yoshida 2017).
This paper relaxes the assumption on submodularity. We
study the problem of Multiset Selection with size constraints, where the objective function is only required to be
monotone, not necessarily submodular. We propose a Pareto
Optimization method for this problem, brieﬂy called POMS.
The POMS method ﬁrst reformulates the original problem
as a bi-objective optimization problem that maximizes the
given objective f and minimizes the multiset size simultaneously, then employs a randomized iterative algorithm to
solve it, and ﬁnally selects the best solution satisfying the
size constraint from the produced set of solutions.
We theoretically investigate the performance of POMS.

Abstract
This paper considers the multiset selection problem with
size constraints, which arises in many real-world applications such as budget allocation. Previous studies required
the objective function f to be submodular, while we relax
this assumption by introducing the notion of the submodularity ratios (denoted by αf and βf ). We propose an anytime
randomized iterative approach POMS, which maximizes the
given objective f and minimizes the multiset size simultaneously. We prove that POMS using a reasonable time achieves
an approximation guarantee of max{1 − e−βf , (αf /2)(1 −
e−αf )}. Particularly, when f is submdoular, this bound is at
least as good as that of the previous greedy-style algorithms.
In addition, we give lower bounds on the submodularity ratio
for the objectives of budget allocation. Experimental results
on budget allocation as well as a more complex application,
namely, generalized inﬂuence maximization, exhibit the superior performance of the proposed approach.

Introduction
The subset selection problem, which selects a subset of
size at most k from a total set of n items for maximizing some given objective function f , arises in many applications, e.g., maximum coverage (Feige 1998), sensor
placement (Krause, Singh, and Guestrin 2008) and inﬂuence maximization (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003).
It is generally NP-hard. When the objective function f satisﬁes the monotone and submodular property, the greedy
algorithm can achieve a tight approximation guarantee of
1 − 1/e (Nemhauser, Wolsey, and Fisher 1978).
However, in many practical applications such as budget
allocation (Alon, Gamzu, and Tennenholtz 2012) and welfare maximization (Kapralov, Post, and Vondrák 2013), a
generalization of subset selection, i.e., multiset selection,
has to be considered. That is, an item can be selected by
multiple times instead of only once, and the objective function is deﬁned over a multiset instead of a subset. Moreover,
∗

This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2017YFB1003100,
2017YFB1003102), the NSFC (61603367, 61672478), the YESS
(2016QNRC001) and the Science and Technology Innovation
Committee Foundation of Shenzhen (ZDSYS201703031748284).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1395

