The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Manipulative Elicitation — A New Attack
on Elections with Incomplete Preferences
Palash Dey
palash@tifr.res.in
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai

However, in typical applications of voting in AI, collaborative ﬁltering for example, the number of alternatives is huge
and we have only partial orders over the set of alternatives
as preferences.
There have been many attempts to extend the use of voting theory in settings with incomplete preferences. The approach of Konczak and Lang (2005) was to study the possible and necessary winner problems. In these problems, the
input is a proﬁle of partial preferences and we want to compute the set of alternatives who wins (under some ﬁxed voting rule) in at least one completion of the proﬁle for the possible winner problem; for the necessary winner problem, we
want to compute the set of alternatives who wins in every
completion of the proﬁle. There have been substantial research effort in the last decade to better understand these two
problems (Lang et al. 2007; Pini et al. 2007; Walsh 2007;
Xia and Conitzer 2011; Betzler, Hemmann, and Niedermeier 2009; Chevaleyre et al. 2010; Betzler, Bredereck,
and Niedermeier 2010; Baumeister, Roos, and Rothe 2011;
Lang et al. 2012; Faliszewski et al. 2014; Dey, Misra, and
Narahari 2016b; 2016a; 2017; 2015; Dey and Misra 2017).
One of the main criticisms of this approach is that the definition of a necessary winner is so strong that none of the
alternatives may satisfy it whereas the deﬁnition of a possible winner is so relaxed that a large number of alternatives
may satisfy it. Moreover, the computational problem of ﬁnding the set of possible winners is NP-hard for most of the
common voting rules (ﬁnding the set of necessary winners
is also co-NP-hard for some voting rules, ranked pairs for
example) (Xia and Conitzer 2011).
Lu and Boutilier (2011) took a completely different approach to handle incomplete preferences and proposed a
worst case regret based approach for score based voting
rules. These voting rules assign some score to every alternative based on the proﬁle and select the alternatives with
the maximum (or minimum) score as winners. Many popular
voting rules, for example, scoring rules, maximin, Copeland,
etc. are score based voting rules. For score based voting
rules, intuitively speaking, the worst case regret, called maximum regret in (Lu and Boutilier 2011), of declaring an alternative w as a winner is the maximum possible difference
between the score of w and the score of a winning alternative
in any completion of the input partial proﬁle; the winners of
a partial proﬁle are the set of alternatives with the minimum

Abstract
Lu and Boutilier (2011) proposed a novel approach based on
“minimax regret” to use classical score based voting rules in
the setting where preferences can be any partial (instead of
complete) orders over the set of alternatives. We show here
that such an approach is vulnerable to a new kind of manipulation which was not present in the classical (where preferences are complete orders) world of voting. We call this
attack “manipulative elicitation.” More speciﬁcally, it may be
possible to (partially) elicit the preferences of the agents in a
way that makes some distinguished alternative win the election who may not be a winner if we elicit every preference
completely. More alarmingly, we show that the related computational task is polynomial time solvable for a large class
of voting rules which includes all scoring rules, maximin,
Copelandα for every α ∈ [0, 1], simpliﬁed Bucklin voting
rules, etc. We then show that introducing a parameter per pair
of alternatives which speciﬁes the minimum number of partial
preferences where this pair of alternatives must be comparable makes the related computational task of manipulative elicitation NP-complete for all common voting rules including a
class of scoring rules which includes the plurality, k-approval,
k-veto, veto, and Borda voting rules, maximin, Copelandα for
every α ∈ [0, 1], and simpliﬁed Bucklin voting rules. Hence,
in this work, we discover a fundamental vulnerability in using
minimax regret based approach in partial preferential setting
and propose a novel way to tackle it.

1

Introduction

Aggregating preferences of a set of agents over a set of alternatives is a fundamental problem in voting theory which
has been used in many applications in AI for making various
decisions. Prominent examples of such applications include
collaborative ﬁltering (Pennock, Horvitz, and Giles 2000),
similarity search (Fagin, Kumar, and Sivakumar 2003), winner determination in sports competitions (Betzler, Bredereck, and Niedermeier 2014), etc. (Moulin et al. 2016). In a
typical scenario of voting, we have a set of alternatives, a tuple of “preferences”, called a proﬁle, over the set of alternatives, and a voting rule which chooses a set of alternatives as
winners based on the proﬁle. Classically, preferences are often modeled as complete orders over the set of alternatives.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4670

