The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Behavior Is Everything — Towards Representing
Concepts with Sensorimotor Contingencies
Nicholas Hay, Michael Stark, Alexander Schlegel, Carter Wendelken,
Dennis Park, Eric Purdy, Tom Silver, D. Scott Phoenix, Dileep George
Vicarious AI, San Francisco, CA, USA
nick@vicarious.com

AI has seen remarkable progress in recent years, due to
a switch from hand-designed shallow representations, to
learned deep representations. While these methods excel with
plentiful training data, they are still far from the human ability to learn concepts from just a few examples by reusing
previously learned conceptual knowledge in new contexts.
We argue that this gap might come from a fundamental misalignment between human and typical AI representations:
while the former are grounded in rich sensorimotor experience, the latter are typically passive and limited to a few
modalities such as vision and text. We take a step towards
closing this gap by proposing an interactive, behavior-based
model that represents concepts using sensorimotor contingencies grounded in an agent’s experience. On a novel conceptual
learning and benchmark suite, we demonstrate that conceptually meaningful behaviors can be learned, given supervision
via training curricula.

1

(a)

DOWN
RIGHT
UP
LEFT

SIG0
SIG1

Abstract
SMC
1 2 3 4 5 6 7

t= 0
4
8
12

cl_self-in-container_vs_noncontainer

16

1 2 3 4 5 6 7

(b)

t= 0
4
8
12

ba_self-in-container_from_betweenpotential-containers

16
20
24

SMC
1: cl_self-in-left-corner_vs_on-hline
2: cl_self-in-right-corner_vs_on-hline
3: ba_self-in-potential-container_from_
left-touches-on-floor
4: ba_self-in-potential-container_from_
right-touches-on-floor
5: ba_self-on-something_from_directly-above
6: ba_self-ontop-object_from_left-toucheson-floor
7: ba_self-touches-target_from_right-onfloor_with_right-nontarget

Introduction

The ﬁeld of AI has seen remarkable progress in recent years,
fueled in large part by advances in deep representation learning. In narrow application domains and with enough training data, deep representations deliver results that approach
or exceed human performance (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012; Mnih et al. 2013; Silver et al. 2016; Lake et al.
2016).
Despite these advances, current deep representation
learning-based AI still faces two main challenges:
(1) There is a clear difference between how human conceptual understanding is grounded in rich, physical, sensorimotor interaction with the environment, and the typical
grounding of current deep learning systems that passively
associate sensory data with textual labels. As an example,
consider the human concept of containment, characterized
by being (un-)able to move oneself or a contained object
relative to the conﬁnes of a container. That is, containment
is constituted by a particular way of interacting with a container, or more generally (in the framing of sensorimotor
contingency theory): “(concepts) are themselves techniques
or means for handling what there is” (Noë 2015).

28
32
36
40
44
48
52
56

Figure 1: (Left) Example PixelWorld (PW) test environments. Red: agent (self), yellow: agent trajectory, white: objects, blue: ﬂoor & frame (see Fig. S11 for detailed annotation). (Right) Hierarchical SMC invocations rolled out over
time for two concepts (see Sect. 3.3) that share the same supply of low-level SMCs from the canonical curriculum (see
Sect. 3.4). Dots show time spent in SMCs (gray) or primitive actions: SIG0 (red), SIG1 (green), and direction (blue).
The active 7 of 26 SMCs included in the curriculum are
illustrated. Note that SMC 2 (cl self-in-right-corner vs onhline) is shared but used in different contexts by the two examples: it conﬁrms the container in (a), but rules it out in
(b), motivating the agent to move on to the actual container
to its left (via SMC 7).

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1861

