The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Targeted Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis via Embedding
Commonsense Knowledge into an Attentive LSTM
∗

†

Yukun Ma,∗ Haiyun Peng,† Erik Cambria†

Rolls-Royce@NTU Corporate Lab, Nanyang Technological University
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University

Hence, aspect-based sentiment analysis (ABSA) (Pontiki
et al. 2014; 2016; Poria, Cambria, and Gelbukh 2016) extends the typical setting of sentiment analysis with a more
realistic assumption that polarity is associated with speciﬁc
aspects (or product features) rather than the whole text unit.
For example, in the sentence “The design of the space is
good but the service is horrible”, the sentiment expressed towards the two aspects (“space” and “service”) is completely
opposite. Through aggregating sentiment analysis with aspects, ABSA allows the model to produce a ﬁne-grained understanding of people’s opinion towards a particular product.
Targeted (or target-dependent) sentiment classiﬁcation (Tang et al. 2016; Dong et al. 2014; Wang et al. 2017),
instead, resolves the sentiment polarity of a given target in
its context, assuming that a sentence might express different
opinions towards different targeted entities. For instance, in
the sentence “I just log on my [facebook]. [Transformers] is
boring”, the sentiment expressed towards [Transformers] is
negative, while there is no clear sentiment for [facebook].
Recently, targeted ABSA (Saeidi et al. 2016) has attempted
to tackle the challenges of both ABSA and targeted sentiment analysis. The task is to jointly detect the aspect category and resolve the polarity of aspects with respect to a
given target.
Deep learning methods (Nguyen and Shirai 2015; Wang
et al. 2016; Tang et al. 2016; Tang, Qin, and Liu 2016;
Wang et al. 2017) have achieved great accuracy when applied to ABSA and targeted sentiment analysis. Especially,
neural sequential models, such as long short-term memory
(LSTM) networks (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), are
of growing interest for their capacity of representing sequential information. Moreover, most of these sequence-based
methods incorporate the attention mechanism, which has its
root in the alignment model of machine translation (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014). Such mechanism takes an
external memory and representations of a sequence as input
and produces a probability distribution quantifying the concerns in each position of the sequence.
Despite these advances in sentiment analysis, we identify
three problems remaining unsolved in current state-of-theart methods. Firstly, a given target might consist of multiple
instances (mentions of the same target) or multiple words
in a sentence, existing research assumes all instances are of
equal importance and simply computes an average vector

Abstract
Analyzing people’s opinions and sentiments towards certain
aspects is an important task of natural language understanding. In this paper, we propose a novel solution to targeted
aspect-based sentiment analysis, which tackles the challenges
of both aspect-based sentiment analysis and targeted sentiment analysis by exploiting commonsense knowledge. We
augment the long short-term memory (LSTM) network with
a hierarchical attention mechanism consisting of a targetlevel attention and a sentence-level attention. Commonsense
knowledge of sentiment-related concepts is incorporated into
the end-to-end training of a deep neural network for sentiment classiﬁcation. In order to tightly integrate the commonsense knowledge into the recurrent encoder, we propose an
extension of LSTM, termed Sentic LSTM. We conduct experiments on two publicly released datasets, which show that the
combination of the proposed attention architecture and Sentic LSTM can outperform state-of-the-art methods in targeted
aspect sentiment tasks.

Introduction
In recent years, sentiment analysis (Cambria et al. 2017a)
has become increasingly popular for processing social media data on online communities, blogs, wikis, microblogging
platforms, and other online collaborative media. Sentiment
analysis is a branch of affective computing research (Poria et
al. 2017) that aims to classify text into either positive or negative, but sometimes also neutral (Chaturvedi et al. 2017).
Most of the literature is on English language but recently an
increasing number of publications is tackling the multilinguality issue (Lo et al. 2017).
While most works approach it as a simple categorization
problem, sentiment analysis is actually a suitcase research
problem (Cambria et al. 2017b) that requires tackling many
natural language processing (NLP) tasks, including named
entity recognition (Ma, Cambria, and Gao 2016), word polarity disambiguation (Xia et al. 2015), personality recognition (Majumder et al. 2017), sarcasm detection (Poria et al.
2016), and aspect extraction. The last one, in particular, is
an extremely important subtask that, if ignored, can consistently reduce the accuracy of sentiment classiﬁcation in the
presence of multiple opinion targets.
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5876

