The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Scheduling in Visual Fog Computing:
NP-Completeness and Practical Efﬁcient Solutions
Hong-Min Chu

Shao-Wen Yang

National Taiwan University
r04922031@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Intel Corporation
shao-wen.yang@intel.com

Padmanabhan Pillai

Abstract

1A
Task 1

Task 2

Job

The visual fog paradigm envisions tens of thousands of heterogeneous, camera-enabled edge devices distributed across
the Internet, providing live sensing for a myriad of different
visual processing applications. The scale, computational demands, and bandwidth needed for visual computing pipelines
necessitates ofﬂoading intelligently to distributed computing
infrastructure, including the cloud, Internet gateway devices,
and the edge devices themselves. This paper focuses on the
visual fog scheduling problem of assigning the visual computing tasks to various devices to optimize network utilization.
We ﬁrst prove this problem is NP-complete, and then formulate a practical, efﬁcient solution. We demonstrate sub-minute
computation time to optimally schedule 20,000 tasks across
over 7,000 devices, and just 7-minute execution time to place
60,000 tasks across 20,000 devices, showing our approach is
ready to meet the scale challenges introduced by visual fog.

1

Yen-Kuang Chen

Intel Corporation
Intel Corporation
padmanabhan.s.pillai@intel.com yen-kuang.chen@intel.com

Job A
Job B

1A

2A

1B

2B

2A

1B

Task Parallelism

Data Parallelism

2B

Task & Data Parallelism

Figure 1: Parallelisms in Visual Fog Computing

but streaming every bit of continuous video streams to the
cloud for processing is hardly possible. The challenge lies in
the fact that visual data are continuous, mandating not only
signiﬁcant computation but also outstanding bandwidth.
Fog (Bonomi et al. 2012; Botta et al. 2016) is a paradigm
for collaboratively using edge devices, intermediate gateways,
and servers on premise or in the cloud as the computing platform. The problem of visual fog computing is to use the
fog paradigm to process continuous video streams in real
time; namely, to generate results continuously in a timely
basis based on the underlying applications. Ofﬂoading is a
technique for a device to outsource tasks to another device
(Satyanarayanan et al. 2009; Kumar et al. 2013) for better
efﬁciency, lower latency or lower power consumption. Ofﬂoading can be particularly valuable in the context of visual
fog, due to the large computational demands of visual processing tasks, and the relatively limited capabilities of edge
devices. However, greedy ofﬂoading can be catastrophic, due
to the high bandwidth data streams and shared upstream resource among multiple pipelines. Thus, global coordinated
scheduling is needed.
Scheduling in visual fog computing is much harder than
the counterpart in cloud computing because (1) devices are
way more heterogeneous in terms of resource types and resource capacities, (2) there are usually a few orders of magnitude more devices, and (3) there are more constraints in terms
of device connectivity and task dependency. Unfortunately,
the state of the art schedulers in cloud computing do not take
into account device connectivity and task dependency as they
don’t exist in cloud computing. The current schedulers also
addressed the scheduling problem at a much smaller scale.
The differences between scheduling in cloud computing and
scheduling in visual fog computing will be described in detail
in Sec. 2.
The goal of this paper is to address the global scheduling
problem for visual fog computing. Scheduling covers spatial

Introduction

Visual data are collected everywhere nowadays. Surveillance
cameras have been around every street corner across the
world. There are more than 4 million cameras in UK and
over 20 million in China. This can serve as the foundation
of smart cities for physical security, smart transportation, etc.
There are also increased number of cameras in retail stores
for customer analytics and directed advertising. Cameras also
penetrated into more and more households for security, senior
care, baby care, etc. IHS forecasted that the amount of data
generated by video surveillance cameras installed globally
will be more than 859 petabytes per day by 2017 (IHS 2015).
The visual data are rich in content and can open vast analytics
opportunities.
However, the visual data are signiﬁcantly underutilized
due to the computation requirements and the outstanding
data volume that can incur. The cloud computing paradigm
has been well evolved in the past decade for easily scaling out
with big data frameworks like Hadoop MapReduce, Spark,
Spark Streaming, etc. However, the bounded bandwidth remains a bottleneck for scaling out video analytics applications; it is also known as the problem of live video analytics
or streaming video analytics. Speciﬁcally, the cloud has been
very scalable for computer vision and machine learning tasks
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6127

