The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Graph Convolutional Networks with
Argument-Aware Pooling for Event Detection
Thien Huu Nguyen

Ralph Grishman

Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Oregon
Eugene, Oregon 97403, USA
thien@cs.uoregon.edu

Computer Science Department
New York University
New York, NY 10003 USA
grishman@cs.nyu.edu
2016b). In the basic implementation, CNNs apply the temporal convolution operation over the consecutive k-grams1
in the sentences, attempting to generate the latent structures
that are informative for ED (Nguyen and Grishman 2015;
Chen et al. 2015). The disadvantage of such consecutive
convolution is the inability to capture the non-consecutive
k-grams that can span words far apart in the sentences.
Those non-consecutive k-grams are necessary to recognize event triggers in some situations. For example, in the
example above, the non-consecutive 3-grams “ofﬁcer was
ﬁred” should be considered to correctly identify the event
type End-Position for the second word “ﬁred”. The nonconsecutive CNN model (NCNN) in (Nguyen and Grishman 2016b) seeks to overcome this problem by operating the
temporal convolution over all the non-consecutive k-grams
in the sentences, leading to the state-of-the-art CNN model
for ED.
Unfortunately, due to the consideration of all possible
non-consecutive k-grams, the non-consecutive CNN architecture might model unnecessary and noisy information, potentially impairing the prediction performance for ED. In
particular, NCNN utilizes the max-pooling operation to aggregate the convolution scores over all the non-consecutive
k-grams. As such k grams might include irrelevant or misleading sequences of words, the max-pooling might incorrectly focus on those k-grams and make a wrong ﬁnal prediction for ED. One example is the non-consecutive 3-gram
“car was ﬁred” in the example above. In contrast to the correct 3-gram “ofﬁcer was ﬁred”, “car was ﬁred” suggests the
event type Attack for the second word “ﬁred”, causing the
confusion or failure of NCNN to predict the true event type
of “End-Position” in this situation.
One way to circumvent this issue for NCNN is to notice
that “police ofﬁcer” is the subject of the second word “ﬁred”
while “a car” does not have much direct connection with
the second “ﬁred” in this example. Guided by this intuition,
in this paper, we propose to perform the convolution operation over the syntactic dependency graphs of the sentences to
perform event detection. Syntactic dependency graphs represents sentences as directed trees with head-modiﬁer dependency arcs between related words (Mcdonald and Pereira
2006; Koo, Carreras, and Collins 2008). Each word in such

Abstract
The current neural network models for event detection have
only considered the sequential representation of sentences.
Syntactic representations have not been explored in this area
although they provide an effective mechanism to directly link
words to their informative context for event detection in the
sentences. In this work, we investigate a convolutional neural
network based on dependency trees to perform event detection. We propose a novel pooling method that relies on entity mentions to aggregate the convolution vectors. The extensive experiments demonstrate the beneﬁts of the dependencybased convolutional neural networks and the entity mentionbased pooling method for event detection. We achieve the
state-of-the-art performance on widely used datasets with
both perfect and predicted entity mentions.

Introduction
Event Detection (ED) is an important information extraction
task of natural language processing that seeks to recognize
instances of speciﬁed types of events (event mentions) in
text. Each event mention is often presented within a single
sentence in which an event trigger is selected to associate
with that event mention. Event triggers are generally single verbs or nominalizations that serve as the main words
to evoke the corresponding events. The event detection task,
more precisely stated, aims to detect event triggers and classify them into speciﬁc types of interest. For instance, consider the following sentence with two words “ﬁred”:
“The police ofﬁcer who ﬁred into a car full of teenagers was
ﬁred Tuesday”
In this example, an ED system should be able to realize that
the ﬁrst occurrence of “ﬁred” is an event trigger of type Attack while the second “ﬁred” takes End-Position as its event
type. ED is a challenging task, as an expression might evoke
different events depending on contexts (illustrated in our
previous example with the word “ﬁred”), and the same event
might be presented in various expressions (e.g, the trigger
words “killed”, “shot” or “beat for the event type Attack).
The current state-of-the-art approach for ED employs
deep learning models in which convolutional neural networks (CNN) are the typical architectures (Nguyen and
Grishman 2015; Chen et al. 2015; Nguyen and Grishman
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

5900

k is often chosen to be some ﬁxed value.

