The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Asynchronous Doubly
Stochastic Sparse Kernel Learning
Bin Gu,1 Xin Miao,2 Zhouyuan Huo,1 Heng Huang1 *
1

Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, USA
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Texas at Arlington, USA
big10@pitt.edu, xin.miao@mavs.uta.edu, zhouyuan.huo@pitt.edu, heng.huang@pitt.edu
2

worse, the kernel methods normally have the computational
complexity O(l3 ) for the training. To address the scalability
issue of kernel methods in the training step, several decomposition algorithms (Takahashi and Nishi 2006) have been
proposed for training the kernel methods. However, even for
the state-of-the-art implementations (e.g. LIBSVM software
package), the observed computational complexity is O(lκ )
where 1 < κ < 2.3 (Chang and Lin 2011a). More related
works of training kernel methods are discussed in the next
section. To sum up, in the current big data era, the existing
kernel methods are not scalable enough at the training step.
Besides the scalability issue at the training step, traditional
kernel methods are also not scalable at the predicting step.
Speciﬁcally, the computational complexity for predicting
a testing sample is O(l), because normally the number of
support vectors grows linearly with the sample size. Thus,
the computational complexity of predicting a testing set with
similar size of training set is O(l2 ). To address the scalability
issue of kernel methods in the predicting step, a compact (or
sparse) model is preferred. The direct method for obtaining
a compact model is adding sparse constraint (normally 1norm) on the coefﬁcients of the model. For example, (Zhu
et al. 2004) imposed the 1-norm on the SVC formulation.
(Yen et al. 2014) imposed 1-norm on the random features.
Li, Yang, and Xing (2005) reformulated Lasso into a form
isomorphic to SVC, which generates a sparse solution in
the nonlinear feature space. However, these methods are not
scalable at the training step.
To address the scalability issues of kernel methods at the
training and predicting steps, in this paper, we ﬁrst introduce a general sparse kernel learning formulation with the
random feature approximation, where the loss functions are
possibly non-convex. Then, we propose a new asynchronous
parallel doubly stochastic algorithm for sparse kernel learning (AsyDSSKL). We believe this is very important for kernel methods for four reasons. 1) Generality: AsyDSSKL
works for a general class of sparse kernel methods based
on the random feature approximation, where the loss function is possibly non-convex. 2) Efﬁcient computation: The
pivotal step of AsyDSSKL is to compute the doubly stochastic gradient on a mini-batch of samples and a selected coordinate, which is quite efﬁcient. 3) Comprehensive convergence guarantees: AsyDSSKL achieves a sublinear rate
when the smooth loss functions are convex or non-convex.

Abstract
Kernel methods have achieved tremendous success in the past
two decades. In the current big data era, data collection has
grown tremendously. However, existing kernel methods are not
scalable enough both at the training and predicting steps. To
address this challenge, in this paper, we ﬁrst introduce a general sparse kernel learning formulation based on the random
feature approximation, where the loss functions are possibly
non-convex. Then we propose a new asynchronous parallel
doubly stochastic algorithm for large scale sparse kernel learning (AsyDSSKL). To the best our knowledge, AsyDSSKL is
the ﬁrst algorithm with the techniques of asynchronous parallel
computation and doubly stochastic optimization. We also provide a comprehensive convergence guarantee to AsyDSSKL.
Importantly, the experimental results on various large-scale
real-world datasets show that, our AsyDSSKL method has the
signiﬁcant superiority on the computational efﬁciency at the
training and predicting steps over the existing kernel methods.

Introduction
Kernel methods have achieved tremendous success in the
past two decades for non-linear learning problems. There
are a large number of successful and popular kernel methods (Vapnik 1998; Zhu and Hastie 2005; Zhu et al. 2004;
Baudat and Anouar 2000; Vovk 2013; Li, Yang, and Xing
2005) for various learning problems. We take binary classiﬁcation and regression for example. Support vector classiﬁcation (SVC) (Vapnik 1998), kernel logistic regression (Zhu
and Hastie 2005) and 1-norm SVC (Zhu et al. 2004) are the
popular kernel methods for binary classiﬁcation. Support vector regression (Vapnik 1998), kernel ridge regression (Vovk
2013) and kernel Lasso (Li, Yang, and Xing 2005) are the
popular kernel methods for regression. These kernel methods
have been successfully applied to solve various real-world applications (such as computational biology (Schölkopf, Tsuda,
and Vert 2004) and remote sensing data analysis (CampsValls and Bruzzone 2009)).
However, traditional kernel methods need to store and
compute the kernel matrix with the size of O(l2 ) where l is
the training sample size. When l is large, the kernel matrix
can be neither stored in local memory nor computed. Even
* To whom all correspondence should be addressed.
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3085

