The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Sketch Worksheets in STEM Classrooms: Two Deployments
Kenneth D. Forbus,1 Bridget Garnier,3 Basil Tikoff,2
Wayne Marko,3 Madeline Usher,1 Matthew McLure1
1

Computer Science, Northwestern University, 2133 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL, 60208, USA
Department of Geoscience, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1215 W. Dayton Street, Madison, Wisconsin, 53706
3
Earth & Planetary Sciences, Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL, 60208, USA
forbus@northwestern.edu

2

2017). One reason is that grading sketches is very time-consuming, compared to short-answer question forms. Providing support for semi-automatic grading of sketches can potentially increase their use in STEM education. The same
mechanisms, if employed correctly, can also provide on-thespot feedback to students, anytime and anywhere, similar to
the functionality provided by cognitive tutors (Koedinger et
al. 1997) for non-spatial subjects.
Sketch worksheets (Yin et al. 2010) are our approach to
providing these capabilities for education. As described below, Sketch Worksheets use ideas from cognitive science
and AI technology to visually analyze student sketches, and
provide advice based on comparisons with instructor
sketches via analogy. Importantly, domain experts and instructors author sketch worksheets, as opposed to AI experts
or software developers needing to be involved. They have
now been developed and deployed in two very different
kinds of classes, including the use of sketch worksheets developed by one university in classes at another. This paper
summarizes these experiences in deployment. We start by
outlining the underlying technology, to set the stage. Next
we describe their deployment in geoscience, including the
process of developing them for an introductory geoscience
class, and lessons learned from using them in classes. Then
we describe how they have been used in a Knowledge Representation & Reasoning course, a topic far from the disciplines that motivated their original development. We close
with conclusions and future work.

Abstract
Sketching can be a valuable tool for science education, but it
is currently underutilized. Sketch worksheets were developed
to help change this, by using AI technology to give students
immediate feedback and to give instructors assistance in
grading. Sketch worksheets use visual representations automatically computed by CogSketch, which are combined with
conceptual information from the OpenCyc ontology. Feedback is provided to students by comparing an instructor’s
sketch to a student’s sketch, using the Structure-Mapping Engine. This paper describes our experiences in deploying
sketch worksheets in two types of classes: Geoscience and
AI. Sketch worksheets for introductory geoscience classes
were developed by geoscientists at University of WisconsinMadison, authored using CogSketch and used in classes at
both Wisconsin and Northwestern University. Sketch worksheets were also developed and deployed for a knowledge
representation and reasoning course at Northwestern. Our
experience indicates that sketch worksheets can provide helpful on-the-spot feedback to students, and significantly improve grading efficiency, to the point where sketching assignments can be more practical to use broadly in STEM education.

Introduction
Sketching is a natural way for people to think through spatial
ideas, and to communicate about these ideas with others.
This makes it attractive for STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics) education, and there is indeed evidence that it can both help students learn and can be
used to help assess student knowledge (e.g. Ainsworth et al.
2011; Jee et al. 2014). In geoscience, for example, sketching
is heavily used by practitioners. Paradoxically, a survey of
geoscience instructors indicates that, while most of them believe that sketching is useful for students as well, they use
sketching assignments less than they desire (Garnier et al.

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7665

