The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

An Automated Employee Timetabling System for Small Businesses
Richard Hoshino, Aaron Slobodin, William Bernoudy
Quest University Canada, Squamish, British Columbia, Canada

Solving the problem for Canadian customs ofﬁcers was a
relatively simple problem given that every individual had the
exact same job description with only two possible shift patterns: either 8-hour shifts with ﬁve days on and two days
off, or 11.5-hour shifts with four days on and four days
off. The ﬁnal posted schedule was an N × 56 matrix, with
N being the number of staff. The Customs Union adopted
the approach known as the Serial Dictatorship (Hoshino and
Raible-Clark 2014), where the ofﬁcers picked their row (i.e.
their shifts for the next eight weeks) based on their seniority.
This process is sub-optimal since employees do not have
the opportunity to indicate their preferences for working certain hours on speciﬁc days, causing an enormous gap between satisﬁed veteran employees who received the shifts
they wanted and unsatisﬁed rookies who did not.
A much better solution would have been to create an ILP
to maximize preference points, where the objective function
is Σe Σd Σs Se · Pe,d,s · Xe,d,s , with Se being the seniority of
employee e, Pe,d,s indicating e’s preference to work on day
d in shift s, and Xe,d,s being the binary variable indicating
whether e is assigned to work on that speciﬁed day and shift.
However, this improved solution would not have been sufﬁcient for small businesses: it is unreasonable to ask staff
to commit to a rotating 56-day schedule; employees want
schedules that are more ﬂexible than the two shift patterns
described above; and unlike customs ofﬁcers, employees
have different roles and responsibilities.
For example, at the most popular cafe in our community, the 30 staff ﬁll multiple roles (barista, line worker, and
back-of-kitchen baker), with numerous employees qualiﬁed
for more than one role. Employees want morning shifts on
some days and evening shifts on others. They have many
hard constraints on which shifts and days they are unavailable while expressing strong preferences for certain roles,
such as being a barista on a busy shift and a line worker on a
slow shift. Moreover, they have different levels of seniority.
The cafe manager spent up to six hours a week constructing
weekly schedules for her staff by hand, a process that was
time-consuming and frustrating to both her and her team.
The other two authors of this paper are undergraduates.
As frequent customers at this cafe, we were familiar with the
manager’s weekly scheduling conundrum and were eager to
tackle a real-world problem. Last year, we successfully deployed our AI-based automated timetabler for this business.

Abstract
Employee scheduling is one of the most difﬁcult challenges
facing any small business owner. The problem becomes more
complex when employees with different levels of seniority
indicate preferences for speciﬁc roles in certain shifts and
request ﬂexible work hours outside of the standard eighthour block. Many business owners and managers, who cannot afford (or choose not to use) commercially-available
timetabling apps, spend numerous hours creating sub-optimal
schedules by hand, leading to low staff morale.
In this paper, we explain how two undergraduate students
generalized the Nurse Scheduling Problem to take into account multiple roles and ﬂexible work hours, and implemented a user-friendly automated timetabler based on a fourdimensional integer linear program. This system has been
successfully deployed at two businesses in our community,
each with 20+ employees: a coffee shop and a health clinic.

Introduction
The Nurse Scheduling Problem (NSP) seeks to assign shifts
to nurses at a hospital. Each nurse has hard constraints on
days they must have off, as well as soft constraints on desired
and undesired shifts during each 24-hour day. The challenge
is to ensure that all of the nurses have a feasible schedule
while simultaneously satisfying the hospital’s requirement
that a certain number of nurses be working at all times. This
well-known operations research problem is NP-hard.
Given the applications of the NSP to ﬁelds other than
health care, numerous researchers have tackled this problem
over many years (Ernst et al. 2004), developing sophisticated
algorithms that involve methods in constraint programming,
including simulated annealing and Tabu search. Many of
these methods have found their way into commerciallyavailable scheduling applications that are used by organizations, especially large businesses with 100+ employees.
The lead author is a former employee of the Government
of Canada, who helped implement an Integer Linear Program (ILP) solver to optimize the allocation of shifts to customs ofﬁcers at airports. The rotating 56-day schedules were
created by applying the NSP to this speciﬁc context, where
each 30-minute block had a required number of ofﬁcers to
reduce waiting times for passengers clearing customs.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7673

