The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Dual Set Multi-Label Learning∗
Chong Liu,1,2 Peng Zhao,1,2 Sheng-Jun Huang,3 Yuan Jiang,1,2 Zhi-Hua Zhou1,2

1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing 210023, China
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 211106, China
{liuc, zhaop, jiangy, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, huangsj@nuaa.edu.cn
2

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new learning framework named
dual set multi-label learning, where there are two sets of labels, and an object has one and only one positive label in each
set. Compared to general multi-label learning, the exclusive
relationship among labels within the same set, and the pairwise inter-set label relationship are much more explicit and
more likely to be fully exploited. To handle such kind of problems, a novel boosting style algorithm with model-reuse and
distribution adjusting mechanisms is proposed to make the
two label sets help each other. In addition, theoretical analyses are presented to show the superiority of learning from dual
label sets to learning directly from all labels. To empirically
evaluate the performance of our approach, we conduct experiments on two manually collected real-world datasets along
with an adapted dataset. Experimental results validate the effectiveness of our approach for dual set multi-label learning.

/DEHO6HW
&DOOLJUDSKHUV

/DEHO6HW
)RQWV

;L]KL:DQJ

5XQQLQJ)RQW

6KDRML+H

5HJXODU)RQW

/RQJML/L

&OHULFDO)RQW

0HQJIX=KDR

6HPL5XQQLQJ)RQW

Figure 1: A real-world example of dual set multi-label learning. It shows calligraphy works of the same Chinese character ’Zhi’, where calligraphers and fonts are two label sets.

can be annotated according to its company and genre, where
companies and genres form the dual set of multiple labels. It
is also noteworthy that in addition to the exclusive relationship among the labels within the same set, the inter-set relationship is usually available. For example, it is well-known
that the famous Chinese calligrapher Xizhi Wang is good at
running font; Porsche is good at producing sports cars; Pixar
focuses on animated movies.
Obviously, in these cases, the relationship among labels
becomes much more clear than in general multi-label learning. Directly employing traditional multi-label learning algorithms to solve such problems will lead to signiﬁcant disadvantages. On one hand, all labels will be equally treated,
which implies that algorithm needs to decide the relevance
for every label, resulting a high computational cost; on the
other hand, the algorithm neglects the exclusive relationship
within the label sets.
To address these issues, in this paper, we propose a novel
learning framework, dual set multi-label learning (DSML).
We also propose an effective algorithm to solve this problem
based on the boosting framework. Speciﬁcally, two sample
distributions are maintained for dual label sets, one for each
set. And we make two base classiﬁers reused by each other
to utilize the information embedded in the other label set.
Moreover, the sample distributions are jointly adjusted such
that the mistakes on one model will be made up by the other
model. In this way, the proposed algorithm is expected to

Introduction
In many real-world tasks, an object can be naturally associated with multiple labels. Multi-label learning is proposed
and studied to address such kind of problems. Given the
training set, multi-label learning aims to learn a predictor
which is able to classify multiple labels at the same time.
For an unseen instance, the predicator is used to answer the
relevant/irrelevant question on each label.
In this paper, we study a new setting where there are two
sets of labels, and an object has one and only one positive
label from each set. In other words, each instance always
has two labels, and the labels from each of the two sets are
exclusive. For example, as shown in Figure 1, the same Chinese character pronounced as ’Zhi’ can be written by different people in different calligraphic fonts. Given a character
from a calligraphy work, we may want to know who wrote
it and which font it belongs to. Here the candidates calligrapher and font correspond to two sets of labels. In fact, this
kind of problems are very common in real applications. For
instance, a car can be labeled with two labels: brand and
type. Given a car image, we may want to know which company produced it and which type it belongs to. Also, a movie
∗
This research was supported by the NSFC (61673201), 973
Program (2014CB340501), and JiangsuSF (BK20150754).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3635

