The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Deep Structured Learning for
Visual Relationship Detection
1

Yaohui Zhu,1,2 Shuqiang Jiang1,2
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{yaohui.zhu}@vipl.ict.ac.cn,{sqjiang}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

Object location

In the research area of computer vision and artiﬁcial intelligence, learning the relationships of objects is an important
way to deeply understand images. Most of recent works detect visual relationship by learning objects and predicates respectively in feature level, but the dependencies between objects and predicates have not been fully considered. In this
paper, we introduce deep structured learning for visual relationship detection. Speciﬁcally, we propose a deep structured
model, which learns relationship by using feature-level prediction and label-level prediction to improve learning ability
of only using feature-level predication. The feature-level prediction learns relationship by discriminative features, and the
label-level prediction learns relationships by capturing dependencies between objects and predicates based on the learnt
relationship of feature level. Additionally, we use structured
SVM (SSVM) loss function as our optimization goal, and
decompose this goal into the subject, predicate, and object optimizations which become more simple and more independent. Our experiments on the Visual Relationship Detection (VRD) dataset and the large-scale Visual Genome (VG)
dataset validate the effectiveness of our method, which outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

Triplet representation
<person, next to, horse>
<horse, carry, bag>
<bag, in, basket>
<basket, carry, bag>
<basket, on, horse>
<grass, under, trees>

Results of visual relationship detection
Figure 1: The results of visual relationship detection contain: 1) the location of objects and the concept of objects, 2)
triplet representation of two objects.

(VQA) (Santoro et al. 2017), and object detection (Zhang et
al. 2017).
Visual relationship detection is to detect all possible relations between objects. As shown in Figure 1, an object relationship in an image I can be represented by R<sub,pre,obj> ,
where sub = {cs , os }, obj = {co , oo }, os , oo are bounding
boxes of sub, obj respectively, cs , co belong to classiﬁcation
space of object, pre belongs to classiﬁcation space of predicate. The goal of visual relationship detection is to extract
a series of relationships A = {R<> , R<> , · · · , R<> } from
I.
The main challenges of visual relationship detection are:
1) The size of the classiﬁcation space of possible relationships is huge. 2) The long-tail distribution of relationships
lead to an extremely imbalanced dataset, where it is hard
to collect enough training images for all the relationships,
especially for infrequent relationships. For example, Visual Genome dataset (Krishna et al. 2017) contains over 75K
distinct visual relationships, and the number of samples for
each relationship ranges from just a handful to over 10K.
A natural approach to detect visual relationship is to treat
it as a classiﬁcation task. But this approach may work in a
restricted context where the number of predicted space is
moderate, such strategy would meet with a fundamental difﬁculty in a large number of imbalanced classes.

Introduction
Although signiﬁcant progress has been made on image
recognition, including both global image classiﬁcation
(Szegedy et al. 2015; He et al. 2016; Szegedy et al. 2017)
and local object detection (Ren et al. 2015; Dai et al. 2016),
with the assistance of deep learning techniques (LeCun,
Bengio, and Hinton 2015) and large scale training data
(Deng et al. 2009; Xiao et al. 2010; Krishna et al. 2017),
there still exists a huge gap in deep understanding of images.
Recently, visual relationship detection has attracted more
and more research attentions. Investigating on this problem
can go one step further to understand images, and should be
a potentially important topic in artiﬁcial intelligence. Furthermore, visual relationship, reﬂects relations between two objects such as spatial relations, action relations, is a
description of the ﬁner granularity of objects in the image.
In addition, visual relationship is also useful for improving
image retrieval (Lu et al. 2016), visual question answering
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7623

