The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Plasticity-Centric Approach to Train
the Non-Differential Spiking Neural Networks
Tielin Zhang,1,2 Yi Zeng,1,2,3 Dongcheng Zhao,1,3 Mengting Shi1,3
1

2

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{tielin.zhang, yi.zeng}@ia.ac.cn
mainly for the process of temporal information. While SNNs
are more biologically plausible, hence more natural to interpret the information processing mechanisms of the brain,
and are relatively energy efﬁcient.
The underlying theories of DNNs are considered to be
inspired by the brain from various perspectives. The convolutional neural network is considered to be inspired by
the visual cortical processing of mammalian brain (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015). The recurrent neural network learns from the Hopﬁeld network which gets the inspiration from the hippocampus CA3 (Zhang et al. 2016).
Many other versions of DNNs are also powered by different brain mechanisms, such as attention (Xu et al. 2015;
Zhang, Zeng, and Xu 2016), memory (Sukhbaatar et al.
2015; Zhang et al. 2016), equilibrium states (Scellier and
Bengio 2017) which have shown their effectiveness on many
speciﬁc tasks.
The principles of neurons, synapses and networks in biological systems are more complex than these in DNNs (Hassabis et al. 2017; Helmstaedter 2015). For example, it has
been proved that the function of a single biological neuron
with complex dendritic branches needs a three-layered artiﬁcial neural network which is composed of hundreds of
hidden-layer neurons to simulate (Hausser and Mel 2003).
From this perspective, one possible way to improve DNNs
is turning to biological neural networks.
The spiking neural networks are considered to be the
third generation of neural networks which are more powerful on the processing of both spatial and temporal information (Maass 1997). Firstly, the neuron models are more biologically realistic, and the neuron will not be activated until
the membrane potential reach the threshold (e.g. the leakyintegrated and ﬁre model (LIF) makes SNNs more energy
efﬁcient). Secondly, the membrane potential will be nonlinear leaky or increased with different inputs, which makes
SNN good at processing nonlinear information. Thirdly, the
synaptic weights between neurons are time-sensitive and
will be changed according to the relative arriving time of
pre- and post-synaptic neuron spikes, which makes SNN
easier to process both spatial and temporal information.
Fourthly, different computing costs in neurons and synapses
cause various kinds of time delays which will contribute to
the asynchronous computation of SNN.
Due to the relevance with the biological brain from the

Abstract
Many efforts have been taken to train spiking neural networks (SNNs), but most of them still need improvements
due to the discontinuous and non-differential characteristics
of SNNs. While the mammalian brains solve these kinds of
problems by integrating a series of biological plasticity learning rules. In this paper, we will focus on two biological plausible methodologies and try to solve these catastrophic training problems in SNNs. Firstly, the biological neural network
will try to keep a balance between inputs and outputs on both
the neuron and the network levels. Secondly, the biological
synaptic weights will be passively updated by the changes of
the membrane potentials of the neighbour-hood neurons, and
the plasticity of synapses will not propagate back to other
previous layers. With these biological inspirations, we propose Voltage-driven Plasticity-centric SNN (VPSNN), which
includes four steps, namely: feed forward inference, unsupervised equilibrium state learning, supervised last layer learning and passively updating synaptic weights based on spiketiming dependent plasticity (STDP). Finally we get the accuracy of 98.52% on the hand-written digits classiﬁcation task
on MNIST. In addition, with the help of a visualization tool,
we try to analyze the black box of SNN and get better understanding of what beneﬁts have been acquired by the proposed
method.1

Introduction
Neural network models are essential for developing Artiﬁcial Intelligence, since they are inspired by the brain at multiple levels of details and practically useful in many application areas. Deep neural networks (DNNs) and Spiking Neural Networks(SNNs) have attracted many attentions for different reasons. DNNs have shown their success on visual
and audio recognition, natural language processing (LeCun,
Bengio, and Hinton 2015), even on decision oriented learning tasks such as Atair 2600 games (Mnih et al. 2015) and
the game Go (Silver et al. 2016). In different types of DNNs,
the feed-forward type (e.g. convolutional DNN) is designed
mainly for the abstraction of spatial information, and the recurrent type (e.g. long-short term memory DNN) is designed
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Tielin Zhang and Yi Zeng contributed to this paper equally
and should be regarded as co-ﬁrst authors. Dongcheng Zhao and
Mengting Shi contributed to this paper equally.

620

