The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Binary Generative Adversarial Networks for Image Retrieval
Jingkuan Song,1 Tao He,1 Lianli Gao,1 Xing Xu,1 Alan Hanjalic,2 Heng Tao Shen1∗
1

Center for Future Media and School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China.
2
Delft University of Technology, Netherlands. {jingkuan.song, hetaoconquer}@gmail.com,
{lianli.gao,xing.xu}@uestc.edu.cn, a.hanjalic@tudelft.nl, shenhengtao@hotmail.com

functions, which can be generally expressed as:

Abstract

b = h (x) ∈ {0, 1}

The most striking successes in image retrieval using deep
hashing have mostly involved discriminative models, which
require labels. In this paper, we use binary generative adversarial networks (BGAN) to embed images to binary codes in
an unsupervised way. By restricting the input noise variable
of generative adversarial networks (GAN) to be binary and
conditioned on the features of each input image, BGAN can
simultaneously learn a binary representation per image, and
generate an image plausibly similar to the original one. In the
proposed framework, we address two main problems: 1) how
to directly generate binary codes without relaxation? 2) how
to equip the binary representation with the ability of accurate image retrieval? We resolve these problems by proposing new sign-activation strategy and a loss function steering
the learning process, which consists of new models for adversarial loss, a content loss, and a neighborhood structure
loss. Experimental results on standard datasets (CIFAR-10,
NUSWIDE, and Flickr) demonstrate that our BGAN signiﬁcantly outperforms existing hashing methods by up to 107%
in terms of mAP (See Table 2)1 .

1

L

(1)

where x ∈ RM ×1 , h(.) are the hash functions, and b is a
binary vector with code length L.
Hashing methods can be generally categorized as being
unsupervised or supervised. The unsupervised learning of
a hash function is usually based on the criterion of preserving important properties of the training data points in
the original space. Typical approaches target pairwise similarity preservation (i.e., the similarity/distance of binary
codes should be consistent with that of the original data
points) (Weiss, Torralba, and Fergus 2008; Liu et al. 2014;
Irie et al. 2014; Song et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2013), multi-wise
similarity preservation (i.e., the similarity orders over more
than two items computed from the input space and the coding space should be preserved) (Norouzi and Fleet 2011),
or implicit similarity preservation (i.e., pursuing effective
space partitioning without explicitly evaluating the relation
between the distances/similarities in the input and coding
spaces), (Heo et al. 2015; Jin et al. 2013). A fundamental
limitation of a hashing method geared to preserve a particular image property is that its performance may degrade when
it is applied to a context where a different property is relevant.
Supervised hashing is designed to generate binary codes
based on predeﬁned labels (Lin et al. 2014; Strecha et
al. 2012; Zhang et al. 2016). For example, Strecha et
al. (Strecha et al. 2012) developed a supervised hashing
method, which maximizes the between-class Hamming distance and minimizes the within-class Hamming distance.
(Lin et al. 2014) proposed to learn the hash codes such to
approximate the pairwise label similarity. Supervised hashing methods usually signiﬁcantly outperform unsupervised
methods. However, the information that can be used for supervision is also typically scarce.
More recently, deep learning has been introduced in
the development of hashing algorithms (Xia et al. 2014;
Lin et al. 2016; Do, Doan, and Cheung 2016; Gu, Ma, and
Yang 2016; Wang et al. 2017a; Gao et al. 2017; Song et
al. 2018), leading to a new generation of deep hashing algorithms. Due to powerful feature representation, remarkable image retrieval performance has been reported using
the hashes obtained in this way. However, a number of

Introduction

With the rapidly increasing amount of images, similarity
search in large image collections has been actively pursued
in a number of domains, including computer vision, information retrieval and pattern recognition (Shakhnarovich,
Darrell, and Indyk 2008; Wang et al. 2017b). However, exact
nearest-neighbor (NN) search is often intractable because of
the size of dataset and the high dimensionality of images. Instead, approximate nearest-neighbor (ANN) search is more
practical and can achieve orders of magnitude in speed-up
compared to exact NN search (Shakhnarovich, Darrell, and
Indyk 2008).
Recently, learning-based hashing methods (Wang et al.
2017b; Irie et al. 2014; Lin et al. 2014; Song et al. 2013;
Shen et al. 2017) have become the mainstream for scalable image retrieval due to their compact binary representation and efﬁcient Hamming distance calculation. Such approaches embed data points to compact binary codes by hash
∗
Heng Tao Shen and Lianli Gao are the corresponding authors.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Our code: https://github.com/htconquer/BGAN

394

