The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Approximate and Exact
Enumeration of Rule Models
Satoshi Hara,1,2 Masakazu Ishihata3
1) Osaka University, Osaka, Japan
2) JST, ERATO, Kawarabayashi Large Graph Project
3) Hokkaido University, Hokkaido, Japan
satohara@ar.sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp, ishihata.masakazu@ist.hokudai.ac.jp
• When users are interested in ﬁnding interesting mechanisms underlying the data, as is often the case in data mining: Users want to obtain useful insights through ﬁtting
machine learning models to data. Highly interpretable
models are essential if we are to obtain insights from
them.

Abstract
In machine learning, rule models are one of the most popular
choices when model interpretability is the primary concern.
Ordinary, a single model is obtained by solving an optimization problem, and the resulting model is interpreted as the
one that best explains the data. In this study, instead of ﬁnding a single rule model, we propose algorithms for enumerating multiple rule models. Model enumeration is useful in
practice when (i) users want to choose a model that is particularly suited to their task knowledge, or (ii) users want to
obtain several possible mechanisms that could be underlying
the data to use as hypotheses for further scientiﬁc studies.
To this end, we propose two enumeration algorithms: an approximate algorithm and an exact algorithm. We prove that
these algorithms can enumerate models in a descending order
of their objective function values approximately and exactly.
We then conﬁrm our theoretical results through experiments
on real-world data. We also show that, by using the proposed
enumeration algorithms, we can ﬁnd several different models
of almost equal quality.

1

Of the various machine learning models, rule models,
such as decision trees (Breiman et al. 1984; Quinlan 2014),
rule lists (Rivest 1987; Letham et al. 2015; Angelino et al.
2017) and rule sets (Li, Shen, and Topor 2002; Lakkaraju,
Bach, and Leskovec 2016), are preferred when model interpretability is the primary concern. These models describe
their predictions using “if-then” rules (see Figure 1 for examples). Because of their simple structures, it is easy for
humans to understand how these models behave.
In this study, instead of ﬁnding a single rule model, we
enumerate several rule models with different structures that
perform almost equally well. Enumerating rule models is
helpful from both model reliability and data mining perspectives, for the following reasons.

Introduction

• Model reliability: In many real-world tasks, we usually
believe that the single model we have found is the one
that best ﬁts the data. This, however, is not always the
case when we take the user’s domain knowledge into account: sometimes, the model is counterintuitive, making
it difﬁcult to rely on. In such cases, enumerating a variety of models and then selecting the one that best ﬁts the
domain knowledge will help to improve the user’s trust in
the model.

Background and Motivation Machine learning models
are nowadays ubiquitous in society. They have a wide
range of applications, in ﬁelds such as medical diagnosis (Ong, Wang, and Mu 2014), judicial decisions (Jordan
and Freiburger 2015), and education (Lakkaraju et al. 2015),
to name a few. While these models are expected to make accurate predictions, we often face another concern, namely
the interpretability of the models. That is, we want humans
to be able to easily understand the information contained in
the models. The need for model interpretability is particularly strong in some practical situations, such as the following (Kim 2015; Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017).

• Data understanding: For many real-world datasets, there
exist multiple rule models that can explain the data almost equally well. Thus, by considering several rule models, we can gain many more important insights into the
data than would have been possible with just a single rule
model.

• When machine learning models are used to support user
decision making: If the model is a complete black-box,
users have no way of verifying that the model is correct.
Interpretable models allow humans to check whether or
not the models are reliable. Moreover, with interpretable
models, users can ﬁnd and correct undesirable biases or
bugs contained in the models based on task knowledge.

Contributions In this study, we make the following contributions.
1. We formulate a rule model enumeration problem as enumerating rule models in descending order of their objective function values (Section 3).

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3157

