The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Subgraph Pattern Neural Networks
for High-Order Graph Evolution Prediction
Changping Meng, S Chandra Mouli, Bruno Ribeiro, Jennifer Neville
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN
{meng40, chandr}@purdue.edu, {ribeiro, neville}@cs.purdue.edu

sharing edges. Unlike node and edge prediction tasks, it is
not clear how to describe an approximate model that can account for these dependencies. A variety of recent methods
have developed heuristics to encode joint label and structure
information into low dimensional node or edge embeddings,
but it is unclear how these ad-hoc methods can properly address the induced subgraph dependencies (Lao and Cohen
2010; Nickel, Tresp, and Kriegel 2011; Dong et al. 2014;
Lin et al. 2015; Grover and Leskovec 2016; Atwood and
Towsley 2016; Nickel, Rosasco, and Poggio 2016; Rahman
and Al Hasan 2016). Our empirical results show that these
methods tend to perform poorly in induced subgraph prediction tasks.
The task of predicting induced subgraph evolution requires an approach that can take into account higher-order
dependencies between the induced subgraphs (due to their
shared edges and non-edges1 ). Our two main contributions
are:
(1) We target the evolution of larger graph structures than
nodes and edges, which, to the best of our knowledge, has
never been focused before. Traditional link prediction tasks
are simpler special cases of our task.
(2) We incorporate the unavoidable dependencies within the
training observations of induced subgraphs into both the input features and the model architecture itself via high-order
dependencies. We denote our model architecture a Subgraph
Pattern Neural Network (SPNN) and show that its strength is
due to a representation that is invariant to isomorphisms and
varying local neighborhood sizes, can also take node/edge
labels into account, and which facilitates inductive reasoning.
SPNN is a discriminative feedforward neural network
with hidden layers that represent the dependent subgraph
patterns observed in the training data. The input features of
SPNN extend the deﬁnition of induced isomorphism density (Lovász and Szegedy 2006) to a local graph neighborhood in a way that accounts for joint edges and nonedges in the induced subgraphs. Moreover, SPNN is inductive (it can be applied to unseen portions of the graph), and
is isomorphic-invariant, such the learned model is invariant
to node permutations. We also show that SPNN learns to
predict using an interpretable neural network structure.

Abstract
In this work we generalize traditional node/link prediction
tasks in dynamic heterogeneous networks, to consider joint
prediction over larger k-node induced subgraphs. Our key insight is to incorporate the unavoidable dependencies in the
training observations of induced subgraphs into both the input features and the model architecture itself via high-order
dependencies. The strength of the representation is its invariance to isomorphisms and varying local neighborhood sizes,
while still being able to take node/edge labels into account,
and facilitating inductive reasoning (i.e., generalization to unseen portions of the network). Empirical results show that
our proposed method signiﬁcantly outperforms other stateof-the-art methods designed for static and/or single node/link
prediction tasks. In addition, we show that our method is scalable and learns interpretable parameters.

Introduction
Learning predictive models of heterogeneous relational and
network data is a fundamental task in machine learning
and data mining (Getoor and Mihalkova 2011; Lao and
Cohen 2010; Lin et al. 2015; Grover and Leskovec 2016;
Nickel, Rosasco, and Poggio 2016). Much of the work in
heterogeneous networks (graphs with node and edge labels) has focused on developing methods for label prediction or single link prediction. There has been relatively
little development in methods that make joint predictions
over larger substructures (e.g., induced k-node subgraphs).
Recent research has shown rich higher-order organization
of such networks (Benson, Gleich, and Leskovec 2016;
Xu, Wickramarathne, and Chawla 2016) and complex subgraph evolution patterns within larger graphs (Paranjape,
Benson, and Leskovec 2017). Applications range from predicting group activity on social networks (e.g., online social
network ad revenues rely heavily on user activity), computational social science (e.g., predicting the dynamics of groups
and their social relationships), relational learning (e.g., ﬁnd
missing and predicting future joint relationships in knowledge graphs).
The main challenge in learning a model to predict the evolution of labeled subgraphs is to jointly account for the induced subgraph dependencies that emerge from subgraphs
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

3778

A non-edge marks the absence of an edge

