The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Unsupervised Representation Learning with Long-Term
Dynamics for Skeleton Based Action Recognition
Nenggan Zheng,1 Jun Wen,2 Risheng Liu,3∗ Liangqu Long,2 Jianhua Dai,4 Zhefeng Gong5
1

Qiushi Academy for Advanced Studies, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
College of Computer Science and Techology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
3
DUT-RU International School of Information Science & Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Liaoning, China
4
College of Information Science and Engineering, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, Hunan, China
5
Department of Neurobiology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
zng@cs.zju.edu.cn, {junwen, myth, zfgong}@zju.edu.cn, rsliu@dlut.edu.cn, david.joshua@qq.com
2

body or choosing a proper width of the sliding window to
model the temporal dynamics. In past few years, end-to-end
deep learning techniques (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014;
LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015), especially Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNNs) have been used for action recognition and achieved impressively better performances (Du,
Wang, and Wang 2015; Zhu et al. 2016). The insights behind
these models are to extract discriminative features to represent the temporal evolutions of different actions. However,
most of these works mentioned above are referred to as supervised learning methods which heavily rely on massive labeled training examples. These labeled data are usually very
expensive and not available. Hence, how to effectively and
efﬁciently learn representations from the common and easily accessible unlabeled examples is challenging and attracts
increasing research attention.

Abstract
In recent years, skeleton based action recognition is becoming an increasingly attractive alternative to existing videobased approaches, beneﬁcial from its robust and comprehensive 3D information. In this paper, we explore an unsupervised representation learning approach for the ﬁrst time
to capture the long-term global motion dynamics in skeleton sequences. We design a conditional skeleton inpainting
architecture for learning a ﬁxed-dimensional representation,
guided by additional adversarial training strategies. We quantitatively evaluate the effectiveness of our learning approach
on three well-established action recognition datasets. Experimental results show that our learned representation is discriminative for classifying actions and can substantially reduce the sequence inpainting errors.

Introduction

Recently, a stream of unsupervised representation learning approaches have been proposed. These methods are formulated with various objectives. Some models enforce the
representations to be temporally smooth and learn slowlyvarying representations (Földiák 2008), while others learn
representations through reconstructing past frames or predicting future frames (Srivastava, Mansimov, and Salakhudinov 2015; Luo et al. 2017). These models receive ﬁxedlength input sequences, and then reconstruct past or predict
ﬁxed-length future frames. Although they show promising
results, most of the learned representations still focus heavily on either capturing appearance features or local motion
dynamics. These approaches are not ﬂexible enough to handle sequences of varying length and fail to take consideration of encoding the long-term global motion dependencies
in skeleton sequences. Their learned representations are not
discriminative enough for classifying skeleton sequences.

As an important branch of computer vision, action recognition has been widely used in many applications, such as intelligent video surveillance, robot vision, human-computer
interaction, game control and so on (Weinland, Ronfard, and
Boyer 2011; Yang and Tian 2017). Traditional studies about
action recognition mainly focus on videos recorded by 2D
cameras. The performances are still unsatisfactory, because
it is difﬁcult to achieve viewpoint and scale invariances as
2D videos lose some information of 3D space. The other
general approach is skeleton based action recognition, in
which a person is represented by 3D coordinate positions
of key joints. Such representations are robust to variations
of positions, scales, and viewpoints.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of skeleton based
action recognition. The key to this problem is to learn the
discriminative body postures and their motion dynamics.
Most of the traditional skeleton based action recognition
methods model the temporal dynamics of skeleton joints
based on Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) (Xia, Chen,
and Aggarwal 2012) or Temporal Pyramids (TPs) (Vemulapalli, Arrate, and Chellappa 2014). These models usually require selecting effective features to represent human

To address the limitations mentioned above, we propose
an unsupervised representation learning framework for compactly encoding long-term global motion dynamics conditional inpainting. As illustrated in Figure 1, the framework consists of three sub-networks, and it works as follows. An encoder (left side) runs through an input sequence
and compactly encodes it into a ﬁxed-dimensional representation. A decoder (middle side) learns to reconstruct the
randomly masked (corrupted) input sequence conditioned

∗

Coresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2644

