The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Safe Reinforcement Learning via Formal Methods:
Toward Safe Control Through Proof and Learning
Nathan Fulton, André Platzer
Computer Science Department,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
{nathanfu, aplatzer}@cs.cmu.edu

model at all. Most approaches toward reinforcement learning provide no guarantee about the safety of the learned
controller or about the safety of actions taken during learning. Absence of safety guarantees become a crippling problem when reinforcement learning is applied to safety-critical
CPSs where industry best practices demand evidence of
safety, such as cars or planes (ISO 2011; RTCA 2012). Incorporating veriﬁed models into safety cases for reinforcement learning-based controllers is important because testing
alone is an intractable approach toward system veriﬁcation
and validation for systems operating in open environments,
such as self-driving cars (Kalra and Paddock 2016).
This paper contributes a technique, called Justiﬁed Speculative Control (JSC), for transferring formal veriﬁcation results to controllers obtained via reinforcement learning. This
approach combines the safety assurance provided by veriﬁcation with the optimality and robustness to model incompleteness provided by reinforcement learning. Our primary
contribution is a set of proofs that transfer computer-checked
safety proofs for hybrid dynamical systems to the policy obtained by a generic reinforcement learning algorithm. We
also present a case study and experiment that demonstrates
leveraging veriﬁcation results speeds up learning.
Justiﬁed Speculative Control combines veriﬁed runtime
monitoring – backed by formally veriﬁed models – with reinforcement learning. When no modeling inaccuracy is detected, the system’s actions are constrained to a set of veriﬁed control actions. When modeling inaccuracy is detected,
the system is justiﬁed in taking actions that are unveriﬁed
and possibly unsafe with respect to the (inaccurate) model.
Reinforcement learning is useful even when the model
is accurate because models used for veriﬁcation are often
nondeterministic. The veriﬁed controller is not a single deterministic policy, but rather a nondeterministic policy with
multiple safe actions. Veriﬁcation results establish the safety
of a set of actions, but do not solve the optimization problem
without signiﬁcant extra effort. A veriﬁcation result usually
will not tell the system how to best choose the most efﬁcient
control action from among as set of safe control actions.
For accurate models, Justiﬁed Speculative Control explains how to sandbox the learning process by a formally
veriﬁed nondeterministic model. The JSC sandbox monitors
the environment and checks that observed state transitions
comport with the system of differential equations used to

Abstract
Formal veriﬁcation provides a high degree of conﬁdence in
safe system operation, but only if reality matches the veriﬁed
model. Although a good model will be accurate most of the
time, even the best models are incomplete. This is especially
true in Cyber-Physical Systems because high-ﬁdelity physical models of systems are expensive to develop and often intractable to verify. Conversely, reinforcement learning-based
controllers are lauded for their ﬂexibility in unmodeled environments, but do not provide guarantees of safe operation.
This paper presents an approach for provably safe learning
that provides the best of both worlds: the exploration and optimization capabilities of learning along with the safety guarantees of formal veriﬁcation. Our main insight is that formal
veriﬁcation combined with veriﬁed runtime monitoring can
ensure the safety of a learning agent. Veriﬁcation results are
preserved whenever learning agents limit exploration within
the confounds of veriﬁed control choices as long as observed
reality comports with the model used for off-line veriﬁcation.
When a model violation is detected, the agent abandons efﬁciency and instead attempts to learn a control strategy that
guides the agent to a modeled portion of the state space.
We prove that our approach toward incorporating knowledge about safe control into learning systems preserves safety
guarantees, and demonstrate that we retain the empirical performance beneﬁts provided by reinforcement learning. We
also explore various points in the design space for these justiﬁed speculative controllers in a simple model of adaptive
cruise control model for autonomous cars.

Introduction
Cyber-physical systems (CPSs) are difﬁcult to get right,
which is why formal veriﬁcation provides rigorous ways of
establishing the safety of controllers with respect to a physical model of the system under control. However, difﬁculties
with formally veriﬁed controllers arise whenever there are
discrepancies between the veriﬁed models and the real implementation. Such discrepancies between model and reality
are inevitable in physical systems operating in open environments (Mitsch and Platzer 2016).
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 1998)
provides ways of learning controllers that tend to perform
well without the need for a perfect model – or even any
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6485

