The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Deep Asymmetric Transfer Network
for Unbalanced Domain Adaptation
Daixin Wang, Peng Cui, Wenwu Zhu
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology,
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
dxwang0826@gmail.com, cuip@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

(Hubert Tsai, Yeh, and Frank Wang 2016) or minimize the
discrepancy between the latent representations of different
domains to correlate the two domains (Zhuang et al. 2015;
Shu et al. 2015). When these methods transfer the knowledge, they all pre-assume that the importance of the source
and target domain data is equivalent. Thus, they always ﬁnd
medium solutions between the source and target domains.
However, in most real-world cases, the source and target
domains are unbalanced in that the source domain is often
more resource-rich and has more reliable knowledge than
the target domain. For example, we often use textual data
to help image applications and it is much easier to classify
texts than images because textual data have a smaller semantic gap (Shu et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2013). Another
typical example is that the English corpora is often used as
the source domain to improve the task in minor languages,
because we have much more annotated English documents
to extract more reliable knowledge than those of minor languages (Zhou et al. 2014). But how to take the domain imbalance into domain adaptation is still an unsolved problem.
There are three challenges for unbalanced domain adaptation: (1) Domain Heterogeneity: Data from different domains have different statistical properties and distributions
(Srivastava and Salakhutdinov 2012), resulting in the domain discrepancy, thus posing a great challenge for representation space alignment and knowledge transfer. (2) Unbalanced Knowledge Transfer. The knowledge in the source
and target domains is unbalanced. We need to discriminate
the two domains and transfer the knowledge in an asymmetric way to get an optimal solution, which makes existing transfer methods inadequate. (3) Data Scarcity. Most existing transfer methods only utilize labeled data to perform
knowledge propagation. However, the labeled data are often scarce, which leads to the transfer model sensitive to the
noises. How to incorporate more information to alleviate the
scarcity is also critical for domain adaptation.
To address the above challenges, we propose a novel Deep
Asymmetric Transfer Network (DATN), to perform unbalanced domain adaptation. Our model contains two pathways
of deep models for source and target domains respectively,
which are able to project the data into the high-level space,
i.e. the semantic space, to bridge the domain heterogeneity (Srivastava and Salakhutdinov 2012). Considering that
the knowledge in source and target domains is unbalanced,

Abstract
Recently, domain adaptation based on deep models has been
a promising way to deal with the domains with scarce labeled
data, which is a critical problem for deep learning models.
Domain adaptation propagates the knowledge from a source
domain with rich information to the target domain. In reality,
the source and target domains are mostly unbalanced in that
the source domain is more resource-rich and thus has more
reliable knowledge than the target domain. However, existing deep domain adaptation approaches often pre-assume the
source and target domains balanced and equally, leading to
a medium solution between the source and target domains,
which is not optimal for the unbalanced domain adaptation.
In this paper, we propose a novel Deep Asymmetric Transfer Network (DATN) to address the problem of unbalanced
domain adaptation. Speciﬁcally, our model will learn a transfer function from the target domain to the source domain and
meanwhile adapting the source domain classiﬁer with more
discriminative power to the target domain. By doing this, the
deep model is able to adaptively put more emphasis on the
resource-rich source domain. To alleviate the scarcity problem of supervised data, we further propose an unsupervised
transfer method to propagate the knowledge from a lot of unsupervised data by minimizing the distribution discrepancy
over the unlabeled data of two domains. The experiments on
two real-world datasets demonstrate that DATN attains a substantial gain over state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Nowadays, deep learning models have been successfully applied to many applications (Krizhevsky and Hinton 2011;
Mikolov et al. 2010; Wang, Cui, and Zhu 2016). However,
the performance for deep models relies heavily on the volume of training data, especially labeled data. When the labeled data are insufﬁcient, the performance would be largely
degraded.
To solve the problem, domain adaptation based on deep
models attracts much interest in both academia and industry. These methods resort to an auxiliary domain, i.e. the
source domain, and transfer its knowledge to the target domain. The key problem is how to bridge the source and the
target domain to transfer the knowledge. Most of the existing methods either map them to a new common space
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

443

