The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Complexity of Veriﬁcation in
Incomplete Argumentation Frameworks
Dorothea Baumeister, Daniel Neugebauer, Jörg Rothe, Hilmar Schadrack
Institut für Informatik
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf
40225 Düsseldorf, Germany

acceptable in various ways) changes when asking whether
they are satisﬁed possibly (in some completion of the incomplete graph) or necessarily (in all its completions).
A large body of previous work in abstract argumentation
addresses quantitative uncertainty about the state of a given
argumentation by using probabilities. Fuzzy argumentation
frameworks (Janssen, Cock, and Vermeir 2008) replace the
attack relation with a fuzzy relation, where each individual attack has a fuzzy value in [0, 1] that represents the degree to which this attack holds. In a fuzzy argumentation
framework, for two sets of arguments, the degree to which
they attack each other can be determined. In probabilistic
argumentation frameworks, Li, Oren, and Norman (2011)
assume that a probability distribution over both arguments
and attacks is given. Other approaches associate a probability with each set of arguments (Dung and Thang 2010;
Rienstra 2012) to indicate whether all and only these arguments are active, or with each spanning subtree of the argument graph (Hunter 2014) to indicate that all and only the
attacks contained in that subtree are active. In all these models, an interesting question is to determine the probability
for a set of arguments to be acceptable. A different branch
of research on probabilistic argumentation uses probabilities
to represent the epistemic state of arguments, attacks, or sets
of arguments, i.e., the belief in those elements (in terms of
acceptance). Although technically similar, this approach has
a completely different purpose than ours, which is the representation of structural uncertainty.
Another ﬁeld that raises similar questions is that of dynamic change of argumentation frameworks. Previous work
has examined how adding or deleting a set of arguments
can alter the set of acceptable sets of arguments (Cayrol,
de Saint-Cyr, and Lagasquie-Schiex 2010; Boella, Kaci, and
van der Torre 2009), the complexity of computing the acceptability of a single argument after changing the arguments or attacks (Liao, Jin, and Koons 2011), or enforcement of a set of arguments (Baumann and Brewka 2010;
Wallner, Niskanen, and Järvisalo 2016; Coste-Marquis et al.
2015), where the question is how much a given argumentation framework needs to be modiﬁed to make the given set
of arguments acceptable.
In the remainder of this paper, we give the required
background in abstract argumentation (Section 2), introduce
incomplete argumentation frameworks as a generalization

Abstract
Abstract argumentation frameworks are a well-established
formalism to model nonmonotonic reasoning processes.
However, the standard model cannot express incomplete or
conﬂicting knowledge about the state of a given argumentation. Previously, argumentation frameworks were extended to
allow uncertainty regarding the set of attacks or the set of arguments. We combine both models into a model of general
incompleteness, complement previous results on the complexity of the veriﬁcation problem in incomplete argumentation frameworks, and provide a full complexity map covering
all three models and all classical semantics. Our main result
shows that the complexity of verifying the preferred semantics rises from coNP- to Σp2 -completeness when allowing uncertainty about either attacks or arguments, or both.

1

Introduction

Within the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence, abstract argumentation frameworks have emerged as a useful methodology
to represent and evaluate nonmonotonic logics. They allow
to create a simple, directed graph from a defeasible knowledge base that consists of only arguments (nodes) and attacks (directed edges), then to identify sets of “acceptable”
arguments in that graph, and ﬁnally to interpret these arguments’ conclusions as models in the knowledge base. In this
framework, when evaluating which arguments are acceptable in the graph, the internal structure of arguments is neglected, which accounts for the simplicity of the formalism.
Since Dung (1995) introduced his seminal model, many
model extensions of argumentation frameworks have been
proposed that allow to capture a wider and more ﬁne-grained
range of applications. This paper continues a line of research aimed at expressing unquantiﬁed uncertainty in an argumentation framework. Such qualitative uncertainty about
the state of an argumentation framework was introduced by
Coste-Marquis et al. (2007) and further studied by Baumeister, Neugebauer, and Rothe (2015) for the set of attacks and
by Baumeister, Rothe, and Schadrack (2015) for the set of
arguments. This paper is the ﬁrst to allow uncertainty about
both arguments and attacks simultaneously. Our main question is to examine how the complexity of verifying certain
semantics (expressing which subsets of the arguments are
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1753

