The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Towards Formal Deﬁnitions of Blameworthiness,
Intention, and Moral Responsibility
Joseph Y. Halpern

Max Kleiman-Weiner

Dept. of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
halpern@cs.cornell.edu

Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
maxkw@mit.edu
he pulls the lever? Should the answer be different in the loop
version of the problem? Pulling the lever in the loop condition is typically judged as less morally permissible than in
the condition without a loop (Mikhail 2007).
The deﬁnitions given here take as their starting point
the structural-equations framework used by Halpern and
Pearl (2005) (HP from now on) in deﬁning causality. This
framework allows us to model counterfactual statements like
“agent ag would have still performed action a even if outcome ϕ had not occurred”. Evaluating such statements is
the key to deﬁning intention and moral responsibility, just as
it is for deﬁning actual causation. To evaluate such counterfactual statements requires a model of what ag would
have done in that new situation. We assume that ag is an
expected utility maximizer with beliefs expressed as probabilities over causal models and preferences expressed as a
utility function over outcomes. This makes it possible to deﬁne ag’s degree of blameworthiness; rather than ag either
being blameworthy or not for an outcome, he is only blameworthy to some degree (a number in [0,1]). Using the same
framework, we can also deﬁne intention. Roughly speaking,
an agent who performs action a intends outcome ϕ if he
would not have done a if a had no impact on whether ϕ occurred.

Abstract
We provide formal deﬁnitions of degree of blameworthiness
and intention relative to an epistemic state (a probability over
causal models and a utility function on outcomes). These, together with a deﬁnition of actual causality, provide the key
ingredients for moral responsibility judgments. We show that
these deﬁnitions give insight into commonsense intuitions in
a variety of puzzling cases from the literature.

1

Introduction

The need for judging moral responsibility arises both in
ethics and in law. In an era of autonomous vehicles and,
more generally, autonomous AI agents that interact with
or on behalf of people, the issue has now become relevant to AI as well. We will clearly need to imbue AI
agents with some means for evaluating moral responsibility. There is general agreement that a deﬁnition of moral
responsibility will require integrating causality, some notion of blameworthiness, and intention (Cushman 2015;
Malle, Guglielmo, and Monroe 2014; Weiner 1995). Previous work has provided formal accounts of causality (Halpern
2016); in this paper, we provide formal deﬁnitions of blameworthiness and intention in the same vein.
These notions are notoriously difﬁcult to deﬁne carefully.
The well-known trolley problem (Thomson 1985) illustrates
some of them: Suppose that a runaway trolley is headed towards ﬁve people who will not be able to get out of the
train’s path in time. If the trolley continues, it will kill all
ﬁve of them. An agent ag is near a switchboard, and while
ag cannot stop the trolley, he can pull a lever which will divert the trolley to a side track. Unfortunately, there is a single
man on the side track who will be killed if ag pulls the lever.
Most people agree that it is reasonable for ag to pull
the lever. But now consider a variant of the trolley problem known as loop (Thomson 1985), where instead of the
side track going off in a different direction altogether, it rejoins the main track before where the ﬁve people are tied up.
Again, there is someone on the side track, but this time ag
knows that hitting the man on the loop will stop the train before it hits the ﬁve people on the main track. How morally
responsible is ag for the death of the man on the side track if

2

Structural equations and HP causality

The HP approach assumes that the world is described in
terms of variables and their values. Some variables have
a causal inﬂuence on others. This inﬂuence is modeled by
a set of structural equations. It is conceptually useful to
split the random variables into two sets: the exogenous variables, whose values are determined by factors outside the
model, and the endogenous variables, whose values are ultimately determined by the exogenous variables. We assume
that there is a special endogenous variable A called the action variable; the possible values of A are the actions that
the agent can choose among.1
1
In a more general setting with multiple agents, each performing actions, we might have a variable Aag for each agent ag. We
might also consider situations over time, where agents perform sequences of actions, determined by a strategy, rather than just a single action. Allowing this extra level of generality has no impact on
the framework presented here.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1853

