The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

totSAT — Totally-Ordered Hierarchical Planning through SAT
Gregor Behnke, Daniel Höller, Susanne Biundo
Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ulm University, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
{gregor.behnke, daniel.hoeller, susanne.biundo}@uni-ulm.de

2017). Recently, a new HTN planning technique based on
a bounded translation into classical planning as been proposed (Alford et al. 2016a). Most search processes of HTN
planners consider both parts of the planning problem – the
hierarchy and the primitive action model – separately and
do not analyse interactions between them. This is especially
true for heuristics, which have – so far – either been based
solely on the hierarchy or solely on the primitive actions.
The work by Alford et al. (2016a) provides an integration of
both worlds. The planner FAPE (Dvorak et al. 2014) does
this too (Bit-Monnot, Smith, and Do 2016), but restricts the
decomposition hierarchy to be non-recursive, which greatly
reduces the expressiveness of HTN planning.
In this paper, we present a new technique for HTN planning based on a translation of the planning problem into a
propositional satisﬁability problem. It enables a uniﬁed view
on both parts of the problem and leads to a signiﬁcantly better performance compared to previous approaches. We restrict ourselves to the class of totally-ordered HTN planning,
thereby easing the SAT formula’s construction. This restriction is justiﬁed by various observations. First, we retain most
of the expressive power of HTN planning and are still more
expressive than STRIPS-based planning (Höller et al. 2014;
Höller et al. 2016). Second, HTN domains often have a high
degree of total order (Alford et al. 2016a), so that planners have even been speciﬁcally designed for this problem
class (Nau et al. 1999; Alford, Kuter, and Nau 2009). Third,
restricting models to be totally-ordered enables the creation
of complete planning algorithms, as partially ordered HTN
planning is undecidable (Erol, Hendler, and Nau 1996),
while totally-ordered planning is EXPTIME-complete (Alford, Bercher, and Aha 2015). Finally, studying the structurally simpler class of totally-ordered HTN planning problems is a suitable ﬁrst step towards creating a SAT-based
planner for general HTN planning problems.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. Next,
we introduce the totally-ordered HTN formalism and survey
related approaches. We then describe our planning algorithm
totSAT and present its empirical evaluation.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel SAT-based planning approach for hierarchical planning by introducing the SATbased planner totSAT for the class of totally-ordered HTN
planning problems. We use the same general approach as
SAT planning for classical planning does: bound the problem, translate the problem into a formula, and if the formula is not satisﬁable, increase the bound. In HTN planning,
a suitable bound is the maximum depth of decomposition.
We show how totally-ordered HTN planning problems can be
translated into a SAT formula, given this bound. Furthermore,
we have conducted an extensive empirical evaluation to compare our new planner against state-of-the-art HTN planners.
It shows that our technique outperforms any of these systems.

Introduction
Hierarchical planning provides a natural and expressive, but
nevertheless easily usable means for planning. Its most common formalism is Hierarchical Task Network (HTN) planning (Erol, Hendler, and Nau 1996), which extends classical
STRIPS-based planning in two ways. It introduces ﬁrst the
concept of abstract tasks – tasks which cannot be executed
directly, and second decomposition methods, which relate
abstract tasks to primitive STRIPS-like actions by providing
a course of (primitive and/or abstract) tasks that needs to be
performed to achieve the abstract task. The various decomposition methods for an abstract task deﬁne the allowed portfolio of ways to achieve that task. They can, e.g., be gained
from domain experts, whose knowledge can be encoded and
exploited this way. This makes HTN planning particularly
useful for planning in complex real-world domains. Its topdown and decomposition-based reasoning also bears similarities with human thought processes (Byrne 1977).
Although HTN planning is often used in real-world applications (Nau et al. 2005; Champandard, Verweij, and
Straatman 2009; Hartanto and Hertzberg 2008; Morisset and
Ghallab 2002; Dvorak et al. 2014; Bercher et al. 2015),
there has so far only been little research in developing
fast, domain-independent HTN planners. Systems are either guided by instructional information, hard-coded in the
domain model, use blind search, or heuristic search in the
plan space, relying on quite simple heuristics (Bercher et al.

HTN Planning
In this paper, we use an adaptation of the formulation of
HTN planning of Geier and Bercher (2011), in which we
omit everything related to partial order. Hierarchical plan-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6110

