The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

An AI Planning Solution to Scenario
Generation for Enterprise Risk Management
Shirin Sohrabi, Anton V. Riabov, Michael Katz, Octavian Udrea
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
1101 Kitchawan Rd, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA

is different from previous work in that we reason about currently emerging risks based on observations from the news
and social media trends, and automatically produce scenarios that both describe the current situation and summarize
the future possible effects of these observations or key risk
drivers. Our objective is to compute multiple alternate scenarios, informing the decision-makers of the breadth of possibilities that may need consideration. This is different from
a narrow focus on predicting the most likely outcome.
Each scenario we produce highlights: (1) the potential
leading indicators, the set of facts that are likely to lead to a
scenario; (2) the scenario and emerging risk, the combined
set of consequences in that scenario; and (3) the business
implications, a subset of potential effects of that scenario
that the decision-makers care about. For example, given a
high inﬂation risk driver, economic decline followed by a decrease in government spending can be the consequences in a
scenario, while decreased client investment in the company
offerings is an example of a business implication. Furthermore, an increase in the cost of transportation could have
been the leading indicator for that scenario. To the best of
our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to apply AI planning in addressing scenario planning for enterprise risk management.
We believe that AI planning provides a very natural formulation for the efﬁcient exploration of possible outcomes required for scenario planning.
Our system, SPA, is currently in a pilot deployment in
IBM. The system is used to continuously monitor news and
social media to identify current trends relevant to the company, and then generate three to six scenarios. These scenarios are then used to start a risk conversation between
the analysts and decision makers. Major advantages of SPA
are: (1) capturing observations from news and social media;
(2) capturing the domain knowledge about the risk drivers
quickly and efﬁciently through our knowledge engineering
efforts, transferable to many other domains and applications;
(3) reasoning with incomplete and biased input while mitigating the bias in generated scenarios.
The main contributions of this paper are (i) characterization of the scenario planning problem for enterprise risk
management through its corresponding plan recognition
problem, (ii) transformation of the domain knowledge as
captured by Mind Maps into an AI planning task, (iii) computation of scenarios by applying the plan-recognition-as-

Abstract
Scenario planning is a commonly used method by companies to develop their long-term plans. Scenario planning for
risk management puts an added emphasis on identifying and
managing emerging risk. While a variety of methods have
been proposed for this purpose, we show that applying AI
planning techniques to devise possible scenarios provides a
unique advantage for scenario planning. Our system, the Scenario Planning Advisor (SPA), takes as input the relevant information from news and social media, representing key risk
drivers, as well as the domain knowledge and generates scenarios that explain the key risk drivers and describe the alternative futures. To this end, we provide a characterization of
the problem, knowledge engineering methodology, and transformation to planning. Furthermore, we describe the computation of the scenarios, lessons learned, and the feedback received from the pilot deployment of the SPA system in IBM.

1

Introduction

Scenario planning is a commonly used method for strategic
planning (Schoemaker 1995). A major beneﬁt to scenario
planning is that it helps businesses or policy-makers to layout the possible alternative futures and anticipate them (Peterson, Cumming, and Carpenter 2003). Risk management is
a set of principles that focus on the outcome for risk-taking
(Stulz 1996). In this paper, we introduce Scenario Planning
Advisor (SPA), a decision support system to assist organizations in generating future scenarios, identifying, and managing emerging risk, a category of risks associated with the
changes in the global or local economies, politics, technology, society, and others. For example, prior to the Brexit referendum in 2016, an international company operating in the
United Kingdom could consider alternative future scenarios
for changes in trade and employment treaties assuming the
majority voted to leave the European Union. The scenarios
will include the implications for the company’s ﬁnances and
its ability to hire; hence, enabling the company to act immediately to minimize the negative impacts.
A variety of (manual) methods and standards for risk
management under different assumptions have been developed (Avanesov 2009). The approach we take in this paper
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

160

