The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Gaussian Process Decentralized Data Fusion Meets Transfer
Learning in Large-Scale Distributed Cooperative Perception
Ruofei Ouyang, Kian Hsiang Low
Department of Computer Science
National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore
{ouyang, lowkh}@comp.nus.edu.sg

To this end, decentralized data fusion algorithms such as
distributed Bayesian ﬁltering (Olfati-Saber 2005) and distributed regression (Guestrin et al. 2004) have been developed to improve scalability and robustness to failure.
Recent works (Chen et al. 2012; 2015; Chen, Low, and
Tan 2013; Cortes 2009) have progressed from the use of simple Markov parametric models assuming independent observations (e.g., in distributed Bayesian ﬁltering) to that of a
rich class of Bayesian nonparametric Gaussian process (GP)
models characterizing continuous-valued, spatially correlated observations in order to represent the latent structure
of the spatially varying, possibly noisy phenomenon with
higher ﬁdelity. Instead of communicating the local data of
each sensing agent directly to every other agent which is
not scalable, the GP decentralized data fusion (GP-DDF)
algorithms of Chen et al. (2015) enable the agents to encapsulate their own data into constant-sized local summaries,
exchange them, and ﬁnally assimilate them into a globally
consistent summary to be exploited for predicting the phenomenon. Different from the above distributed regression
algorithms, they do not need to exploit spatial locality assumptions for gaining efﬁciency and can thus be used for
mobile sensing agents whose paths are not constrained by locality. They also do not suffer from the drawbacks of the GP
distributed data fusion algorithm of Cortes (2009) relying
on an iterative procedure of weighted least squares, which
assumes bounded correlation and uncorrelated past observations that can severely compromise its predictive performance and converges very slowly in the case of a large
number of agents. In contrast, the GP-DDF algorithms can
be computed exactly and efﬁciently. More importantly, their
predictive performance can be theoretically guaranteed to be
equivalent to that of sophisticated centralized sparse approximations (Chen et al. 2013; Hoang, Hoang, and Low 2015;
2016; 2017; Low et al. 2015; Quiñonero-Candela and Rasmussen 2005; Snelson and Ghahramani 2007; Xu et al.
2014) of the GP model.
However, like their centralized counterparts, the GP-DDF
algorithms rely on the notion of a ﬁxed support set of input
locations common to all agents for encapsulating their own
data into local summaries, which raises three non-trivial issues limiting their scalability to small domains of spatial
phenomena and hence small data sizes: (a) When the domain is expanded, the support set must be increased propor-

Abstract
This paper presents novel Gaussian process decentralized
data fusion algorithms exploiting the notion of agent-centric
support sets for distributed cooperative perception of largescale environmental phenomena. To overcome the limitations
of scale in existing works, our proposed algorithms allow every mobile sensing agent to choose a different support set and
dynamically switch to another during execution for encapsulating its own data into a local summary that, perhaps surprisingly, can still be assimilated with the other agents’ local summaries (i.e., based on their current choices of support sets)
into a globally consistent summary to be used for predicting
the phenomenon. To achieve this, we propose a novel transfer learning mechanism for a team of agents capable of sharing and transferring information encapsulated in a summary
based on a support set to that utilizing a different support set
with some loss that can be theoretically bounded and analyzed. To alleviate the issue of information loss accumulating
over multiple instances of transfer learning, we propose a new
information sharing mechanism to be incorporated into our
algorithms in order to achieve memory-efﬁcient lazy transfer
learning. Empirical evaluation on real-world datasets show
that our algorithms outperform the state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Central to many environmental sensing and monitoring applications (e.g., trafﬁc ﬂow and mobility demand predictions over urban road networks (Chen et al. 2015), monitoring of ocean and freshwater phenomena (Dolan et al.
2009), adaptive sampling and active sensing/learning (Cao,
Low, and Dolan 2013; Hoang et al. 2014; Low, Dolan,
and Khosla 2008; 2009; 2011; Low et al. 2007; 2012;
Ouyang et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2016), Bayesian optimization (Daxberger and Low 2017; Hoang, Hoang, and Low
2018; Ling, Low, and Jaillet 2016), among others) is the
need to scale up data fusion algorithms for big data because
massive volumes of data/observations gathered by multiple
static and/or mobile sensing agents have to be assimilated
to form a globally consistent predictive belief of the environmental phenomenon of interest. A centralized approach
to data fusion is ill-suited here because it suffers from poor
scalability in the data size and a single point of failure.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3876

