The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Comparing Population Means under
Local Differential Privacy: with Signiﬁcance and Power
Bolin Ding, Harsha Nori, Paul Li, Joshua Allen
{bolind, hanori, paul.li, joshuaa}@microsoft.com
Microsoft, One Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA 98052

trust and send exact data to a data collector, who then injects noise in the testing process to ensure DP. However,
this model is not applicable in our setup, as users may not
trust the data collector (e.g., a tech company) due to potential hacks and leaks (Hackett 2015), and prefer not to have
unprivatized data leave their devices. Therefore, we adopt
the local model of differential privacy (LDP) (Duchi, Jordan, and Wainwright 2013). Under LDP, users do not need to
trust the data collector. Before sent to the data collector, each
user’s data is privatized by a randomized algorithm with the
property that the likelihood of any speciﬁc output of the algorithm varies little with the input, i.e., the exact data.
In this paper, we study how to conduct hypothesis tests
to compare population means (e.g., in A/B testing), while
ensuring LDP for each user. We focus on the class of t-tests
when presenting our solutions – they can be easily extended
for Z-tests if populations follow Normal distributions.
An A/B test splits users randomly into two populations,
to give them two different experiences, a control and a treatment, respectively, and then tests for differences between the
two population means in a measure of interest (clicks, usage,
monetization, etc.). A null hypothesis H0 is that the two population means are equal or differ by a ﬁxed constant. Statistical tests (e.g., t-tests) are used to determine whether the
null hypothesis should be rejected based on random samples
from the populations. To measure errors in the conclusions,
type-I error is the probability of falsely rejecting H0 when it
is true, and type-II error, or complement of statistical power,
is the probability of failing to reject H0 when it is false. We
want a test to have type-I error bounded by a pre-speciﬁed
threshold, called signiﬁcance level, and have high power.
A typical test has three common steps: 1) compute the
observed value of a test statistic from samples; 2) calculate
the p-value, i.e., the probability, under H0 , of a test statistic
being more extreme than the observed one; 3) reject H0 if
and only if the p-value is less than the signiﬁcance level.
Challenges and our contributions. In t-tests (as well as Ztests when population variances are unknown) that compare
population means, sample means and sample variances are
the essential terms in the test statistic to be computed in step
1). While there are several approaches, e.g., (Duchi, Jordan,
and Wainwright 2013), to estimate means, there is no known
technique to estimate sample variances under LDP. In fact,
we show that any estimator to variances based on a previous

Abstract
A statistical hypothesis test determines whether a hypothesis should be rejected based on samples from populations. In
particular, randomized controlled experiments (or A/B testing) that compare population means using, e.g., t-tests, have
been widely deployed in technology companies to aid in making data-driven decisions. Samples used in these tests are
collected from users and may contain sensitive information.
Both the data collection and the testing process may compromise individuals’ privacy. In this paper, we study how to conduct hypothesis tests to compare population means while preserving privacy. We use the notation of local differential privacy (LDP), which has recently emerged as the main tool to
ensure each individual’s privacy without the need of a trusted
data collector. We propose LDP tests that inject noise into every user’s data in the samples before collecting them (so users
do not need to trust the data collector), and draw conclusions
with bounded type-I (signiﬁcance level) and type-II errors
(1− power). Our approaches can be extended to the scenario
where some users require LDP while some are willing to provide exact data. We report experimental results on real-world
datasets to verify the effectiveness of our approaches.

Introduction
Randomized controlled experiments (or A/B testing) and hypothesis tests are used by many companies, e.g., Google,
Facebook, Amazon, and Microsoft, to design and improve
their products and services (Tang et al. 2010; Panger 2016;
Kohavi and Round 2004; Kohavi et al. 2012). These statistical techniques base business decisions on samples of actual
customer data collected during experiments to draw more
informed conclusions. However, such data samples usually
contain sensitive information, e.g., usage statistics of certain
apps or services; in order to meet users’ privacy expectations
and tightening privacy regulations (e.g., European GDPR
law), ensuring that these experiments and tests do not breach
the privacy of individuals is an important problem.
Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al. 2006) has emerged
as a standard for the privacy guarantees, and been used by,
e.g., Apple (Apple 2017), Google (Erlingsson, Pihur, and
Korolova 2014), and Uber (Greenberg 2017). In a wellstudied DP model used by, e.g., (Gaboardi et al. 2016), users
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26

