The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Hierarchical Attention Transfer Network for
Cross-Domain Sentiment Classiﬁcation
Zheng Li, Ying Wei, Yu Zhang, Qiang Yang
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
zlict@cse.ust.hk, yweiad@gmail.com, yu.zhang.ust@gmail.com, qyang@cse.ust.hk

dant labeled data to improve the target domain, has become
a promising direction. However, the expression of users’
emotions usually varies across domains. For example, in
the Books domain, words readable and thoughtful are used
to express positive sentiment, whereas insipid and plotless
often indicate negative sentiment. On the other hand, in
the Electronics domain, rubbery and glossy express positive
sentiment, whereas words fuzzy and blurry usually express
negative sentiment. Due to the domain discrepancy, a sentiment classiﬁer trained in a source domain may not work
well when directly applied to a target domain.

Abstract
Cross-domain sentiment classiﬁcation aims to leverage useful
information in a source domain to help do sentiment classiﬁcation in a target domain that has no or little supervised information. Existing cross-domain sentiment classiﬁcation methods cannot automatically capture non-pivots, i.e., the domainspeciﬁc sentiment words, and pivots, i.e., the domain-shared
sentiment words, simultaneously. In order to solve this problem, we propose a Hierarchical Attention Transfer Network
(HATN) for cross-domain sentiment classiﬁcation. The proposed HATN provides a hierarchical attention transfer mechanism which can transfer attentions for emotions across domains by automatically capturing pivots and non-pivots. Besides, the hierarchy of the attention mechanism mirrors the
hierarchical structure of documents, which can help locate the
pivots and non-pivots better. The proposed HATN consists of
two hierarchical attention networks, with one named P-net
aiming to ﬁnd the pivots and the other named NP-net aligning the non-pivots by using the pivots as a bridge. Specifically, P-net ﬁrstly conducts individual attention learning to
provide positive and negative pivots for NP-net. Then, Pnet and NP-net conduct joint attention learning such that the
HATN can simultaneously capture pivots and non-pivots and
realize transferring attentions for emotions across domains.
Experiments on the Amazon review dataset demonstrate the
effectiveness of HATN.

To address the problem, researchers have proposed various methods for cross-domain sentiment classiﬁcation.
Blitzer et al. (Blitzer, Dredze, and Pereira 2007) proposed
a Structural Correspondence Learning (SCL) method which
utilizes multiple pivot prediction tasks to infer the correlation between pivots and non-pivots. Pan et al. (Pan et al.
2010) proposed the Spectral Feature Alignment (SFA) to
ﬁnd an alignment between pivots and non-pivots by using
the cooccurrence between them. However, these methods
need to manually select pivots and they are based on discrete feature representations such as bag-of-words with linear classiﬁers. Recently, deep neural models are explored
to automatically produce superior feature representations
for cross-domain sentiment classiﬁcation. Stacked Denoising Auto-encoders (SDA) have been successfully adopted
to learn hidden representations shared across domains (Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio 2011; Chen et al. 2012). Yu and
Jiang (Yu and Jiang 2016) leveraged two auxiliary tasks
to learn sentence embeddings with a Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) (Kim 2014) which works well across domains, while they still rely on manually identifying positive and negative pivots. Ganin et al. (Ganin and Lempitsky
2015; Ganin et al. 2016) proposed the Domain-Adversarial
training of Neural Networks (DANN) which ﬁrst introduces
a domain classiﬁer incapable of discriminating representations from a source or a target domain by reversing the gradient direction of the neural network. In order to improve
the interpretability of deep models, Li et al. (Li et al. 2017)
proposed an Adversarial Memory Network (AMN) to automatically identity the pivots by using the attention mechanism and adversarial training. Nevertheless, AMN only focuses on word-level attention and ignores the hierarchical
structure of documents, which may not accurately capture

Introduction
Users usually express opinions about products or services
on social media or review sites. It is helpful to correctly understand their emotional tendency. Sentiment classiﬁcation,
which aims to automatically determine the overall sentiment
polarity (e.g., positive or negative) of a document, has raised
continuous attentions over the past decades (Pang, Lee, and
Vaithyanathan 2002; Hu and Liu 2004; Pang and Lee 2008;
Liu 2012). Supervised learning algorithms that require labeled data have been successfully explored to build sentiment classiﬁers for a speciﬁc domain (Wang and Manning
2012; Socher et al. 2013; Tang et al. 2015). However, there
exists insufﬁcient labeled data in a target domain of interest, where labeling data may be time-consuming and expensive. Cross-domain sentiment classiﬁcation, which borrows knowledge from related source domains with abunc 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5852

