The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Generative Neural Networks for 3D Colorization
Zhenpei Yang

Lihang Liu

Qixing Huang

University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712, USA
zhenpei12@utexas.edu

University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712, USA
lihangliu@utexas.edu

University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712, USA
huangqx@cs.utexas.edu

network takes a shape and a latent color parameter as input and outputs a colorization of the input shape. By varying the latent parameters (e.g., the rows in Figure 1), we
obtain diverse boundary-preserving colorizations for a single shape. Moreover, by varying the input shapes, we obtain
consistent colorizations across a shape collection. We introduce a principled way to train this generative model from
a training dataset that only offers a single colorization per
shape (e.g., typical internet shape collections). The central
idea is to design the generative model so that it takes a latent
parameter and a shape as input to generate a 3D colorization, which can then be used to generate a colorization for
a different shape. This network design enables us to train
the generative model at each shape by implicitly propagating color information of neighboring shapes. We introduce
a simple, yet effective formulation to train this generative
model. The objective function consists of a regularization
term and a data term. The regularization term constrains that
latent color parameters of input shapes follow a prior distribution (e.g., the normal distribution). We formulate this term
as minimizing the Earth-Mover distance (EMD) between the
latent samples to an empirical distribution sampled from the
prior distribution. We ﬁnd that this strategy works remarkably well when the dimensionality of the parameter space is
low (we use 5 for all the shape collections). The data term
penalizes the difference between the synthesized colorizations and the real colorizations. The objective function can
be easily optimized via alternating minimization, i.e., it alternates between optimizing the latent parameters and the
network parameters. Each step leads to simple optimizations
that can be solved very effectively. We have evaluated the
proposed approach on ﬁve diverse categories collected from
ShapeNet (Chang et al. 2015). We train a separate generative
model for each category. The resulting network can synthesize diverse and consistent colorizations across each shape
collection. We also compare the proposed approach with alternative approaches, demonstrating the effectiveness of the
proposed network design and the training procedure.

Abstract
Automatic generation of 3D visual content is a fundamental problem that sits at the intersection of visual computing
and artiﬁcial intelligence. So far, most existing works have
focused on geometry synthesis. In contrast, advances in automatic synthesis of color information, which conveys rich
semantic information of 3D geometry, remain rather limited.
In this paper, we propose to learn a generative model that
maps a latent color parameter space to a space of colorizations across a shape collection. The colorizations are diverse
on each shape and consistent across the shape collection. We
introduce an unsupervised approach for training this generative model and demonstrate its effectiveness across a wide
range of categories. The key feature of our approach is that it
only requires one colorization per shape in the training data,
and utilizes a neural network to propagate the color information of other shapes to train the generative model for each
particular shape. This characteristics makes our approach applicable to standard internet shape repositories.

Introduction
In this paper, we introduce an unsupervised method that
trains a generative model to synthesize diverse and consistent color information across a shape collection (See Figure 1). Our work is motivated from recent advances in image
colorization that train end-to-end neural networks for converting gray images into color images. However, our problem setting is different in several ways. First, we aim to generate diverse and consistent color content across a shape collection. In contrast, most existing image colorization techniques either can only synthesize a single color image for
each input gray image or require that the training data contain multiple color images for each gray image for synthesizing diverse colorizations. Moreover, while each gray image
possesses an effective regularization for the underlying color
image, lacking such constraints on 3D geometry makes 3D
colorizations considerably harder. Finally, unlike the breadth
of resources available for 2D convolutional neural networks,
3D deep learning is a relatively under-explored ﬁeld, and
synthesizing appearance on surface geometry requires developing appropriate neural networks. The proposed neural

Related Works
2D colorization. Generating colored digital content has
been studied extensively in the 2D image domain. In terms
of human interaction, early works on image colorization
focused on interactive colorization (Levin, Lischinski, and

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2580

