The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

SNNN: Promoting Word Sentiment and
Negation in Neural Sentiment Classiﬁcation
Qinmin Hu, Jie Zhou, Qin Chen, Liang He
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing
School of Computer Science and Software Engineering
East China Normal University, Shanghai, 200062, China
{qmhu,lh}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, {jzhou, qchen}@ica.stc.sh.cn
2016; Socher et al. 2011a; 2011b; 2012; 2013; Kim 2014;
Tang, Qin, and Liu 2015b; Yang et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2016;
Ren et al. 2016a)
Tang et al. (Tang, Qin, and Liu 2015b) proposed a neural
network model to learn vector-based document representation
in a CNN based sentiment classiﬁcation, where the authors
found that neural gates outperformed the traditional recurrent
neural network. Then, Chen et al. (Chen et al. 2016) brought
a hierarchical neural network to incorporate global user and
product information as attentions. They mainly challenged
Tang’s work that the characteristics of the user and product
information should be reﬂected on the semantic level, instead
of the word level. Based on these two pieces of the state-ofthe-art work, we aim to investigate further word inﬂuence
in neural sentiment classiﬁcation. The motivation is that it
is theoretically feasible and sound by adding more word
information from multiple dimensions in the word level as the
input, since the quality of document/sentence representation
highly depends on word representations.

Abstract
We mainly investigate word inﬂuence in neural sentiment
classiﬁcation, which results in a novel approach to promoting word sentiment and negation as attentions. Particularly, a
sentiment and negation neural network (SNNN) is proposed,
including a sentiment neural network (SNN) and a negation
neural network (NNN). First, we modify the word level by
embedding the word sentiment and negation information as
the extra layers for the input. Second, we adopt a hierarchical
LSTM model to generate the word-level, sentence-level and
document-level representations respectively. After that, we
enhance word sentiment and negation as attentions over the
semantic level. Finally, the experiments conducting on the
IMDB and Yelp data sets show that our approach is superior to
the state-of-the-art methods. Furthermore, we draw the interesting conclusions that (1) LSTM performs better than CNN
and RNN for neural sentiment classiﬁcation; (2) word sentiment and negation are a strong alliance as attentions, while
overﬁtting occurs when they are simultaneously applied at
the embedding layer; and (3) word sentiment/negation can be
singly implemented for better performance as both embedding
layer and attention at the same time.

I

positive it

not

negative it

output

Introduction and Motivation
Many approaches in sentiment classiﬁcation, utilize a supervised classiﬁer and rely on extensive feature engineering
(Go, Bhayani, and Huang 2009; Barbosa and Feng 2010;
Pak and Paroubek 2010; Jiang et al. 2011; Mukherjee, Bhattacharyya, and others 2012; Hamdan, Béchet, and Bellot
2013; Mohammad, Kiritchenko, and Zhu 2013; Cheng et al.
2017). However, feature engineering costs extensive labour
work and needs speciﬁc domain knowledge. Therefore, feature learning is an alternative way to learn discriminative
features automatically from data. The work presented by
(Socher et al. 2013; Yessenalina and Cardie 2011; Hu et
al. 2016) proved that the features of a sentence/document
could be learnt through its word embedding. Existing approaches of learning word embedding (Collobert et al. 2011;
Mikolov et al. 2013b; Yang, Hu, and He 2015) then focused
on modeling the syntactic context. After that, people turn
to neural network for its learning ability of text representation (Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio 2011; Zhai and Zhang

project
input
context

sentence

like
affirmative
I like it.

negated
I do not like it.

Figure 1: A perfect example of sentiment representation: (1)
the correct sentiment is obtained as output on both sentences;
(2) “not” at the output level is ideally represented the negated
word “not” of the input level.
Figure 1 presents a perfect example to show that the correct
sentiment is obtained at the output level on both sentences
(Hu et al. 2016). Theoretically, we say the surrounding words
and word sentiment are predicted in afﬁrmative (negated)
context, when the afﬁrmative (negated) words are mapped to
the afﬁrmative (negated) representations.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3255

