The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Approximate Inference via Weighted Rademacher Complexity
Jonathan Kuck

Ashish Sabharwal

Stefano Ermon

Computer Science Department
Stanford University
jkuck@cs.stanford.edu

Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Seattle, WA
ashishs@allenai.org

Computer Science Department
Stanford University
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

#P-hard problem of exact summation (Valiant 1979) using
the solutions of NP-hard optimization problems.
Optimization can be performed efﬁciently for certain
classes of weight functions, such as those involved in the
computation of the permanent of a non-negative matrix.
If instead of summing (permanent computation) we maximize the same weight function, we obtain a maximum
weight matching problem, which is in fact solvable in polynomial time (Kuhn 1955). However, adding hash-based constraints makes the maximum matching optimization problem intractable, which limits the application of randomized hashing approaches (Ermon et al. 2013c). On the
other hand, there do exist fully polynomial-time randomized approximation schemes (FPRAS) for non-negative permanent computation (Jerrum, Sinclair, and Vigoda 2004;
Bezáková et al. 2006). This gives hope that approximation
schemes may exist for other counting problems even when
optimization with hash-based constraints is intractable.
We present a new method for approximating and bounding the size of a general weighted set (i.e., the sum of the
weights of its elements) using geometric arguments based
on the set’s shape. Our approach, rather than relying on
hash-based techniques, establishes a novel connection with
Rademacher complexity (Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David
2014). This generalizes geometric approaches developed for
the unweighted case to the weighted setting, such as the work
of Barvinok (1997) who uses similar reasoning but without connecting it with Rademacher complexity. In particular,
we ﬁrst generalize Rademacher complexity to weighted sets.
While Rademacher complexity is deﬁned as the maximum
of the sum of Rademacher variables over a set, weighted
Rademacher complexity also accounts for the weight of each
element in the set. Just like Rademacher complexity is related
to the size of the set, we show that weighted Rademacher
complexity is related to the total weight of the set. Further, it
can be estimated by solving multiple instances of a maximum
weight optimization problem, subject to random Rademacher
perturbations. Notably, the resulting optimization problem
turns out to be computationally much simpler than that required by the aforementioned randomized hashing schemes.
In particular, if the weight function is log-supermodular,
the corresponding weighted Rademacher complexity can be
estimated efﬁciently, as our perturbation does not change
the original optimization problem’s complexity (Orlin 2009;

Abstract
Rademacher complexity is often used to characterize the learnability of a hypothesis class and is known to be related to the
class size. We leverage this observation and introduce a new
technique for estimating the size of an arbitrary weighted set,
deﬁned as the sum of weights of all elements in the set. Our
technique provides upper and lower bounds on a novel generalization of Rademacher complexity to the weighted setting
in terms of the weighted set size. This generalizes Massart’s
Lemma, a known upper bound on the Rademacher complexity
in terms of the unweighted set size. We show that the weighted
Rademacher complexity can be estimated by solving a randomly perturbed optimization problem, allowing us to derive
high-probability bounds on the size of any weighted set. We
apply our method to the problems of calculating the partition function of an Ising model and computing propositional
model counts (#SAT). Our experiments demonstrate that we
can produce tighter bounds than competing methods in both
the weighted and unweighted settings.

Introduction
A wide variety of problems can be reduced to computing the
sum of (many) non-negative numbers. These include calculating the partition function of a graphical model, propositional
model counting (#SAT), and calculating the permanent of
a non-negative matrix. Equivalently, each can be viewed as
computing the discrete integral of a non-negative weight function. Exact summation, however, is generally intractable due
to the curse of dimensionality (Bellman 1961).
As alternatives to exact computation, variational methods
(Jordan et al. 1998; Wainwright, Jordan, and others 2008)
and sampling (Jerrum and Sinclair 1996; Madras 2002) are
popular approaches for approximate summation. However,
they generally do not guarantee the estimate’s quality.
An emerging line of work estimates and formally bounds
propositional model counts or, more generally, discrete integrals (Ermon et al. 2013a; Chakraborty, Meel, and Vardi
2013; Ermon et al. 2014; Zhao et al. 2016). These approaches
reduce the problem of integration to solving a small number
of optimization problems involving the same weight function
but subject to additional random constraints introduced by
a random hash function. This results in approximating the
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6376

