The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Group Sparse Bayesian Learning
for Active Surveillance on Epidemic Dynamics
1

Hongbin Pei,1,2 Bo Yang,1,2∗ Jiming Liu,3 Lei Dong4

College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun, China
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, China
3
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong
4
Institute of Remote Sensing and Geographical Information Systems, Peking University, Beijing, China

2

Owing to a lack of systematic deployment of already limited surveillance resources, disease surveillance has long
suffered from low reporting rates, biased sampling, and
lengthy reporting time-lags (Gerardo-Giorda et al. 2013).
For instance, Tengchong city, a malaria endemic region in
China, has 18 towns (consisting of 221 villages), 167,964
households, and 658,207 residents that are distributed in a
mountainous area of 5,845 square kilometers. From 2005
to 2011 in Tengchong, 7,835 conﬁrmed malaria cases were
reported, but the Tengchong Centers for Disease Control
(CDC), the local disease surveillance team, could only afford to have a few staff members conducting the timeconsuming case surveys.
Active surveillance is a promising strategy to address the
challenge of limited surveillance resources, in which epidemic dynamics is predicted by proactively monitoring a
relatively small number of sentinel components, whose state
data are collected to achieve a good trade-off between prediction accuracy and surveillance cost. The key to implementing active surveillance is to determine, in a dynamical
system, which components are important for dynamics prediction and how to identify them. This is a non-trivial task
because the interaction structure among components, which
characterizes the dynamics mechanism, is usually hidden
and heterogenous, such as the social contact network in
charge of disease spread (Yang et al. 2017).
Here, we address this challenge by proposing a novel importance measure, the γ value, to determine how important a
component is to predicting epidemic dynamics. Based on the
measure, we develop a backward-selection algorithm designated the sentinel network mining algorithm (SNMA for
short) to mine a sentinel network. The sentinel network encodes the inﬂuence relationship from sentinel components
to the overall system components, which is a row sparse network that contains only the inﬂuential links emitted from the
sentinels. With the discovered sentinel network, one can predict the future overall system dynamics by only monitoring
and feeding the sentinels’ states into a system function.
Different from existing works, we model the task of sentinel network mining as a group sparse learning problem
and propose an effective and ﬂexible Bayesian learning algorithm for various dynamical systems, including the most
widely used linear continuous system and logistic discrete
system. The expectation-maximization (EM) and variational

Abstract
Predicting epidemic dynamics is of great value in understanding and controlling diffusion processes, such as infectious disease spread and information propagation. This task
is intractable, especially when surveillance resources are very
limited. To address the challenge, we study the problem of active surveillance, i.e., how to identify a small portion of system components as sentinels to effect monitoring, such that
the epidemic dynamics of an entire system can be readily
predicted from the partial data collected by such sentinels.
We propose a novel measure, the γ value, to identify the sentinels by modeling a sentinel network with row sparsity structure. We design a ﬂexible group sparse Bayesian learning algorithm to mine the sentinel network suitable for handling
both linear and non-linear dynamical systems by using the
expectation maximization method and variational approximation. The efﬁcacy of the proposed algorithm is theoretically
analyzed and empirically validated using both synthetic and
real-world data.

1 Introduction
Predicting epidemic dynamics is of great value in understanding and controlling diffusion processes. Diffusion phenomena, such as infectious disease spread and information
propagation, exist widely in the real world. By the notion of
a dynamical system, which is a powerful tool for characterizing dynamics (Brunton, Proctor, and Kutz 2016), the task of
epidemic dynamics prediction is to estimate ensuing system
states using given current states. Therefore, the foundation
of this task is surveillance, which is to monitor and report
the current system states in a timely manner.
However, in practice, it is often very challenging to monitor the overall components in a system because diffusion phenomena often cross over very large spatiotemporal
ranges, e.g., spreading of infectious diseases in a country
(Polgreen et al. 2009), air contaminant diffusion in a large
city (Zheng, Liu, and Hsieh 2013), and hot topics/meme forwarding on social media (Chen et al. 2013). For large-scale
diffusion phenomena, timely and all-around monitoring is
hard and infeasible, especially when available surveillance
resources are very limited.
∗

Corresponding author. ybo@jlu.edu.cn
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

800

