The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Machine-Translated Knowledge
Transfer for Commonsense Causal Reasoning
Jinyoung Yeo,† Geungyu Wang,‡ Hyunsouk Cho,† Seungtaek Choi,‡ Seung-won Hwang‡
†

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang, Republic of Korea
‡
Yonsei Univeristy, Seoul, Republic of Korea
{jinyeo,prory}@postech.edu {posuer,hist0613,seungwonh}@yonsei.ac.kr

English questions and answers, from English resources. We
show that, even under extreme scenarios with no languagespeciﬁc corpus, we can achieve comparable COPA accuracy
using only English resources.
So far, most successful approaches on existing multilingual work such as question answering (Ture and Boschee
2016), sentiment classiﬁcation (Zhou, Wan, and Xiao 2016),
relation extraction (Faruqui and Kumar 2015) adopt onebest MT (1MT) which translates all contents into its most
probable English via Machine Translation (MT) systems.
Then, a certain multilingual task is performed on the translated English in the same manner with its monolingual task
on English. Intuitively, this baseline may be strong for our
work with the huge success of both English causal reasoning and Neural Machine Translation (NMT) (Johnson et
al. 2016) adopted in off-the-shelf translators (e.g., Google
Translate1 , Microsoft Translator2 , and Naver Papago3 ).
However, 1MT does not fully capture causality in a target
language, e.g., its causal reasoning accuracy on the machinetranslated English (ME) is up-to 64.2% below 70.2% on native English (NE). Our goal is thus to enable 1MT to achieve
comparable reasoning performance. For that, we observe the
following limitations in Example 1:

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of multilingual causal reasoning in resource-poor languages. Existing approaches, translating into the most probable resource-rich language such
as English, suffer in the presence of translation and language gaps between different cultural area, which leads to
the loss of causality. To overcome these challenges, our goal
is thus to identify key techniques to construct a new causality network of cause-effect terms, targeted for the machinetranslated English, but without any language-speciﬁc knowledge of resource-poor languages. In our evaluations with
three languages, Korean, Chinese, and French, our proposed
method consistently outperforms all baselines, achieving upto 69.0% reasoning accuracy, which is close to the state-ofthe-art accuracy 70.2% achieved on English.

Introduction
There is growing interest in the commonsense causal reasoning, to explain past observations or predict future events
by understanding their general causal dependency. Recent
efforts for such understanding are focused on measuring the
plausibility of one event statistically leading to another, and
are competing on Choice of Plausible Alternatives (COPA)
evaluation (Roemmele, Bejan, and Gordon 2011), which is
to select the more plausible alternative as a cause (or effect)
of the premise as:
Example 1 Premise: The girl met her favorite actor. What
happened as an effect?
Alternative 1: She went to see his new ﬁlm.
Alternative 2: She asked him for his autograph.
For the purpose of this reasoning, the state-of-the-art, called
CausalNet (Luo et al. 2016), harvests causality scores of
cause-effect term pairs, e.g., (‘actor’,‘autograph’), by mining their linguistic causal patterns, e.g., “If...actor ..., then...
autograph...”, from an extremely large corpus. As a result, it
achieved a remarkable accuracy (70.2%) from COPA. However, although this approach, building on a large corpus,
shows higher reasoning accuracy as the corpus size grows,
it is applicable only to resource-rich language (e.g., English)
and not to resource-poor language.
To overcome this challenge, we propose to train multilingual causal reasoning, e.g., COPA task translated into non-

• [L1] Translation gap: Korean sentence [Alternative 1]4
is incorrectly translated into “She went to see a new release”. Due to this error, its plausibility is weakened as
the ME causality (‘actor’,‘release’) has a lower causality
score than the NE causality (‘actor’,‘ﬁlm’).
• [L2] Language gap: Korean sentence [Alternative 2] is
correctly translated into “She asked him a signature” because ‘autograph’ and ‘signature’ map to the same word
in Korean expressing both. As a result, the critical causality (‘actor’,‘autograph’) is lost by ‘signature’ not frequently used around ‘actor’ in NE.
To bridge these gaps, we propose a framework, PSG, to
(1) understand ME with the above gaps, and model such difference in both (2) word alignment and (3) score propagation to transfer causality knowledge from NE to ME. These
1

https://translate.google.com
https://translator.microsoft.com
3
https://papago.naver.com
4
[EN] represents a foreign language sentence meaning “EN”.
2

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2021

