The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

AI Meets Chemistry
Akihiro Kishimoto, Beat Buesser, Adi Botea
IBM Research, Ireland

and Jurisica 2012). That way AI research focusing on chemistry as a target translates directly into beneﬁts for society,
much faster than research focused on games.
In the past, researchers have attempted to develop expert
systems and knowledge-reasoning systems to solve problems in chemistry. Examples include the Dendral Project
(Lindsay et al. 1980) and Project Halo (Friedland et al.
2004). However, despite its importance in practice and its
difﬁculty in nature, over the last couple of years a relatively
small number of papers, such as (Duvenaud et al. 2015;
Jin et al. 2017; Savage et al. 2017), have been published at
premier computer science conferences.
At the same time, automation of chemistry has been
an essential topic for chemists, e.g., (Dragone et al. 2017;
Peplow 2014), and papers particularly about employing Machine Learning approaches have started to appear in chemistry journals (Gómez-Bombarelli et al. 2016; Segler and
Waller 2017a; 2017b; Coley et al. 2017).
Due to more powerful hardware resources and recent
signiﬁcant advances in AI technologies including Machine
Learning, NLP, search and planning, we are convinced that
with the maturity of AI research it is now the right time to
address chemistry on a much bigger scale than previously.

Abstract
We argue that chemistry should be the next grand challenge
for Artiﬁcial Intelligence. The AI research community and
humanity would beneﬁt tremendously from focusing AI research on chemistry on a regular basis, as a benchmark as
well as a real-world application domain. To support our position, we review the importance of chemical compound discovery and synthesis planning and discuss the properties of
search spaces in a chemistry problem. Knowledge acquired
in domains such as two-player board games or single-player
puzzles places the AI community in a good position to solve
critical problems in the chemistry domain. Yet, we show that
searching in chemistry problems poses signiﬁcant additional
challenges that will have to be addressed. Finally, we envision
how several AI areas like Natural Language Processing, Machine Learning, planning and search, are relevant for chemistry.

Introduction
Artiﬁcial Intelligence research has generated multiple essential technologies, such as Natural Language Processing,
Machine Learning, planning, and search, with a wide range
of applications. These ﬁelds have led to advances where AI
is already outperforming humans, for example the Chinook
Checkers-playing program (Schaeffer 2009), IBM’s Deep
Blue in chess (Campbell, Jr., and Hsu 2002) and Watson for
Jeopardy! (Ferrucci et al. 2010), and Google DeepMind’s
Alpha-Go in Go (Silver et al. 2016). However, there is still
an uncountable number of unsolved challenges we can think
of. One of them is RoboCup (Kitano et al. 1997), where a
team of robots attempts to win against human soccer players.
In this paper we promote chemistry as an ideal domain for
AI research, encouraging the AI community to use chemistry as a benchmark domain on a regular basis. Chemistry
has applications in many industries like pharmaceuticals,
food and nutrition, and materials. The commercial impacts
and effects on society of these industries are signiﬁcant. For
example, a single chemical compound named atorvastatin,

, generated annual revenues of
better known as drug Lipitor R
over 12 billion US dollars, before its patent expired (Heifets

Research Motivation
A chemist developing a new drug molecule that cures a certain disease typically needs to design the chemical structure
of the target compound, and plan a sequence of chemical
reactions, similar to pathways or routes, to synthesize the
target compound in an incredibly large combinatorial space
of possible chemical reactions. Most importantly, a chemist
needs to experimentally validate each step of the process
and ﬁnally use the gained insights to validate new knowledge and creatively think of new hypotheses about chemistry. Success depends on whether the products of each reaction step are synthesized as predicted in sufﬁcient quantity and on whether additional requirements like efﬁcacy and
non-toxicity are fulﬁlled.
Developing new drugs involves generating and evaluating very large numbers of chemical compounds. Most compounds turn out as negative samples, as they do not exhibit
the desired properties, such as being an effective drug. The
development of one new drug typically takes over 10 years
and costs over one billion US dollars (Dickson and Gagnon

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7978

