The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Actionable Email Intent Modeling with Reparametrized RNNs∗†
Chu-Cheng Lin‡

Dongyeop Kang

Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD
clin103@jhu.edu

Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA
dongyeok@cs.cmu.edu

Michael Gamon

Patrick Pantel

Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA
mgamon@microsoft.com

Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA
ppantel@microsoft.com

Abstract

reply, adding a task to your to-do list, or helping you take
action against another system. To build and train such systems,
email data sets are essential, but unfortunately public email
datasets such as Klimt and Yang; Oard et al. (2004; 2015) are
much smaller than the proprietary data used by Google; and
more importantly, they lack any direct information/annotation
regarding the recipients’ actions.
In this paper, we design an annotation scheme for such
actions and have applied it to a corpus of publicly available emails. In order to overcome the data bottleneck for
end-to-end training, we leverage other data and annotations
that we hypothesize to contain structures similar to email
and recipient actions. We apply multitask and multidomain
learning, which use domain or task invariant knowledge to improve performance on a speciﬁc task/domain (Caruana 1997;
Yang and Hospedales 2014). We show that these secondary
domains and tasks in combination with multitask and multidomain learning can help our model discover invariant structures
in conversations that improve a classiﬁer on our primary data
and task: email recipient action classiﬁcation.
Previous work in the deep learning literature tackled multidomain/multitask learning by designing an encoder that
encodes all data and the domain/task description into a
shared representation space (Collobert and Weston 2008;
Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio 2011; Ammar et al. 2016;
Yang, Salakhutdinov, and Cohen 2017). The overall model
architecture generally is unchanged from the single-domain
single-task setting; but the learned representations are now
reparametrized to take account of knowledge from additional
data and task/domain knowledge. In this work, we propose
an alternative approach of model reparametrization. We train
multiple parameter-sharing models across diﬀerent domains
and tasks jointly, without maintaining a shared encoded representation in the network. We show that reparametrized
LSTMs consistently achieve better likelihood and overall
accuracy on test data than common domain adaption variants.
We also show that the representation extracted from a network
instantiated with the shared parameter weights performs well
on a previously unseen task.
The contributions of this paper are:
First, we designed an annotation scheme for labeling actionable workplace emails, which as we argue in section 2.2,

Emails in the workplace are often intentional calls to action
for its recipients. We propose to annotate these emails for what
action its recipient will take. We argue that our approach of
action-based annotation is more scalable and theory-agnostic
than traditional speech-act-based email intent annotation, while
still carrying important semantic and pragmatic information.
We show that our action-based annotation scheme achieves
good inter-annotator agreement. We also show that we can
leverage threaded messages from other domains, which exhibit
comparable intents in their conversation, with domain adaptive Rainbow(Recurrently AttentIve Neural Bag-Of-Words).
On a collection of datasets consisting of IRC, Reddit, and
email, our reparametrized RNNs outperform common multitask/multidomain approaches on several speech act related
tasks. We also experiment with a minimally supervised scenario of email recipient action classiﬁcation, and ﬁnd the
reparametrized RNNs learn a useful representation.

1

Introduction

Despite the emergence of many new communication tools in
the workplace, email remains a major, if not the dominant,
messaging platform in many corporate settings (Agema 2015).
Helping people manage and act on their emails can make them
more productive. Recently, Google’s system that suggests
email replies has gained wide adoption (Kannan et al. 2016).
We can imagine many other classes of assistance scenarios
that can improve worker productivity. For example, consider
a system that is capable of predicting your next action when
receiving an email. The system could then oﬀer assistance to
accomplish that action, for example in the form of a quick
∗ Madian Khabsa (madian@apple.com) and Ahmed Hassan
Awadallah (hassanam@microsoft.com) are co-authors of this work.
An oversight during submission omitted their names and that error
could not be amended due to the AAAI policy regarding author
list modiﬁcation. For academic integrity reasons, please cite the
corrected version here: https://rebrand.ly/rainbowmsr.
† This work was done when Madian Khabsa was at Microsoft
Research.
‡ This work was done during an internship at Microsoft Research.
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4856

