The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Knowledge-Based Word Sense
Disambiguation Using Topic Models
Devendra Singh Chaplot, Ruslan Salakhutdinov
{chaplot,rsalakhu}@cs.cmu.edu
Machine Learning Department
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University

more practical applications, there has been signiﬁcant interest in developing unsupervised knowledge-based systems.
These systems only require an external knowledge source
(such as WordNet) but no labeled training data.
In this paper, we propose a novel knowledge-based WSD
algorithm for the all-word WSD task, which utilizes the
whole document as the context for a word, rather than just
the current sentence used by most WSD systems. In order to model the whole document for WSD, we leverage
the formalism of topic models, especially Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA). Our method is a variant of LDA in
which the topic proportions for a document are replaced by
synset proportions for a document. We use a non-uniform
prior for the synset distribution over words to model the
frequency of words within a synset. Furthermore, we also
model the relationships between synsets by using a logisticnormal prior for drawing the synset proportions of the document. This makes our model similar to the correlated topic
model , with the difference that our priors are not learned
but ﬁxed. In particular, the values of these priors are determined using the knowledge from WordNet. We evaluate
our system on a set of ﬁve benchmark datasets, Senseval2, Senseval-3, SemEval-2007, SemEval-2013 and SenEval2015 and show that the proposed model outperforms stateof-the-art knowledge-based WSD system.

Abstract
Word Sense Disambiguation is an open problem in Natural Language Processing which is particularly challenging
and useful in the unsupervised setting where all the words
in any given text need to be disambiguated without using
any labeled data. Typically WSD systems use the sentence
or a small window of words around the target word as the
context for disambiguation because their computational complexity scales exponentially with the size of the context. In
this paper, we leverage the formalism of topic model to design a WSD system that scales linearly with the number of
words in the context. As a result, our system is able to utilize
the whole document as the context for a word to be disambiguated. The proposed method is a variant of Latent Dirichlet Allocation in which the topic proportions for a document
are replaced by synset proportions. We further utilize the information in the WordNet by assigning a non-uniform prior to
synset distribution over words and a logistic-normal prior for
document distribution over synsets. We evaluate the proposed
method on Senseval-2, Senseval-3, SemEval-2007, SemEval2013 and SemEval-2015 English All-Word WSD datasets
and show that it outperforms the state-of-the-art unsupervised
knowledge-based WSD system by a signiﬁcant margin.

1

Introduction

Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) is the task of mapping an ambiguous word in a given context to its correct
meaning. WSD is an important problem in natural language
processing (NLP), both in its own right and as a stepping
stone to more advanced tasks such as machine translation
(Chan, Ng, and Chiang 2007), information extraction and
retrieval (Zhong and Ng 2012), and question answering (Ramakrishnan et al. 2003). WSD, being AI-complete (Navigli 2009), is still an open problem after over two decades
of research. Following Navigli (2009), we can roughly distinguish between supervised and knowledge-based (unsupervised) approaches. Supervised methods require senseannotated training data and are suitable for lexical sample
WSD tasks where systems are required to disambiguate a
restricted set of target words. However, the performance of
supervised systems is limited in the all-word WSD tasks as
labeled data for the full lexicon is sparse and difﬁcult to obtain. As the all-word WSD task is more challenging and has

2

Related Work

Lesk (Lesk 1986) is a classical knowledge-based WSD algorithm which disambiguates a word by selecting a sense
whose deﬁnition overlaps the most with the words in its context. Many subsequent knowledge-based systems are based
on the Lesk algorithm. Banerjee and Pedersen (2003) extended Lesk by utilizing the deﬁnitions of words in the
context and weighing the words by term frequency-inverse
document frequency (tf-idf). Basile, Caputo, and Semeraro
(2014) further enhanced Lesk by using word embeddings to
calculate the similarity between sense deﬁnitions and words
in the context.
The above methods only use the words in the context for
disambiguating the target word. However, Chaplot, Bhattacharyya, and Paranjape (2015) show that sense of a word
depends on not just the words in the context but also on
their senses. Since the senses of the words in the context
are also unknown, they need to be optimized jointly. In the

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5062

