The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

CMCGAN: A Uniform Framework for
Cross-Modal Visual-Audio Mutual Generation
Wangli Hao,1,4 Zhaoxiang Zhang,1,2,3,4,∗ He Guan1,4
1

Research Center for Brain-inspired Intelligence, CASIA
2
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{haowangli2015,zhaoxiang.zhang,guanhe2015}@ia.ac.cn
video tasks. However, due to the environmental disturbance
and sensor fault, one of the modality may be missing or damaged, which will bring signiﬁcant inconveniences such as
silent ﬁlm and screen blurred. If we can restore the missing
modality from the remaining modality based on the crossmodal prior, great bonus will be gained for various multimedia tasks and many traditional single-modal databases can
be reused in conjunction to gain better performance.
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have gained
extraordinary popularity because of their ability in generating high-quality realistic samples, which is superior to other
generative models. Compared to numerous work focusing
on static information translation, such as image-to-image
(Isola et al. 2016; Zhu et al. 2017) and text-to-image (Reed
et al. 2016), few of methods concern dynamic visual-audio
modality conversion and generation. Chen et al. ﬁrstly design Conditional GANs for cross-modal visual-audio generation. Drawbacks of their work are that the mutual generation process relies on different models and it cannot be
trained end-to-end.
Inspired by (Isola et al. 2016; Zhu et al. 2017), we propose
Cross-Modal Cycle Generative Adversarial Network (CMCGAN) to achieve cross-modal visual-audio mutual generation. Compared to CycleGAN, CMCGAN introduces a
latent vector to handle dimension and structure asymmetry
among different modalities. Moreover, another two generation paths are coupled with CycleGAN to facilitate crossmodal visual-audio translation and generation. Finally, a
joint corresponding adversarial loss is designed to unify the
visual-audio mutual generation in a common framework. In
addition, CMCGAN can be trained end-to-end to obtain better convenience.
Beneﬁting from CMCGAN, a dynamic multimodal classiﬁcation network is developed for double modalities. Once
only single modal as input, we will supplement the absent
one in the aid of CMCGAN and then perform the subsequent
classiﬁcation task. In summary, we make the following contributions:

Abstract
Visual and audio modalities are two symbiotic modalities underlying videos, which contain both common and complementary information. If they can be mined and fused sufﬁciently, performances of related video tasks can be signiﬁcantly enhanced. However, due to the environmental interference or sensor fault, sometimes, only one modality exists while the other is abandoned or missing. By recovering the missing modality from the existing one based on
the common information shared between them and the prior
information of the speciﬁc modality, great bonus will be
gained for various vision tasks. In this paper, we propose a
Cross-Modal Cycle Generative Adversarial Network (CMCGAN) to handle cross-modal visual-audio mutual generation.
Speciﬁcally, CMCGAN is composed of four kinds of subnetworks: audio-to-visual, visual-to-audio, audio-to-audio and
visual-to-visual subnetworks respectively, which are organized in a cycle architecture. CMCGAN has several remarkable advantages. Firstly, CMCGAN uniﬁes visual-audio mutual generation into a common framework by a joint corresponding adversarial loss. Secondly, through introducing a
latent vector with Gaussian distribution, CMCGAN can handle dimension and structure asymmetry over visual and audio
modalities effectively. Thirdly, CMCGAN can be trained endto-end to achieve better convenience. Beneﬁting from CMCGAN, we develop a dynamic multimodal classiﬁcation network to handle the modality missing problem. Abundant experiments have been conducted and validate that CMCGAN
obtains the state-of-the-art cross-modal visual-audio generation results. Furthermore, it is shown that the generated
modality achieves comparable effects with those of original
modality, which demonstrates the effectiveness and advantages of our proposed method.

Video mainly contains two symbiotic modalities, the visual and the audio ones. Information embedded in these two
modalities owns both common and complementary information respectively. Common information can make the translation over visual and audio modalities be possible. Meanwhile, complementary information can be adopted as the
prior of one modality to facilitate the associative tasks. Thus,
sufﬁcient utilization of these common and complementary
information will further boost the performances of related

• We propose a Cross-Modal Cycle Generative Adversarial Network(CMCGAN) to simultaneously handle crossmodal visual-audio mutual generation in the same model.

∗

Corresponding author. (zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn)
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We develop a joint adversarial loss to unify visual-audio
mutual generation, which makes it possible not only to

6886

