The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Investigating Inner Properties of Multimodal Representation and
Semantic Compositionality with Brain-Based Componential Semantics
Shaonan Wang,1,2 Jiajun Zhang,1,2 Nan Lin,3,4 Chengqing Zong1,2,5
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
CAS Key Laboratory of Behavioural Science, Institute of Psychology, Beijing, China
4
Department of Psychology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
5
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Shanghai, China
{shaonan.wang,jjzhang,cqzong}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn; linn@psych.ac.cn
For example, it is still unclear 1) what properties are encoded
in multimodal representations, and in what aspects do they
outperform single-modality representations. 2) Whether different semantic combination rules are encoded in different input modalities, and how different composition models
combine inner properties of semantic representations. Accordingly, to facilitate the development of better multimodal
models, it is desirable to efﬁciently compare and investigate
the inner properties of different semantic representations and
different composition models.
Experiments with brain imaging tools have accumulated evidence indicating that human concept representations are at least partly embodied in perception, action, and
other modal neural systems related to individual experiences
(Binder and Desai 2011). In summary of the previous work,
Binder et al. (2016) propose the “brain-based componential
semantic representations” based entirely on such functional
divisions in the human brain, and represent concepts by sets
of properties like vision, somatic, audition, spatial, and emotion. Since multimodal models, in some extent, simulate human concept learning to capture the perceptual information
that is nicely encoded in the human brain, we assume that
correlating them with brain-based semantics in a proper way
would interpret the inner properties of multimodal representations and semantic compositionality.
To that end, we ﬁrst propose a simple correlation method,
which utilizes the brain-based componential semantic vectors (Binder et al. 2016) to investigate the inner properties of multimodal word representations. Our method calculates correlations between the relation matrix given by
brain-based property vectors and multimodal word vectors.
The resulting correlation score represents the capability of
the multimodal word vectors in capturing the brain-based
semantic property. Then we employ a mapping method to
explore how semantic compositionality works in different
input modalities. Speciﬁcally, we learn a mapping function
from the distributed semantic space to the brain-based componential space. After mapping word and phrase representations to the (interpretable) brain-based semantic space, we
compare the transformations of their inner properties in the
process of combining word representations into phrases.
Our results show that 1) single modality vectors from

Abstract
Multimodal models have been proven to outperform textbased approaches on learning semantic representations. However, it still remains unclear what properties are encoded
in multimodal representations, in what aspects do they outperform the single-modality representations, and what happened in the process of semantic compositionality in different input modalities. Considering that multimodal models are originally motivated by human concept representations, we assume that correlating multimodal representations
with brain-based semantics would interpret their inner properties to answer the above questions. To that end, we propose
simple interpretation methods based on brain-based componential semantics. First we investigate the inner properties
of multimodal representations by correlating them with corresponding brain-based property vectors. Then we map the
distributed vector space to the interpretable brain-based componential space to explore the inner properties of semantic
compositionality. Ultimately, the present paper sheds light on
the fundamental questions of natural language understanding,
such as how to represent the meaning of words and how to
combine word meanings into larger units.

Introduction
Multimodal models that learn semantic representations using both linguistic and perceptual inputs are originally motivated by human concept learning and the evidence that many
concept representations in the brain are grounded in perception (Andrews, Vigliocco, and Vinson 2009). The perceptual
information in such models is derived from images (Roller
and Im Walde 2013; Collell, Zhang, and Moens 2017),
sounds (Kiela and Clark 2015), or data collected in psychological experiments (Johns and Jones 2012; Hill and Korhonen 2014; Andrews, Vigliocco, and Vinson 2009). Multimodal methods have been proven to outperform text-based
approaches on a range of tasks, including modeling semantic similarity of two words or sentences and ﬁnding the most
similar images to a word (Bruni, Tran, and Baroni 2014;
Lazaridou, Pham, and Baroni 2015; Kurach et al. 2017).
Despite of their superiority, what happened inside is hard
to be interpreted and many questions have been unexplored.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5964

