The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Coupled Poisson Factorization Integrated with User/Item Metadata
for Modeling Popular and Sparse Ratings in Scalable Recommendation
Trong Dinh Thac Do, Longbing Cao
Advanced Analytics Institute, University of Technology Sydney,
TrongDinhThac.Do@student.uts.edu.au and Longbing.Cao@uts.edu.au

Blei (2015) introduced Poisson Factorization (PF) and used
the variational inference method for scalable recommendation on large and sparse data by only scanning non-zero ratings, which appears to be very promising.
PF factorizes the ratings by individual users on items
based on their posterior assumption of Gamma distribution,
but it may not capture the rating popularity and sparsity
and comprehensive user/item couplings embodied through
explicit and implicit variables (Cao, Ou, and Yu 2012;
Cao 2015), which essentially shows recommendation problems are non-IID (Cao 2016). For example, the complete
conditional posterior of items is in Eq. (1). a is the initial
shape
of the Gamma distribution-based item weights βik ;
a + u zuik is the shape of the Gamma distribution-based
item weights after we sample the observed data; and zuik
represents the rating given by user u on item i.


βik |θ, η, z, y ∼ Gamma(a +
zuik , ηi +
θuk ) (1)

Abstract
Modelling sparse and large data sets is highly in demand yet
challenging in recommender systems. With the computation
only on the non-zero ratings, Poisson Factorization (PF) enabled by variational inference has shown its high efﬁciency in
scalable recommendation, e.g., modeling millions of ratings.
However, as PF learns the ratings by individual users on items
with the Gamma distribution, it cannot capture the coupling
relations between users (items) and the rating popularity (i.e.,
favorable rating scores that are given to one item) and rating
sparsity (i.e., those users (items) with many zero ratings) for
one item (user). This work proposes Coupled Poisson Factorization (CPF) to learn the couplings between users (items),
and the user/item attributes (i.e., metadata) are integrated into
CPF to form the Metadata-integrated CPF (mCPF) to not only
handle sparse but also popular ratings in very large-scale data.
Our empirical results show that the proposed models significantly outperform PF and address the key limitations in PF
for scalable recommendation.

u

u

Let us illustrate the PF problems using the toy examples in
Table 1a by estimating the weight of the movie ‘The Game
(1997)’ for user 940. With the posterior distribution in Eq.
(1), the result is around 2 or 3. However, as shown in Table
1a, many users gave ratings 1 to ‘The Game (1997)’, hence
it may be more practical to set the item weight closer to 1.
This is the problem of rating popularity for a user (item).
PF is good at capturing sparse ratings using the Gamma
distribution (Gopalan, Hofman, and Blei 2015) as in Eq. (1).
Only the non-zero ratings are added to ﬁt the shape of the
Gamma distribution. With sparse ratings for a user (item),
most of the weights will be 0 and only a few will be larger
than 0. This makes the computation faster but may lead to
wrong recommendations. We explain this scenario using Table 1b. It may be more reasonable to recommend ‘The Game
(1997)’ to user 405 since two users rated it as 5. However,
PF only suggests 2 or 3. This problem appears when many
users give high ratings to an item while others do not rate it.
This creates the problem of rating sparsity for a user (item).
In this work, we address the aforementioned rating popularity and sparsity issues in PF-based RS by involving and
modeling user/item metadata and the user and item couplings (Cao 2015; 2016). First, the Coupled Poisson Factorization (CPF) is proposed to model user/item relations.
Here “Coupled” refers to (1) coupled users by learning the

Introduction
Recommender Systems (RS) play increasingly important
roles in many applications, including online businesses and
social media. Collaborative ﬁltering is a basic method that
has been widely explored in RS. For example, user-based
collaborative ﬁltering makes predictions about the interest
of a user based on an analysis of the preferences of other
similar users. As a fundamental tool for collaborative ﬁltering, Matrix Factorization (MF) (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky
2009) has undergone many variations such as Non-negative
Matrix Factorization (NMF) (Lee and Seung 1999).
However, as discussed in (Mnih and Salakhutdinov 2008;
Gopalan, Hofman, and Blei 2015), MF models face signiﬁcant challenges in handling real-life RS problems, e.g., they
cannot handle large data because of the intensive mathematical computation required. Although different MF variants
have been explored to address such issues, e.g., Probabilistic
Matrix Factorization (Mnih and Salakhutdinov 2008) handles large amount of data based on its statistical method,
they are still inefﬁcient especially for sparse data, since they
perform the computation on all data which usually consists
of many zero ratings. Accordingly, Gopalan, Hofman, and
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2918

