The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

On Organizing Online Soirees with Live Multi-Streaming
Chih-Ya Shen,1 C. P. Kankeu Fotsing,4,5 De-Nian Yang,2 Yi-Shin Chen1,4 Wang-Chien Lee3
1

Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
2
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University, PA, USA
4
Institute of Information Systems and Applications, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
5
Social Networks and Human-Centered Computing Program, Taiwan International Graduate Program,
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
chihya@cs.nthu.edu.tw, cedricfotsing@yahoo.fr, dnyang@iis.sinica.edu.tw, yishin@cs.nthu.edu.tw, wlee@cse.psu.edu
(Mashable 2017), and has been used for more than 300 million times (Twitch 2016b). Indeed, social interaction is an
important feature that brings users and their friends together
to enjoy real-time live streaming (Hamilton, Garretson, and
Kerne 2014). From our analysis on datasets collected from
bilibili1 and Twitch, nearly 30% of friends watch 51% overlapping channels. 21% of friends in bilibili simultaneously
watch the same videos and chat with more than 26.5 lines
on a 3-minute long video. Moreover, the users in Twitch join
Twitch Teams with friends, and 62% of the users in a team
watch the same channels.
2) Multi-Streaming. This feature, supported by Youtube
Live, Facebook Live, Teevox, Dualstreamnow, and Twitchster, allows viewers to simultaneously watch multiple channels with correlated but different perspectives. NBC sports
and Fox sports live streaming channels, both offering multiple (at least four) viewing angles in sports games (e.g.,
NFL, MLB, UFC), have attracted more than 25M and 48M
viewers, respectively. From our analysis of a real dataset on
2017 Taipei Summer Universiade (FISU 2017) broadcasted
on Youtube Live, at least 30% of viewers watch multiple
streams of the same or different sports games at the same
time. The user study (detailed in the experimental results
section) on 432 Twitch users also manifests that more than
90% of them have enjoyed multi-streaming. Moreover, research also shows that user satisfaction has been boosted by
the immersive experience of watching different camera angles of an event at the same time (Haimson and Tang 2017;
Hamilton et al. 2016; Mostafa et al. 2016; Hamilton, Garretson, and Kerne 2014; Jain, Sarda, and Haritsa 2004).
The above new features have boosted the variety and volume of available contents and channels in live streaming
platforms, e.g., Twitch has reported 2.1 million broadcasters
and more than 100 million users (Twitch 2016a). Nevertheless, the wide variety and large volume of channels and contents also bring prominent challenges to users who would
like to exploit these platforms to organize some social events
or gather some friends to watch live streaming together. To
meet the need for an online soiree organization service, in
this paper, we propose a new framework that helps organize an online soiree of live streaming by ﬁnding a group of

Abstract
The popularity of live streaming has led to the explosive
growth in new video contents and social communities on
emerging platforms such as Facebook Live and Twitch. Viewers on these platforms are able to follow multiple streams
of live events simultaneously, while engaging discussions
with friends. However, existing approaches for selecting live
streaming channels still focus on satisfying individual preferences of users, without considering the need to accommodate
real-time social interactions among viewers and to diversify
the content of streams. In this paper, therefore, we formulate a new Social-aware Diverse and Preferred Live Streaming Channel Query (SDSQ) that jointly selects a set of diverse and preferred live streaming channels and a group of
socially tight viewers. We prove that SDSQ is NP-hard and
inapproximable within any factor, and design SDSSel, a 2approximation algorithm with a guaranteed error bound. We
perform a user study on Twitch with 432 participants to validate the need of SDSQ and the usefulness of SDSSel. We also
conduct large-scale experiments on real datasets to demonstrate the superiority of the proposed algorithm over several
baselines in terms of solution quality and efﬁciency.

Introduction
With the birth of Twitch, Facebook Live, Twitter Periscope,
and Ustream, live streaming has recently become very popular. In addition to allowing users to create streaming channels on various topics in real time (e.g., news, sports,
games), these new platforms support two unique features:
1) Live Interactions. Live streaming platforms have been
regarded as virtual third places for social interactions
(Hamilton, Garretson, and Kerne 2014). They enable viewers to interact (e.g., chat and send virtual gifts) with each
other and the broadcaster in real time as events unfold. As
Facebook reported (Facebook 2016), people frequently interact with friends and comment 10 times more on Facebook
Live videos than on a regular video. Moreover, the feature
of allowing users to invite friends to watch live streams together and have fruitful interactions (e.g., for sports games)
has become a cornerstone in Facebook Live and Twitch
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

151

https://www.bilibili.com/.

