The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Cooperative Games with Bounded Dependency Degree
Ayumi Igarashi

Rani Izsak

Edith Elkind

University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
ayumi.igarashi@cs.ox.ac.uk

Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot, Israel
ran.izsak@weizmann.ac.il

University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
edith.elkind@cs.ox.ac.uk

a few points, and hence this approach is of limited value.
A more ﬂexible way to cope with hardness is to provide
complexity guarantees for all instances so that the guarantee depends on the complexity of the instance, that is, to design algorithms whose running time depends on how well
the input instance is structured. In the context of cooperative games, this approach has been pursued by Ieong and
Shoham (2005), who propose a representation formalism,
which they call marginal contribution nets (MC-nets), and
design an algorithm for computing an allocation in the core
whose running time depends on the treewidth of the graph
associated with the MC-net representation of the input game.
In this work, we explore the power of the latter approach for two measures of structural complexity of set
functions that have been recently developed by Feige and
Izsak (2013): the dependency degree and the supermodular degree. Intuitively, the complexity of a set function v is
measured using the notion of dependency among players at
v; such dependencies induce a graph describing the relation
between players—the dependency graph. A player’s dependency degree is her degree in this graph; her supermodular degree is her degree in a modiﬁed version of this graph,
which only takes certain dependencies into account.
Our contribution. We argue that both the dependency degree and the supermodular degree are useful in the context of
cooperative games, both analytically and computationally.
We show that several cooperative game theory concepts
can be naturally interpreted in terms of a dependency graph.
In particular, a players’ dependency degree reﬂects on her
importance in the game: in a simple game, a dummy player
is an isolated vertex of the dependency graph and a veto
player is a vertex with the maximum degree. We can also relate properties of a game, such as its dimension, to the properties of its dependency graph: for instance, we show that dependency graphs of weighted voting games are clique-trees,
namely, chordal graphs.
We then investigate which solution concepts in cooperative games can be computed efﬁciently if the dependency/supermodular degree is bounded. For simple games,
we obtain a number of tractability results with respect to
the supermodular degree. Speciﬁcally, we prove that simple games admit an efﬁcient algorithm for computing an element of the core or the least core when the supermodular
degree is small. Further, while ﬁnding an optimal coalition

Abstract
Cooperative games provide a framework to study cooperation
among self-interested agents. They offer a number of solution concepts describing how the outcome of the cooperation
should be shared among the players. Unfortunately, computational problems associated with many of these solution concepts tend to be intractable—NP-hard or worse. In this paper, we incorporate complexity measures recently proposed
by Feige and Izsak (2013), called dependency degree and supermodular degree, into the complexity analysis of cooperative games. We show that many computational problems for
cooperative games become tractable for games whose dependency degree or supermodular degree are bounded. In particular, we prove that simple games admit efﬁcient algorithms
for various solution concepts when the supermodular degree
is small; further, we show that computing the Shapley value is
always in FPT with respect to the dependency degree. Finally,
we observe that, while determining the dependency among
players is computationally hard, there are efﬁcient algorithms
for special classes of games.

1

Introduction

Cooperative games provide a convenient framework to study
cooperation among self-interested agents. Formally, a cooperative transferable utility game, or simply a game, is a pair
(N, v) where N = {1, 2, . . . , n} is a ﬁnite set of players and
v : 2N → R is a characteristic function. We are interested
in how players should divide the value v(N ) of the grand
coalition N . To capture the idea of a stable or fair payoff
division scheme, a number of solution concepts have been
developed, such as the core and the Shapley value. Unfortunately, the computational problems associated with many
of these solution concepts are often intractable—NP-hard or
worse.
There are two ways to circumvent computational intractability in this context. The ﬁrst approach is to identify interesting classes of games that admit efﬁcient algorithms. For instance, it is well-known that when the characteristic function v is convex, an outcome in the core can
be computed by a polynomial-time algorithm. However, this
algorithm offers no guarantees when the input game is not
convex, even if the convexity constraint is only violated at
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1063

