The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

SPOT Poachers in Action: Augmenting Conservation
Drones with Automatic Detection in Near Real Time
Elizabeth Bondi,1 Fei Fang,2 Mark Hamilton,3 Debarun Kar,1 Donnabell Dmello,1 Jongmoo Choi,1
Robert Hannaford,4 Arvind Iyer,4 Lucas Joppa,3 Milind Tambe,1 Ram Nevatia1
1

University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089 USA
{bondi, dkar, ddmello, jongmooc, tambe, nevatia}@usc.edu
2
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213 USA, feifang@cmu.edu
3
Microsoft, Redmond, WA, 98052 USA, {marhamil, lujoppa}@microsoft.com
4
AirShepherd, Berkeley Springs, WV, 25411 USA
rob@coolideassolutions.com, arvind.iyer@lindberghfoundation.org
Abstract
The unrelenting threat of poaching has led to increased development of new technologies to combat it. One such example
is the use of long wave thermal infrared cameras mounted on
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs or drones) to spot poachers
at night and report them to park rangers before they are able
to harm animals. However, monitoring the live video stream
from these conservation UAVs all night is an arduous task.
Therefore, we build SPOT (Systematic POacher deTector), a
novel application that augments conservation drones with the
ability to automatically detect poachers and animals in near
real time. SPOT illustrates the feasibility of building upon
state-of-the-art AI techniques, such as Faster RCNN, to address the challenges of automatically detecting animals and
poachers in infrared images. This paper reports (i) the design
and architecture of SPOT, (ii) a series of efforts towards more
robust and faster processing to make SPOT usable in the ﬁeld
and provide detections in near real time, and (iii) evaluation
of SPOT based on both historical videos and a real-world
test run by the end users in the ﬁeld. The promising results
from the test in the ﬁeld have led to a plan for larger-scale
deployment in a national park in Botswana. While SPOT is
developed for conservation drones, its design and novel techniques have wider application for automated detection from
UAV videos.

Figure 1: Example UAV and thermal frames from UAV, with
white boxes surrounding poachers.

be monitored at all times in order to notify park rangers
of poachers. Monitoring of streaming footage is an arduous task requiring human supervision throughout the night,
and is also prone to systematic lapses in quality as human
detection often degrades with fatigue (Porikli et al. 2013).
Furthermore, as more drones are added to the system, more
resources are required to monitor the additional videos.
Whereas previous work in AI has focused on game theory for patrol planning (Xu et al. 2017; Wang, Zhang, and
Zhong 2017) and machine learning-based poaching prediction (Gholami et al. 2017; Critchlow et al. 2015) to assist
human patrollers in combating poaching, little effort has focused on decision aids to assist the UAV crew in detecting
poachers and animals automatically. Given the tedious work
of monitoring UAV videos, such a decision aid is in high
demand. It could help reduce the burden of the monitoring
personnel and the probability of missing poachers by simply
notifying personnel or park rangers of a detection. In the future, the decision aid could also be integrated with existing
tools that predict poaching activity and guide human patrols.
For example, the system could scout ahead for poachers to
protect park rangers, monitor in other directions than human
patrollers, or gather more information about the location of
wildlife for better predictions. The integration would lead to
a new generation of machine learning and game theoretic
tools to guide rangers and UAVs simultaneously.
In building this decision aid, there are several major challenges. First, automatic detection in thermal infrared videos

Introduction
Poaching has recently been on the rise, particularly poaching of elephants and rhinoceroses in Africa (Great Elephant Census 2016). With elephant and rhino numbers dropping rapidly, it is imperative that we swiftly act before they
are hunted to extinction. Multiple strategies exist to combat poaching, including park ranger patrols, and more recently, the use of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs or drones)
(Ivošević et al. 2015). In particular, UAVs equipped with
long wave thermal infrared (hereafter referred to as thermal
infrared) cameras can be used for nighttime surveillance to
notify park rangers of poaching activity because there is increased poaching activity at night, and because animals and
humans are warm and emit thermal infrared light even at
night. However, the video stream from these UAVs must
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7741

