The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Movie Question Answering:
Remembering the Textual Cues for Layered Visual Contents
Bo Wang, Youjiang Xu, Yahong Han

Richang Hong

School of Computer Science and Technology,
Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{bwong, yjxu, yahong}@tju.edu.cn

School of Computer and Information,
Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China
hongrc.hfut@gmail.com

words via Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) (Malinowski, Rohrbach,
and Fritz 2015). In order to accurately associate speciﬁc language elements with particular visual content, attention (Zhu
et al. 2016) or dynamic memory (Xiong, Merity, and Socher
2016) mechanisms were proposed to improve the performance of VQA.
As videos could be taken as a spatio-temporal extension
of images, video understanding requires a better representation to encode both the visual content of each frame and the
temporal dependencies among successive video frames. Different from other videos, most movies have a speciﬁc background (e.g., action ﬁlm and war ﬁlm) as well as the shooting style (e.g., ﬂashback). Thus understanding the story of
a movie via only the visual content is really a challenging
task. On the other hand, a movie always contains a standard
subtitle which consists of the dialogues between actors. This
offers a possibility to better understand the story of a movie
and thus facilitate applications of automatically movie question answering.
In this paper, we explore how to utilize movie clips and
subtitles for movie question answering. We propose a Layered Memory Network (LMN) to learn a layered representation of movie content, i.e., frame-level and clip-level layers,
by a Static Word Memory module and a Dynamic Subtitle Memory module, respectively. The Static Word Memory
contains all the words information of the MovieQA dataset
(Tapaswi et al. 2016) while the Dynamic Subtitle Memory contains all the subtitle information. The framework of
our proposed method is illustrated in Fig. 1. Firstly, we get
the frame-level representation by representing regional features of each movie frame with Static Word Memory module. Secondly, the generated frame-level representation is
fed into the Dynamic Subtitle Memory module to obtain
the ﬁnal clip-level representation. Thus, the hierarchically
formed movie representations, i.e., the layered representation learned by LMN from frame and clip-level, not only
encode the correspondence between words and visual content inside frames, but also encode the temporal alignment
between sentences and frames inside movie clips.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows. (1) We propose a Layered Memory Network which
can utilize visual and text information. The model can represent movie content with more semantic information in both

Abstract
Movies provide us with a mass of visual content as well as
attracting stories. Existing methods have illustrated that understanding movie stories through only visual content is still
a hard problem. In this paper, for answering questions about
movies, we put forward a Layered Memory Network (LMN)
that represents frame-level and clip-level movie content by
the Static Word Memory module and the Dynamic Subtitle
Memory module, respectively. Particularly, we ﬁrstly extract
words and sentences from the training movie subtitles. Then
the hierarchically formed movie representations, which are
learned from LMN, not only encode the correspondence between words and visual content inside frames, but also encode the temporal alignment between sentences and frames
inside movie clips. We also extend our LMN model into three
variant frameworks to illustrate the good extendable capabilities. We conduct extensive experiments on the MovieQA
dataset. With only visual content as inputs, LMN with framelevel representation obtains a large performance improvement. When incorporating subtitles into LMN to form the
clip-level representation, we achieve the state-of-the-art performance on the online evaluation task of ‘Video+Subtitles’.
The good performance successfully demonstrates that the
proposed framework of LMN is effective and the hierarchically formed movie representations have good potential for
the applications of movie question answering.

Introduction
Bridging the visual understanding and computer-human
interaction is a challenging task in artiﬁcial intelligence.
Though visual captioning (Li et al. 2017; Yang, Han, and
Wang 2017; Liu, Li, and Shi 2017; Pan et al. 2016; Wang et
al. 2012) has shown to be promising in connecting the visual
content to natural languages, it usually narrates the coarse
semantic of visual content and lacks abilities of modeling
different correlations among visual cues. Whereas visual
question answering (VQA) (Malinowski, Rohrbach, and
Fritz 2015; Zhu et al. 2016; Xiong, Merity, and Socher 2016)
relies on the holistic scene understanding to ﬁnd correct
answers for different levels of visual understanding. Popular methods towards VQA aim to learn the co-occurrence
of a particular combination of features extracted from images and questions, e.g., space embedding for images and
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7380

