The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Two Knowledge-Based Methods for
High-Performance Sense Distribution Learning
Tommaso Pasini, Roberto Navigli
{pasini,navigli}@di.uniroma1.it

the lack of connectivity for lower frequency senses (Pilehvar
and Navigli 2014).
In order to cope with the so-called knowledge acquisition
bottleneck and provide reliable answers for all words in the
lexicon, both supervised and knowledge-based approaches
resort to the most frequent sense (MFS) baseline, that is,
they exploit the mode of the prior probability distribution on
senses of each word. This is computed based on the sense
frequencies within the largest manually annotated corpus
available for the English language, i.e., SemCor (Miller et
al. 1993). The MFS is normally used as a backoff strategy
when the WSD system is less conﬁdent or does not have any
training example for the target word at hand.
The MFS strategy has become a very strong baseline for
English WSD and it is often hard to beat (Navigli, Jurgens,
and Vannella 2013; Moro and Navigli 2015), due to the
skewed distribution of word senses. While this is especially
true for knowledge-based systems, it also holds for supervised systems whose bias towards frequent senses strictly
depends on the number of examples in the training set.
Determining sense probability distributions based on
SemCor comes, however, with important limitations: ﬁrst,
due to its size, the corpus lacks coverage of a signiﬁcant
part of English vocabulary (for instance, words such as viral, or online) and of many senses of ambiguous words (for
instance, cloud in the computing sense, or bank as a supply held in reserve). Furthermore, it does not provide a reliable estimate of those words which, instead, are to be found
in it (for instance, the corpus contains two occurrences of
tiger, one for the animal and one for an audacious person,
which does not reﬂect the expected probability); second,
SemCor is almost 30 years old, with an outdated distribution
of word uses (for example, the predominant sense of pipe is
tobacco pipe while in modern English it is tube carrying
water (McCarthy et al. 2004a)); third, there are no corpora
of the same size in other languages, so sense distribution
estimation from sense-tagged corpora is mostly limited to
English, not to mention domain-speciﬁc estimates of word
sense priors (Faralli and Navigli 2012).
Given the above limitations, we advocate that the ability
to automatically learn the distribution of a word’s senses is a
necessary step to improve the performance of current stateof-the-art WSD systems, to enhance domain-speciﬁc WSD
and to enable multilingual WSD for supervised systems. In

Abstract
Knowing the correct distribution of senses within a corpus
can potentially boost the performance of Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) systems by many points. We present two
fully automatic and language-independent methods for computing the distribution of senses given a raw corpus of sentences. Intrinsic and extrinsic evaluations show that our methods outperform the current state of the art in sense distribution learning and the strongest baselines for the most frequent
sense in multiple languages and on domain-speciﬁc test sets.
Our sense distributions are available at http://trainomatic.org.

Introduction
Word sense disambiguation (WSD) is the task of assigning
the correct meaning to a word in a context, by choosing
among the senses available in an inventory such as WordNet (Fellbaum 1998). WSD has received considerable interest from both academia and industry, thanks to its potential
in several ﬁelds of AI, such as text understanding, machine
translation and machine reading. Two main approaches have
been explored to address the task, namely a supervised and
a knowledge-based approach. The former exploits machine
learning – e.g., SVM (Zhong and Ng 2010) and, more recently, Neural Networks (Raganato, Delli Bovi, and Navigli
2017) – in order to predict the most suitable sense of a target
word occurring in a given context. The latter, instead, relies
on the connection between concepts in a semantic network
and aims to ﬁnd the correct sense of the target word in a context by exploiting the information available in a knowledge
resource, often by applying graph techniques (e.g., PageRank (Brin and Page 1998), densest subgraph approximation
(Moro, Raganato, and Navigli 2014), etc.).
Compared to tasks such as part-of-speech tagging where
the number of classes is limited, WSD faces the issue of a
different set of meanings for each word of interest, which
multiplies the size of the training set, and increases the ﬁne
granularity of sense inventories. This inherently affects the
performance of the two above-mentioned approaches: supervised algorithms suffer from the lack of enough training examples, while knowledge-based systems are hampered by
poor contexts – as they do not exploit local features – and
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5374

