The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Repairing Ontologies via Axiom Weakening
Nicolas Troquard, Roberto Confalonieri, Pietro Galliani,
Rafael Peñaloza, Daniele Porello, Oliver Kutz
Faculty of Computer Science
Free University of Bozen-Bolzano
Piazza Domenicani, 3
I-39100 Bozen-Bolzano BZ, Italy

and Suntisrivaraporn 2007). While these methods are effective, and have been used in practice, they have the side effect of removing also many potentially wanted implicit consequences. In this paper,1 we propose a more ﬁne-grained
method for ontology repair based on weakening axioms, thus
making them more general. The idea is that, through this
weakening, more of the original knowledge is preserved;
that is, our method is less destructive.
We show, both theoretically and empirically, that axiom
weakening is a powerful approach for repairing ontologies.
On the theoretical side, we prove that the computational
complexity of this task is not greater than that of the standard reasoning tasks in description logics. Empirically, we
compare the results of weakening axioms against deleting
them, over existing ontologies developed in the life sciences.
This comparison shows that our approach preserves significantly more of the original ontological knowledge than removing axioms, based on an evaluation measure inspecting the preservation of taxonomic structure (see e.g., (Alani,
Brewster, and Shadbolt 2006; Resnik 1999) for related measures).
The main result of this paper is to present a new ontology repair methodology capable of preserving most of
the original knowledge, without incurring any additional
costs in terms of computational complexity. By thereby preserving more implicit consequences of the ontology, our
methodology also provides a contribution to the ontology
development cycle (Neuhaus et al. 2013). Indeed, it can be
a useful tool for test-driven ontology development, where
the preservation of the entailment of competency questions from the weakened ontology can be seen as a measure for the quality of the repair (Grüninger and Fox 1995;
Ren et al. 2014).
We begin by outlining formal preliminaries, including the
introduction of reﬁnement operators and a basic analysis of
properties of both, specialisation and generalisation operators. This is followed by a complexity analysis of the problem of computing weakened axioms in our approach. We
then present several variations of repair algorithms, a detailed empirical evaluation of their performance, and a quality analysis of the returned ontologies. We close with a dis-

Abstract
Ontology engineering is a hard and error-prone task, in which
small changes may lead to errors, or even produce an inconsistent ontology. As ontologies grow in size, the need for automated methods for repairing inconsistencies while preserving as much of the original knowledge as possible increases.
Most previous approaches to this task are based on removing a few axioms from the ontology to regain consistency.
We propose a new method based on weakening these axioms
to make them less restrictive, employing the use of reﬁnement operators. We introduce the theoretical framework for
weakening DL ontologies, propose algorithms to repair ontologies based on the framework, and provide an analysis of
the computational complexity. Through an empirical analysis made over real-life ontologies, we show that our approach
preserves signiﬁcantly more of the original knowledge of the
ontology than removing axioms.

Introduction
Ontology engineering is a hard and error-prone task, where
even small changes may lead to unforeseen errors, in particular to inconsistency. Ontologies are not only growing
in size, they are also increasingly being used in a variety
of AI and NLP applications, e.g., (Bateman et al. 2010;
Prestes et al. 2013). At the same time, methods to generate ontologies through automated methods gain popularity: e.g., ontology learning (Lehmann and Hitzler 2010;
Sazonau, Sattler, and Brown 2015), extraction from web resources such as DBpedia (Auer et al. 2007), or the combination of knowledge from different sources (Stuckenschmidt,
Parent, and Spaccapietra 2009).
Such ontology generation methods are all likely to require
ontology repair and reﬁnement steps, and trying to repair an
ontology containing hundreds, or even thousands of axioms
by hand is infeasible. For these reasons, it has become fundamental to develop automated methods for repairing ontologies while preserving as much of the original knowledge as
possible.
Most existing ontology repair approaches are based on
removing a few axioms to expel the errors (Schlobach and
Cornet 2003; Kalyanpur et al. 2005; 2006; Baader, Peñaloza,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
An extended version of the paper is available at https://arxiv.
org/abs/1711.03430.

1981

