The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Computational Social Choice and
Computational Complexity: BFFs?∗
Lane A. Hemaspaandra
Department of Computer Science
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627, USA

One thing that those numbers are reﬂecting is the fact
that comsoc and complexity have worked together very well.
Comsoc research, from the seminal work of Bartholdi, Orlin, Tovey, and Trick (1989b; 1989a; 1991; 1992) onward,
has done an enviably skilled job of interestingly employing
complexity classiﬁcation—which admittedly has strengths
and weaknesses, both in its theory and in its application—to
reveal a subtle and varied landscape as to what is difﬁcult
and what is hard, and how small changes in problems and
models can induce seismic changes in complexity.
Yet this article’s primary goal is not to praise that praiseworthy achievement. It is to recognize two more subtle
things that have already happened, but that we think need
to be recognized for what they are, and what more can be
done.
Firstly, the comsoc/computational complexity friendship
is truly a two-way street. Although everyone knows that
complexity classiﬁcation is widely used in comsoc research,
we will stress a direction that is not well-recognized within
the AI community or the complexity community: Research
in comsoc has often been of great beneﬁt to complexity
theory. In particular, complexity classiﬁcation within comsoc has populated key complexity classes with problems that
are undeniably natural and compelling. Why is that important? Complexity theorists like creating complexity classes
that capture computational capabilities/resources that seem
natural and compelling to the complexity theorists. But if
those classes then turn out, for example, to have no natural complete problems, it is like hosting a party and having
no one show up. It could even make one wonder whether
the classes really were important at all. So complexity owes
quite a debt to comsoc, for bringing parties to life.
In addition to stressing the two-way street aspect of the
comsoc/computational complexity friendship, we will also
point out how rather subtle, lesser-known complexity notions and machinery have in the comsoc world found fertile
ground to actually do important things. Complexity notions
ranging from search-versus-decision issues to one-to-one reductions to the join operator have arguably been used in the
comsoc world in more natural and more satisfying ways than
they have been used within complexity theory itself.
We present four different issues where the work in comsoc exempliﬁes one or both of these themes: comsoc work
helping complexity, and lesser-known complexity notions

Abstract
We discuss the connection between computational social
choice (comsoc) and computational complexity. We stress
the work so far on, and urge continued focus on, two lessrecognized aspects of this connection. Firstly, this is very
much a two-way street: Everyone knows complexity classiﬁcation is used in comsoc, but we also highlight beneﬁts to
complexity that have arisen from its use in comsoc. Secondly,
more subtle, less-known complexity tools often can be very
productively used in comsoc.

1

Introduction

Even in a work context, friendship is amazingly powerful.
We all know how valuable it is to have collaborators who
have each other’s backs: working closely toward a shared
project goal yet each bringing their own skills and perspective to the project, to seek to reach insights and advances that
neither researcher could have achieved alone.
Research areas can be like that too. Computational
social choice (henceforward, comsoc)—which brings a
computational-cost lens to such social-choice issues as preference aggregation/elections/manipulation/fair division—
certainly has roots tracing far back; but comsoc’s existence as a recognized, distinctive research area within
AI/multiagent-systems is quite recent. Despite that, its
growth as an area during these recent years has been explosive, and we suggest that a synergy between comsoc and
complexity has been partially responsible for that growth. At
the 2017 AAMAS conference, for example, there were four
sessions devoted to Computational Social Choice; no other
topic had that many sessions. Those four sessions included
21 papers, and of those 21, 7 had the word “complexity” in
their titles although in the entire conference only two other
papers had the word complexity in their titles. In contrast, at
the 2003 AAMAS conference the string “social choice” does
not even appear in the ACM Digital Library online table of
contents; neither does the string “election” or any form of
the word “vote,” and only three papers in the entire conference have the word “complexity” in their titles.
∗
A version with some additional details/citations appears
as (Hemaspaandra 2017).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7971

