The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

S-Net: From Answer Extraction to Answer Synthesis
for Machine Reading Comprehension
Chuanqi Tan,†∗ Furu Wei,‡ Nan Yang,‡ Bowen Du,† Weifeng Lv,† Ming Zhou‡
†

State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
‡
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
†
tanchuanqi@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn † {dubowen,lwf}@buaa.edu.cn
‡
{fuwei,nanya,mingzhou}@microsoft.com
the SQuAD dataset. It formulates the task as predicting the
start and end positions of the answer in the passage. However, as deﬁned in the MS-MARCO dataset, the answer may
come from multiple spans, and the system needs to elaborate the answer using words in the passages and words from
the questions as well as words that cannot be found in the
passages or questions.
Table 1 shows several examples from the MS-MARCO
dataset. Except in the ﬁrst example the answer is an exact
text span in the passage, in other examples the answers need
to be synthesized or generated from the question and passage. In the second example the answer consists of multiple
text spans (hereafter evidence snippets) from the passage. In
the third example, the answer contains words from the question. In the fourth example, the answer has words that cannot
be found in the passages or question. In the last example, all
words are not in the passages or questions.
In this paper, we present an extraction-then-synthesis
framework for machine reading comprehension shown in
Figure 1, in which the answer is synthesized from the extraction results. We build an evidence extraction model to predict the most important sub-spans from the passages as evidence, and then develop an answer synthesis model which
takes the evidence as additional features along with the question and passage to further elaborate the ﬁnal answers.

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel approach to machine reading comprehension for the MS-MARCO dataset. Unlike the
SQuAD dataset that aims to answer a question with exact text
spans in a passage, the MS-MARCO dataset deﬁnes the task
as answering a question from multiple passages and the words
in the answer are not necessary in the passages. We therefore
develop an extraction-then-synthesis framework to synthesize
answers from extraction results. Speciﬁcally, the answer extraction model is ﬁrst employed to predict the most important
sub-spans from the passage as evidence, and the answer synthesis model takes the evidence as additional features along
with the question and passage to further elaborate the ﬁnal
answers. We build the answer extraction model with state-ofthe-art neural networks for single passage reading comprehension, and propose an additional task of passage ranking
to help answer extraction in multiple passages. The answer
synthesis model is based on the sequence-to-sequence neural
networks with extracted evidences as features. Experiments
show that our extraction-then-synthesis method outperforms
state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Machine reading comprehension (Rajpurkar et al. 2016;
Nguyen et al. 2016), which attempts to enable machines to
answer questions after reading a passage or a set of passages, attracts great attentions from both research and industry communities in recent years. The release of the Stanford Question Answering Dataset (SQuAD) (Rajpurkar et
al. 2016) and the Microsoft MAchine Reading COmprehension Dataset (MS-MARCO) (Nguyen et al. 2016) provides
the large-scale manually created datasets for model training
and testing of machine learning (especially deep learning)
algorithms for this task. There are two main differences in
existing machine reading comprehension datasets. First, the
SQuAD dataset constrains the answer to be an exact subspan in the passage, while words in the answer are not necessary in the passages in the MS-MARCO dataset. Second, the
SQuAD dataset only has one passage for a question, while
the MS-MARCO dataset contains multiple passages.
Existing methods for the MS-MARCO dataset usually
follow the extraction based approach for single passage in

Question
Evidence
Extraction

Evidence
Snippets

Synthesis &
Generation

Answer

Passage

Figure 1: Overview of S-Net. It ﬁrst extracts evidence snippets by matching the question and passage, and then generates the answer by synthesizing the question, passage, and
evidence snippets.
Speciﬁcally, we develop the answer extraction model with
state-of-the-art attention based neural networks which predict the start and end positions of evidence snippets. As
multiple passages are provided for each question in the MSMARCO dataset, we propose incorporating passage ranking
as an additional task to improve the results of evidence extraction under a multi-task learning framework. We use the
bidirectional recurrent neural networks (RNN) for the word-

∗

Contribution during internship at Microsoft Research.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5940

