The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Hierarchical Recurrent Attention Network for Response Generation
1

Chen Xing,12∗ Yu Wu,3 Wei Wu,4 Yalou Huang,12 Ming Zhou4

College of Computer and Control Engineering, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
2
College of Software, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
3
State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
4
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
xingchen1113@gmail.com wuyu@buaa.edu.cn huangyl@nankai.edu.cn {wuwei,mingzhou}@microsoft.com
Abstract
We study multi-turn response generation in chatbots where
a response is generated according to a conversation context.
Existing work has modeled the hierarchy of the context, but
does not pay enough attention to the fact that words and utterances in the context are differentially important. As a result,
they may lose important information in context and generate irrelevant responses. We propose a hierarchical recurrent
attention network (HRAN) to model both the hierarchy and
the importance variance in a uniﬁed framework. In HRAN,
a hierarchical attention mechanism attends to important parts
within and among utterances with word level attention and utterance level attention respectively. Empirical studies on both
automatic evaluation and human judgment show that HRAN
can signiﬁcantly outperform state-of-the-art models for context based response generation.

Introduction

Figure 1: An example of multi-turn conversation

Conversational agents include task-oriented dialog systems
which are built in vertical domains for speciﬁc tasks (Young
et al. 2013; Boden 2006; Wallace 2009; Young et al. 2010),
and non-task-oriented chatbots which aim to make natural
and human-like conversations with people regarding to a
wide range of issues in open domains (Jafarpour, Burges,
and Ritter 2010). A common practice of building a chatbot
is to train a response generation model within an encoderdecoder framework from large scale message-response pairs
(Shang, Lu, and Li 2015; Vinyals and Le 2015). Such models ignore conversation history when responding, which is
contradictory to the nature of real conversation between humans. To resolve the problem, researchers have taken conversation history into consideration and proposed response
generation for multi-turn conversation (Sordoni et al. 2015;
Serban et al. 2015; 2016b; 2016c).
In this work, we study multi-turn response generation for
open domain conversation in chatbots in which we try to
learn a response generation model from responses and their
contexts. A context refers to a message and several utterances in its previous turns. In practice, when a message
comes, the model takes the context as input and generate

a response as the next turn. Multi-turn conversation requires
a model to generate a response relevant to the whole context.
The complexity of the task lies in two aspects: 1) a conversation context is in a hierarchical structure (words form an utterance, and utterances form the context) and has two levels
of sequential relationships among both words and utterances
within the structure; 2) not all parts of the context are equally
important to response generation. Words are differentially
informative and important, and so are the utterances. Stateof-the-art methods such as HRED (Serban et al. 2016a) and
VHRED (Serban et al. 2016c) focus on modeling the hierarchy of the context, whereas there is little exploration on
how to select important parts from the context, although it is
often a crucial step for generating a proper response. Without this step, existing models may lose important information in context and generate irrelevant responses1 . Figure 1
gives an example from our data to illustrate the problem.
The context is a conversation between two speakers about
height and boyfriend, therefore, to respond to the context,
1

Note that one can simply concatenate all utterances and employs the classic sequence-to-sequence with attention to model
word importance in generation. This method, however, loses utterance relationships and results in bad generation quality, as will
be seen in expeirments.

∗

The work was done when the ﬁrst author was an intern in Microsoft Research Asia.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5610

