The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Brief History and Recent Achievements in Bidirectional Search
Nathan R. Sturtevant

Ariel Felner

Computer Science Department
University of Denver
USA
sturtevant@cs.du.edu

ISE Department
Ben-Gurion University
Be’er-Sheva, Israel
felner@bgu.ac.il

Barker and Korf (2015) recently hypothesized that in most
cases one should either use bidirectional brute-force search
(Bi-BS) or Uni-HS (e.g. A*), but that Bi-HS is never the best
approach. This work spurred further research into Bi-HS,
and has lead to new theoretical understanding on the nature
of Bi-HS as well as new Bi-HS algorithms (e.g., MM, fMM
and NBS described below) with strong theoretical guarantees. The purpose of this paper is to provide a high-level
picture of this new line of work while placing it in the larger
context of previous work on bidirectional search.
While there are still many questions yet to answer, we
have, for the ﬁrst time, the full suite of analytic tools necessary to determine whether bidirectional search will be useful
on a given problem instance. This is coupled with a Bi-HS
algorithm that is guaranteed to expand no more than twice
the minimum number of the necessary state expansions in
practice. With these tools we can illustrate use-cases for
bidirectional search and point to areas of future research.

Abstract
The state of the art in bidirectional search has changed signiﬁcantly a very short time period; we now can answer questions
about unidirectional and bidirectional search that until very
recently we were unable to answer. This paper is designed to
provide an accessible overview of the recent research in bidirectional search in the context of the broader efforts over the
last 50 years. We give particular attention to new theoretical
results and the algorithms they inspire for optimal and nearoptimal node expansions when ﬁnding a shortest path.

Introduction and Overview
Shortest path algorithms have a long history dating to Dijkstra’s algorithm (DA) (Dijkstra 1959). DA is the canonical
example of a best-ﬁrst search which prioritizes state expansions by their g-cost (distance from the start state). Historically, there were two enhancements to DA developed relatively quickly: bidirectional search and the use of heuristics.
Nicholson (1966) suggested bidirectional search where
the search proceeds from both the start and the goal simultaneously. In a two dimensional search space a search to radius
r will visit approximately r2 states. A bidirectional search
will perform two searches of approximately (r/2)2 states, a
reduction of a factor of two. In exponential state spaces the
reduction is from bd to 2bd/2 , an exponential gain in both
memory and time. This is illustrated in Figure 1, where the
large circle represents a unidirectional search towards the
goal, while the smaller circles represent the two parts of a
bidirectional search.
Just two years later, DA was independently enhanced with
admissible heuristics (distance estimates to the goal) that
resulted in the A* algorithm (Hart, Nilsson, and Raphael
1968). A* is goal directed – the search is focused towards the
goal by the heuristic. This signiﬁcantly reduces the search
effort required to ﬁnd a path to the goal.
The obvious challenge was whether these two enhancements could be effectively combined into bidirectional
heuristic search (Bi-HS). Pohl (1969) ﬁrst addressed this
challenge showing that in practice unidirectional heuristic
search (Uni-HS) seemed to beat out Bi-HS. Many Bi-HS
algorithms were developed over the years (see a short survey below), but no such algorithm was shown to consistently
outperform Uni-HS.

Terminology and Background
We deﬁne a shortest-path problem as a n-tuple
(start, goal, expF , expB , hF , hB ), where the goal is
to ﬁnd the least-cost path between start and goal in a graph
G. G is not provided a priori, but is provided implicitly
through the expF and expB functions that can expand and
return the forward (backwards) successors of any state.
Bidirectional search algorithms interleave two separate
searches, a search forward from start and a search backward from goal. We use fF , gF and hF to indicate f -, g-,
and h-costs in the forward search and fB , gB and hB similarly in the backward search. Likewise, OpenF and OpenB
store states generated in the forward and backward directions, respectively. Finally, gminF , gminB , f minF and
f minB denote the minimal g- and f -values in OpenF and
OpenB respectively. d(x, y) denotes the shortest distance
between x and y.
Front-to-end algorithms use two heuristic functions. The
forward heuristic, hF , is forward admissible iff hF (u) ≤
d(u, goal) for all u in G and is forward consistent iff
hF (u) ≤ d(u, u ) + hF (u ) for all u and u in G. The backward heuristic, hB , is backward admissible iff hB (v) ≤
d(start, v) for all v in G and is backward consistent iff
hB (v) ≤ d(v  , v) + hB (v  ) for all v and v  in G. C ∗ =
d(start, goal) is the cost of an optimal solution.

8000

