The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Combining Experts’ Causal Judgments
Dalal Alrajeh

Hana Chockler

Joseph Y. Halpern

Department of Computing
Imperial College London
dalal.alrajeh04@imperial.ac.uk

Department of Informatics
King’s College London
Hana.Chockler@kcl.ac.uk

Computer Science Department
Cornell University
halpern@cs.cornell.edu

may disagree on the relationships between them. For example, one expert may believe that C2 is independent of C1
while another may believe that C1 causally depends on C2 .
Yet somehow the policymaker wants to use the information
in these causal models to reach her decision.
Despite the clear need for causal reasoning, and the examples in the literature and in practice where experts work
with causal models (e.g., (Chockler et al. 2015; Sampson, Winship, and Knight 2013)), there is surprisingly little work on combining causal judgments. Indeed, the only
work that we are aware of is that of Bradley, Dietrich, and
List (2014) (BDL from now on), who prove an impossibility
result. Speciﬁcally, they describe certain arguably reasonable desiderata, and show that there is no way of combining
causal models so as to satisfy all their desiderata. They then
discuss various weakenings of their assumptions to see the
extent to which the impossibility can be avoided, none of
which seem that satisfactory.
There is also much work on the closely related problem of
causal discovery: constructing a single causal model from a
data set. A variety of techniques have been used to ﬁnd the
model that best describes how the data is generated (see, e.g.,
(Claassen and Heskes 2010; 2012; Hyttinen, Eberhardt, and
Jarvisalo 2014; Tillman and Spirtes 2011; Triantaﬁllou and
Tsamardinos 2015); Triantaﬁllou and Tsamardinos (2015)
provide a good overview of work in the area). Of course,
if we have the data that the experts used to generate their
models, then we should apply the more reﬁned techniques
of the work on causal discovery. However, while the causals
model constructed by experts are presumably based on data,
the data itself is typically no longer available. Rather, the
models represent the distillation of years of experience, obtained by querying the experts.
In this paper, we present an approach to combining experts’ causal models when sufﬁcient data for discovering
the overall causal model is not available. The key step in
combining experts’ causal models lies in deﬁning when two
causal models are compatible. Causal models can be combined only if they are compatible. We start with a notion of
strong compatibility, where the conditions say, among other
things, that if both M1 and M2 involve variables C1 and C2 ,
then they must agree on the causal relationship between C1
and C2 . But that is not enough. Suppose that in both models C1 depends on C2 , C3 , and C4 . Then in a precise sense,

Abstract
Consider a policymaker who wants to decide which intervention to perform in order to change a currently undesirable situation. The policymaker has at her disposal a team of experts,
each with their own understanding of the causal dependencies between different factors contributing to the outcome.
The policymaker has varying degrees of conﬁdence in the experts’ opinions. She wants to combine their opinions in order
to decide on the most effective intervention. We formally deﬁne the notion of an effective intervention, and then consider
how experts’ causal judgments can be combined in order to
determine the most effective intervention. We deﬁne a notion
of two causal models being compatible, and show how compatible causal models can be combined. We then use it as the
basis for combining experts causal judgments. We illustrate
our approach on a number of real-life examples.

1

Introduction

Consider a policymaker who is trying to decide which intervention, that is, which actions, should be implemented
in order to bring about a desired outcome, such as preventing violent behavior in prisons or reducing famine mortality
in some country. The policymaker has access to various experts who can advise her on which interventions to consider.
Some experts may be (in the policymaker’s view) more reliable than others; they may also have different areas of expertise; or may have perceived alternative factors in their
analysis. The goal of the policymaker is to choose the best
intervention, taking into account the experts’ advice.
There has been a great deal of work on combining experts’
probabilistic judgments. (Genest and Zidek (1986) provide a
somewhat dated but still useful overview; Dawid (1987) and
Fenton et al. (2016), among others, give a Bayesian analysis.) We are interested in combining experts’ judgments in
order to decide on the best intervention. Hence, we need
more than probabilities. We need to have a causal understanding of the situation. Thus, we assume that the experts
provide the policymaker with causal models. In general,
these models may involve different variables (since the experts may be focusing on different aspects of the problem).
Even if two models both include variables C1 and C2 , they
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6311

