The Eighth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence 2018 (EAAI-18)

Investigating Active Learning for Concept Prerequisite Learning
Chen Liang, Jianbo Ye, Shuting Wang, Bart Pursel, C. Lee Giles
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16801
{cul226, jxy198, bkp10, giles}@ist.psu.edu
sxw327@cse.psu.edu

Abstract

Probability
distribution

Concept prerequisite learning focuses on machine learning
methods for measuring the prerequisite relation among concepts. With the importance of prerequisites for education, it
has recently become a promising research direction. A major
obstacle to extracting prerequisites at scale is the lack of large
scale labels which will enable effective data driven solutions.
We investigate the applicability of active learning to concept
prerequisite learning. We propose a novel set of features tailored for prerequisite classiﬁcation and compare the effectiveness of four widely used query strategies. Experimental
results for domains including data mining, geometry, physics,
and precalculus show that active learning can be used to reduce the amount of training data required. Given the proposed
features, the query-by-committee strategy outperforms other
compared query strategies.

Conditional probability
distribution
Bayes’
theorem
Likelihood
function

Posterior
probability

Maximum
likelihood

Bayesian
network
Naïve Bayes
classifier

Hidden
Markov model

Figure 1: Concept prerequisite relations. “A → B” represents that the concept A is a prerequisite of the concept B.

Introduction
A prerequisite relation describes a fundamental directed relation among concepts in knowledge structures. Following
the learning order that is consistent with the underlying
prerequisite relations is also crucial to successful teaching
and learning processes. For the example shown in Figure 1,
learning the concept “Hidden Markov model” requires ﬁrst
understanding its prerequisites such as “posterior probability” and “maximum likelihood”. Obtaining prerequisite relations is crucial for a variety of other educational applications such as curriculum planning (Agrawal, Golshan, and
Papalexakis 2015) and intelligent tutoring systems (Aleven
and Koedinger 2002). It can be especially useful for online learning at scale where students are faced with a large
amount of educational resources.
This paper focuses on the concept prerequisite learning
problem (Talukdar and Cohen 2012; Liang et al. 2015),
where the goal is to predict whether a concept A is a prerequisite of a concept B given the pair (A, B). Although there
has been research on learning prerequisites (Vuong, Nixon,
and Towle 2011; Talukdar and Cohen 2012; Liang et al.
2015; Wang et al. 2016; Scheines, Silver, and Goldin 2014;
Liu et al. 2016; Pan et al. 2017), the lack of large scale prerequisite labels remains a major obstacle for effective machine learning-based solutions.

A possible solution for learning a good classiﬁer given
limited labeled instances is active learning (Angluin 1988;
Cohn, Ghahramani, and Jordan 1996; Settles 2010), since it
is designed to learn classiﬁers with signiﬁcantly fewer labels
by actively directing the query to the most “valuable” examples. As such, active learning methods could could also be
applied to solving the current challenges of concept prerequisite learning.
The goal of this work is to make the ﬁrst attempt of applying active learning to the concept prerequisite learning
problem. We investigate three families of query selection
strategies by comparing their effectiveness on reducing the
amount of training data. The ﬁrst are informativeness-based
methods such as uncertainty sampling (Lewis and Catlett
1994) and query-by-committee (Seung, Opper, and Sompolinsky 1992). The second are methods which take both informativeness and representativeness into account. The third
are diversity-based strategies which aim to cover the feature
space as broadly as possible. For classiﬁcation, we propose
a novel set of features for representing concept pairs and
choose from four widely used classiﬁers the most suitable
one for conducting active learning experiments. Our experiment results show a clear win for query-by-committee over
other compared query strategies and show that active learning can be used to reduce the amount of training data required for concept prerequisite learning.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7913

