The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Towards Imperceptible and Robust
Adversarial Example Attacks against Neural Networks
Bo Luo, Yannan Liu, Lingxiao Wei, Qiang Xu
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{boluo,ynliu,lxwei,qxu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

imposed on input images by these attacks are usually perceptible and not robust. On the one hand, existing attacks do not
consider human perceptual system during perturbation generation. They all use distance metrics of Lp norms (L0 , L2
and L∞ norms) to evaluate the similarity between the original samples and the crafted adversarial ones. These metrics
treat perturbations of different pixels in an image equally
important for human eyes. However, according to (Liu et
al. 2010), people are more sensitive to perturbations of pixels in low variance regions. For example, perturbations in
the uniform background are easier to be detected than those
in image regions with mussy objects. Without considering
the human perceptual system, previous methods may perturb
highly sensitive pixels in the attack process, which increases
the probability to be detected by human eyes. On the other
hand, previous attacks are not robust enough. The success
rate of attack drops signiﬁcantly in the physical world due to
the noises and deviation inevitably generated. For instance,
adversarial images may be compressed or suffer from noises
during transmission from the attacker to the classiﬁer. Thus,
the adversarial example which attacks successfully in the
experimental condition may fail in the complex physical
world. Recently, some research efforts have been dedicated
to robust attacks for certain situations, such as face recognition (Sharif et al. 2016) and road sign recognition (Evtimov
et al. 2017). However, they are rather application-speciﬁc
and cannot be generalized for other applications.

Abstract
Machine learning systems based on deep neural networks, being able to produce state-of-the-art results on various perception tasks, have gained mainstream adoption in many applications. However, they are shown to be vulnerable to adversarial
example attack, which generates malicious output by adding
slight perturbations to the input. Previous adversarial example crafting methods, however, use simple metrics to evaluate
the distances between the original examples and the adversarial ones, which could be easily detected by human eyes.
In addition, these attacks are often not robust due to the inevitable noises and deviation in the physical world. In this
work, we present a new adversarial example attack crafting
method, which takes the human perceptual system into consideration and maximizes the noise tolerance of the crafted
adversarial example. Experimental results demonstrate the efﬁcacy of the proposed technique.

Introduction
With the increasing popularity of deep learning technology,
its security problems have attracted a signiﬁcant amount of
attention from both academia and industry. Among all security problems, the most severe one is adversarial example
attack ﬁrst proposed in (Szegedy et al. 2013). It attempts to
modify the legal input with slight perturbations that largely
changes the output given by neural networks. This kind of
attack is really a threat for security-sensitive systems, such
as self-driving systems, disease diagnose systems and malicious email ﬁlters (Bojarski et al. 2016; Amato et al. 2013;
Clark, Koprinska, and Poon 2003; Graves, Mohamed, and
Hinton 2013). For example, in self-driving systems, an adversarial example attack can change a stop-road sign to a
turn-left signal. Then the car will make a wrong decision
and cause a serious trafﬁc accident.
Recently, several adversarial example attacks against
image classiﬁcation systems are proposed in the literature (Szegedy et al. 2013; Papernot et al. 2016; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014). They target to misclassify
the input image to speciﬁc class or just misclassify it by
adding minimum perturbations. However, the perturbations

To solve the above problems, in this paper, we propose
a new method to craft imperceptible and robust adversarial
examples against neural networks. We ﬁrst introduce a new
distance metric considering sensitivity of the human perceptual system to different pixels. This metric guides us with
how many perturbations can be added without being detected. Then we optimize to maximize the noise tolerance
of adversarial examples to improve the success attack rate in
the physical world, which is generally applicable for a large
amount of applications based on neural networks. By introducing a new metric to evaluate the effects of perturbations
added to each pixel, we present a greedy algorithm to ﬁnd
which pixels to perturb and what magnitude to add effectively and efﬁciently that is applicable for most models as
long as they are differentiable. Our optimization method can
generate adversarial examples with both high imperceptibility and high robustness, as demonstrated in the experimental

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1652

