The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Uncovering Scene Context for
Predicting Privacy of Online Shared Images
Ashwini Tonge,1 Cornelia Caragea,1 Anna Squicciarini2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Kansas State University
College of Information Sciences and Technology, Pennsylvania State University
atonge@ksu.edu, ccaragea@ksu.edu, asquicciarini@ist.psu.edu

Abstract
With the exponential increase in the number of images that
are shared online every day, the development of effective and
efﬁcient learning methods for image privacy prediction has
become crucial. Prior works have used as features automatically derived object tags from images’ content and manually
annotated user tags. However, we believe that in addition to
objects, the scene context obtained from images’ content can
improve the performance of privacy prediction. Hence, we
propose to uncover scene-based tags from images’ content
using convolutional neural networks. Experimental results on
a Flickr dataset show that the scene tags and object tags complement each other and yield the best performance when used
in combination with user tags.

(a) bed, piano, home

(b) persons, sports

Figure 1: Anecdotal evidence where only object tags fail to
infer true privacy classes as private (a) and public (b).
private or public. Figure 1 shows anecdotal evidence where
only object information (shown in blue) may fail to infer correct predictions of images’ privacy. Intuitively, adding scene
information (shown in green italics) can help make a more
accurate assessment. For example, the object tag “bed” can
occur in private or public classes depending on the scene
context, i.e., “home” or “bedroom” (private) vs. “furniture
store” (public). To this end, we propose the extraction of
scene tags to capture additional information from the visual
content that is not captured by existing object tags. We explore the combination of user tags with the object, scene and
object-scene tags for privacy prediction. Our results show
that the combination of all three types of tags (object, scene,
and user) yields better performance compared with user tags
alone and the combination of user tags with scene or object
tags. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work to uncover the
scene context from the image content for privacy prediction.

Introduction
Technology today offers innovative ways to share photos
with people all around the world, making online photo sharing an incredibly popular activity for Internet users. These
users share quotidian details and post pictures of their signiﬁcant milestones and private events. The smartphones and
other mobile devices facilitate the exchange of information
virtually at any time. New privacy concerns are on the rise
and mostly emerge due to users’ lack of understanding that
semantically rich images may reveal sensitive information.
For example, a seemingly harmless photo of a student’s New
Year’s party may accidentally reveal sensitive information
about the student’s location, personal habits, and colleagues.
Recently, Squicciarini et al. (2014) and Zerr et al. (2012)
explored learning models for image privacy prediction using user tags and visual features and found that user tags
are informative for classifying images as private or public.
However, since user tags are at the sole discretion of users,
they typically tend to be noisy and incomplete.Tonge and
Caragea (2016) automatically derived object tags from images’ content and showed that the combination of object tags
and user tags outperforms each set of tags individually. Still,
a manual inspection of the user tags revealed that these user
tags contain both objects and scenes.
Thus, we posit that in addition to the object-centric tags,
useful information about the scene context can be extracted
from images’ content to help better discriminate images as

Proposed Features
We believe that scene tags can contribute along with object
tags to learn privacy characteristics of a given image, as they
can help provide clues into what the image owners intended
to show through the photo. Therefore, we employ two types
of semantic features for privacy prediction based on: (1) objects stream, pre-trained on a large scale object dataset (ImageNet) (Russakovsky et al. 2015), to capture the objects
depicted in the image; and (2) scene stream, pre-trained on
a large scale scene dataset (Places2) (Zhou et al. 2016), to
obtain the pattern about scene context of the image.
Object-centric Tags. To automatically obtain object tags
from the visual content, we adopt an approach given in
(Tonge and Caragea 2016). We use the probability distribution over 1000 object categories for the input image obtained by applying the softmax function over the last fully-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8167

