The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Unsupervised Personalized Feature Selection
Jundong Li, Liang Wu, Harsh Dani, Huan Liu
Computer Science and Engineering, Arizona State University, USA
{jundong.li,wuliang,hdani,huan.liu}@asu.edu

and unsupervised methods. Supervised methods are mainly
designed for classiﬁcation or regression problems, they attempt to ﬁnd relevant features that can discriminate instances from different classes. On the other hand, without
label information to guide the selection process, unsupervised methods employ alternative criteria to assess the importance of features such as data similarity (He, Cai, and
Niyogi 2005; Cai, Zhang, and He 2010), local discriminative information (Yang et al. 2011; Li et al. 2012) or data
reconstruction error (Farahat, Ghodsi, and Kamel 2011; Li,
Tang, and Liu 2017). As most real-world data is unlabeled
and label information is time consuming and labor intensive
to obtain, unsupervised feature selection is more appealing
in practical usage. Recently, sparse learning based feature
selection methods (Tibshirani 1996; Liu, Ji, and Ye 2009;
Cai, Zhang, and He 2010; Nie et al. 2010) received increasing attention as they can embed feature selection into the
model construction phase, which often gives good learning
performance and model interpretability. Through a 1 -norm
or a 2,1 -norm sparse regularization term, feature sparsity is
achieved for all instances. The features with small or zero
weights then can be directly eliminated as they have limited
contribution to the model construction.

Abstract
Feature selection is effective in preparing high-dimensional
data for a variety of learning tasks such as classiﬁcation, clustering and anomaly detection. A vast majority of existing feature selection methods assume that all instances share some
common patterns manifested in a subset of shared features.
However, this assumption is not necessarily true in many
domains where data instances could show high individuality. For example, in the medical domain, we need to capture
the heterogeneous nature of patients for personalized predictive modeling, which could be characterized by a subset of
instance-speciﬁc features. Motivated by this, we propose to
study a novel problem of personalized feature selection. In
particular, we investigate the problem in an unsupervised scenario as label information is usually hard to obtain in practice.
To be speciﬁc, we present a novel unsupervised personalized
feature selection framework UPFS to ﬁnd some shared features by all instances and instance-speciﬁc features tailored
to each instance. We formulate the problem into a principled
optimization framework and provide an effective algorithm
to solve it. Experimental results on real-world datasets verify
the effectiveness of the proposed UPFS framework.

Introduction

Most of the sparse learning based feature selection methods proposed so far, overwhelmingly build a single global
model (i.e., feature weight) for all data instances. Despite
its empirical success in terms of high prediction accuracy
(either classiﬁcation or clustering), this kind of global models inevitably ignore the individuality or personality of each
individual data instance. In many cases, instances could
be highly idiosyncratic. For example, posting behaviors of
users in social media sites could differ remarkably. Based on
their personal characters and interests, the words and phrases
they frequently use are rather diverse, with different social
foci. In this regard, the key challenge centers around if we
can tailor the feature selection for each instance such that
important features for different instances can be different.
Although it is important to ﬁnd personalized features, different instances more or less have some commonality. For example, in medical predictive modeling, despite the fact that
health conditions of patients could vary a lot, they may share
a certain amount of common symptoms for a speciﬁc disease. Hence, it is also of vital importance to leverage these
common patterns for learning by ﬁnding some shared fea-

Recent years have witnessed huge amounts of highdimensional data in many data mining, machine learning,
computer vision and natural language processing applications. High-dimensional data not only demands more on the
computational and storage requirements, but also degenerates many learning algorithms due to the curse of dimensionality (Friedman, Hastie, and Tibshirani 2001; Guyon
and Elisseeff 2003; Liu and Motoda 2007; Li et al. 2016;
Li and Liu 2017). Feature selection is one of the most effective data preprocessing strategies to deal with these highdimensional data. It directly selects a subset of relevant features from the original high-dimensional feature space for a
compact and accurate representation. Feature selection helps
build simpler and more comprehensive learning models, improve learning performance, and prepare clean and understandable data.
According to the availability of label information, feature
selection algorithms can be divided into supervised methods
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3514

