The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Deep Reinforcement Learning for Unsupervised Video
Summarization with Diversity-Representativeness Reward
Kaiyang Zhou,1,2 Yu Qiao,1∗ Tao Xiang2
1

Guangdong Key Lab of Computer Vision and Virtual Reality,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
Queen Mary University of London, UK
k.zhou@qmul.ac.uk, yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn
vised learning, using both video-level summaries and framelevel importance scores. At test time, DPP-LSTM predicts
importance scores and outputs feature vectors simultaneously, which are together used to construct a DPP matrix.
Due to the DPP modeling, DPP-LSTM needs to be trained
in a two-stage manner.
Although DPP-LSTM (Zhang et al. 2016b) has shown
state-of-the-art performances on several benchmarks, we argue that supervised learning cannot fully explore the potential of deep networks for video summarization because there
does not exist a single ground truth summary for a video.
This is grounded by the fact that humans have subjective
opinions on which parts of a video should be selected as the
summary. Therefore, devising more effective summarization
methods that rely less on labels is still in demand.
Mahasseni et al. (Mahasseni, Lam, and Todorovic 2017)
developed an adversarial learning framework to train DPPLSTM. During the learning process, DPP-LSTM selects
keyframes and a discriminator network is used to judge
whether a synthetic video constructed by the keyframes is
real or not, in order to enforce DPP-LSTM to select more
representative frames. Although their framework is unsupervised, the adversarial nature makes the training unstable,
which may result in model collapse. In terms of increasing diversity, DPP-LSTM cannot beneﬁt maximally from the
DPP module without the help of labels. Since a RNN-based
encoder-decoder network following DPP-LSTM for video
reconstruction requires pretraining, their framework requires
multiple training stages, which is not efﬁcient in practice.
In this paper, we formulate video summarization as a sequential decision-making process and develop a deep summarization network (DSN) to summarize videos. DSN has
an encoder-decoder architecture, where the encoder is a convolutional neural network (CNN) that performs feature extraction on video frames and the decoder is a bidirectional
LSTM network that produces probabilities based on which
actions are sampled to select frames. To train our DSN, we
propose an end-to-end, reinforcement learning-based framework with a diversity-representativeness (DR) reward function that jointly accounts for diversity and representativeness
of generated summaries, and does not rely on labels or user
interactions at all.
The DR reward function is inspired by the general criteria of what properties a high-quality video summary should

Abstract
Video summarization aims to facilitate large-scale video
browsing by producing short, concise summaries that are
diverse and representative of original videos. In this paper,
we formulate video summarization as a sequential decisionmaking process and develop a deep summarization network
(DSN) to summarize videos. DSN predicts for each video
frame a probability, which indicates how likely a frame is selected, and then takes actions based on the probability distributions to select frames, forming video summaries. To train
our DSN, we propose an end-to-end, reinforcement learningbased framework, where we design a novel reward function
that jointly accounts for diversity and representativeness of
generated summaries and does not rely on labels or user interactions at all. During training, the reward function judges how
diverse and representative the generated summaries are, while
DSN strives for earning higher rewards by learning to produce more diverse and more representative summaries. Since
labels are not required, our method can be fully unsupervised.
Extensive experiments on two benchmark datasets show that
our unsupervised method not only outperforms other stateof-the-art unsupervised methods, but also is comparable to or
even superior than most of published supervised approaches.

Introduction
Driven by the exponential growth in the amount of online
videos in recent years, research in video summarization has
gained increasing attention, leading to various methods proposed to facilitate large-scale video browsing (Gygli et al.
2014; Gygli, Grabner, and Van Gool 2015; Zhang et al.
2016a; Song et al. 2015; Panda and Roy-Chowdhury 2017;
Mahasseni, Lam, and Todorovic 2017; Potapov et al. 2014).
Recently, recurrent neural network (RNN), especially
with the long short-term memory (LSTM) cell (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), has been exploited to model
the sequential patterns in video frames, as well as to tackle
the end-to-end training problem. Zhang et al. (Zhang et al.
2016b) proposed a deep architecture that combines a bidirectional LSTM network with a Determinantal Point Process
(DPP) module that increases diversity in summaries, referring to as DPP-LSTM. They trained DPP-LSTM with super∗

Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7582

