The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Sample-Efﬁcient Learning of Mixtures
Hassan Ashtiani, Shai Ben-David

Abbas Mehrabian

David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
200 University Avenue West
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, N2L 3G1
{mhzokaei, shai}@uwaterloo.ca

Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing
121 Calvin Lab #2190
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA 94720-2190
abbasmehrabian@gmail.com

algorithms with ﬁnite-sample guarantees. In this paper, we
study the important family of mixture models within this
framework.
Notice that we consider PAC learning of distributions
(a.k.a. density estimation), which is different from parameter estimation. In the parameter estimation problem, it is
assumed that the target distribution belongs to some parametric class, and the goal is to learn/identify the parameters (see, e.g., (Dasgupta 1999; Belkin and Sinha 2010;
Moitra and Valiant 2010)).
As an example of our setting, assume that the target distribution is a Gaussian mixture with k components in Rd .
Then, how many examples do we need to ﬁnd a distribution that is ε-close to the target? This sample complexity question, as well as the corresponding computational
complexity question, has received a lot of attention recently
(see, e.g. (Feldman, Servedio, and O’Donnell 2006; Chan
et al. 2014; Suresh et al. 2014; Diakonikolas et al. 2016;
Diakonikolas, Kane, and Stewart 2017b; Acharya et al.
2017)).
In this paper, we consider a scenario in which we are given
a method for learning a class of distributions (e.g., Gaussians). Then, we ask whether we can use it, as a black box,
to come up with an algorithm for learning a mixture of such
distributions (e.g., mixture of Gaussians). We will show that
the answer to this question is afﬁrmative.
We propose a generic method for learning mixture models. Roughly speaking, we show that by going from learning
a single distribution from a class to learning a mixture of k
distributions from the same class, the sample complexity is
multiplied by a factor of at most (k log2 k)/ε2 . This result
is general, and yet it is surprisingly tight in many important
cases. In this paper, we assume that the algorithm knows the
number of components k.
As a demonstration, we show that our method provides a
better sample complexity for learning mixtures of Gaussians
than the state of the art. In particular, for learning mixtures
O(d2 k/ε4 ) samof k Gaussians in Rd , our method requires 
 2 k 3 /ε4 ) bound
ples, improving by a factor of k 2 over the O(d
of (Diakonikolas, Kane, and Stewart 2017b). Furthermore,
for the special case of mixtures of axis-aligned Gaussians,
we provide an upper bound of 
O(dk/ε4 ), which is the ﬁrst
optimal bound with respect to k and d up to logarithmic fac-

Abstract
We consider PAC learning of probability distributions (a.k.a.
density estimation), where we are given an i.i.d. sample generated from an unknown target distribution, and want to output a distribution that is close to the target in total variation
distance. Let F be an arbitrary class of probability distributions, and let F k denote the class of k-mixtures of elements of
F . Assuming the existence of a method for learning F with
sample complexity mF (ε), we provide a method for learning F k with sample complexity O(k log k · mF (ε)/ε2 ). Our
mixture learning algorithm has the property that, if the F learner is proper and agnostic, then the F k -learner would be
proper and agnostic as well.
This general result enables us to improve the best known sample complexity upper bounds for a variety of important mixture classes. First, we show that the class of mixtures of k
axis-aligned Gaussians in Rd is PAC-learnable in the agnostic
4

) samples, which is tight in k and d up
setting with O(kd/ε
to logarithmic factors. Second, we show that the class of mixtures of k Gaussians in Rd is PAC-learnable in the agnostic
setting with sample complexity 
O(kd2 /ε4 ), which improves
O(k4 d4 /ε2 )
the previous known bounds of 
O(k3 d2 /ε4 ) and 
in its dependence on k and d. Finally, we show that the class
of mixtures of k log-concave distributions over Rd is PAClearnable using 
O(d(d+5)/2 ε−(d+9)/2 k) samples.

1

Introduction

Learning distributions is a fundamental problem in statistics and computer science, and has numerous applications in
machine learning and signal processing. The problem can be
stated as:
Given an i.i.d. sample generated from an unknown
probability distribution g, ﬁnd a distribution ĝ that is
close to g in total variation distance.1
This strong notion of learning is not possible in general
using a ﬁnite number of samples. However, if we assume
that the target distribution belongs to or can be approximated
by a family of distributions, then there is hope to acquire
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Total variation distance is a prominent distance measure between distributions. For a discussion on this and other choices
see (Devroye and Lugosi 2001, Chapter 5).

2679

