The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Distributional Reinforcement
Learning with Quantile Regression
Will Dabney
DeepMind

Mark Rowland

University of Cambridge∗

Marc G. Bellemare

Rémi Munos

Google Brain

DeepMind

the-art on the suite of benchmark Atari 2600 games (Bellemare et al. 2013).
One of the theoretical contributions of the C 51 work was
a proof that the distributional Bellman operator is a contraction in a maximal form of the Wasserstein metric between
probability distributions. In this context, the Wasserstein
metric is particularly interesting because it does not suffer
from disjoint-support issues (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017) which arise when performing Bellman updates.
Unfortunately, this result does not directly lead to a practical
algorithm: as noted by the authors, and further developed by
Bellemare et al. (2017), the Wasserstein metric, viewed as a
loss, cannot generally be minimized using stochastic gradient methods.
This negative result left open the question as to whether it
is possible to devise an online distributional reinforcement
learning algorithm which takes advantage of the contraction
result. Instead, the C 51 algorithm ﬁrst performs a heuristic
projection step, followed by the minimization of a KL divergence between projected Bellman update and prediction.
The work therefore leaves a theory-practice gap in our understanding of distributional reinforcement learning, which
makes it difﬁcult to explain the good performance of C 51.
Thus, the existence of a distributional algorithm that operates end-to-end on the Wasserstein metric remains an open
question.
In this paper, we answer this question afﬁrmatively. By
appealing to the theory of quantile regression (Koenker
2005), we show that there exists an algorithm, applicable in
a stochastic approximation setting, which can perform distributional reinforcement learning over the Wasserstein metric.
Our method relies on the following techniques:
• We “transpose” the parametrization from C 51: whereas
the former uses N ﬁxed locations for its approximation distribution and adjusts their probabilities, we assign
ﬁxed, uniform probabilities to N adjustable locations;
• We show that quantile regression may be used to stochastically adjust the distributions’ locations so as to minimize
the Wasserstein distance to a target distribution.
• We formally prove contraction mapping results for our
overall algorithm, and use these results to conclude that
our method performs distributional RL end-to-end under
the Wasserstein metric, as desired.
The main interest of the original distributional algorithm
was its state-of-the-art performance, despite still acting by

Abstract
In reinforcement learning (RL), an agent interacts with the
environment by taking actions and observing the next state
and reward. When sampled probabilistically, these state transitions, rewards, and actions can all induce randomness in
the observed long-term return. Traditionally, reinforcement
learning algorithms average over this randomness to estimate
the value function. In this paper, we build on recent work advocating a distributional approach to reinforcement learning
in which the distribution over returns is modeled explicitly
instead of only estimating the mean. That is, we examine
methods of learning the value distribution instead of the value
function. We give results that close a number of gaps between
the theoretical and algorithmic results given by Bellemare,
Dabney, and Munos (2017). First, we extend existing results
to the approximate distribution setting. Second, we present
a novel distributional reinforcement learning algorithm consistent with our theoretical formulation. Finally, we evaluate
this new algorithm on the Atari 2600 games, observing that
it signiﬁcantly outperforms many of the recent improvements
on DQN, including the related distributional algorithm C 51.

Introduction
In reinforcement learning, the value of an action a in state s
describes the expected return, or discounted sum of rewards,
obtained from beginning in that state, choosing action a, and
subsequently following a prescribed policy. Because knowing this value for the optimal policy is sufﬁcient to act optimally, it is the object modelled by classic value-based methods such as SARSA (Rummery and Niranjan 1994) and QLearning (Watkins and Dayan 1992), which use Bellman’s
equation (Bellman 1957) to efﬁciently reason about value.
Recently, Bellemare, Dabney, and Munos (2017) showed
that the distribution of the random returns, whose expectation constitutes the aforementioned value, can be described
by the distributional analogue of Bellman’s equation, echoing previous results in risk-sensitive reinforcement learning
(Heger 1994; Morimura et al. 2010; Chow et al. 2015). In
this previous work, however, the authors argued for the usefulness in modeling this value distribution in and of itself.
Their claim was asserted by exhibiting a distributional reinforcement learning algorithm, C 51, which achieved state-of∗

Contributed during an internship at DeepMind.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2892

