The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Balancing Lexicographic Fairness and a Utilitarian
Objective with Application to Kidney Exchange
Duncan C. McElfresh†,‡
†

‡

Department of Mathematics
University of Maryland
dmcelfre@math.umd.edu

Balancing fairness and efﬁciency in resource allocation is a
classical economic and computational problem. The price of
fairness measures the worst-case loss of economic efﬁciency
when using an inefﬁcient but fair allocation rule; for indivisible goods in many settings, this price is unacceptably high.
One such setting is kidney exchange, where needy patients
swap willing but incompatible kidney donors. In this work,
we close an open problem regarding the theoretical price of
fairness in modern kidney exchanges. We then propose a general hybrid fairness rule that balances a strict lexicographic
preference ordering over classes of agents, and a utilitarian
objective that maximizes economic efﬁciency. We develop a
utility function for this rule that favors disadvantaged groups
lexicographically; but if cost to overall efﬁciency becomes
too high, it switches to a utilitarian objective. This rule has
only one parameter which is proportional to a bound on the
price of fairness, and can be adjusted by policymakers. We
apply this rule to real data from a large kidney exchange and
show that our hybrid rule produces more reliable outcomes
than other fairness rules.

Introduction

Chronic kidney disease is a worldwide problem whose societal burden is likened to that of diabetes (Neuen et al. 2013).
Left untreated, it leads to end-stage renal failure and the need
for a donor kidney—for which demand far outstrips supply.
In the United States alone, the kidney transplant waiting list
grew from 58,000 people in 2004 to over 100,000 needy patients (Hart et al. 2016).1
To alleviate some of this supply-demand mismatch, kidney exchanges (Rapaport 1986; Roth, Sönmez, and Ünver
2004) allow patients with willing living donors to trade
donors for access to compatible or higher-quality organs.
In addition to these patient-donor pairs, modern exchanges
include non-directed donors, who enter the exchange without a patient in need of a kidney. Exchanges occur in cycleor chain-like structures, and now account for 10% of living transplants in the United States. Yet, access to a kidney exchange does not guarantee equal access to kidneys
themselves; for example, certain classes of patients may be

1.1

Related Work

We brieﬂy overview related work in balancing efﬁciency and
fairness in resource allocation problem. Bertsimas, Farias,
and Trichakis (2011) deﬁne the price of fairness; that is, the
relative loss in system efﬁciency under a fair allocation rule.
Hooker and Williams (2012) give a formal method for combining utilitarianism and equity. We direct the reader to those
two papers for a greater overview of research in fairness in
general resource allocation problems.
Fairness in the context of kidney exchange was ﬁrst studied by Roth, Sönmez, and Ünver (2005b); they explore concepts like Lorenz dominance in a stylized model, and show
that preferring fair allocations can come at great cost. Li
et al. (2014) extend this model and present an algorithm
to solve for a Lorenz dominant matching. Stability in kidney exchange, a concept intimately related to fairness, was
explored by Liu, Tang, and Fang (2014). The use of randomized allocation machanisms to promote fairness in stylized models is theoretically promising (Fang et al. 2015;

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1

Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
john@cs.umd.edu

particularly disadvantaged based on health characteristics or
other logistical factors. Thus, fairness considerations are an
active topic of theoretical and practical research in kidney
exchange and the matching market community in general.
Intuitively, any enforcement of a fairness constraint or
consideration may have a negative effect on overall economic efﬁciency. A quantiﬁcation of this tradeoff is known
as the price of fairness (Bertsimas, Farias, and Trichakis
2011). Recent work by Dickerson, Procaccia, and Sandholm (2014) adapted this concept to the kidney exchange
case, and presented two fair allocation rules that strike a balance between fairness and efﬁciency. Yet, as we show in this
paper, those rules can “fail” unpredictably, yielding an arbitrarily high price of fairness.
With this as motivation, we adapt to the kidney exchange
case a recent technique for trading off a form of fairness and
utilitarianism in a principled manner. This technique is parameterized by a bound on the price of fairness, as opposed
to a set of parameters that may result in hard-to-predict ﬁnal matching behavior, as in past work. We implement our
rule in a realistic mathematical programming framework
and–on real data from a large, multi-center, ﬁelded kidney
exchange–show that our rule effectively balances fairness
and efﬁciency without unwanted outlier behavior.

Abstract

1

John P. Dickerson†,‡

https://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/data/

1161

