The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

End-to-End United Video Dehazing and Detection
1

Boyi Li,1∗ Xiulian Peng,2 Zhangyang Wang,3 Jizheng Xu,2 Dan Feng1

Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University
boyilics@gmail.com,xipe@microsoft.com,atlaswang@tamu.edu,jzxu@microsoft.com,dfeng@hust.edu.cn

Layer1

Abstract
The recent development of CNN-based image dehazing has
revealed the effectiveness of end-to-end modeling. However,
extending the idea to end-to-end video dehazing has not been
explored yet. In this paper, we propose an End-to-End Video
Dehazing Network (EVD-Net), to exploit the temporal consistency between consecutive video frames. A thorough study
has been conducted over a number of structure options, to
identify the best temporal fusion strategy. Furthermore, we
build an End-to-End United Video Dehazing and Detection
Network (EVDD-Net), which concatenates and jointly trains
EVD-Net with a video object detection model. The resulting
augmented end-to-end pipeline has demonstrated much more
stable and accurate detection results in hazy video.

Layer2

Layer3

Layer4

Layer5

ࡶ ࢞ ൌࡷ ࢞ ࡵ ࢞ െࡷ ࢞
Clean Image Generation Module

Input

Conv1

Conv2

Concat1

Conv3

Concat2

Conv4

Concat3

conv5(K)

Output

K-estimation Module

Figure 1: The AOD-Net architecture for single image dehazing (Li et al. 2017a; 2017b), which inspires EVD-Net.
This paper ﬁlls in the blank of CNN-based video dehazing
by an innovative integration of two important merits in one
uniﬁed model: (1) we inherit the spirit of training an end-toend model (Li et al. 2017a; Wang et al. 2016), that directly
regresses clean images from hazy inputs without any intermediate step. That is proven to outperform the (sub-optimal)
results of multi-stage pipelines; (2) we embrace the video
setting by explicitly considering how to embed the temporal
coherence between neighboring video frames when restoring the current frame. By an extensive architecture study,
we identify the most promising temporal fusion strategy,
which is both interpretable from a dehazing viewpoint and
well aligned with previous ﬁndings (Karpathy et al. 2014;
Kappeler et al. 2016). We call our proposed model End-toEnd Video Dehazing Network (EVD-Net).
Better yet, EVD-Net can be considered as pre-processing
for a subsequent high-level computer vision task, and we
can therefore jointly train the concatenated pipeline for the
optimized high-level task performance in the presence of
haze. Using video object detection as a task example, we
build the augmented End-to-End United Video Dehazing and
Detection Network (EVDD-Net), and achieve much more
stable and accurate detection results in hazy video.

Introduction
The removal of haze from visual data captured in the wild
has been attracting tremendous research interests, due to
its profound application values in outdoor video surveillance, trafﬁc monitoring and autonomous driving, and so
on (Tan 2008). In principle, the generation of hazy visual
scene observations follows a known physical model (to be
detailed next), and the estimation of key physical parameters, i.e., the atmospheric light magnitude and transmission
matrix, become the core step in solving haze removal as
an inverse problem (He, Sun, and Tang 2011; Fattal 2014;
Berman, Avidan, and others 2016). Recently, the prosperity of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) has led to many efforts paid
to CNN-based single image dehazing (Ren et al. 2016;
Cai et al. 2016; Li et al. 2017a). Among them, DehazeNet
(Cai et al. 2016) and MSCNN (Ren et al. 2016) focused on
predicting the most important parameter, transmission matrix, from image inputs using CNNs, then generating clean
images by the physical model. Lately, AOD-Net (Li et al.
2017a) was the ﬁrst model to introduce a light-weight end-toend dehazing convolutional neural network by re-formulating
the physical formula. However, there have been only a limited amount of efforts in exploring video dehazing, which
is the more realistic scenario, either by traditional statistical
approaches or by CNNs.

Related Work
Previous single image haze removal algorithms focus on the
classical atmospheric scattering model:
I (x) = J (x) t (x) + A (1 − t (x)) ,

∗

The work was done at Microsoft Research Asia.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

(1)

where I (x) is observed hazy image, J (x) is the scene radiance (“clean image”) to be recovered. There are two critical

7016

