The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Does William Shakespeare REALLY Write Hamlet?
Knowledge Representation Learning with Conﬁdence
Ruobing Xie,1,2 Zhiyuan Liu,1∗ Fen Lin,2 Leyu Lin2

1
Department of Computer Science and Technology,
State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems,
National Lab for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, China
2
Search Product Center, WeChat Search Application Department, Tencent, China.

There are existing amounts of widely-utilized large-scale
knowledge graphs such as Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008),
DBpedia (Auer et al. 2007) and other domain-speciﬁc KGs.
However, these knowledge graphs are still far from complete to describe the inﬁnite real-world facts, in which some
kinds of knowledge may even change frequently. Therefore,
knowledge construction and timely update are signiﬁcant for
knowledge-driven applications. Most conventional knowledge graph construction methods usually involve huge human supervision or expert annotation, which are extremely
labor-intensive and time-consuming. Nowadays, automatic
mechanism and crowdsourcing take larger parts in knowledge construction, while these methods may suffer from
possible noises and conﬂicts due to limited human supervision. For instance, recent neural relation extraction model
on benchmark achieves only around 60% precision when the
recall is 20% (Lin et al. 2016). Moreover, (Heindorf et al.
2016) focuses on vandalism detection in Wikidata, which
also veriﬁes the existence and problems of noises in KGs.
In this paper, we concentrate on how to deal with noises in
knowledge representation learning (KRL), which provides
an effective and ﬂexible way for using knowledge. KRL represents entities and relations with distributed representations
mainly according to triple facts in KGs. Therefore, it is crucial to consider noises in knowledge representation learning
and knowledge-driven tasks.

Abstract
Knowledge graphs (KGs), which could provide essential relational information between entities, have been widely utilized
in various knowledge-driven applications. Since the overall human knowledge is innumerable that still grows explosively and changes frequently, knowledge construction and
update inevitably involve automatic mechanisms with less
human supervision, which usually bring in plenty of noises
and conﬂicts to KGs. However, most conventional knowledge representation learning methods assume that all triple
facts in existing KGs share the same signiﬁcance without
any noises. To address this problem, we propose a novel
conﬁdence-aware knowledge representation learning framework (CKRL), which detects possible noises in KGs while
learning knowledge representations with conﬁdence simultaneously. Speciﬁcally, we introduce the triple conﬁdence to
conventional translation-based methods for knowledge representation learning. To make triple conﬁdence more ﬂexible and universal, we only utilize the internal structural information in KGs, and propose three kinds of triple conﬁdences considering both local and global structural information. In experiments, We evaluate our models on knowledge graph noise detection, knowledge graph completion and
triple classiﬁcation. Experimental results demonstrate that
our conﬁdence-aware models achieve signiﬁcant and consistent improvements on all tasks, which conﬁrms the capability
of CKRL modeling conﬁdence with structural information in
both KG noise detection and knowledge representation learning.

Introduction

+DPOHWLVDWUDJHG\
ZULWWHQE\:LOOLDP
6KDNHVSHDUHDWDQ
XQFHUWDLQGDWHEHWZHHQ
DQG

Recent years have witnessed the great thrive in artiﬁcial intelligence that has broad impacts on our daily lives. In tasks
like information retrieval and question answering, people are
not satisﬁed with merely semantic matching, but expect AI
agents to have knowledge for understanding, reasoning and
solving. Knowledge graphs (KGs), which provide effective
well-structured relational information between entities, are
essential supporters for knowledge-based AI agents. A typical KG usually stores knowledge with triple facts in the
form of (head entity, relation, tail entity), which is also
abridged as (h, r, t).

KHWHURJHQHRXV
LQIRUPDWLRQ

QRLVHV
.5/
ZLWKFRQILGHQFH
NQRZOHGJH
NQRZOHGJHJUDSK

NQRZOHGJH
UHSUHVHQWDWLRQ

Figure 1: Noises in KGs and conﬁdence-aware KRL.
We attempt to detect possible noises and conﬂicts located
in existing knowledge graphs, while constructing noise-free
knowledge representations simultaneously. However, most
conventional KRL methods assume that all triple facts in
existing KGs are completely correct. To solve this problem,
we propose a novel conﬁdence-aware knowledge represen-

∗

Corresponding author: Z. Liu (liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn)
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4954

