The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Poisson Gamma Probabilistic Model for Latent
Node-Group Memberships in Dynamic Networks
Sikun Yang, Heinz Koeppl
Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology,
Technische Universität Darmstadt
64283 Darmstadt, Germany
{sikun.yang, heinz.koeppl}@bcs.tu-darmstadt.de
or non-links) to latent Gaussian random variables via the
logistic or probit function (Durante and others 2014). The
time-complexity of these approaches often scales quadratically with the number of nodes, i.e., O(N 2 ). This will become infeasible for large networks and will become especially inefﬁcient for sparse networks. In this work we leverage the Bernoulli-Poisson link function (Dunson and Herring 2005; Zhou 2015; Caron and Fox 2015) to map an observed binary edge to a latent Poisson count random variable, which leads to a computational cost that only scales
with the number of non-zero edges. As large, real-world networks are usually very sparse, the proposed method yields
signiﬁcant speed-up and enables the analysis of larger dynamic networks. We allow for a time-varying nonnegative
degree of membership of a node to a group. We realize this
by constructing a gamma Markov chain to capture the time
evolution of those latent membership variables. Inspired by
recent advances in data augmentation and marginalization
techniques (Zhou and Carin 2015), we develop an easy-toimplement efﬁcient Gibbs sampling algorithm for model inference. We also present an online Gibbs sampling algorithm that can process data in mini-batches and thus readily scales to massive sparse dynamic networks. The algorithms performs favorably on standard datasets when compared to state-of-the-art methods (Foulds and others 2011;
Acharya and others 2015; Zhou 2015).

Abstract
We present a probabilistic model for learning from dynamic
relational data, wherein the observed interactions among networked nodes are modeled via the Bernoulli Poisson link
function, and the underlying network structure are characterized by nonnegative latent node-group memberships, which
are assumed to be gamma distributed. The latent memberships evolve according to Markov processes. The optimal
number of latent groups can be determined by data itself.
The computational complexity of our method scales with the
number of non-zero links, which makes it scalable to large
sparse dynamic relational data. We present batch and online
Gibbs sampling algorithms to perform model inference. Finally, we demonstrate the model’s performance on both synthetic and real-world datasets compared to state-of-the-art
methods.

Introduction
Considerable work has been done on the analysis of static
networks in terms of community detection or link prediction (Hoff and others 2001; Kemp and others 2006;
Airoldi and others 2008). However, due to the temporal evolution of nodes (e.g. individuals), their role within a network can change and hence observed links among nodes
may appear or disappear over time (Mucha and others 2010;
Goldenberg and others 2010). Given such dynamic network
data, one may be interested in understanding the temporal
evolution of groups in terms of their size and node-group
memberships and in predicting missing or future unobserved
links based on historical records.
A dynamic network of N nodes can be represented as
a sequence of adjacency matrices b(t) ∈ {0, 1}N ×N , t =
(t)
1, . . . , T , where bmn = 1 indicates the presence of a link
(t)
between node m and n at time point t and bmn = 0 otherwise. For the sake of clarity we focus on undirected and
unweighted networks but the presented method can be extended to weighted networks via the compound Poisson
distribution (Basbug and Engelhardt 2016) and to multirelational networks (Bordes and others 2011; Nickel and
others 2016).
Many of the current probabilistic methods for dynamic
networks map observed binary edge-variables (either links

Dynamic Poisson Gamma Membership Model
In the proposed model, each node n is characterized by a
(t)
time-dependent latent membership variable φnk that determines its interactions or involvement in group k at the t-th
snapshot of the dynamic networks. This latent node-group
membership is modeled by a gamma random variable and
is, thus, naturally nonnegative real-valued. This is contrast
to multi-group memberships models (or latent feature models) (Foulds and others 2011; Heaukulani and others 2013;
Kim and others 2013) where each node-group membership
is represented by a binary latent feature vector. These models assume that each node either associates to one group or
not – simply by a binary feature. The proposed model on the
other hand can characterize how strongly each node associates with multiple groups.
Dynamics of latent node-group memberships. For dy-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4366

