The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Towards Efﬁcient Detection of
Overlapping Communities in Massive Networks
Bing-Jie Sun,1,2 Huawei Shen,1 Jinhua Gao,1,2 Wentao Ouyang,1 Xueqi Cheng1
1

CAS Key Laboratory of Network Data Science and Technology, Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{sunbingjie, gaojinhua}@software.ict.ac.cn, {shenhuawei, ouyangwt, cxq}@ict.ac.cn
this scale (Newman and Girvan 2004; Cheng et al. 2010;
Newman 2013; 2006). On the other hand, communities
in real-world networks are highly overlapped, requiring
that community detection method could capture the heterogeneity of community membership (Airoldi et al. 2008;
Palla et al. 2005; Kim and Leskovec 2012; Newman and Leicht 2007; Karrer and Newman 2011). Therefore, we lack
a method that could efﬁciently detect overlapping communities in massive networks, especially when the number of
communities is large.
In the last few years, researchers attempt to combat the
aforementioned problem by improving the computational
efﬁciency of several well-performed and principled methods
for overlapping community detection. For example, Gopalan
and Blei proposed an efﬁcient method to uncover overlapping communities in massive networks (Gopalan and Blei
2013). Their method is actually a variant of mixed membership stochastic blockmodel (Airoldi et al. 2008), achieving high efﬁciency by stochastic variational inference (Latouche, Birmele, and Ambroise 2012), i.e., approximately
estimating the posterior community membership of nodes
by analyzing a sub-sampling of network rather than the
whole network. Yang et al. proposed BIGCLAM method
which optimizes a variant of non-negative matrix factorization objective function to discover communities through
maximizing the likelihood of network (Yang and Leskovec
2013). The speedup lies in transforming the loop over all
nodes into the loop of neighbor nodes when calculating the
gradient of a node. Sun et al. proposed to use fast nonoverlapping community detection method to initialize overlapping community detection method, achieving high efﬁciency by avoiding local optimum of non-convex optimization (Sun, Shen, and Cheng 2014). However, these methods
are still inappropriate to detect overlapping communities in
massive networks when the number of communities is large.
The key defect of these methods lies in that the basic models
for these methods consider all nodes pairs with or without
links, with an implicit squared computation complexity.
In this paper, we aim to achieve an efﬁcient method to detect overlapping communities in massive networks. For this
purpose, we take a well-performed and principled model,
i.e., Poisson model, for overlapping community detection
as starting point, and design speedup strategies to achieve
high efﬁciency. The obtained method distinguishes itself

Abstract
Community detection is essential to analyzing and exploring natural networks such as social networks, biological networks, and citation networks. However, few methods could
be used as off-the-shelf tools to detect communities in real
world networks for two reasons. On the one hand, most existing methods for community detection cannot handle massive
networks that contain millions or even hundreds of millions
of nodes. On the other hand, communities in real world networks are generally highly overlapped, requiring that community detection method could capture the mixed community
membership. In this paper, we aim to offer an off-the-shelf
method to detect overlapping communities in massive real
world networks. For this purpose, we take the widely-used
Poisson model for overlapping community detection as starting point and design two speedup strategies to achieve high
efﬁciency. Extensive tests on synthetic and large scale real
networks demonstrate that the proposed strategies speedup
the community detection method based on Poisson model by
1 to 2 orders of magnitudes, while achieving comparable accuracy at community detection.

Introduction
Many real world networks, such as biological networks, social networks, and citation networks, are found to divide naturally into communities, i.e., groups of nodes with relatively
denser connections within groups but sparser connections
between them (Girvan and Newman 2002). One fundamental problem in network analysis is how to detect such communities observed in networks.
Community detection has attracted much interest among
scientists from various ﬁelds in the last decade (Fortunato
2010; Palla et al. 2005; Shen et al. 2009; Karrer and Newman 2011; Ren et al. 2009; Newman and Leicht 2007;
Newman 2013; Sun et al. 2017; Sun, Shen, and Cheng 2014;
Rosvall and Bergstrom 2008; Newman and Peixoto 2015).
However, few methods could be used as off-the-shelf tools
to detect communities in real world networks, which is attributed to two challenges underlying the problem of community detection. On the one hand, many real world networks have millions and even hundreds of millions of
nodes. Most existing methods cannot handle networks at
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

418

