The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Diagnosing and Improving Topic Models
by Analyzing Posterior Variability
Linzi Xing

Michael J. Paul

Department of Computer Science
University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309
linzi.xing@colorado.edu

Department of Information Science
University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309
mpaul@colorado.edu

possibility of inferring a posterior distribution over its parameters, which can provide an (approximate) measure of
conﬁdence of different parameter estimates. However, while
Bayesian inference methods have been successful at obtaining more robust model estimates, they have mostly not been
used for evaluating and understanding topic models.1
In this work, we investigate what kinds of characteristics
about topics can be learned from the posterior of the parameters, focusing on variability in the posterior. Speciﬁcally,
we look at how LDA topic parameters change across different posterior samples during Gibbs sampling. We ﬁnd that
the level of ﬂuctuation in the parameter estimates can provide insights into the quality, consistency, and salience of
the topics and their word probabilities.
This paper is divided into two main sections:

Abstract
Bayesian inference methods for probabilistic topic models
can quantify uncertainty in the parameters, which has primarily been used to increase the robustness of parameter estimates. In this work, we explore other rich information that
can be obtained by analyzing the posterior distributions in
topic models. Experimenting with latent Dirichlet allocation
on two datasets, we propose ideas incorporating information
about the posterior distributions at the topic level and at the
word level. At the topic level, we propose a metric called
topic stability that measures the variability of the topic parameters under the posterior. We show that this metric is correlated with human judgments of topic quality as well as with
the consistency of topics appearing across multiple models.
At the word level, we experiment with different methods for
adjusting individual word probabilities within topics based
on their uncertainty. Humans prefer words ranked by our adjusted estimates nearly twice as often when compared to the
traditional approach. Finally, we describe how the ideas presented in this work could potentially applied to other predictive or exploratory models in future work.

• Topic-level analysis: We explore how the variability in
a topic’s word distribution can be indicative of the quality and consistency of the topic. We propose a metric
called topic stability that we show is correlated with human judgments of topic quality as well as with the consistency of the topic across multiple models.

Introduction

• Word-level analysis: Within a topic, we examine how
the probabilities of individual words vary, and ﬁnd that
words whose posteriors have high variability tend to be
less salient and representative of the topic. We propose
modiﬁcations to the ranking of words within a topic to adjust for this characteristic, and we show that people consistency prefer our modiﬁed rankings in experiments.

Topic models, which extract themes from text datasets, have
been widely used for large-scale corpus analysis with diverse applications including the study of topics in scientiﬁc
articles (Hall, Jurafsky, and Manning 2008), ﬁnding patterns
in classic literature (Jockers and Mimno 2013), understanding news media coverage (Roberts et al. 2013), and detecting
population activities in online data (Paul and Dredze 2014).
Of course, using topic models in these ways requires the belief that the topics meaningfully correspond to real concepts
in a dataset. When topic models produce nonsensical topics
or inconsistent outputs, it is difﬁcult for a user to reliably use
these models as a method of scientiﬁc inquiry. These challenges have motivated work on evaluating and understanding what it is that topic models discover (Chang et al. 2009;
Mimno et al. 2011; Chuang et al. 2015).
In some sense, the lack of certainty about topics is already
built into many commonly used models and inference algorithms. As a Bayesian model, the popular latent Dirichlet
allocation (LDA) (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003) affords the

Our proposed methods are quite different from existing
approaches. This leaves open a variety other possibilities
for applying these ideas beyond what we investigated here,
which we discuss after presenting our ﬁndings.

Topic Modeling
We use latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003) as our topic model. LDA has two types of parameters. Each document d has a probability distribution over
topics, θd . Each topic k is associated with a distribution over
1
An exception is work on posterior predictive checking of topic
models (Mimno and Blei 2011), which diagnoses models by looking at discrepancies in how the model ﬁts the data, but not variability of the posterior as proposed here.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6005

