The Eighth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence 2018 (EAAI-18)

Mighty Thymio for University-Level
Educational Robotics∗
Jérôme Guzzi,1 Alessandro Giusti,1 Gianni A. Di Caro,2 Luca Maria Gambardella1
1

Dalle Molle Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IDSIA), USI-SUPSI, Lugano, Switzerland
2
Carnegie Mellon University in Qatar, Doha, Qatar

based, ROS-compatible platform suitable for higher education. The resulting robot remains very affordable and compact, suitable to be carried at home by students. Alternative
commercial solutions with a comparable software ﬂexibility,
such as the Turtlebot 3,2 are signiﬁcantly larger, heavier, and
more expensive. We describe the upgrade in hardware and
software components of the Mighty Thymio, and present its
use in two educational activities.3

Abstract
Thymio is a small, inexpensive, mass-produced mobile robot
with widespread use in primary and secondary education. In
order to make it more versatile and effectively use it in later
educational stages, including university levels, we have expanded Thymio’s capabilities by adding off-the-shelf hardware and open software components. The resulting robot, that
we call Mighty Thymio, provides additional sensing functionalities, increased computing power, networking, and full ROS
integration. We present the architecture of Mighty Thymio
and show its application in advanced educational activities.

Platform Description
The hardware upgrade is tool-free and can be performed by
the students themselves in a few minutes. A frame with Lego
bricks is added directly on the Lego-compatible Thymio
base. The frame carries the following hardware (Fig. 1-left):

Introduction
Thymio (Mondada et al. 2017) is a small (11 x 11.2 x 5.3
cm) commercial open-hardware mobile robot designed for
teaching computational thinking (Magnenat et al. 2014) and
mobile robotics. Thymio is part of a very successful package1 that comprises the robot, different visual programming
environments, and activities for schools at primary and early
secondary stages of education.
Thymio is an affordable and sturdy platform made by: a
translucent plastic body with attachments for Lego bricks,
two differentially driven wheels, an internal battery, 9 proximity sensors (infrared), 5 buttons, an accelerometer, a microphone, a loudspeaker, an IR receiver, three large RGB
LEDs to change the body color, and several smaller LEDs
spread around the body. The open source ﬁrmware can be
programmed using Aseba (Magnenat et al. 2011), a distributed, event-based programming language. A wireless
(802.15.4) interface has been recently introduced.
Thymio has been adopted by schools, in particular in
Switzerland and in France. However, it lacks some features
that are important for educational activities at university levels, such as the option to add sensors (e.g., visual ones), integration with ROS (Quigley et al. 2009), and onboard computing power for complex perceptual and control tasks.
To overcome these limitations, we introduce Mighty
Thymio, an incremental extension of Thymio to a Linux-

Odroid C1: a powerful quad-core ARM Linux board with
1 GB SDRAM, 16 GB ﬂash memory, 4 USB ports;
Power pack: an easily swappable USB power pack that
powers the robot for several hours;
Odroid UPS: a Li-Po battery that provides power when
swapping power packs;
Odroid 720p (web) camera: ﬁxed by a tiltable clap;
Wi-Fi dongle: that provides wireless networking.
Parts are connected by common USB cables. In particular,
the Thymio base is connected to one of the Odroid C1’s USB
ports to send commands and read sensors. The Odroid C1
exposes many other interfaces (Ethernet, UART, I2 C, GPIO,
SPI, ADC) to connect additional sensors and actuators. The
total cost of the add-ons is about 130 dollars.
Software We provide a ﬁle-system image that includes
all software for the Odroid C1. The software is based on
ROS. We extend the open-source Aseba-ROS bridge and
Thymio ROS driver4 to exposes all Thymio’s sensors and
actuators using standard ROS messages. Moreover, we add
ROS interfaces for: camera, LED dynamic patterns (blinking/waving patterns that are very helpful to represent robot
internal states), battery monitoring (the robot changes color

∗
This project has been partially supported by the Swiss National Center of Competence Research (NCCR) Robotics through
the Swiss National Science Foundation.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.thymio.org

2

https://turtlebot3.readthedocs.io
Parts list, detailed building instructions, and code available at
https://github.com/jeguzzi/mighty-thymio.
4
https://github.com/ethz-asl/ros-aseba
3

7952

