The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Measuring Strong Inconsistency
Markus Ulbricht

Matthias Thimm

Gerhard Brewka

Department of Computer Science Institute for Web Science and Technologies Department of Computer Science
Leipzig University
University of Koblenz-Landau
Leipzig University
Germany
Germany
Germany

inconsistent subsets of a knowledge base K of a possibly
nonmonotonic framework has been introduced, called strong
K-inconsistency. The notion of strong inconsistency generalizes classical inconsistency in a well-behaved manner as
it preserves many structural properties as e. g. the hitting set
duality with maximal consistent sets (Reiter 1987). Moreover, this notion allows us to generalize existing inconsistency measures based on minimal inconsistent sets to arbitrary logics, which is the topic of the present paper.
Research in inconsistency measurement is driven by rationality postulates, i. e., desirable properties that should
hold for concrete approaches. There is a growing number of
rationality postulates for inconsistency measurement but not
every postulate is generally accepted, see (Besnard 2014)
for a discussion on this topic. The issue of measuring inconsistency in nonmonotonic frameworks requires some reconsideration compared to the classical setting. This becomes
apparent when considering the monotony postulate which
is usually satisﬁed by classical inconsistency measures and
demands I(K) ≤ I(K ) whenever K ⊆ K holds, i. e.,
the severity of inconsistency cannot be decreased by adding
new information. However, in nonmonotonic frameworks,
adding information may resolve conﬂicts. It is thus possible
that K is inconsistent, while K is not, so we would expect
I(K ) < I(K) for any reasonable measure I.
The main contributions of this paper can be summarized
as follows. As the basis of our investigation, we consider
generalized versions of three measures based on minimal inconsistent sets (Section 2). In order to assess their behaviour,
we develop rationality postulates based on previous ones
from the literature. Some of the postulates still make sense
for a general, possibly nonmonotonic logic, but most of them
require reﬁnements (Section 3). We analyze the measures
with respect to the postulates in Section 4 and assess their
computational complexity by considering natural decision
and function problems following (Thimm and Wallner 2016)
in Section 5. We apply our ideas to the problem of measuring inconsistency wrt. given contexts, i. e., of relating values
of inconsistency of subsets of a knowledge base to inconsistency of the whole knowledge base (Section 6). We discuss
related work in Section 7. Section 8 concludes.1

Abstract
We address the issue of quantitatively assessing the severity
of inconsistencies in nonmonotonic frameworks. While measuring inconsistency in classical logics has been investigated
for some time now, taking the nonmonotonicity into account
poses new challenges. In order to tackle them, we focus on
the structure of minimal strongly K-inconsistent subsets of
a knowledge base K—a generalization of minimal inconsistency to arbitrary, possibly nonmonotonic, frameworks. We
propose measures based on this notion and investigate their
behavior in a nonmonotonic setting by revisiting existing rationality postulates, analyzing the compliance of the proposed
measures with these postulates, and by investigating their
computational complexity.

1

Introduction

In the literature on inconsistency measurement—see e. g.
(Hunter and Konieczny 2004; Grant and Hunter 2006;
Thimm 2016)—inconsistency measures are functions that
aim at assessing the severity of the inconsistency in knowledge bases formalized in propositional logic. The basic intuition behind an inconsistency measure I is that the larger
the inconsistency in K the larger the value I(K).
A simple but popular approach to measure inconsistency is to take the number of minimal inconsistent subsets (Hunter and Konieczny 2008), i. e., to deﬁne IMI (K) =
|Imin (K)|, where Imin (K) is the set of all minimal inconsistent subsets of a knowledge base K. This measure already complies with many basic ideas of inconsistency measurement, in particular IMI (K) = 0 iff K is consistent. By
also taking the size and the relationships of minimal inconsistent subsets into account, a wide variety of different inconsistency measures can be deﬁned on top of that idea,
see e. g. (Hunter and Konieczny 2008; Jabbour et al. 2016;
Jabbour and Sais 2016).
Measuring inconsistency in nonmonotonic logics has
only recently gained some attention (Ulbricht, Thimm, and
Brewka 2016; Brewka, Thimm, and Ulbricht 2017) and a
thorough study is still needed. In this setting, a measure such
as IMI is not applicable as a consistent nonmonotonic knowledge base K may contain minimal inconsistent subsets. In
(Brewka, Thimm, and Ulbricht 2017), a reﬁned notion of
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
An extended version of this paper with proofs can be found at
http://mthimm.de/misc/utb aaai18 ext.pdf

1989

