The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Exploring Human-Like Attention
Supervision in Visual Question Answering
Tingting Qiao, Jianfeng Dong, Duanqing Xu
Zhejiang University, China
{qiaott, danieljf24, xdq}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Attention mechanisms have been widely applied in the Visual Question Answering (VQA) task, as they help to focus
on the area-of-interest of both visual and textual information.
To answer the questions correctly, the model needs to selectively target different areas of an image, which suggests that
an attention-based model may beneﬁt from an explicit attention supervision. In this work, we aim to address the problem of adding attention supervision to VQA models. Since
there is a lack of human attention data, we ﬁrst propose a
Human Attention Network (HAN) to generate human-like attention maps, training on a recently released dataset called
Human ATtention Dataset (VQA-HAT). Then, we apply the
pre-trained HAN on the VQA v2.0 dataset to automatically
produce the human-like attention maps for all image-question
pairs. The generated human-like attention map dataset for the
VQA v2.0 dataset is named as Human-Like ATtention (HLAT)
dataset. Finally, we apply human-like attention supervision to
an attention-based VQA model. The experiments show that
adding human-like supervision yields a more accurate attention together with a better performance, showing a promising
future for human-like attention supervision in VQA.

Original image

Attention map
(without supervision)

Attention map
(with supervision)

Question˖What animals
are following the horse?

Predicted answer: horses

Predicted answer: dogs

Question˖How many
candles are on the table?

Predicted answer: 0

Predicted answer: 2

Figure 1: Visualization of images, attention maps and predicted answers. As it is possible to see, through explicit attention supervision, the attention maps are more accurate
and the predicted answers yield better results. Best viewed
in color.

Introduction
Recently, attention-based models have been proved effective
in VQA recently (Shih, Singh, and Hoiem 2016; Yang et al.
2016; Fukui et al. 2016; Lu et al. 2016; Kim et al. 2016a). Inspired by human attention mechanisms, these models learn
dynamic weights indicating the importance of different regions in an image. However, the accuracy of the attention
that is implicitly learned during training is not ensured. As
it can be observed in Fig.1, the model without attention supervision generates inaccurate attention maps, which results
in the incorrect answers. A new VQA-HAT (Human ATtention) dataset has been recently collected by (Das et al. 2016)
and used to evaluate the attention learned in VQA attentionbased models. The conclusion of this work was that current
attention-based models do not seem to focus on the same
area as humans do when answering the questions, which
suggests that there is still room for improving the performance of VQA by adding human attention supervision. The
public VQA-HAT dataset has good potential to help training. However, only around 10% of the human attention maps

for the image-question pairs in the VQA v1.0 dataset (Antol
et al. 2015) are labeled, which makes it less effective when
used for the purpose of evaluating and improving the quality
of the machine-generated attention maps as it is quite limited. Besides, there are further questions to be explored:
• Do the regions highlighted by the human attention help
VQA attention-based models to yield better answers?
• How can human attention help to improve the performance of attention-based models in VQA?
To tackle these questions, a new and large-scale human attention dataset is ﬁrst needed. Collecting human labeled attention maps is one possible approach, but as mentioned in
(Das et al. 2016; Gan et al. 2017), it is a time-consuming and
expensive task. Since attention-based models in VQA have
shown the good performance on VQA tasks, we therefore
aim to develop a general network to automatically generate
attention maps for image-question pairs through training on

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7300

