The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Automatic Model Selection in Subspace
Clustering via Triplet Relationships
Jufeng Yang,1 Jie Liang,1 Kai Wang,1 Yong-Liang Yang,2 Ming-Ming Cheng1
1

College of Computer and Control Engineering, Nankai University, No.38 Tongyan Road, Tianjin, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath, United Kingdom

nuclear norm (Vidal 2011; Yang et al. 2016). The algorithm
then employs the spectral clustering (Shi and Malik 2000)
on the afﬁnity matrix derived from C for ﬁnal assignments.
Note that in practice, both the number of subspaces K and
their dimensions {dj }K
j=1 are always unknown (Vidal 2011;
Wang and Zhu 2015). Hence, the goals of subspace clustering include ﬁnding the appropriate K and assigning
data points into K clusters (Elhamifar and Vidal 2013;
Li et al. 2016).
However, modeling the cluster number in the optimization
framework is difﬁcult (Li et al. 2016), since the deﬁnition of
clusters is unquantiﬁable on the complex data space. Sequentially, most of the spectral based subspace clustering algorithms set the parameter K manually, which achieve state-ofthe-art performance on the conﬁned applications where the
number of clusters is ﬁxed and given.
Clustering aims to group the similar patterns into the same
cluster by maximizing the inter-cluster dissimilarity and the
intra-cluster similarity. An effective way for estimating K is
to map the original samples into intrinsic correlation space,
followed by an iterative optimization according to the local
similarity relationships among samples. Elhamifar et al. (Elhamifar and Vidal 2013) propose that the ΓC achieves a
block-diagonal structure with K blocks corresponding to
K clusters, where C is derived from (1) and Γ denotes a
proper permutation matrix. Moreover, Peng et al. (Peng et
al. 2016) verify the intra-subspace projection dominance
(IPD) of C derived from (1) with various ξ’s, i.e., for all
xp , xq ∈ S and xk ∈
/ S, we have cpq ≥cpk . Hence, considering a graph G = (X, C) (Nasihatkon and Hartley 2011), i.e.,
xi , xj ∈ X being the vertices and cij being the weight between xi and xj , the automatic segmentation can be greedily
generated via the following two steps inspired by the density based algorithms (Rodriguez and Laio 2014): 1) ﬁnding
 initialized clusters {Ci }K by minimizing the weighted
K
i=1
sum of all inter-cluster connections. 2) assigning the remaining samples x to a proper C by maximizing the weighted
connections between x and C.
Yet, since the low-dimensional sub-manifolds can be very
dense (Peng, Zhang, and Yi 2013), the points xi and xj
which are close regarding the pairwise distance may not
belong to the same subspace, especially near the intersection
 in which one edge can
of two subspaces. A hypergraph G
link up more than two vertices (Gao, Tsang, and Chia 2013;

Abstract
This paper addresses both the model selection (i.e. estimating
the number of clusters K) and subspace clustering problems
in a uniﬁed model. The real data always distribute on a union
of low-dimensional sub-manifolds which are embedded in a
high-dimensional ambient space. In this regard, the state-ofthe-art subspace clustering approaches ﬁrstly learn the afﬁnity
among samples, followed by a spectral clustering to generate
the segmentation. However, arguably, the intrinsic geometrical structures among samples are rarely considered in the
optimization process. In this paper, we propose to simultaneously estimate K and segment the samples according to the
local similarity relationships derived from the afﬁnity matrix.
Given the correlations among samples, we deﬁne a novel data
structure termed the Triplet, each of which reﬂects a high relevance and locality among three samples which are aimed to
be segmented into the same subspace. While the traditional
pairwise distance can be close between inter-cluster samples
lying on the intersection of two subspaces, the wrong assignments can be avoided by the hyper-correlation derived from
the proposed triplets due to the complementarity of multiple
constraints. Sequentially, we propose to greedily optimize a
new model selection reward to estimate K according to the
correlations between inter-cluster triplets. We simultaneously
optimize a fusion reward based on the similarities between
triplets and clusters to generate the ﬁnal segmentation. Extensive experiments on the benchmark datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness and robustness of the proposed approach.

Introduction
State-of-the-art subspace clustering methods model highdimensional data samples X = {xi ∈ RD }N
i=1 into a union
of low-dimensional subspaces {Sj }K
(Elhamifar
and Vidal
j=1
2009; Vidal 2011), where D and N denote the dimensionality and scale of the given dataset, respectively, K ≥ 1.
The primary step of the spectral based subspace clustering
methods is to calculate the coefﬁcient matrix C by solving
an optimization problem as follows:
min L(XC, X) + λCξ ,
C

(1)

where L(·, ·) : RN ×N → R+ denotes the reconstruction loss,
λ is the trade-off parameter and ·ξ denotes the regularization term where different ξ’s lead to 0 , 1 , 2 , ∞ or the
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4358

