The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Improving Sequence-to-Sequence
Constituency Parsing
Lemao Liu, Muhua Zhu, Shuming Shi
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
{redmondliu,muhuazhu, shumingshi}@tencent.com

Abstract
Sequence-to-sequence constituency parsing casts the treestructured prediction problem as a general sequential problem by top-down tree linearization, and thus it is very easy
to train in parallel with distributed facilities. Despite its success, it relies on a probabilistic attention mechanism for a
general purpose, which can not guarantee the selected context to be informative in the speciﬁc parsing scenario. Previous work introduced a deterministic attention to select the informative context for sequence-to-sequence parsing, but it is
based on the bottom-up linearization even if it was observed
that top-down linearization is better than bottom-up linearization for standard sequence-to-sequence constituency parsing.
In this paper, we thereby extend the deterministic attention
to directly conduct on the top-down tree linearization. Intensive experiments show that our parser delivers substantial improvements over the bottom-up linearization in accuracy, and
it achieves 92.3 Fscore on the Penn English Treebank section 23 and 85.4 Fscore on the Penn Chinese Treebank test
dataset, without reranking or semi-supervised training.

Figure 1: Top-down and bottom-up linearlization of a parse
tree in sequence-to-sequence constituency parsing. The input sequence x is the leaves of the parse tree in the top, and
the output is the linearized sequence y in the bottom. A dash
line indicates the relation between xi and “XX”.
to input tokens to select relevant context for better prediction as shown in Figure 2(a). This parsing model is general and easy to understand; particularly it runs in a sequential manner and thus is easy to parallelize with GPUs.
However, the probabilistic attention can not guarantee the
selected context is informative enough to yield satisfactory outputs. As a result, its accuracy is only comparable
to the feature-rich linear models (Petrov and Klein 2007;
Zhu et al. 2013), especially given that it utilizes global context.
Ma et al. (2017) proposed a deterministic attention for sequence to sequence parsing, which deﬁnes the alignments
between output and input tokens in a deterministic manner
to select the relevant context. This method was able to select better context than probabilistic attention for parsing.
However, their approach was conducted on the bottom up
linearization (see its linearized sequence in Figure 1) and
they require to binarize a parse tree, which induces the issue of ambiguity: different binarized trees may lead to the
same tree. In addition, the bottom-up linearization lacks of
top-down guidance such as lookahead information, which
has been proved to be useful for better prediction (Roark
and Johnson 1999; Liu and Zhang 2017b). As a result, their
parser is still worse than the state of the art parsers in accuracy.

Introduction
Constituency parsing is a fundamental task in natural language processing, and it plays an important role in downstream applications such as machine translation (Galley et
al. 2004; 2006) and semantic analysis (Rim, Seo, and Simmons 1990; Manning, Schütze, and others 1999). Over the
decades, feature-rich linear models had been dominant in
constituency parsing (Petrov and Klein 2007; Zhu et al.
2013); but they are not good at capturing the long distance dependencies due to feature sparsity. Recurrent neural networks have the advantages to address such issue,
and recently there has been much work on recurrent neural models for constituency parsing (Vinyals et al. 2015;
Watanabe and Sumita 2015; Dyer et al. 2016; Cross and
Huang 2016).
In particular, sequence-to-sequence parsing (Vinyals et al.
2015) has been increasingly popular. Its basic idea is to
linearize a parse tree into a sequence in a top-down manner (see Figure 1) and then transform parsing into a standard sequence-to-sequence learning task. The main technique inside the sequence-to-sequence parsing is a probabilistic attention mechanism, which aligns an output token
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4873

