The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

CSWA: Aggregation-Free Spatial-Temporal Community Sensing
Jiang Bian,∗ Haoyi Xiong,∗ Yanjie Fu, Sajal K. Das
Missouri University of Science and Technology, United States
*Equal Contribution

Spatial-temporal community sensing is an efﬁcient paradigm
that leverages the mobile sensors of community members to
monitor the spatial-temporal phenomena in the environment,
such as air pollution or temperature. According to (Zhang et
al. 2014a), there are two major roles in community sensing
– the organizer and the participants – where the former is
the individual or organization that creates the sensing task,
recruits participants and collects the sensor data, while the
latter (i.e., participants) involve in the sensing task and provide the sensing data. Frequently, the organizer pursues a
high (or even full) spatial-temporal coverage of the collected
sensor data. However incentives (e.g., monetary rewards) and
the threats to privacy (e.g., exposing real-time locations) are
two major concerns that may affect the willingness of the
participants to join a community sensing task.
In addition to the community sensing paradigm, a widespectrum of applications, ranging from vehicle trafﬁc monitoring (Ji, Zheng, and Li 2016; Yoon, Noble, and Liu 2007;
Herring et al. 2010; Hachem, Pathak, and Issarny 2013;

Pan et al. 2013) to air quality sensing (Aberer et al. 2010) and
urban noise monitoring (Liu et al. 2014), have been proposed
to efﬁciently monitor the environment of a large area through
aggregating the real-time sensor and location data from the
participants. Such applications use spatial-temporal coverage as the metric for overall task performance. Speciﬁcally,
to characterize spatial-temporal coverage, the target area is
split into subareas and the sensing duration is divided into
a sequence of equal-length sensing cycles. In this way, the
fraction of subareas covered by at least one sensor reading in
each cycle is used to measure the spatial-temporal coverage.
For example, (Xiong et al. 2015; Sheng, Tang, and Zhang
2012) proposed to use the full spatial-temporal coverage
as the criterion of the participants selection for community sensing, while (Zhang et al. 2014b; Hachem, Pathak,
and Issarny 2013) studied the partial spatial-temporal coverage as the objectives of the optimization for budgetconstrained participant selection. With the sensor data that
partially covers the target area, (Wang et al. 2015; 2016a;
2017b) proposed compressive community sensing, which is
capable of recovering the missing sensor data of the uncovered subareas from the data collected. Through the compressive community sensing, it is possible to accurately monitor
the target area with even lower spatial-temporal coverage,
thus resulting in reduced incentive consumption and fewer
participants involved.
Though compressive community sensing can effectively
reduce the required incentives and participants, it still aggregates the real-time location and sensor data from each
participant, so as to ﬁrst identify the covered subareas, ﬁll
with collected data, and then recover the missing data for
the rest. To protect the location privacy of participants, the
same of group of researchers (Wang et al. 2017a; 2016b) proposed to leverage the Differential Geo-Obfuscation to replace
each participants’ real-time location with a "mock" location
while insuring the recovery accuracy. With the Differential
Geo-Obfuscation, the participants’ locations are expected to
be well obfuscated; however, it is still possible to attack the
participant’s location when certain prior knowledge is leaked.
Thus, in our research, to further protect the real-time location
privacy, we propose a novel Aggregation-Free Compressive
Community Sensing framework, with following assumptions:

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Assumption I: the organizer is NOT allowed to collect the
real-time location or the sensor data from any participant;

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel community sensing paradigm
CSWA –Community Sensing Without Sensor/Location Data
Aggregation. CSWA is designed to obtain the environment
information (e.g., air pollution or temperature) in each subarea
of the target area, without aggregating sensor and location data
collected by community members. CSWA operates on top of
a secured peer-to-peer network over the community members
and proposes a novel Decentralized Spatial-Temporal Compressive Sensing framework based on Parallelized Stochastic
Gradient Descent. Through learning the low-rank structure via
distributed optimization, CSWA approximates the value of
the sensor data in each subarea (both covered and uncovered)
for each sensing cycle using the sensor data locally stored in
each member’s mobile device. Simulation experiments based
on real-world datasets demonstrate that CSWA exhibits low
approximation error (i.e., less than 0.2◦ C in city-wide temperature sensing task and 10 units of PM2.5 index in urban air
pollution sensing) and performs comparably to (sometimes
better than) state-of-the-art algorithms based on the data aggregation and centralized computation.

Introduction

2087

