The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Exploring Implicit Feedback for
Open Domain Conversation Generation
Wei-Nan Zhang, Lingzhi Li, Dongyan Cao, Ting Liu∗
Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval
School of Computer Science and Technology
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
{wnzhang, lzli, dycao, tliu}@ir.hit.edu.cn
Abstract

Table 1: Human-human conversation segments that are sampled from the OpenSubtitles dataset and contain the implicit
feedback.
Conversation Segments
Implicit
Feedback
A: All the girls ogle him, but he
1
Stance
doesn’t turn me on.
B: I don’t think he’s your type.
A: I love you so much. Do you have
2
Emotion
any feelings for me?
B: Would I see you if I didn’t?
A: You look pretty in anything. Are
3
Sentiment
you that happy?
B: I am.
A: What’s my least favorite word?
B: Phlegm.
4
Stalemate
A: You’re just guessing. It’s
“panties”.
B: Ohh.

User feedback can be an effective indicator to the success of
the human-robot conversation. However, to avoid to interrupt
the online real-time conversation process, explicit feedback
is usually gained at the end of a conversation. Alternatively,
users’ responses usually contain their implicit feedback, such
as stance, sentiment, emotion, etc., towards the conversation
content or the interlocutors. Therefore, exploring the implicit
feedback is a natural way to optimize the conversation generation process. In this paper, we propose a novel reward function which explores the implicit feedback to optimize the future reward of a reinforcement learning based neural conversation model. A simulation strategy is applied to explore the
state-action space in training and test. Experimental results
show that the proposed approach outperforms the Seq2Seq
model and the state-of-the-art reinforcement learning model
for conversation generation on automatic and human evaluations on the OpenSubtitles and Twitter datasets.

Introduction
Conversational robot is one of the most interesting and challenging topics in artiﬁcial intelligence research. It is usually developed to imitate the human-human chatting and applied to many scenarios, such as chitchat, interactive question answering, task-oriented dialogue, interactive recommendation, etc. With the blooming of deep neural network,
neural conversation models show amazing promise for conversation generation on two major categories. One is single turn response generation which is a context insensitive
responding process that generates a response by only considering an input message. Many research focuses on the
single turn response generation (Shang, Lu, and Li 2015;
Vinyals and Le 2015; Li et al. 2016a; Dai and Le 2015;
Li et al. 2016b; Yao, Zweig, and Peng 2015; Mou et
al. 2016; Xing et al. 2016b; Vougiouklis, Hare, and Simperl 2016; Xing et al. 2016a). It is also worth mentioning that the single turn response generation task is also
promoted by the short text conversation (STC) task of
NTCIR-12 (http://ntcir12.noahlab.com.hk/stc.htm) and 13
(http://ntcirstc.noahlab.com.hk/STC2/stc-cn.htm). However,

the main drawback of most single turn response generation models is that they tend to frequently generate generic
responses, such as “Me, too”, “I don’t know”, due to the
maximum likelihood training (Li et al. 2016a; Serban et al.
2016c). Moreover, these generic responses are not ease to
respond and thus lead to an early close of conversations (Li
et al. 2016c).
The other is multi-turn conversation generation which
utilizes the recurrent neural network (RNN) based encoderdecoder (Serban et al. 2016a; 2016c; 2016b) and the end-toend memory network (Bordes and Weston 2016) to model
the context information. Recently, the reinforcement learning based conversation generation approaches are proposed
to modeling long-term reward (Li et al. 2016c; Asghar et al.
2016; Dhingra et al. 2016). The goal of these models is to
generate coherent responses to make the conversations easy
to sustain (Li et al. 2016c).
Despite the success of previous work on multi-turn neural
conversation generation, a serious issue still remains: The
existing approaches for neural conversation generation have
not considered the implicit feedback on both of ofﬂine and
online learning of the human-robot conversation process.

∗

Corresponding Author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

547

