The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

SEE: Syntax-Aware Entity Embedding
for Neural Relation Extraction
Zhengqiu He,1 Wenliang Chen,1,4∗ Zhenghua Li 1
Meishan Zhang,3 Wei Zhang,2 Min Zhang1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, China
2
Alibaba Group, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Heilongjiang University, China
4
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, China
zqhe@stu.suda.edu.cn, {wlchen, zhli13, minzhang}@suda.edu.cn
mason.zms@gmail.com, lantu.zw@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract

joined

Distant supervised relation extraction is an efﬁcient approach
to scale relation extraction to very large corpora, and has
been widely used to ﬁnd novel relational facts from plain
text. Recent studies on neural relation extraction have shown
great progress on this task via modeling the sentences in lowdimensional spaces, but seldom considered syntax information to model the entities. In this paper, we propose to learn
syntax-aware entity embedding for neural relation extraction.
First, we encode the context of entities on a dependency tree
as sentence-level entity embedding based on tree-GRU. Then,
we utilize both intra-sentence and inter-sentence attentions to
obtain sentence set-level entity embedding over all sentences
containing the focus entity pair. Finally, we combine both
sentence embedding and entity embedding for relation classiﬁcation. We conduct experiments on a widely used real-world
dataset and the experimental results show that our model can
make full use of all informative instances and achieve stateof-the-art performance of relation extraction.

2006

In

early

he

Khosla_Ventures
firm

a silicon valley venture started
Vinod_Khosla
by founder
a Microsystems
of

Sun

Figure 1: An example dependency tree containing two entities in sentence “In early 2006, he joined Khosla Ventures, a silicon valley venture ﬁrm started by Vinod Khosla,
a founder of Sun Microsystems.”.

for distant supervision to produce training corpus. While this
may be problematic in some conditions, thus can result in
noises. For example, the sentence “Investors include Vinod
Khosla of Khosla Ventures, who, with the private equity
group of texas paciﬁc group ventures, invested $20 million.”
is not for relation /business/company/founders of Khosla
Ventures and Vinod Khosla in Freebase, but it is still be regarded as a positive instance under the assumption of distant
supervision. Based on the observation, recent work present
multi-instance learning (MIL) to address the problem, by
treating each produced sentence differently during the training (Riedel, Yao, and McCallum 2010; Zeng et al. 2015;
Lin et al. 2016). Our work also falls into this category.
Under the statistical models with handcrafted features,
a number of studies have proposed syntactic features, and
achieved better results by using them (Hoffmann et al. 2011;
Surdeanu et al. 2012). Recently, the neural network models
have dominated the work of RE because of higher performances (Lin et al. 2016; Ji et al. 2017). Similarly, the syntax
information has also been investigated in neural RE. One
representative method is to use the shortest dependency path
(SDP) between a given entity pair (Miwa and Bansal 2016),

Introduction
Relation extraction (RE), deﬁned as the task of extracting
semantic relations between entity pairs from plain text, has
received increasing interests in the community of natural
language processing (Riedel et al. 2013; Miwa and Bansal
2016). The task is a typical classiﬁcation problem after the
entity pairs are speciﬁed (Zeng et al. 2014). Traditional supervised methods require large-scale manually-constructed
corpus, which is expensive and conﬁned to certain domains.
Recently, distant supervision has gained a lot of attentions
which is capable of exploiting automatically-produced training corpus (Mintz et al. 2009). The framework has achieved
great success and has brought state-of-the-art performances
in RE.
Given an entity pair (e , e ) from one knowledge base
(KB) such as Freebase, assuming that the predeﬁned semantic relation on the KB is r, we simply label all sentences containing the two entities by label r. This is the key principle
∗

The corresponding author is Wenliang Chen.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5795

