The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Expected Policy Gradients
Kamil Ciosek, Shimon Whiteson
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
Wolfson Building, Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QD
{kamil.ciosek,shimon.whiteson}@cs.ox.ac.uk

assumes a critic that approximates ∇a Q when in practice it approximates Q instead. In addition, DPG learns
off-policy1 , which is undesirable when we want learning
to take the cost of exploration into account. More importantly, learning off-policy necessitates designing a suitable
exploration policy, which is difﬁcult in practice. In fact, efﬁcient exploration in DPG is an open problem and most
applications simply use independent Gaussian noise or the
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck heuristic (Uhlenbeck and Ornstein 1930;
Lillicrap et al. 2015).
In this paper, we propose a new approach called expected
policy gradients (EPG) that uniﬁes policy gradients in a way
that yields both theoretical and practical insights. Inspired
by expected sarsa (Sutton and Barto 1998; van Seijen et al.
2009), the main idea is to integrate across the action selected
by the stochastic policy when estimating the gradient, instead
of relying only on the action selected during the sampled
trajectory.
EPG enables two theoretical contributions. First, we establish a number of equivalences between EPG and DPG, among
which is a new general policy gradient theorem, of which
the stochastic and deterministic policy gradient theorems are
special cases. Second, we prove that EPG reduces the variance of the gradient estimates without requiring deterministic
policies and, for the Gaussian case, with no computational
overhead over SPG.
EPG also enables a practical contribution: a principled
exploration strategy for continuous problems. We show that
it is optimal in a certain sense to explore with a Gaussian
policy such that the covariance is proportional to eH , where
H is the scaled Hessian of the critic with respect to the
actions. We present empirical results conﬁrming that this new
approach to exploration substantially outperforms DPG with
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck exploration in four challenging MuJoCo
domains.

Abstract
We propose expected policy gradients (EPG), which unify
stochastic policy gradients (SPG) and deterministic policy gradients (DPG) for reinforcement learning. Inspired by expected
sarsa, EPG integrates across the action when estimating the
gradient, instead of relying only on the action in the sampled
trajectory. We establish a new general policy gradient theorem,
of which the stochastic and deterministic policy gradient theorems are special cases. We also prove that EPG reduces the
variance of the gradient estimates without requiring deterministic policies and, for the Gaussian case, with no computational
overhead. Finally, we show that it is optimal in a certain sense
to explore with a Gaussian policy such that the covariance
is proportional to eH , where H is the scaled Hessian of the
critic with respect to the actions. We present empirical results
conﬁrming that this new form of exploration substantially outperforms DPG with the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck heuristic in four
challenging MuJoCo domains.

Introduction
Policy gradient methods (Sutton et al. 2000; Peters and
Schaal 2006; 2008b; Silver et al. 2014), which optimise policies by gradient ascent, have enjoyed great success in reinforcement learning problems with large or continuous action
spaces. The archetypal algorithm optimises an actor, i.e., a
policy, by following a policy gradient that is estimated using
a critic, i.e., a value function.
The policy can be stochastic or deterministic, yielding
stochastic policy gradients (SPG) (Sutton et al. 2000) or
deterministic policy gradients (DPG) (Silver et al. 2014).
The theory underpinning these methods is quite fragmented,
as each approach has a separate policy gradient theorem
guaranteeing the policy gradient is unbiased under certain
conditions.
Furthermore, both approaches have signiﬁcant shortcomings. For SPG, variance in the gradient estimates means that
many trajectories are usually needed for learning. Since gathering trajectories is typically expensive, there is a great need
for more sample efﬁcient methods.
DPG’s use of deterministic policies mitigates the problem of variance in the gradient but raises other difﬁculties. The theoretical support for DPG is limited since it

Background
A Markov decision process is a tuple (S, A, R, p, p0 , γ)
where S is a set of states, A is a set of actions (in practice
either A = Rd or A is ﬁnite), R(s, a) is a reward function,
p(s | a, s) is a transition kernel, p0 is an initial state distri-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
We show in this paper that, in certain settings, off-policy DPG
is equivalent to EPG, our on-policy method.

2868

