The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Cognition-Cognizant Sentiment Analysis with Multitask
Subjectivity Summarization Based on Annotators’ Gaze Behavior
Abhijit Mishra, Srikanth Tamilselvam,
Riddhiman Dasgupta, Seema Nagar, Kuntal Dey
IBM Research AI, India
{abhijimi,srikanth.tamilselvam,riddasgu,senagar3,kuntadey}@in.ibm.com

binary SA systems have applications galore in social media analysis, recommender systems, e-commerce settings, to
name a few.
The central challenge for such SA systems is to ﬁgure
out the portions of the input review that are subjective, i.e.,
contain opinion and not facts, and are relevant i.e., express
opinion regarding the central aspect. This process is called
Subjectivity Extraction (Pang and Lee 2004). A subjective
extract of a movie review, per se, would not contain facts
(e.g., Jim Caviezel plays Dantes), or opinions that are less
connected to the central aspect (e.g., “Jim Caviezel was excellent as the count, and you loved to hate Guy Pearce as
his friend-gone-enemy”). Subjectivity Extraction remains a
problem hard to solve, as it demands tremendous amount of
world knowledge and reasoning. A few works, such as Pang
and Lee (2004) and (Mukherjee and Bhattacharyya 2012),
successfully extract facts from opinion before performing
SA, but extracting the relevant subjective portions still remains a difﬁcult problem.
Unlike machines, humans are quite apt in extracting subjective summaries from reviews. This is evident from their
reading behavior, while they read and infer sentiment expressed in an opinion. Mishra, Joshi, and Bhattacharyya
(2014), through a pilot study, observe that, human annotators
perform subjectivity extraction in such a way that the extracts are gradually formed and revised during reading of the
document. This is supported by the eye-movement behavior of the annotators. Eye-movement attributes such as gazeﬁxations and regressive saccades, provide evidences regarding what portions of the text needs to be retained as subjective extracts and how subjective extracts gradually build
up before decision regarding sentiment is ﬁnalized. In summary, document level sentiment analysis, for humans, is an
interplay between multiple tasks such as subjectivity extraction and sentiment inferencing.
Can machines learn to read like humans, and perform sentiment inferencing? We attempt to answer this question by
proposing a multitask recurrent neural network architecture
that learns to predict sentiment by simultaneously learning
to predict gaze. Additionally, the system also learns to perform an auxiliary linguistic tasks of part-of-speech (POS)
tag prediction. The linguistic task is included to make the
system aware of the lexical and syntactic properties of the
text. Our architecture is based on shared layers of Long

Abstract
For document level sentiment analysis (SA), Subjectivity Extraction, ie., extracting the relevant subjective portions of the
text that cover the overall sentiment expressed in the document, is an important step. Subjectivity Extraction, however,
is a hard problem for systems, as it demands a great deal of
world knowledge and reasoning. Humans, on the other hand,
are good at extracting relevant subjective summaries from an
opinionated document (say, a movie review), while inferring
the sentiment expressed in it. This capability is manifested in
their eye-movement behavior while reading: words pertaining
to the subjective summary of the text attract a lot more attention in the form of gaze-ﬁxations and/or saccadic patterns.
We propose a multi-task deep neural framework for document
level sentiment analysis that learns to predict the overall sentiment expressed in the given input document, by simultaneously learning to predict human gaze behavior and auxiliary linguistic tasks like part-of-speech and syntactic properties of words in the document. For this, a multi-task learning algorithm based on multi-layer shared LSTM augmented
with task speciﬁc classiﬁers is proposed. With this composite multi-task network, we obtain performance competitive
with or better than state-of-the-art approaches in SA. Moreover, the availability of gaze predictions as an auxiliary output helps interpret the system better; for instance, gaze predictions reveal that the system indeed performs subjectivity
extraction better, which accounts for improvement in document level sentiment analysis performance.

1

Introduction

Document level Sentiment Analysis (SA) has been a wellstudied problem. It deals with predicting the polarity of the
opinion expressed by a user/reviewer in the form a discourse, typically spanning over a few paragraphs. In this
work, we propose yet another solution to document level
SA; speciﬁcally, we tackle binary sentiment classiﬁcation,
for instance, classifying a movie review as positive (“thumbs
up”) or negative (“thumbs down”). Though sentiment expressed in an opinion can be different for different aspects
(e.g., “quality of music” in a movie review), and aspectbased SA is a separate branch of research, SA systems are
often required to predict the sentiment polarity based on one
central aspect that the overall opinion revolves around. Such
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5884

