The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Wasserstein Distance Guided
Representation Learning for Domain Adaptation
Jian Shen, Yanru Qu, Weinan Zhang,∗ Yong Yu
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{rockyshen, kevinqu, wnzhang, yyu}@apex.sjtu.edu.cn

2009), subsampling (Chen, Chen, and Weinberger 2011),
feature mapping (Tzeng et al. 2014) and weight regularization (Rozantsev, Salzmann, and Fua 2016). Among these
methods feature mapping has shown great success recently,
which projects the data from different domains to a common latent space where the feature representations are domain invariant. Recently, deep neural networks, as a great
tool to automatically learn effective data representations,
have been leveraged in learning knowledge-transferable feature representations for domain adaptation (Glorot, Bordes,
and Bengio 2011; Chen et al. 2012; Zhuang et al. 2015;
Long et al. 2015; Ganin et al. 2016).
On the other hand, generative adversarial nets (GANs)
(Goodfellow et al. 2014) are heavily studied during recent
years, which play a minimax game between two adversarial networks: the discriminator is trained to distinguish real
data from the generated data, while the generator learns to
generate high-quality data to fool the discriminator. It is intuitive to employ this minimax game for domain adaptation
to make the source and target feature representations indistinguishable. These adversarial adaptation methods have
become a popular solution to reduce domain discrepancy
through an adversarial objective with respect to a domain
classiﬁer (Ganin et al. 2016; Tzeng et al. 2017). However,
when the domain classiﬁer network can perfectly distinguish
target representations from source ones, there will be a gradient vanishing problem. A more reasonable solution would
be to replace the domain discrepancy measure with Wasserstein distance, which provides more stable gradients even if
two distributions are distant (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou
2017).
In this paper, we propose a domain invariant representation learning approach to reduce domain discrepancy for domain adaptation, namely Wasserstein Distance Guided Representation Learning (WDGRL), inspired by recently proposed Wasserstein GAN (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou
2017). WDGRL trains a domain critic network to estimate
the empirical Wasserstein distance between the source and
target feature representations. The feature extractor network
will then be optimized to minimize the estimated Wasserstein distance in an adversarial manner. By iterative adversarial training, we ﬁnally learn feature representations invariant to the covariate shift between domains. Additionally,
WDGRL can be easily adopted in existing domain adap-

Abstract
Domain adaptation aims at generalizing a high-performance
learner on a target domain via utilizing the knowledge distilled from a source domain which has a different but related data distribution. One solution to domain adaptation
is to learn domain invariant feature representations while
the learned representations should also be discriminative in
prediction. To learn such representations, domain adaptation
frameworks usually include a domain invariant representation
learning approach to measure and reduce the domain discrepancy, as well as a discriminator for classiﬁcation. Inspired by
Wasserstein GAN, in this paper we propose a novel approach
to learn domain invariant feature representations, namely
Wasserstein Distance Guided Representation Learning (WDGRL). WDGRL utilizes a neural network, denoted by the
domain critic, to estimate empirical Wasserstein distance between the source and target samples and optimizes the feature
extractor network to minimize the estimated Wasserstein distance in an adversarial manner. The theoretical advantages of
Wasserstein distance for domain adaptation lie in its gradient property and promising generalization bound. Empirical
studies on common sentiment and image classiﬁcation adaptation datasets demonstrate that our proposed WDGRL outperforms the state-of-the-art domain invariant representation
learning approaches.

Introduction
Domain adaptation deﬁnes the problem when the target domain labeled data is insufﬁcient, while the source domain
has much more labeled data. Even though the source and
target domains have different marginal distributions (BenDavid et al. 2007; Pan and Yang 2010), domain adaptation
aims at utilizing the knowledge distilled from the source
domain to help target domain learning. In practice, unsupervised domain adaptation is concerned and studied more
commonly since manual annotation is often expensive or
time-consuming. Faced with the covariate shift and the lack
of annotations, conventional machine learning methods may
fail to learn a high-performance model.
To effectively transfer a classiﬁer across different domains, different methods have been proposed, including
instance reweighting (Mansour, Mohri, and Rostamizadeh
∗

Weinan Zhang is the corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4058

