The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

On Validation and Predictability of
Digital Badges’ Inﬂuence on Individual Users
Tomasz Kuśmierczyk, Kjetil Nørvåg
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
{tomaszku,noervaag}@ntnu.no

101

user characteristics

100
10−1
10−2
10−3
0

10

badge awarding, bu

Badges are a common, and sometimes the only, method
of incentivizing users to perform certain actions on online sites. However, due to many competing factors inﬂuencing user temporal dynamics, it is difﬁcult to determine whether the badge had (or will have) the intended
effect or not.
In this paper, we introduce two complementary approaches for determining badge inﬂuence on users. In the
ﬁrst one, we cluster users’ temporal traces (represented
with Poisson processes) and apply covariates (user features) to regularize results. In the second approach, we
ﬁrst classify users’ temporal traces with a novel statistical framework, and then we reﬁne the classiﬁcation
results with a semi-supervised clustering of covariates.
Outcomes obtained from an evaluation on synthetic
datasets and experiments on two badges from a popular Q&A platform conﬁrm that it is possible to validate,
characterize and to some extent predict users affected by
the badge.

102

badge introduction, τ

#days between actions

Abstract

20

30

40

50

60

action number

70

age
location
views
comments
upvotes
downvotes

40
Madison
102981
3246
14407
9019

Figure 1: Sample user from Stack Overﬂow inﬂuenced by
the Research Assistant badge that is awarded for tag wiki
edits. The user increases its action rate when the badge is
introduced to the community (at time τ ), and returns to the
previous rate after receiving it (at time bu ).
many competing factors inﬂuencing their dynamics. Furthermore, neither ground truth nor counterfactual data showing
behavior of users not inﬂuenced by badges are available.
In this paper, we focus on the most popular type of badges,
i.e., threshold badges, that are awarded after a user performs
a certain number of desired actions. The above challenges
in this context can be addressed by simultaneously looking
at users’ temporal traces and their general characteristics. In
particular, we identiﬁed the following useful patterns:
– attracted users change their mean behavior around the
badge awarding time
– inﬂuenceable users are similar
As an example, Figure 1 illustrates how user action rate
changes due to the badge, and also shows the associated user
features and statistics.
In this paper, we propose two complementary solutions to
the user badge inﬂuence problem exploiting the above observations. In both we apply users’ temporal traces (modeled as
non-homogeneous Poisson processes) as a main source of the
badge effect information and use associated covariates (user
features and statistics) to regularize classiﬁcation results.
This paper makes the following contributions:
– introduction and formalization of the user badge inﬂuence
problem
– validation and prediction of the inﬂuence of badges on
individual users with two novel methods:
I. a model-based algorithm to cluster (problem-speciﬁc)
counting processes with covariates used to encode
priors

Introduction
Awarding a digital badge after a user performs certain actions
is a common mechanism to motivate users on online sites, be
it social networking sites like Foursquare1 , education sites
like Khan Academy2 , or crowdlearning Q&A sites like Stack
Overﬂow3 . Previously, there have been several attempts at
modeling the badges’ effect on online communities and at
recommending how the badge systems should be designed.
However, there are no previous studies actually verifying
whether the badges have any impact on individual users or
not; it has been taken for granted that badges affect targeted
users in a desired way. In contrast, in this paper we take a
closer look at this assumption, and present the ﬁrst work that
addresses the problems of validation, characterization and
prediction of users attracted to badges.
It is a challenging task to answer the question whether a
user was (is) in any way motivated by the badge. Users tend
to evolve over time, and apart from badges there are usually
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://foursquare.com
2
https://www.khanacademy.org/
3
https://stackoverﬂow.com

322

