The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Leveraging Lexical Substitutes
for Unsupervised Word Sense Induction
Domagoj Alagić, Jan Šnajder

Sebastian Padó

TakeLab, Faculty of Electrical Engineering
and Computing, University of Zagreb
Unska 3, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia
{domagoj.alagic,jan.snajder}@fer.hr

Institut für Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung
University of Stuttgart
Pfaffenwaldring 5b, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany
pado@ims.uni-stuttgart.de

Abstract

ID

Instance (word in context)

Word sense induction is the most prominent unsupervised approach to lexical disambiguation. It clusters word instances,
typically represented by their bag-of-words contexts. Therefore, uninformative and ambiguous contexts present a major challenge. In this paper, we investigate the use of an alternative instance representation based on lexical substitutes,
i.e., contextually suitable, meaning-preserving replacements.
Using lexical substitutes predicted by a state-of-the-art automatic system and a simple clustering algorithm, we outperform bag-of-words instance representations and compete
with much more complex structured probabilistic models.
Furthermore, we show that an oracle based on manuallylabeled lexical substitutes yields yet substantially higher performance. Taken together, this provides evidence for a complementarity between word sense induction and lexical substitution that has not been given much consideration before.

1

. . . consistently reading papers with
poor English. . .
. . . while reading an item in the English paper today . . .
. . . papers may use previously published material. . .
. . . the material uses fancy paper. . .

1

2
3
4

Cluster

Substitutes

1

article,
manuscript
newspaper,
periodical
article,
publication
pulp,
parchment

2
1
3

Table 1: Example of WSI clusters and lexical substitutions
for four instances of the noun paper.

These problems have motivated research in word sense
induction or WSI (Schütze 1998). WSI aims to induce word
senses from unannotated corpora, typically by performing
clustering. Unlike in WSD, word senses therefore arise dynamically from the corpora under consideration and can be
tailored to the requirements of the scenario at hand. In this
manner, WSI avoids the pitfalls of WSD outlined above. As
an example for WSI, consider the (illustrative) clusters for
some instances of paper shown in Table 1. Cluster 1 has the
interpretation “paper as a scholarly article”, cluster 2 corresponds to “paper as a newspaper”, while cluster 3 corresponds to “paper as material”, without making ﬁner-grained
distinctions. For comparison, WordNet lists seven senses for
the noun paper, among which one for the scholarly article,
three for the newspaper, and two for the material.
Importantly, the ability of WSI to identify meaningful
word senses hinges on the extent to which the senses correlate with distinct contexts, as per the distributional hypothesis (Harris 1954). Thus, a major challenge for WSI is that
many contexts are ambiguous or not discriminative enough,
particularly at a bag-of-words level. This is also illustrated in
Table 1: in terms of context words overlap, instances 1 and
2 as well as instances 3 and 4 are rather similar, rendering it
difﬁcult to cluster them into separate sense clusters.
Our paper speciﬁcally addresses the problem of noisy
contexts. We start from the hypothesis that WSI can beneﬁt
from complementing contextual information with a different
description of instance meaning, namely lexical substitutes.
Lexical substitution or LS (McCarthy and Navigli 2007) is
another relatively recent alternative to WSD that completely

Introduction

Lexical ambiguity, the phenomenon of words having multiple senses, is pervasive in language. Considerable attention
in natural language processing (NLP) has been devoted to
developing methods for describing lexical ambiguity and resolving it. Resolving lexical ambiguity has been argued to
matter for many tasks from information retrieval (Stokoe,
Oakes, and Tait 2003) and information extraction (Ciaramita
and Altun 2006) to sentiment analysis (Wiebe and Mihalcea
2006) and machine translation (Carpuat and Wu 2007).
The most prominent approach to modeling and resolving lexical ambiguity is word sense disambiguation or WSD
(Navigli 2009), where the task is to assign to each instance of
a word a sense label from a ﬁxed inventory such as WordNet
(Fellbaum 1998). While useful, WSD methods suffer from
two drawbacks. First, WSD typically uses supervised classiﬁcation methods or lexical knowledge bases, which require
large amounts of manually labeled data or large-coverage
lexical resources. This makes WSD methods expensive to
develop. Second, the assumption that a complete and appropriate sense inventory is available turns out to be problematic for various reasons, including resource coverage,
domain-speciﬁc usages, or questions of sense granularity
(Edmonds and Kilgarriff 2002; Snyder and Palmer 2004).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5004

