The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Energy-Efﬁcient Automatic Train Driving
by Learning Driving Patterns
Jin Huang, Yue Gao,∗ Sha Lu, Xibin Zhao,∗ Yangdong Deng, Ming Gu
School of Software/KLISS/TNList
Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China.
∗
indicates corresponding authors, emails: {gaoyue,zxb}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Railway is regarded as the most sustainable means of modern transportation. With the fast-growing of ﬂeet size and the
railway mileage, the energy consumption of trains is becoming a serious concern globally. The nature of railway offers a
unique opportunity to optimize the energy efﬁciency of locomotives by taking advantage of the undulating terrains along
a route. The derivation of an energy-optimal train driving solution, however, proves to be a signiﬁcant challenge due to the
high dimension, nonlinearity, complex constraints, and timevarying characteristic of the problem. An optimized solution
can only be attained by considering both the complex environmental conditions of a given route and the inherent characteristics of a locomotive. To tackle the problem, this paper
employs a high-order correlation learning method for online
generation of the energy optimized train driving solutions.
Based on the driving data of experienced human drivers, a
hypergraph model is used to learn the optimal embedding
from the speciﬁed features for the decision of a driving operation. First, we design a feature set capturing the driving status. Next all the training data are formulated as a hypergraph
and an inductive learning process is conducted to obtain the
embedding matrix. The hypergraph model can be used for
real-time generation of driving operation. We also proposed
a reinforcement updating scheme, which offers the capability
of sustainable enhancement on the hypergraph model in industrial applications. The learned model can be used to determine an optimized driving operation in real-time tested
on the Hardware-in-Loop platform. Validation experiments
proved that the energy consumption of the proposed solution
is around 10% lower than that of average human drivers.

Figure 1: The illustration of the developed Automatic Train
Driving system. It has two interactive units at both side of
the locomotive. The Train driving mode can be switched between manually driving and automatic driving.

energy efﬁciency of trains by taking advantage of the undulating terrains along a route. The Automatic Train Driving
system, as shown in Figure 1, serves the purpose of driving the train with rather optimized and consistent solutions
compare to human drivers. However, the derivation of an
energy-optimal driving solution for a train is challenging
because both the geographic environment of the route and
the inherent conditions of a train have to be considered. The
high dimension, nonlinearity, complex constraints, and timevarying characteristics make it hard to generate an optimized
driving operation (Yang et al. 2016).
Signiﬁcant research and engineering efforts have been
dedicated to derive the optimized driving operation. As it
was proved that a unique optimal solution can be derived
under certain assumptions, many analytical solutions were
proposed (Vu 2009; Albrecht et al. 2011; Howlett and Pudney 2012). However, the assumptions may not hold under realistic situations. In addition, complex driving constraints have to be respected in today’s railway system. To
handle the realistic conditions and complex constraints, advanced numerical searching techniques, like the Genetic Algorithm (Han et al. 1999; Li and Hou 2007), Evolutionary
Algorithms (Chang and Kwan 2004), Dynamic Programming (Vašak et al. 2009; Miyatake and Ko 2010; Franke,

Introduction
Regarded as the most sustainable means of modern transportation, the railway system itself is facing the challenge
of energy efﬁciency. In fact, the fast-growing train ﬂeet size
and railway mileage make the energy consumption of trains
a global concern. According to the Railway Handbook 2016,
the railway system was responsible for 2,200 PJ, or 0.6% of
global energy consumption. Such an amount suggests that
even a 1% energy-saving sufﬁces to support the residential
power of two major metropolitan cities like New York. The
nature of railway offers a unique opportunity to optimize the
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2265

