The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Building Continuous Occupancy
Maps with Moving Robots
Ransalu Senanayake, Fabio Ramos
School of Information Technologies,
The University of Sydney,
Australia

In a different approach, occupancy mapping has been
treated as a supervised learning problem in Gaussian process occupancy maps (GPOMs) (O’Callaghan and Ramos
2014) and Hilbert maps (HMs) (Ramos and Ott 2015).
Both of these representations are continuous and exploit the
spatial proximity of occupied and non-occupied observations, usually from a laser range ﬁnder, to predict the occupancy property of unseen regions. Because the representations are continuous they can be applied to indoor and
outdoor environments. Common to both methods is the use
of kernels (Smola and Schlkopf 2003; Kivinen, Smola, and
Williamson 2014) to capture spatial closeness between observations. Another important advantage of continuous occupancy maps is the fact that they provide a functional representation of space where derivatives with respect to model
parameters and occupancy levels are directly available. This
is important for simultaneous localization and mapping
problems (Stachniss, Leonard, and Thrun 2016) where the
robot needs to localize within a map being constructed,
and path planning (Norouzii, Miro, and Dissanayake 2016)
where the robot attempts to ﬁnd a trajectory that minimizes
the chance of collisions (Marinho et al. 2016) (Mukadam et
al. 2017).
Within the context of these recent developments, the paper brings the following contributions:
1. An analysis of Bayesian Hilbert maps (BHMs) and Gaussian process occupancy maps considering the fact that
both use kernels and variational inference;
2. The use of convolution of kernels in robotic mapping;
3. Proposing the BHMs framework to map the occupancy of
large environments using moving robots.
The paper is organized as follows. Firstly, we provide
an overview of continuous occupancy mapping techniques.
Then, in the next section, the BHMs framework is introduced for moving robots to map large areas. We discuss
the similarities and differences between BHMs and GPOMs
highlighting that both are Bayesian models with a similar
likelihood that uses kernels to automatically capture complex spatial patterns using a few sparse data points. Next, we
propose a variety of techniques to use convolution within the
BHMs framework. Finally, we report experimental results
based on simulated environments and real-world benchmark
datasets.

Abstract
Mapping the occupancy level of an environment is important for a robot to navigate in unknown and unstructured
environments. To this end, continuous occupancy mapping
techniques which express the probability of a location as
a function are used. In this work, we provide a theoretical
analysis to compare and contrast the two major branches
of Bayesian continuous occupancy mapping techniques—
Gaussian process occupancy maps and Bayesian Hilbert
maps—considering the fact that both utilize kernel functions
to operate in a rich high-dimensional implicit feature space
and use variational inference to learn parameters. Then, we
extend the recent Bayesian Hilbert maps framework which
is so far only used for stationary robots, to map large environments with moving robots. Finally, we propose convolution of kernels as a powerful tool to improve different aspects of continuous occupancy mapping. Our claims are also
experimentally validated with both simulated and real-world
datasets.

Introduction
Spatial awareness is of fundamental importance for artiﬁcial intelligent systems to operate safely and robustly in real
world applications. The recent development of autonomous
cars, which is revolutionizing transportation and urban design practices, brings unprecedented need for accurate, robust, fast, and, adaptive spatial representations that can be
directly utilized in decision making systems. One type of
such spatial representation that has been very popular in
robotics is occupancy mapping, in which points in 2D or 3D
space receive a label on whether or not it is occupied by an
object. The seminal work by Elfes (Elfes 1989) introduced
the occupancy grid map which discretizes the environment
into cells and computes a probability distribution on the occupancy level. Due to its simplicity, occupancy grid maps
have been the standard spatial representation particularly for
indoor environments where the dimensions of the space to
be mapped are known in advance. However, strong independent assumptions between the occupancy level of each cell
and the need to deﬁne the level of discretization or resolution
of the map at the beginning of the mapping process constitute major limitations for the technique.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6532

