The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Iterative Continuous Convolution for
3D Template Matching and Global Localization
Vitor Guizilini, Fabio Ramos
School of Information Technologies, The University of Sydney, Australia
e-mail: {vitor.guizilini@;fabio.ramos}sydney.edu.au

of real world structures and environments than a single 2D
slice. Unfortunately, the computational complexity of crosscorrelation grows exponentially in relation to the number
of input dimensions, rendering 3D calculations very timeconsuming. Moreover, due to the discrete nature of digital
data, the exact formulation is often substituted by a discrete
approximation, that even though much simpler requires substantially more computational power and memory. Several
different approaches have been proposed over the years to alleviate this drawback, such as separable kernels (Hummel and
Lower 1986), recursive ﬁltering (Bernd 2005) and transformation to the frequency domain (Bracewell 2003). However,
these approaches are mostly circumstantial and cannot be
applied in every scenario: not all kernels are separable; recursive ﬁltering often suffers from inaccuracy and instability;
and calculations in the frequency domain have considerable
more memory requirements and lower numerical precision.
Cross-correlation shares many similarities with convolution, an equally important mathematical tool with applications in areas such as ﬁltering (Jan 2000), denoising
(Vaseghi 2006), compression (Salomon 2006) and deconvolution (Castleman 1996). In order to extend its use to higherdimensional spaces, a substantial amount of work has been
done to increase efﬁciency in the convolution formulation:
in (Riegler, Ulusoy, and Geiger 2016), an octotree is used to
exploit sparsity in input data to hierarchically partition the
space, creating a varying-size voxel grid that avoids wasteful computations and decreases memory requirements. This
framework is then used to train a convolutional neural network for tasks such as object classiﬁcation, orientation estimation and point cloud labeling. Similarly, (Li et al. 2016)
represents 3D space as volumetric ﬁelds and proposes the
use of ﬁeld probing ﬁlters to efﬁciently extract features from
sparse input data.
All these approaches, however, are still discrete, and very
little attention has been paid over the years to the application
of continuous convolution to similar tasks. This paper proposes a novel methodology that enables the use of continuous
convolution between sparse 3D pointclouds1 , delivering the
result as a function that can be queried at arbitrary resolutions and at logarithmic time, thus allowing for very efﬁcient

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel methodology for 3D template
matching that is scalable to higher-dimensional spaces and
larger kernel sizes. It uses the Hilbert Maps framework to
model raw pointcloud information as a continuous occupancy
function, and we derive a closed-form solution to the convolution operation that takes place directly in the Reproducing
Kernel Hilbert Space deﬁning these functions. The result is a
third function modeling activation values, that can be queried
at arbitrary resolutions with logarithmic complexity, and by iteratively searching for high similarity areas we can determine
matching candidates. Experimental results show substantial
speed gains over standard discrete convolution techniques,
such as sliding window and fast Fourier transform, along with
a signiﬁcant decrease in memory requirements, without accuracy loss. This efﬁciency allows the proposed methodology
to be used in areas where discrete convolution is currently
infeasible. As a practical example we explore the key problem
in robotics of global localization, in which a vehicle must be
positioned on a map using only its current sensor information,
and provide comparisons with other state-of-the-art techniques
in terms of computational speed and accuracy.

1

Introduction

Template matching is a technique used to identify areas in
a dataset that are similar to a given pattern. It has a wide
range of applications in several ﬁelds of research, most predominantly image processing (Brunelli 2009), where it is
used in tasks such as scene recognition, object classiﬁcation, autonomous navigation and so forth. Broadly speaking,
most template matching techniques either rely on data preprocessing, using predeﬁned models (Opromolla et al. 2015)
or salient features (Steder, Grisetti, and Burgard 2010) to
represent information; or work directly on raw input data,
using cross-correlation techniques (Briechle and Hanebeck
2001) to measure similarity.
Although generally more attractive, since it does not require preprocessing or prior assumptions about input data,
cross-correlation techniques still struggle with scaling limitations, especially in higher-dimensional scenarios. Recent
evolutions in sensor technology have led to a jump from two
to three-dimensional datasets, that are more representative

1
Even though this paper focuses on 3D data, the proposed
methodology can be trivially extended to any input dimensionality.

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6493

