The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Duplicate Question Identiﬁcation
by Integrating FrameNet with Neural Networks
1
2

Xiaodong Zhang,1 Xu Sun,1 Houfeng Wang1,2
MOE Key Lab of Computational Linguistics, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China
Collaborative Innovation Center for Language Ability, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, 221009, China
{zxdcs, xusun, wanghf}@pku.edu.cn

• Q3: How can I go downtown from the airport?
• Q4: How can I go downtown from the park?

Abstract
There are two major problems in duplicate question identiﬁcation, namely lexical gap and essential constituents matching. Previous methods either design various similarity features or learn representations via neural networks, which
try to solve the lexical gap but neglect the essential constituents matching. In this paper, we focus on the essential
constituents matching problem and use FrameNet-style semantic parsing to tackle it. Two approaches are proposed to
integrate FrameNet parsing with neural networks. An ensemble approach combines a traditional model with manually designed features and a neural network model. An embedding
approach converts frame parses to embeddings, which are
combined with word embeddings at the input of neural networks. Experiments on Quora question pairs dataset demonstrate that the ensemble approach is more effective and outperforms all baselines.1

First, different people tend to use different words and
phrases to express the same meaning. For Q1 and Q2, although they are semantically equivalent, there are only a few
overlapped words. If only considering the surface form of
the questions without leveraging any semantic information,
it is hard to identify that they are duplicate. This problem
is called lexical gap. Second, for Q3 and Q4, although most
words are overlapped and there is only one different word,
they are not duplicate. There are two essential constituents,
points of departure and destination, in the two questions. The
departure places are different, therefore the answers for one
question are useless for the other one. It is hard for a model
to classify them as non-duplicate because their surface forms
are so similar. We refer to this problem as essential constituents matching.
Distributed representation is an effective way to tackle the
lexical gap problem. Researchers have designed various similarity features based on word embeddings (Franco-Salvador
et al. 2016), or acquired representations of questions via neural networks and then calculated their similarity (Santos et
al. 2015; Lei et al. 2016). Although much effort has been
paid to the lexical gap problem, there is little research on the
essential constituents matching problem, which is also vital
to DQI. Previous approaches are generally based on similarity. Therefore they are unlikely to classify Q3 and Q4 as
non-duplicate. The words and sentence patterns of the two
questions are so similar that representations learned by neural networks are likely to be similar. There should be a way
to model the matching of essential constituents in question
pairs explicitly. The unmatched essential constituents can
provide strong clues for predicting question pairs as nonduplicate.
It is non-trivial to extract essential constituents in a question. A common way is to deﬁne constituent categories by
experts and label some questions by annotators to get a labeled dataset. Then, a supervised sequence labeling model
can be trained on the dataset to extract essential constituents,
which is similar to named entity recognition task (Sang
and Meulder 2003). However, deﬁning and labeling essential constituents in open domain are impractical, consuming too much time and funding. Fortunately, there is a correlation between essential constituents and semantic units

Introduction
Duplicate question identiﬁcation (DQI) aims to compare two
questions and identify whether they are semantically equivalent or not, i.e., a binary classiﬁcation problem. It is a vital task for community question answering (CQA). With an
automatic DQI method, a CQA forum can merge duplicate
questions so as to organize questions and answers more efﬁciently. Besides, by retrieving questions that are semantically equivalent to a question presented by a user, an automatic QA system can answer the user’s question with answers of the retrieved questions.
There are two major problems in DQI, namely lexical gap
(or called semantic gap) and essential constituents matching.
Essential constituents of a question refer to constituents that
are important to the meaning of the question. A constituent
contains two parts, name and value. For example, for a question asking route, there is usually a destination constituent.
Four questions are listed below to explain the two problems. The ﬁrst two questions are duplicate, and the last two
are non-duplicate.
• Q1: What is the most populous state in the USA?
• Q2: Which state in the United States has the most people?
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The code is available at https://github.com/zxdcs/DQI

6061

