The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Deterministic Policy Optimization by Combining Pathwise
and Score Function Estimators for Discrete Action Spaces
Daniel Levy, Stefano Ermon
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
{danilevy,ermon}@cs.stanford.edu

namics. While these approaches can greatly improve sample efﬁciency, the dynamics model needs to be carefully
hand-crafted for each task. Recently, hybrid approaches, at
the interface of model-free and model-based, have attempted
to balance sample-efﬁciency with generalizability, with notable success in robotics (Levine et al. 2016).
Existing methods, however, are limited to continuous action spaces (Levine and Abbeel 2014; Heess et al. 2015). In
this work, we introduce a hybrid reinforcement learning algorithm for deterministic policy optimization that is applicable to continuous and discrete action spaces. Starting from
a class of deterministic policies, we relax the corresponding policy optimization problem to one over a carefully chosen set of stochastic policies under approximate dynamics.
This relaxation allows the derivation of a novel policy gradient estimator, which combines pathwise derivative and score
function estimator. This enables incorporating model-based
assumptions while remaining applicable to discrete action
spaces. We then perform gradient-based optimization on this
larger class of policies while slowly annealing stochasticity,
converging to an optimal deterministic solution. We additionally justify and bound the dynamics approximation under certain assumptions. Finally, we complement this estimator by a scalable method to estimate the dynamics, ﬁrst
introduced in (Levine and Abbeel 2014), and with a general
extension to non-differentiable rewards, rendering it applicable to a large class of tasks. Our contributions are as follows:

Abstract
Policy optimization methods have shown great promise in
solving complex reinforcement and imitation learning tasks.
While model-free methods are broadly applicable, they often
require many samples to optimize complex policies. Modelbased methods greatly improve sample-efﬁciency but at the
cost of poor generalization, requiring a carefully handcrafted
model of the system dynamics for each task. Recently, hybrid methods have been successful in trading off applicability
for improved sample-complexity. However, these have been
limited to continuous action spaces. In this work, we present
a new hybrid method based on an approximation of the dynamics as an expectation over the next state under the current policy. This relaxation allows us to derive a novel hybrid policy gradient estimator, combining score function and
pathwise derivative estimators, that is applicable to discrete
action spaces. We show signiﬁcant gains in sample complexity, ranging between 1.7 and 25×, when learning parameterized policies on Cart Pole, Acrobot, Mountain Car and Hand
Mass. Our method is applicable to both discrete and continuous action spaces, when competing pathwise methods are
limited to the latter.

Introduction
Reinforcement and imitation learning using deep neural networks have achieved impressive results on a wide range
of tasks spanning manipulation (Levine et al. 2016; Levine
and Abbeel 2014), locomotion (Silver et al. 2014), games
(Mnih et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2016), and autonomous
driving (Ho and Ermon 2016; Li, Song, and Ermon 2017).
Model-free methods search for optimal policies without explicitly modeling the system’s dynamics (Williams 1992;
Schulman et al. 2015). Most model-free algorithms build
an estimate of the policy gradient by sampling trajectories
from the environment and perform gradient ascent. However, these methods suffer from either very high sample
complexity due to the generally large variance of the estimator, or are restricted to policies with few parameters.
On the other hand, model-based reinforcement learning
methods learn an explicit model of the dynamics of the system. A policy can then be optimized under this model by
back-propagating the reward signal through the learned dy-

• We introduce a novel deterministic policy optimization
method, that leverages a model of the dynamics and can
be applied to any action space, whereas existing methods
are limited to continuous action spaces. We also provide
theoretical guarantees for our approximation.
• We show how our estimator can be applied to a broad
class of problems by extending it to discrete rewards, and
utilizing a sample-efﬁcient dynamics estimation method
(Levine and Abbeel 2014).
• We show that this method successfully optimizes complex
neural network deterministic policies without additional
variance reduction techniques. We present experiments
on tasks with discrete action spaces where model-based
or hybrid methods are not applicable. On these tasks,
we show signiﬁcant gains in terms of sample-complexity,
ranging between 1.7 and 25×.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3474

