The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multi-Entity Aspect-Based Sentiment
Analysis with Context, Entity and Aspect Memory
Jun Yang, Runqi Yang, Chongjun Wang, Junyuan Xie
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
yangjunny@126.com, runqiyang@gmail.com, chjwang@nju.edu.cn, jyxie@nju.edu.cn

Sentiment analysis over product reviews has drawn much
attention in recent years. One of the most widely applied
technique is called aspect-based sentiment analysis (ABSA
for short, also known as aspect level sentiment analysis)(Wang et al. 2016; Lipenkova 2015; Tang, Qin, and Liu
2016). Given text and target aspects, the goal of ABSA is
to ﬁnd sentiment polarity towards each speciﬁc aspect. For
example, given “The food is nice but too expensive.” and
aspects “food” and “price”, ABSA will give results (food,
positive), (price, negative).
However, ABSA is not directly applicable to experiencesharing posts, in which the number of entities mentioned
may vary. So we deﬁne the task of Multi-Entity AspectBased Sentiment Analysis (ME-ABSA) to model this scenario: Given entities as well as aspects mentioned in the text
1
, the goal is to predict sentiment polarity towards each (entity, aspect) combination. In the Pampers-Kao example, we
will predict sentiment towards 6 (entity, aspect) combinations for there are 2 entities and 3 aspects. It’s obvious that
ABSA is a special case of ME-ABSA with the number of
entities limited to one.
ME-ABSA is a challenging task. There are three main
challenges:
Aspect sentiment matching: to extract aspect level sentiment is the basic challenge confronted with both ABSA and
ME-ABSA task. In the Pampers-Kao example, “a bit expensive” refers to (price, negative) and “no more allergic” refers
to (anti-allergy, positive).
Entity aspect-sentiment matching: matching the right
aspect and sentiment to the right entity is challenging, especially when there are multiple entities, multiple aspects and
multiple sentiment polarities in a post. In the Pampers-Kao
example, sentiment towards the same aspect anti-allergy is
negative for Pampers but positive for Kao.
Not-to-match: this mainly associates with neutral posts.
In the Pampers-Kao example, we cannot match (antileakage, positive) to Kao. Kao should remain neutral on antileakage aspect.
In this paper, we introduce an innovative method for this
task. We use an interaction layer, a position attention layer

Abstract
Inspired by recent works in Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis(ABSA) on product reviews and faced with more complex posts on social media platforms mentioning multiple entities as well as multiple aspects, we deﬁne a novel task called
Multi-Entity Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis (ME-ABSA).
This task aims at ﬁne-grained sentiment analysis of (entity,
aspect) combinations, making the well-studied ABSA task a
special case of it. To address the task, we propose an innovative method that models Context memory, Entity memory
and Aspect memory, called CEA method. Our experimental
results show that our CEA method achieves a signiﬁcant gain
over several baselines, including the state-of-the-art method
for the ABSA task, and their enhanced versions, on datasets
for ME-ABSA and ABSA tasks. The in-depth analysis illustrates the signiﬁcant advantage of the CEA method over baseline methods for several hard-to-predict post types. Furthermore, we show that the CEA method is capable of generalizing to new (entity, aspect) combinations with little loss of
accuracy. This observation indicates that data annotation in
real applications can be largely simpliﬁed.

Introduction
Mining massive online social media text gives insights on
consumer needs as well as their product experience, helping
producers to improve their products. Sentiment Analysis is
a useful tool to extract consumers’ attitudes towards brands,
products as well as related aspects.
Online posts associated with products or services can be
divided into two kinds. First is product reviews, such as
comments on Amazon and Yelp. These posts are about some
aspects of particular products or services. In some cases, one
post is targeted at one entity: the product or service itself.
The second kind is experience-sharing posts, such as posts
on Twitter or in forums like baby care forums. In most cases,
a variable number of entities and aspects are mentioned in a
post. For example, “Tried Pampers. No leakage found but
his butt went red. Then I changed to Kao. It’s a bit expensive
but not allergenic.”
In this post, there are two entities: Pampers and Kao(two
paper diaper brands) and three aspects: anti-leakage, antiallergy and price.

1

Extracting entities and aspects mentioned in the post lies in
the scope of information extraction, which is not the key concern
in this sentiment analysis task.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6029

