The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

SmartHS: An AI Platform for Improving Government Service Provision
Yongqing Zheng,1,2 Han Yu,3,4,6 Lizhen Cui,1,2 Chunyan Miao,3,4 Cyril Leung,5 Qiang Yang6
1

School of Software Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China
2
Dareway Software Co. Ltd, Jinan, Shandong, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of Excellence in
Active Living for the Elderly, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
5
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
6
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
Corresponding authors: zhengyongqing@dareway.com.cn, han.yu@ntu.edu.sg/hanyu@ust.hk, clz@sdu.edu.cn
Abstract
Over the years, government service provision in China has
been plagued by inefﬁciencies. Previous attempts to address this challenge following a toolbox e-government system model in China were not effective. In this paper, we report on a successful experience in improving government service provision in the domain of social insurance in Shandong
Province, China. Through standardization of service workﬂows following the Complete Contract Theory (CCT) and
the infusion of an artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) engine to maximize the expected quality of service while reducing waiting
time, the Smart Human-resource Services (SmartHS) platform transcends organizational boundaries and improves system efﬁciency. Deployments in 3 cities involving 2,000 participating civil servants and close to 3 million social insurance
service cases over a 1 year period demonstrated that SmartHS
signiﬁcantly improves user experience with roughly a third of
the original front desk staff. This new AI-enhanced mode of
operation is useful for informing current policy discussions
in many domains of government service provision.

Figure 1: An example hierarchical organizational structure.

services, even moral hazard behaviours (Hölmstrom 1979),
frequently occur. The prevalence of poor quality government
services in China has reached a high level. This prompted the
State Council of the People’s Republic of China to issue ofﬁcial reports detailing the difﬁculties facing residents requiring government services (SCC 2016). The most frequently
mentioned symptoms of poor quality government services
include procrastination, evading responsibility, abuse of discretion, exchange of favours based on “guanxi” (i.e. personal relationship) (Park and Luo 2001), residents having to
go through multiple government departments for one matter (sometimes repeatedly) and long waiting time. The poor
quality of government services in China has contributed to
social dissatisfaction (Easterlin et al. 2012).
Over the past decade, efforts to improve government service provision in China started to emerge (Nat 2005). Electronic government (e-government) has been identiﬁed by
China as an important means for enhancing residents’ access
to government services. The application of e-government
in countries such as the United States and Singapore has
demonstrated great effectiveness in acting as a medium for
delivering better services to residents and improving internal efﬁciency (Bertot, Jaeger, and Grimes 2010). The currently deployed e-government system in China (Seifert and
Chung 2009) did not focus on breaking down the organizational boundaries across multiple government departments
which are impeding task-oriented workﬂows, but are instead
similar to electronic toolboxes for improving individual civil
servant efﬁciency (Zhang 2002; Holliday and Yep 2005;

Introduction
The Chinese government organizational structure follows
a top-down tree-like hierarchy (Horling and Lesser 2004),
which is designed to provide effective control from the top
level to the grassroots level. A similar structure can be found
within each government organization. Under such a structure (Figure 1), ofﬁcial communications between leaf nodes
need to be routed through their parent nodes. This sacriﬁces
efﬁciency for control. Government services provided to Chinese residents (e.g., claiming social insurance beneﬁts, setting up an enterprise) are superimposed on top of this hierarchical structure. Most of the time, residents only directly
deal with the leaf nodes which are the executive branches
providing government services. A service may require several leaf nodes (not necessarily all from the same organization) each capable of rendering part of the service to form a
workﬂow like the scenario shown in Figure 1.
The inefﬁciency in Chinese government service provision
has given rise to an environment in which poor quality of
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7704

