The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Retrieving and Classifying Affective
Images via Deep Metric Learning
Jufeng Yang,1 Dongyu She,1 Yu-Kun Lai,2 Ming-Hsuan Yang3
1

College of Computer and Control Engineering, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
2
School of Computer Science and Informatics,
Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom
3
School of Engineering, University of California, Merced, USA
Abstract

Affective image understanding has been extensively studied
in the last decade since more and more users express emotion
via visual contents. While current algorithms based on convolutional neural networks aim to distinguish emotional categories in a discrete label space, the task is inherently ambiguous. This is mainly because emotional labels with the same
polarity (i.e., positive or negative) are highly related, which is
different from concrete object concepts such as cat, dog and
bird. To the best of our knowledge, few methods focus on
leveraging such characteristic of emotions for affective image
understanding. In this work, we address the problem of understanding affective images via deep metric learning and propose a multi-task deep framework to optimize both retrieval
and classiﬁcation goals. We propose the sentiment constraints
adapted from the triplet constraints, which are able to explore the hierarchical relation of emotion labels. We further
exploit the sentiment vector as an effective representation to
distinguish affective images utilizing the texture representation derived from convolutional layers. Extensive evaluations
on four widely-used affective datasets, i.e., Flickr and Instagram, IAPSa, Art Photo, and Abstract Paintings, demonstrate
that the proposed algorithm performs favorably against the
state-of-the-art methods on both affective image retrieval and
classiﬁcation tasks.

Amusement
Contentment
Awe
Excitement
Fear
Sadness
Disgust
Anger

Figure 1: Examples from the Flickr and Instagram dataset
where different colors indicate different sentiments. The
Mikels’ emotion wheel suggests that pairwise emotion correlation can be deﬁned as the reciprocal of the corresponding
distance. Clearly the emotion labels with the same polarity
(i.e., positive emotions in the top row, or negative emotions
in the bottom row) are highly related.

of designing visual features manually, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) provide end-to-end feature learning
frameworks. Several CNN-based methods for affective image classiﬁcation demonstrate the effectiveness of deep representations over hand-crafted features (You et al. 2016;
Yang, She, and Sun 2017).
However, compared to conventional vision tasks (e.g., object recognition), affective image understanding is inherently ambiguous due to the following two challenges,
namely subjectivity and complexity of emotions. First, the
emotions are not semantically independent of each other,
which is drastically different from concrete object concepts
(e.g., cat, dog and bird). Figure 1 shows that there exists a
clear hierarchical relation that the emotions with the same
polarity (e.g., both positive or negative) are highly related.
Moreover, the correlation between emotions with the same
polarity can be deﬁned by the reciprocal of pairwise distance
in Mikels’ wheel (Mikels et al. 2005), where the neighboring emotions are more related to each other. However, existing studies have rarely focused on leveraging the relation of
emotions for affective image understanding since they are
trained in the discrete label space (You et al. 2015). Second, most CNN-based methods rely on the feature representation ability of CNNs, especially fully-connected lay-

Introduction
Psychological studies have demonstrated that visual contents (e.g., images and videos) can evoke a variety of emotional responses for human observers (Detenber, Simons,
and Bennett Jr. 1998). As such, it is intriguing and important to understand the emotion of a given image due to its
broad potential applications including emotion semantic image retrieval (ESIR) (Wang and He 2008), aesthetic quality
categorization (Lu et al. 2014), and opinion mining (Qian,
Zhang, and Xu 2016; Zhao et al. 2016), to name a few.
Numerous methods have been developed for classifying (Machajdik and Hanbury 2010; Zhao et al. 2014a) and
retrieving (Zhang et al. 2013; Zhao et al. 2014b) affective
images, where the main focus is to extract low-level features (e.g., texture, color and composition) that can well
represent the evoked emotion from visual contents. Instead
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

491

