The Twenty-Third AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium

Hierarchical Methods for a Uniﬁed Approach to
Discourse, Domain, and Style in Neural Conversational Models
João Sedoc
Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA
joao@cis.upenn.edu

Introduction

(2)

(2)

ht−1

With the advent of personal assistants such as Siri and Alexa,
there has been a renewed focus on dialog systems, speciﬁcally open domain conversational agents. Dialog is a challenging problem since it spans multiple conversational turns.
To further complicate the problem, there are many contextual
cues and valid possible utterances. Dialog is fundamentally a
multiscale process given that context is carried from previous utterances in the conversation; however, current neural
methods lack the ability to carry human-like conversation.
Neural dialog models, which are based on recurrent neural
network Encoder-Decoder sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq)
models (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho,
and Bengio 2015), lack the ability to create temporal and
stylistic coherence in conversations.
Hierarchical systems are natural forms of abstraction that
can be used to capture natural language hierarchy. There
are words → sentences → paragraphs → documents, and
more speciﬁcally in dialog words → utterances (conversational turns) → conversations → interactions. Hierarchical
models for such systems are well studied dating back to
the work of El Hihi and Bengio (1995). These hierarchical models have also been incorporated into dialog (Serban et al. 2017) for carrying context across multiple turns.
Other common approaches for maintaining coherence incorporate topic models or sentence clusters (Xing et al. 2017;
Cheng, Fang, and Ostendorf 2017) as well as persona (Li et
al. 2016).
This thesis incorporates dialog acts (such as Statementnon-opinion [”Me, I’m in the legal department.”], Acknowledge [“Uh-huh.”]) and discourse connectives (e.g. “because”,
“then”), utterance clustering and domain prediction (for instance conversations about “politics”), and style shifting (i.e.
depressed vs happy tone) using hierarchical methods. Our approach is unique as it focuses on the utterance-level discourse
of neural dialog models, and thus only requires a statistic that
captures word level representations. As shown in Figure 1,
while focusing on utterance level (h(2) ), these methods directly alter representations both at conversational level and
word level responses.

ht+1

ht−1

(1)

ht

(1)

ht+1

(1)

ht+2

(1)

Xt−1

Xt

Xt+1

Xt+2

Figure 1: An example two state processes where xi is a word
(2)
vector, and hi is the higher level representation.

Methods
While our approach is intended to unify utterance domain
(or cluster type), utterance style, and dialog acts / discourse
connectives , we divide our overall method into three components: 1) factored responses, 2) conversational tree and 3)
style shifting.
1. Factored Response Prediction While domain is often
ill-deﬁned, our intent is for domain to capture the topic or
theme of the conversation utterances, which often change
during a conversation. Factored response models generate
multiple intelligent responses in a conversation, as shown in
Figure 2.

Figure 2: DOM-Seq2Seq model which selects the response
from a particular class of concurrent Seq2Seq models.

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8036

