The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Partial Multi-Label Learning
Ming-Kun Xie, Sheng-Jun Huang∗
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization
Nanjing 211106, China
{mkxie,huangsj}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract
It is expensive and difﬁcult to precisely annotate objects with
multiple labels. Instead, in many real tasks, annotators may
roughly assign each object with a set of candidate labels. The
candidate set contains at least one but unknown number of
ground-truth labels, and is usually adulterated with some irrelevant labels. In this paper, we formalize such problems as
a new learning framework called partial multi-label learning
(PML). To solve the PML problem, a conﬁdence value is
maintained for each candidate label to estimate how likely
it is a ground-truth label of the instance. On one hand, the
relevance ordering of labels on each instance is optimized by
minimizing a rank loss weighted by the conﬁdences; on the
other hand, the conﬁdence values are optimized by further
exploiting structure information in feature and label spaces.
Experimental results on various datasets show that the proposed approach is effective for solving PML problems.

濈濜濙澔濧濙濨澔濣濚澔濗濕濢濘濝濘濕濨濙澔濠濕濖濙濠濧

濵瀈濼濿濷濼瀁濺

瀊濼瀁濷瀂瀊

瀆濾瀌

瀆瀇瀅濸濸瀇

瀃濸瀂瀃濿濸

濶濴瀅

瀇瀅濸濸

Figure 1: An example of partial multi-label learning. The
image is partially labeled by noisy annotators in crowdsourcing. Among the candidate labels, building, window, sky and
street are ground-truth labels while people, car and tree are
irrelevant labels.

Introduction
Multi-label learning (MLL) deals with the problem where
each object is assigned with multiple class labels simultaneously (Zhang and Zhou 2014). For example, an image may
be annotated with labels sea, sunset, and beach. The task of
multi-label learning is to train a classiﬁcation model that can
predict all the relevant labels for unseen instances.
In traditional multi-label studies, a common assumption
is that each training instance has been precisely annotated
with all of its relevant labels. However, in many applications, this assumption hardly holds because the precise annotation is usually difﬁcult and costly. Instead, annotators may
roughly assign each instance a set of candidate labels. In addition to the relevant labels, the candidate set also contains
some irrelevant labels. For example, in Figure 1, the image
is annotated with a set of candidate labels, which may be
the union set of annotations from multiple noisy annotators
under the crowdsourcing setting. While the annotation cost
is signiﬁcantly reduced by partial labeling, the learning task
becomes much more challenging because the ground-truth
labels are mixed with some irrelevant labels, and the number of ground-truth labels is even unknown.

We formalize this learning problem as a new framework
called partial multi-label learning (PML). More speciﬁcally,
PML tries to learn a multi-label model from partially labeled
training examples, where each instance is annotated with a
set of candidate labels, indicating the following supervised
information: a) the candidate set may consist of both relevant
and irrelevant labels; b) the number of relevant labels in the
candidate set is at least one but unknown; c) labels not in the
candidate set are irrelevant to the instance.
PML is a novel learning framework with signiﬁcant difference from existing settings. There are some studies trying to exploit weak supervision for multi-label learning. For
example, semi-supervised MLL(Wang and Tsotsos 2016;
Wu et al. 2015; Belkin, Niyogi, and Sindhwani 2006) trains
the model based on both unlabeled and precisely labeled
examples; MLL with weak label allows missing labels
(Sun, Zhang, and Zhou 2010; Bucak, Jin, and Jain 2011;
Zhao and Guo 2015). However, these approaches do not consider partial labeling with candidate label sets, and cannot be
applied to PML problems. Partial label learning(Cour, Sapp,
and Taskar 2011; Szummer and Jaakkola 2001) is similar to
PML, but is designed for single-label case, where there is
always one ground-truth label in the candidate set. We will
discuss the differences between PML and related studies in

∗
This research was supported by JiangsuSF (BK20150754) and
NSFC (61503182, 61732006).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4302

