The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Hierarchical Discriminative Learning
for Visible Thermal Person Re-Identiﬁcation
Mang Ye, Xiangyuan Lan, Jiawei Li, Pong C. Yuen∗
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
{mangye,jwli,pcyuen}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, xiangyuanlan@life.hkbu.edu.hk

Visible Camera
in the day

Abstract

Thermal Camera
at night
Matching

Person re-identiﬁcation is widely studied in visible spectrum,
where all the person images are captured by visible cameras.
However, visible cameras may not capture valid appearance
information under poor illumination conditions, e.g, at night.
In this case, thermal camera is superior since it is less dependent on the lighting by using infrared light to capture the human body. To this end, this paper investigates a cross-modal
re-identiﬁcation problem, namely visible-thermal person reidentiﬁcation (VT-REID). Existing cross-modal matching
methods mainly focus on modeling the cross-modality discrepancy, while VT-REID also suffers from cross-view variations caused by different camera views. Therefore, we propose a hierarchical cross-modality matching model by jointly
optimizing the modality-speciﬁc and modality-shared metrics. The modality-speciﬁc metrics transform two heterogenous modalities into a consistent space that modality-shared
metric can be subsequently learnt. Meanwhile, the modalityspeciﬁc metric compacts features of the same person within
each modality to handle the large intra-modality intra-person
variations (e.g. viewpoints, pose). Additionally, an improved
two-stream CNN network is presented to learn the multimodality sharable feature representations. Identity loss and
contrastive loss are integrated to enhance the discriminability
and modality-invariance with partially shared layer parameters. Extensive experiments illustrate the effectiveness and
robustness of the proposed method.

Figure 1: Illustration about the visible thermal person reidentiﬁcation (VT-REID). Person images from different
modalities should be matched.
However, the visible camera may not be able to capture all
the appearance information for person re-identiﬁcation, especially under poor illumination conditions. In these cases,
thermal camera is superior since it is less dependent on the
lighting by using infrared light to capture the human body.
Therefore, thermal cameras can be introduced for robust
person re-identiﬁcation under the low illumination environments. As shown in Fig.1, the query images are captured
by visible cameras during the daytime, while gallery images
are obtained from thermal cameras at night. In this paper,
we name this cross-modal person re-identiﬁcation problem
as Visible-Thermal person Re-identiﬁcation (VT-REID).
As far as we know, two pioneer works have investigated
the thermal image based re-identiﬁcation problem. In 2013,
Mogelmose et al. (Mogelmose et al. 2013) propose a trimodal re-identiﬁcation model by integrating three modalities features (rgb, depth and thermal) to improve the reidentiﬁcation performance. Similarly, Nguyen (Nguyen et
al. 2017) introduces a person recognition system by combining the visible and thermal image features. Both of them
try to fuse the thermal modality information to improve the
traditional visible image based re-identiﬁcation. Different
from their works, we aim at investigating this cross-modal
re-identiﬁcation problem, thus need to bridge the gap between these two heterogeneous modalities.
Existing cross-modal re-identiﬁcation methods (Li, Xiao,
and et al. 2017) mainly focus on bridging the gap between
the visual and text domains, which cannot be directly applied for VT-REID. Related cross-modal matching problem
has been widely studied in many heterogenous recognition
applications, such as thermal-visible face recognition, face
sketch recognition and so on. Usually, they mainly focus

Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation (REID) addresses the problem of
matching different persons across disjoint camera views
(Zheng, Yang, and Tian 2017; Wang et al. 2016b). It has
gained much attention in recent computer vision communities due to its importance in intelligent video surveillance
(Lan, Zhang, and Yuen 2016; Lan, Yuen, and Chellappa
2017; Lan et al. 2015). Most of current re-id methods are focusing on visible images, i.e., given a probe image/video and
match it against a set of gallery images/videos. Under this
visible domain to model the large cross-camera variations,
encouraging results have been achieved (Ye et al. 2017) by
1) learning or designing representative features for visual appearance of persons, and 2) learning proper similarity measurements on the visual feature vectors.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7501

