The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Multilayer Convolutional Encoder-Decoder
Neural Network for Grammatical Error Correction
1

Shamil Chollampatt,1 Hwee Tou Ng1,2
NUS Graduate School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering
2
Department of Computer Science
National University of Singapore
shamil@u.nus.edu, nght@comp.nus.edu.sg
have been used as features to improve the generalization of
the SMT approach (Chollampatt, Taghipour, and Ng 2016),
SMT still suffers from limitations in accessing the global
source and target context effectively. The treatment of words
and phrases as discrete entities during decoding also limits its generalization capabilities. To this end, several neural encoder-decoder approaches were proposed for this task
(Xie et al. 2016; Yuan and Briscoe 2016; Ji et al. 2017;
Schmaltz et al. 2017). However, their performance still falls
substantially behind state-of-the-art SMT approaches.
All prior neural approaches for GEC relied on using recurrent neural networks (RNNs). In contrast to previous neural approaches, our neural approach to GEC is based on a
fully convolutional encoder-decoder architecture with multiple layers of convolutions and attention (Gehring et al.
2017). Our analysis shows that convolutional neural networks (CNNs) can capture local context more effectively
than RNNs as the convolution operations are performed
over smaller windows of word sequences. Most grammatical errors are often localized and dependent only on the
nearby words. Wider contexts and interaction between distant words can also be captured by a multilayer hierarchical
structure of convolutions and an attention mechanism that
weights the source words based on their relevance in predicting the target word. Moreover, only a ﬁxed number of
non-linearities are performed on the input irrespective of the
input length whereas in RNNs, the number of non-linearities
is proportional to the length of the input, diminishing the effects of distant words.
We further improve the performance by ensembling multiple models. Contrary to prior neural approaches, we use
a simpler pre-processing method to alleviate the unknown
word problem (Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch 2016). Rare
words are split into multiple frequent sub-words using a
byte pair encoding (BPE) algorithm. One of the major weaknesses of prior neural approaches is that they do not incorporate task-speciﬁc features nor utilize large native English
corpora to good effect. We use such English corpora in our
encoder-decoder model to pre-train the word vectors to be
used for initializing the embeddings in the encoder and decoder. We also train an N-gram language model to be used as
a feature along with edit operation count features in rescoring to produce an overall better output.
To summarize, this paper makes the following contribu-

Abstract
We improve automatic correction of grammatical, orthographic, and collocation errors in text using a multilayer convolutional encoder-decoder neural network. The network is
initialized with embeddings that make use of character Ngram information to better suit this task. When evaluated
on common benchmark test data sets (CoNLL-2014 and JFLEG), our model substantially outperforms all prior neural
approaches on this task as well as strong statistical machine
translation-based systems with neural and task-speciﬁc features trained on the same data. Our analysis shows the superiority of convolutional neural networks over recurrent neural
networks such as long short-term memory (LSTM) networks
in capturing the local context via attention, and thereby improving the coverage in correcting grammatical errors. By
ensembling multiple models, and incorporating an N-gram
language model and edit features via rescoring, our novel
method becomes the ﬁrst neural approach to outperform the
current state-of-the-art statistical machine translation-based
approach, both in terms of grammaticality and ﬂuency.

Introduction
With the increasing number of non-native learners and writers of the English language around the globe, the necessity to improve authoring tools such as error correction systems is increasing. Grammatical error correction (GEC) is
a well-established natural language processing (NLP) task
that deals with building systems for automatically correcting errors in written text, particularly in non-native written
text. The errors that a GEC system attempts to correct are
not limited to grammatical errors, but also include spelling
and collocation errors.
GEC in English has gained much attention within the
NLP community recently. The phrase-based statistical machine translation (SMT) approach has emerged as the stateof-the-art approach for this task (Chollampatt and Ng 2017;
Junczys-Dowmunt and Grundkiewicz 2016), in which GEC
is treated as a translation task from the language of “bad”
English to the language of “good” English. The translation model is learned using parallel error-corrected corpora
(source text that contains errors and their corresponding corrected target text). Although neural network (NN) models
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5755

