The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Adaptive Feature Abstraction for Translating Video to Text
Yunchen Pu,†∗ Martin Renqiang Min,‡ Zhe Gan,† Lawrence Carin†
†

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University
{yunchen.pu, zhe.gan, lcarin}@duke.edu
‡
Machine Learning Group, NEC Laboratories America
renqiang@nec-labs.com

rich video content is mapped to a single feature vector for
caption generation; this approach is prone to missing detailed and localized spatiotemporal information. To mitigate
this, one may employ methods to focus attention on local
regions of the feature map, but typically this is done with
features from a selected (usually top) CNN layer. By employing features from a ﬁxed CNN layer, the algorithm is
limited in its ability to model rich, context-aware semantics
that requires focusing on different feature abstraction levels. As investigated in Mahendran and Vedaldi; Zeiler and
Fergus (2015; 2014), the feature characteristics/abstraction
is correlated with the CNN layers: features from layers at or
near the top of a CNN tend to focus on global (extended)
visual percepts, while features from lower CNN layers provide more local, ﬁne-grained information. It is desirable to
select/weight features from different CNN layers adaptively
when decoding a caption, selecting different levels of feature
abstraction by sequentially emphasizing features from different CNN layers. In addition to focusing on features from
different CNN layers, it is also desirable to emphasize local
spatiotemporal regions in feature maps at particular layers.
To realize these desiderata, our proposed decoding process for generating a sequence of words dynamically emphasizes different levels (CNN layers) of 3D convolutional features, to model important coarse or ﬁne-grained spatiotemporal structure. Additionally, the model adaptively attends
to different locations within the feature maps at particular
layers. While some previous models use 2D CNN features
to generate video representations, our model adopts features
from a deep 3D convolutional neural network (C3D). Such
features have been shown to be effective for video representation, action recognition and scene understanding (Tran et
al. 2015), by learning the spatiotemporal features that can
provide better appearance and motion information. In addition, the proposed model is inspired by the recent success of
attention-based models that mimic human perception (Mnih
et al. 2014; Xu et al. 2015).
The proposed model, dual Adaptive Feature Representation (dualAFR), involves comparing and evaluating different levels of 3D convolutional feature maps. However,
there are three challenges that must be overcome to directly compare features between layers: (i) the features
from different C3D levels have distinct dimensions, undermining the direct use of a multi-layer perceptron (MLP)

Abstract
Previous models for video captioning often use the output
from a speciﬁc layer of a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) as video features. However, the variable contextdependent semantics in the video may make it more appropriate to adaptively select features from the multiple CNN
layers. We propose a new approach to generating adaptive
spatiotemporal representations of videos for the captioning
task. A novel attention mechanism is developed, which adaptively and sequentially focuses on different layers of CNN
features (levels of feature “abstraction”), as well as local spatiotemporal regions of the feature maps at each layer. The
proposed approach is evaluated on three benchmark datasets:
YouTube2Text, M-VAD and MSR-VTT. Along with visualizing the results and how the model works, these experiments quantitatively demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed adaptive spatiotemporal feature abstraction for translating videos to sentences with rich semantics.

Introduction
Videos represent among the most widely used forms of data,
and their accurate characterization poses an important challenge for computer vision and machine learning. Generating a natural-language description of a video, termed video
captioning, is an important component of video analysis. Inspired by the successful encoder-decoder framework used
in machine translation (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015;
Cho et al. 2014; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014) and image
caption generation (Karpathy and Li 2015; Kiros, Salakhutdinov, and Zemel 2014; Mao et al. 2015; Pu et al. 2016;
Vinyals et al. 2015; Gan et al. 2017a; 2017b), most recent
work on video captioning (Donahue et al. 2015; Pan et al.
2016b; Venugopalan et al. 2015a; 2015b; Yao et al. 2015;
Yu et al. 2016) employs a two-dimensional (2D) or threedimensional (3D) Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) as
an encoder, mapping an input video to a compact featurevector representation. A Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
is typically employed as a decoder, unrolling the feature vector to generate a sequence of words of arbitrary length.
Despite achieving encouraging success in video captioning, previous models suffer important limitations. Often the
∗
Most of this work was done when the ﬁrst author was a summer intern at NEC Laboratories America.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7284

