The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Thinking in PolAR Pictures: Using Rotation-Friendly
Mental Images to Solve Leiter-R Form Completion
Joshua H. Palmer, Maithilee Kunda
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Vanderbilt University
PMB 351679, 2301 Vanderbilt Place, Nashville, TN 37235-1679, USA

Benbow 2009). Thus, improving methods for measuring and
understanding nonverbal human cognition is an important
area of need for current research.
Neuropsychological tests like the Leiter-R, where a person’s performance is measured in behavioral terms, still
represent the state-of-the-art in measuring human cognition. While advances in neuroimaging have certainly yielded
many important insights into brain functioning, neuroimaging by itself does not directly tell us about a person’s cognitive functions. On tests like the Leiter-R, then, it is important
to understand exactly what cognitive strategies are indicated
by particular behavioral patterns of performance. AI systems
that simulate problem solving on such tests can be used as a
research tool to investigate the extent to which these cognitive tests are, in fact, testing the constructs they claim to be
testing. While computational experiments with an AI system cannot directly tell us what strategies a person is using,
they can be very informative about the space of cognitive
strategies that are possible on a given test.
For example, the Leiter-R developers argue that the
Figure-Ground (FG) subtest relies on a discriminative approach, whereas Form Completion (FC) is more generative/synthesizing. The FC literature indicates that examinees
create a mental image of the fragments and rotate them to
complete the full object. However, we hypothesize that FC
can also be solved with a discriminative matching procedure
a la FG, modulo rotation. If different individuals solve FC in
different ways—some using a discriminative approach and
some using a generative approach—then similar FC scores
in two different individuals could in fact have very different
cognitive interpretations.
In this paper, we present a new computational cognitive
model that solves problems from the Leiter-R FC subtest.
Our central claim is that the set of representations and operations proposed here are sufﬁcient for solving at least some
FC problems. Given that (to our knowledge) no previous
computational models of the Leiter-R test exist, this computational account by itself provides some scientiﬁc value by
helping us understand the information processing requirements of the FC subtest. Future work will include making
comparisons to human performance data and also expanding the range of operations and strategies used by the model
to try to capture additional dimensions of cognitive strategy
variation that may be measurable by the FC test.

Abstract
The Leiter International Performance Scale-Revised (LeiterR) is a standardized cognitive test that seeks to “provide a
nonverbal measure of general intelligence by sampling a wide
variety of functions from memory to nonverbal reasoning.”
Understanding the computational building blocks of nonverbal cognition, as measured by the Leiter-R, is an important
step towards understanding human nonverbal cognition, especially with respect to typical and atypical trajectories of child
development. One subtest of the Leiter-R, Form Completion, involves synthesizing and localizing a visual ﬁgure from
its constituent slices. Form Completion poses an interesting
nonverbal problem that seems to combine several aspects of
visual memory, mental rotation, and visual search. We describe a new computational cognitive model that addresses
Form Completion using a novel, mental-rotation-friendly image representation that we call the Polar Augmented Resolution (PolAR) Picture, which enables high-ﬁdelity mental rotation operations. We present preliminary results using actual
Leiter-R test items and discuss directions for future work.

Introduction
The Leiter International Performance Scale-Revised (LeiterR) is a standardized test of human cognition that seeks to
“provide a nonverbal measure of general intelligence by
sampling a wide variety of functions from memory to nonverbal reasoning.” (Kaplan and Roid 2010) It consists of
twenty subtests, all administered non-verbally, with subtest
variants intended for individuals ranging from children as
young as 2 years of age to adults. Examples of speciﬁc subtests include (Roid and Miller 1997): Figure Ground (FG),
ﬁnding a ﬁgure/object embedded in an arbitrarily complex
background; Form Completion (FC), synthesizing and localizing an object from its constituent slices; and Repeated Patterns (RP), ﬁlling in blanks with previously-seen elements.
Nonverbal, and especially visuospatial, cognition, is a
critical factor in child development. Atypical patterns of
nonverbal cognitive development characterize many conditions such as autism (Dawson et al. 2007), dyslexia (SmithSpark et al. 2003), and others, and furthermore, visuospatial ability is increasingly recognized as a key contributor
to STEM education and career success (Wai, Lubinski, and
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

612

