The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Plan-Based Intention Revision∗
Adam Amos-Binks

R. Michael Young

Department of Computer Science
NC State University
Raleigh, NC, USA, 27695
aaamosbi@ncsu.edu

School of Computing and
The Entertainment Arts and Engineering Program
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 84112
young@eae.utah.edu

Introduction

Algorithm 1 BDI control loop excerpt (Rao and Georgeff 1998)

Plan-based story generation has operationalized concepts
from the Belief-Desire-Intention (BDI) theory of mind to
create goal-driven character agents with explainable behavior. Two classes of agents have emerged from this representation. A ‘conscious rationalizer’ agent who can justify
adopting an intention with an air-tight causally-linked sequence of actions and a ‘fairweather’ agent who drops their
intention the moment a causal complication is introduced.
While adopting and dropping intentions is essential for
goal-oriented agents, restricting agents to these two classes
does not capture the dynamic nature of intentions. Intention revision models explainable behavior changes, which
is especially important for the complex interactions between
character intentions in interactive narratives.
We deﬁne an intention revision model with two parts. We
ﬁrst prescribe when agents should reconsider existing intentions with logic from BDI agent design. Second, we deﬁne
how agents decide to revise intentions using persistent goals
(P-GOAL) as characterized by Cohen and Levesque (1990).
Using the QUEST (Graesser, Lang, and Roberts 1991) cognitive model of question answering, we describe an evaluation assessing the explainability of intention revision.

1: ... B(belief s),D(desires),I(intentions), π(plan)
2: get next observation ω
3: revise B on the basis of ω
4: if (reconsider(B, I)) then
5:
D = options(B, I)
6:
I = f ilter(B, D, I)
7:
if not sound(π, B, I) then
8:
π = plan(B, I)
9: ...

causal link threat is introduced to their plan. Underlying both
of these models of intention is Cohen and Levesque’s (1990)
intentional logic for rational agents. At the core of this logic
is the deﬁnition of a P-GOAL. A goal that an agent is committed to achieving and will only drop upon achieving it or
believing it is unachievable. These foundations inﬂuenced
the designs of decision making for BDI agents (Rao and
Georgeff 1998). Of interest to this work is how a BDI agent
might decide to change intentions, summarized in Alg. 1.
Assessments of BDI agent behavior often rest in the behavior’s explainability. One extensively used explainability measure is the QUEST cognitive model of questionanswering (Q-A) in the context of stories. The model uses
a QUEST knowledge structure (QKS) to represent mental models of a story’s intentional structure. QUEST also
deﬁnes how to structure Q-A and includes a QKS search
method to predict responses. Comparing QUEST predictions and people’s responses to Q-A assesses explainability.

Previous work
Story planners have demonstrated a range of character agent
intention. IPOCL story planning (Riedl and Young 2010)
operationalized intention by only generating solution plans
containing actions on a causally connected action sequence
to a character agent’s intentional goal. Character intentions
are structured into intention frames and are the source of
our ‘conscious rationalizer’ agent. Building on this approach
was Glaive and the CPOCL representation (Ware et al.
2014). CPOCL modelled conﬂict between agents by allowing two agents to pursue conﬂicting plans. This led to our
‘fairweather’ agent, who drops their intentional goal once a

Plan-based Intention Revision
In our formalization, we use typical deﬁnitions for POCL
planning (e.g. (Penberthy and Weld 1992)), extended to
characterize intentional structures (Riedl and Young 2010).
A character agent’s goal-driven behavior is within the
context of a story plan that solves a story planning problem.


Deﬁnition 1 (Story plan) A story plan π is S, B, O, L, I
where the set of steps is S, B the set of binding constraints
on the variables of S, O the partial ordering of the steps in
S, L the set of causal links joining steps from S, and ﬁnally
I, the set of intention frames that deﬁne character subplans.

∗
This material is based upon work supported in whole or
in part with funding from the Laboratory for Analytic Sciences
(LAS). Any opinions, ﬁndings, conclusions, or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the LAS and/or any agency or entity of
the United States Government.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8047

