The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Action Schema Networks:
Generalised Policies with Deep Learning
Sam Toyer,1 Felipe Trevizan,1,2 Sylvie Thiébaux,1 Lexing Xie1,3
1

Research School of Computer Science, Australian National University
2
Data61, CSIRO 3 Data to Decisions CRC
ﬁrst.last@anu.edu.au

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce the Action Schema Network (ASNet): a neural network architecture for learning generalised
policies for probabilistic planning problems. By mimicking
the relational structure of planning problems, ASNets are able
to adopt a weight sharing scheme which allows the network
to be applied to any problem from a given planning domain.
This allows the cost of training the network to be amortised
over all problems in that domain. Further, we propose a training method which balances exploration and supervised training on small problems to produce a policy which remains
robust when evaluated on larger problems. In experiments,
we show that ASNet’s learning capability allows it to signiﬁcantly outperform traditional non-learning planners in several
challenging domains.

1

Figure 1: In a CNN, successive convolutions grow the receptive ﬁeld of a neuron at higher layers; analogously for
ASNet, a neuron for a particular action a or proposition p
sees a larger portion of the current state at higher layers.

Introduction

Automated planning is the task of ﬁnding a sequence of actions which will achieve a goal within a user-supplied model
of an environment. Over the past four decades, there has
been a wealth of research into the use of machine learning for automated planning (Jiménez et al. 2012), motivated
in part by the belief that these two essential ingredients of
intelligence—planning and learning—ought to strengthen
one other (Zimmerman and Kambhampati 2003). Nevertheless, the dominant paradigm among state-of-the-art classical and probabilistic planners is still based on heuristic state
space search. The domain-independent heuristics used for
this purpose are capable of exploiting common structures
in planning problems, but do not learn from experience.
Top planners in both the deterministic and learning tracks
of the International Planning Competition often use machine learning to conﬁgure portfolios (Vallati et al. 2015),
but only a small fraction of planners make meaningful use
of learning to produce domain-speciﬁc heuristics or control
knowledge (de la Rosa, Celorrio, and Borrajo 2008). Planners which transfer knowledge between problems in a domain have been similarly underrepresented in the probabilistic track of the competition.
In parallel with developments in planning, we’ve seen a
resurgence of interest in neural nets, driven largely by their
success at problems like image recognition (Krizhevsky,

Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) and learning to play video
games (Mnih et al. 2013). This paper brings some gains of
deep learning to planning by proposing a new neural network architecture, the ASNet, which is specialised to the
structure of planning problems much as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are specialised to the structure of images. The basic idea is illustrated in Figure 1: rather than
operating on a virtual graph of pixels with edges deﬁned by
adjacency relationships, an ASNet operates on a graph of
actions and propositions (i.e. Boolean variables), with edges
deﬁned by relations of the form “action a affects proposition
p” or “proposition p inﬂuences the outcome of action a”.
This structure allows an ASNet to be trained on one problem
from a given planning domain and applied to other, different
problems without re-training.
We make three new contributions. (1) A neural network
architecture for probabilistic planning that automatically
generalises to any problem from a given planning domain.
(2) A representation that allows weight sharing among actions modules belonging to the same action schema, and
among proposition modules associated with the same predicate. This representation is augmented by input features
from domain-independent planning heuristics. (3) A train-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6294

