The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Fair Inference on Outcomes
Razieh Nabi, Ilya Shpitser
Computer Science Department
Johns Hopkins University
{rnabiab1@, ilyas@cs}.jhu.edu

may inﬂuence the hiring decision indirectly, via secondary
applicant characteristics important for the job, and correlated with gender. We argue that this view captures a number
of intuitive properties of discrimination, and generalizes existing formal (Pearl 2009; Zhang, Wu, and Wu 2017) and
informal proposals (Bertrand and Mullainathan 2004).
The paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst ﬁx our notation
and give a brief introduction to causal inference and mediation analysis, which will be necessary to formally deﬁne
our approach to fair inference. We then discuss representative prior work on fair inference, and enumerate issues these
methods may run into. Moving forward, we show that fair
inference from ﬁnite samples under our deﬁnition can be
viewed as a certain type of constrained optimization problem. We then discuss a number of complications to the basic
framework of fair inference. We illustrate our framework via
experiments on real datasets in the experimental section followed by additional discussion and ﬁnal conclusions.

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the problem of fair statistical inference involving outcome variables. Examples include classiﬁcation and regression problems, and estimating treatment
effects in randomized trials or observational data. The issue
of fairness arises in such problems where some covariates or
treatments are “sensitive,” in the sense of having potential of
creating discrimination. In this paper, we argue that the presence of discrimination can be formalized in a sensible way
as the presence of an effect of a sensitive covariate on the
outcome along certain causal pathways, a view which generalizes (Pearl 2009). A fair outcome model can then be learned
by solving a constrained optimization problem. We discuss a
number of complications that arise in classical statistical inference due to this view and provide workarounds based on
recent work in causal and semi-parametric inference.

Introduction
As statistical and machine learning models become an increasingly ubiquitous part of our lives, policymakers, regulators, and advocates have expressed concerns about the
impact of deployment of such models that encode potential
harmful and discriminatory biases. Unfortunately, data analysis is based on statistical models that do not, by default, encode human intuitions about fairness and bias. For instance,
it is well-known that recidivism is predicted at higher rates
among certain minorities in the US (Angwin et al. 2016).
To what extent are these predictions discriminatory? What
is a sensible framework for thinking about these issues? A
growing community is now addressing issues of fairness and
transparency in data analysis in part by deﬁning, analyzing, and mitigating harmful effects of algorithmic bias from
a variety of perspectives and frameworks (Pedreshi, Ruggieri, and Turini 2008; Feldman et al. 2015; Hardt, Price,
and Srebro 2016; Kamiran, Zliobaite, and Calders 2013;
Corbe-Davies et al. 2017; Jabbari et al. 2016).
In this paper, we propose to model discrimination based
on a “sensitive feature,” such as race or gender, with respect
to an outcome as the presence of an effect of the feature on
the outcome along certain “disallowed” causal pathways. As
a simple example, discussed in (Pearl 2009), job applicants’
gender should not directly inﬂuence the hiring decision, but

Variables will be denoted by uppercase letters, V , values by
lowercase letters, v, and sets by bold letters. A state space of
a variable will be denoted by XV . We will represent datasets
by D = (Y, X), where Y is the outcome and X is the feature
vector. We denote by xij and y i the ith realization of the jth
feature Xj ∈ X and the outcome Y . Similarly, xi is the ith
realization of the entire feature vector.
In this paper, we consider probabilistic classiﬁcation and
regression problems with a set of features X and an outcome
Y , where a feature S ∈ X is sensitive, in the sense that making inferences on the outcome Y based on S carelessly may
result in discrimination. There are many examples of S, Y
pairs that have this property. These include hiring discrimination (Y is a hiring decision, and S is gender), or recidivism prediction in parole hearings (where Y is a parole decision, and S is race). Our approach readily generalizes to any
outcome based inference task, such as establishing causal effects, although we do not consider these generalizations here
in the interests of space.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

In causal inference, in addition to the outcome Y , we distinguish a treatment variable A ∈ X, and sometimes also

Notation And Preliminaries

Causal Inference

1931

