The Eighth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence 2018 (EAAI-18)

On the Importance of a Research Data Archive
Benedict Wright,1 Oliver Brunner,2 Bernhard Nebel1
1

BrainLinks-BrainTools, University of Freiburg, Germany
{bwright, nebel}@informatik.uni-freiburg.de 2 oliver.brunner@merkur.uni-freiburg.de

ing the data for long term storage to the issues of how to
keep data accessible over a long period. As we are talking
about digital preservation of research data, we consider the
required archival time to be around 10 years. This is in contrast to other digital preservation areas such as cultural heritage, where data needs to be stored and accessible for an
indeﬁnite, potentially inﬁnite duration.

Abstract
As research becomes more and more data intensive, managing this data becomes a major challenge in any organization.
At university level there is seldom a uniﬁed data management
system in place. The general approach to storing data in such
environments is to deploy network storage. Each member can
store their data organized to their own likings in their dedicated location on the network. Additionally, users tend to
store data in distributed manner such as on private devices,
portable storage, or public and private repositories. Adding
to this complexity, it is common for university departments
to have high ﬂuctuation of staff, resulting in major loss of
information and data on an employee’s departure. A common scenario then is that it is known that certain data has
already been created via experiments or simulation. However,
it can not be retrieved, resulting in a repetition of generation,
which is costly and time-consuming. Additionally, as of recent years, publishers and funding agencies insist on storing,
sharing, and reusing existing research data. We show how
digital preservation can help group leaders and their employees cope with these issues, by introducing our own archival
system OntoRAIS.

Digital Preservation from a Researcher’s
Perspective
As researchers, we produce a large amount of data required
for our work. This data consists of many types depending
on the research ﬁeld we are active in. In the case of Computer Science, this will usually be source code, experiment
results, images, and videos. We have grown accustomed to
using a central network storage for storing individual documents. For collaboration, multiple repositories and shared
folders are used. This structuring of ﬁles usually results in
a non-uniform storage of data in different locations. This
works as long as the data is actively being worked with, and
the creators of the data are still working at the work group.
Problems arise when the authors have left, and one tries to
access data created in the past. Generally there exists a rough
notion of where the requested data lies, however, retrieving
it from multiple repositories and storage locations on the internal network is tedious, and not always possible. Often the
data will be stored on devices no longer functional. Additionally, many smaller data sets and scripts may be stored on
the researcher’s device, which may become unavailable once
the researcher has left the work group. All these issues pose
major obstacles to the activity of researchers and the group
as a whole. New employees face the difﬁculty of getting to
know the previous work going beyond what has been published, data and source code needs to be reconstructed, and
time-consuming experiments need to be rerun. Therefore, a
central archive containing all data in a retrievable manner is
essential for any work group. Once such an archive has been
established, it can be used to not only hold data for internal
use, but also for sharing data with people from other organizations or to the public. This also helps in accommodating
the requirements stated by funding agencies, publishers and
good scientiﬁc practice of storing and sharing scientiﬁc data
(German Research Foundation (DFG) 2013).

Introduction
A common problem in research at university level is the loss
of data as a result of missing or wrong data management
and leaving of essential staff members. Data is often stored
on laptops, private computers, ﬂash drives, or other storage
devices which are not part of a central system. Even if data is
stored on a network storage, it is usually stored in individual
home drives and organized according to individual preferences. This leads to the situation in which it is known that
certain data has already been created, but it is nearly impossible to retrieve. One solution to this issue is digital preservation. In this short paper we will ﬁrst discuss the topic of
digital preservation from the perspective of different stakeholders. The second section will then introduce an archiving
software we are currently developing called OntoRAIS. Finally, we will discuss some general archiving issues.

What is Digital Preservation?
Digital preservation deals with all aspects of preserving digitally created or digitalized data. This ranges from preparc 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7941

