The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

New 2,1 -Norm Relaxation of
Multi-Way Graph Cut for Clustering
Xu Yang,1 Cheng Deng,1 Xianglong Liu,2∗ Feiping Nie3
1

School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xian 710071, China
2
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
3
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xian 710072, China
{xuyang.xd, chdeng.xd, mldeeper}@gmail.com , xlliu@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn
2014) and the relationship of features (Liu, Tsang, and
Müller 2017) to obtain better results. The clustering methods based on graph cut exploit a weighted undirected graph
to represent the similarities of the data, and try to ﬁnd the
best cuts of the graph to produce the ideal clustering results. However, ﬁnding such optimal graph cut is a NP-hard
problem. To address this problem, the graph cut clustering
problem is generally relaxed into the eigenvector space of
continuous Laplace matrix, and different segmentations corresponds to different eigenvector spaces.
The graph cut clustering mainly contains two-way partitioning and multi-way partitioning. Two-way partitioning
divides a graph into exactly two subgraphs, while multiway partitioning divides a graph into multiple vertex disjoint subgraphs. Any two-way method can be applied to
generate multiple partitions, but the quality of the solution
may be unsatisﬁed due to the inherent limitation of the result. Hence, many multi-way clustering methods have been
successively proposed by using the multi-dimensional spectral embedding. The ratio cut clustering (Chan, Schlag, and
Zien 1994) and the normalized cut clustering (Ng, Jordan,
and Weiss 2002) are the two most common multi-way spectral clustering methods, in which Laplacian embedding and
the generalized eigenvectors of Laplace matrix are respectively used to produce the optimal solution. Practically, these
solutions can not be directly regarded as clustering results,
and a further clustering algorithm such as K-means has to
be adopted to obtain the ﬁnal clustering results. However,
this traditional relaxation strategy is more likely to cause the
results deviating from the optimal solution. More recently,
tight relaxation of balanced graph clustering method was
proposed (Nie et al. 2016a), where the solution is a vector
to partition the data afﬁnity graph into two disjoint sets. It
requires to recursively run the clustering method to obtain
the desired number of partitions, which can only get lowquality approximated multi-way clustering results and also
leads to the high computational cost.
In this paper, we propose a new relaxation for the multiway graph cut clustering method to obtain much clearer
cluster structures which solve the multi-way clustering task
without approximation. Different from traditional ratio cut
graph clustering method, we constrain the normalized solution with the 2,1 -norm to enforce each element to have
equal chance to be zero. Thus, the solution of our new

Abstract
The clustering methods have absorbed even-increasing attention in machine learning and computer vision communities
in recent years. Exploring manifold information in multi-way
graph cut clustering, such as ratio cut clustering, has shown
its promising performance. However, traditional multi-way
ratio cut clustering method is NP-hard and thus the spectral solution may deviate from the optimal one. In this paper, we propose a new relaxed multi-way graph cut clustering method, where 2,1 -norm distance instead of squared distance is utilized to preserve the solution having much more
clearer cluster structures. Furthermore, the resulting solution
is constrained with normalization to obtain more sparse representation, which can encourage the solution to contain more
discrete values with many zeros. For the objective function,
it is very difﬁcult to optimize due to minimizing the ratio of
two non-smooth items. To address this problem, we transform
the objective function into a quadratic problem on the Stiefel
manifold (QPSM), and introduce a novel yet efﬁcient iterative
algorithm to solve it. Experimental results on several benchmark datasets show that our method signiﬁcantly outperforms
several state-of-the-art clustering approaches.

Introduction
As an important task in machine learning and computer vision communities, clustering has been widely used in image segmentation (Shi and Malik 2000), image categorization (Grauman and Darrell 2006), and digital media analysis
(An et al. 2012). The goal of clustering is to ﬁnd a partition in order to keep similar data vectors in the same cluster
while those dissimilar ones in different clusters. In recent
years, many clustering methods have been proposed, such
as K-means clustering, spectral clustering, support vector
clustering (Ben-Hur et al. 2001), and non-negative matrix
factorization clustering (Xu, Liu, and Gong 2003). Among
these methods, exploring manifold information in spectral
clustering can greatly promote the clustering performance,
whose basic idea is to transform the clustering problem into
the optimal partition problem of a graph via spectral theory. The graph-based learning aims at capturing the intrinsic
manifold structure underlying the images (Deng et al. 2013;
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4374

