The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Cognitive Assistant for
Visualizing and Analyzing Exoplanets
Jeffrey O. Kephart, Victor C. Dibia, Jason Ellis
Biplav Srivastava, Kartik Talamadupula, Mishal Dholakia
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598 USA
{kephart, dibiavc, jasone, biplavs, krtalamad, mdholak} @ us.ibm.com

Abstract
We demonstrate an embodied cognitive agent that helps scientists visualize and analyze exo-planets and their host stars.
The prototype is situated in a room equipped with a large display, microphones, cameras, speakers, and pointing devices.
Users communicate with the agent via speech, gestures, and
combinations thereof, and it responds by displaying content
and generating synthesized speech. Extensive use of context
facilitates natural interaction with the agent.

Figure 1: Snapshot of display after interactions with agent.

Introduction
The last few years have witnessed a proliferation of voiceactivated AI assistants and chatbots that help people ﬁnd information, trouble-shoot problems, and perform useful tasks
such as placing orders online. Inspired by the prescient vision of Licklider on human-machine symbiosis (Licklider
1960) and more recent work on symbiotic cognitive computing (Farrell et al. 2016; Kephart and Lenchner 2015), we
seek to take a step beyond this current generation by creating embodied cognitive agents, which we deﬁne as software
agents that co-inhabit a physical space with people, and use
their understanding of what is happening in that space to act
as valuable collaborators on cognitive tasks.
The prototype described here is an embodied cognitive
assistant that helps astrophysicists visualize and analyze exoplanets — planets that orbit stars other than the sun. Since
their ﬁrst discovery in 1992, data on over 3600 conﬁrmed
exoplanets have been collected by ground-based and orbiting telescopes and other devices (Akeson and others 2013).
Today, astrophysicists and other scientists expend signiﬁcant mental energy on the mechanics of combining, visualizing and analyzing data, and extracting knowledge from the
written literature. Our goal is to create assistants that substantially reduce the cognitive burdens faced by astrophysicists and other scientists (and ultimately business people as
well), allowing them to focus a greater fraction of their mental time and energy on more creative and exploratory pursuits. Our prototype takes signiﬁcant steps towards this goal.

Technical Details
The prototype is situated in a room equipped with a large
display, microphones, cameras, speakers, and pointing devices. Users communicate with the assistant via speech,
gestures, and combinations thereof. The assistant responds
by displaying content in the form of web pages on the
screen (Fig. 1), often accompanied by synthesized speech.
It can also exhibit proactive behavior, such as guiding users
through the process of clarifying their requests.
The agent’s perceptual system comprises two main components: speech-understanding and pointing-interpretation.
To understand speech, the audio signal is fed to the IBM
Watson speech engine. A conversation service receives the
resulting transcript via pub-sub, sends it to the Watson Conversation service and the Watson NLU service, and combines the results to generate a data structure that contains
user intent inferred from a classiﬁer (trained to distinguish
among 30 different classes), as well as entities such as physical properties, mathematical quantities, and peoples’ names.
The pointing device is an HTC VIVE controller that is
modiﬁed to produce a cursor that is projected on the display.
The cursor’s location is emitted as a mouse event, and associated with the window identity and event type. Application and spatial context are maintained in a Redis database,
which supports reads and writes on a millisecond timescale.
When it receives the data structure generated by the conversation agent, the parser looks up appropriate information
in the spatial and application context, and combines the received information with the context to produce a command,

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8206

