The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Pose Grammar to Encode Human
Body Conﬁguration for 3D Pose Estimation
1

Hao-Shu Fang,1,2∗ Yuanlu Xu,1∗ Wenguan Wang,1,3∗ Xiaobai Liu,4 Song-Chun Zhu1

Dept. Computer Science and Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Beijing Institute of Technology 4 Dept. Computer Science, San Diego State University
fhaoshu@gmail.com, yuanluxu@cs.ucla.edu, wenguanwang@bit.edu.cn
xiaobai.liu@mail.sdsu.edu, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu
Kinematics
Grammar

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a pose grammar to tackle the problem of 3D human pose estimation. Our model directly takes
2D pose as input and learns a generalized 2D-3D mapping
function. The proposed model consists of a base network
which efﬁciently captures pose-aligned features and a hierarchy of Bi-directional RNNs (BRNN) on the top to explicitly
incorporate a set of knowledge regarding human body conﬁguration (i.e., kinematics, symmetry, motor coordination). The
proposed model thus enforces high-level constraints over human poses. In learning, we develop a pose sample simulator
to augment training samples in virtual camera views, which
further improves our model generalizability. We validate our
method on public 3D human pose benchmarks and propose a
new evaluation protocol working on cross-view setting to verify the generalization capability of different methods. We empirically observe that most state-of-the-art methods encounter
difﬁculty under such setting while our method can well handle such challenges.

1

Symmetry
Grammar

Motor Coordination
Grammar

Estimated 3D Human
Pose

Figure 1: Illustration of human pose grammar, which express
the knowledge of human body conﬁguration. We consider
three kinds of human body dependencies and relations in
this paper, i.e., kinematics (red), symmetry (blue) and motor
coordination (green).

Introduction

Estimating 3D human poses from a single-view RGB image has attracted growing interest in the past few years for
its wide applications in robotics, autonomous vehicles, intelligent drones etc. This is a challenging inverse task since
it aims to reconstruct 3D spaces from 2D data and the inherent ambiguity is further ampliﬁed by other factors, e.g.,
clothes, occlusions, background clutters. With the availability of large-scale pose datasets, e.g., Human3.6M (Ionescu
et al. 2014), deep learning based methods have obtained encouraging success. These methods can be roughly divided
into two categories: i) learning end-to-end networks that recover 2D input images to 3D poses directly, ii) extracting 2D
human poses from input images and then lifting 2D poses to
3D spaces.
There are some advantages to decouple 3D human pose
estimation into two stages. i) For 2D pose estimation, ex-

isting large-scale pose estimation datasets (Andriluka et al.
2014; Charles et al. 2016) have provided sufﬁcient annotations; whereas pre-trained 2D pose estimators (Newell,
Yang, and Deng 2016) are also generalized and mature
enough to be deployed elsewhere. ii) For 2D to 3D reconstruction, inﬁnite 2D-3D pose pairs can be generated by projecting each 3D pose into 2D poses under different camera
views. Recent works (Yasin et al. 2016; Martinez et al. 2017)
have shown that well-designed deep networks can achieve
state-of-the-art performance on Human3.6M dataset using
only 2D pose detections as system inputs.
However, despite their promising results, few previous
methods explored the problem of encoding domain-speciﬁc
knowledge into current deep learning based detectors.
In this paper, we develop a deep grammar network to explicitly encode a set of knowledge over human body dependencies and relations, as illustrated in Figure 1. These
knowledges explicitly express the composition process of
joint-part-pose, including kinematics, symmetry and motor
coordination, and serve as knowledge bases for reconstructing 3D poses. We ground these knowledges in a multi-level
RNN network which can be end-to-end trained with backpropagation. The composed hierarchical structure describes

∗
Hao-Shu Fang, Yuanlu Xu and Wenguan Wang contributed
equally to this paper. This work is supported by ONR MURI
Project N00014-16-1-2007, DARPA XAI Award N66001-17-24029, and NSF IIS 1423305, 1657600. Hao-Shu Fang and Wenguan Wang are visiting students. The correspondence author is Xiaobai Liu.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6821

