The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning the Probability of Activation in the Presence of Latent Spreaders
Maggie Makar

John Guttag

Jenna Wiens

CSAIL, MIT
Cambridge, MA
mmakar@mit.edu

CSAIL, MIT
Cambridge, MA
guttag@mit.edu

CSE, University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI
wiensj@umich.edu

upon both the individual’s susceptibility, which we assume
is captured by observed individual-speciﬁc characteristics
(e.g., age, medical history), and an exposure state that cannot be directly observed but can be inferred based on one’s
network of contacts.
In the information diffusion literature, previous approaches that tackle tasks with missing data do not explicitly take into account susceptibility factors that make an individual more/less likely to get infected and do not model
the spreader states based on neighbor characteristics (Sundareisan, Vreeken, and Prakash 2015; Farajtabar et al. 2015;
He et al. 2016; Rozenshtein et al. 2016). Xing et al. (2014)
model susceptibility and infection as latent states but assume that inﬂuence can be exerted by infected nodes only.
They conclude that their model could not identify “asymptomatic shedders”. Fan et al. (2016) model the overall exposure to the contagion (rather than the individual neighbor inﬂuence state) as a latent variable. They do not attempt
to learn the neighbor-speciﬁc characteristics that make her
a spreader. In economics, the workhorse of quantitative research pertaining to social interactions is the linear-in-means
model. This model captures the notion that an individual’s
behavior depends on the average behavior and/or characteristics of members of her group. The linear-in-means model,
which assumes that the spreader status of the neighbors is
observed, is a special case of our proposed model. There
have been several extensions to the classical linear-in-means
model. Toulis and Kao (2013) consider situations where the
inﬂuence is observed but the network structure is uncertain
to derive a causal peer inﬂuence. In contrast to previous approaches, we assume a fully observed network structure and
individual characteristics, but make no assumptions about
the neighbors’ spreader states (latent or observed) and the
mode of infection (through exposure or susceptibility). Our
main contributions are:

Abstract
When an infection spreads in a community, an individual’s
probability of becoming infected depends on both her susceptibility and exposure to the contagion through contact with
others. While one often has knowledge regarding an individual’s susceptibility, in many cases, whether or not an individual’s contacts are contagious is unknown. We study the
problem of predicting if an individual will adopt a contagion in the presence of multiple modes of infection (exposure/susceptibility) and latent neighbor inﬂuence. We present
a generative probabilistic model and a variational inference
method to learn the parameters of our model. Through a series of experiments on synthetic data, we measure the ability
of the proposed model to identify latent spreaders, and predict the risk of infection. Applied to a real dataset of 20,000
hospital patients, we demonstrate the utility of our model in
predicting the onset of a healthcare associated infection using
patient room-sharing and nurse-sharing networks. Our model
outperforms existing benchmarks and provides actionable insights for the design and implementation of targeted interventions to curb the spread of infection.

1

Introduction and Background

In the early 1900s, a New Yorker was identiﬁed as the
ﬁrst asymptomatic carrier of Typhoid. While she appeared
healthy, “Typhoid Mary,” as she later became known, infected 51 individuals (Britannica 2014). A model estimating
the probability of contracting Typhoid for a New Yorker in
that era would have had to take into account three important
factors: 1) the personal characteristics that would make her
more or less susceptible to the infection (e.g., genetic factors) 2) the network of individuals she has come into contact with, and 3) the contagious status of those individuals,
regardless of their apparent healthy state. Mary’s example
highlights the difﬁculty of estimating the risk of being activated (i.e., getting infected) in the presence of both endogenous characteristics and exogenous factors that may be hidden. While we focus on infectious diseases, similar examples exist in other domains (e.g., social networks).
We present a generative probabilistic model for modeling each individual’s Probability of Activation in the presence of Latent Spreaders (PALS). PALS models the infection state of an individual as a random variable that depends

1. Improved risk estimation: In situations where exposure
plays a role, PALS outperforms the baseline model. Additionally, PALS is robust to different modes of infection. It
accurately estimates the risk of infection if the infection is
acquired through exposure only, susceptibility only (e.g.,
non-communicable diseases), or a combination of both.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2. Identiﬁcation of latent spreaders: PALS accurately
identiﬁes inﬂuential individuals based on their character-

134

