The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Decoupled Convolutions for CNNs
Guotian Xie,1,2∗ Ting Zhang,4 Kuiyuan Yang,3 Jianhuang Lai,1,2 Jingdong Wang4
1

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-Sen University
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security
3
DeepMotion, 4 Microsoft Research
xieguotian1990@gmail.com,{Ting.Zhang, jingdw}@microsoft.com
kuiyuanyang@deepmotion.ai, stsljh@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2

channel extent, e.g., group convolution (Ioannou et al. 2016;
Zhang et al. 2017), channel-wise convolution or separable
ﬁlters (Chollet 2016) and other works sparsify the spatial extent with smaller ﬁlters, e.g., 3 × 3, 1 × 3 and 3 × 1 (Szegedy
et al. 2016). In this paper, in contrast to design the ﬁlters, we
are interested in decoupling the convolution along the spatial and channel domains and propose an effective approach
based on the decoupled interpretation.
We start from analyzing the process of convolution on the
input, and decompose this process into two steps. First each
location in the input is projected across the channel domain.
In this way, the projection along channel domain is not related to the spatial information of the input. Second, we accumulate the projections of the locations across spatial domain, and this process is only related to the spatial relationship. We reformulate the decoupled two steps in a convolution form, ﬁrst conducting 1×1 across channel-domain convolution, and then conducting across spatial-domain convolution with a spatial conﬁguration. This process is denoted
as decoupling spatial convolution.
From this decoupling view, we found that the decoupled
structure of standard spatial convolution is unbalance, in
which the 1 × 1 across channel-domain convolution is in
a high dimensional space that might lead to redundancy,
whereas the across spatial-domain convolution is a structured sparse group convolution. To solve this problem, we
propose a balance decoupling spatial convolution (BDSC)
to relax the sparsity of across spatial-domain convolution
by learning a spatial conﬁguration, and to reduce the redundancy of across channel-domain convolution by reducing the
intermediate output channels. In this way, we found in our
experiments that, the performance of the models using our
decoupling convolution drops slightly comparing with the
standard spatial convolution, yet the model size is smaller
than models of standard spatial convolution.
Our contributions in this paper are:

Abstract
In this paper, we are interested in designing small CNNs by
decoupling the convolution along the spatial and channel domains. Most existing decoupling techniques focus on approximating the ﬁlter matrix through decomposition. In contrast,
we provide a two-step interpretation of the standard convolution from the ﬁlter at a single location to all locations, which
is exactly equivalent to the standard convolution. Motivated
by the observations in our decoupling view, we propose an
effective approach to relax the sparsity of the ﬁlter in spatial aggregation by learning a spatial conﬁguration, and reduce the redundancy by reducing the number of intermediate channels. Our approach achieves comparable classiﬁcation performance with the standard uncoupled convolution,
but with a smaller model size over CIFAR-100, CIFAR-10
and ImageNet.

Introduction
Since AlexNet (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012)
successfully applied Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
to ImageNet and won the challenge by a large margin in
2012, CNNs become the most widely used model for image classiﬁcation (He et al. 2016), object detection (Ren et
al. 2015; Redmon and Farhadi 2016) and image segmentation (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Kolesnikov and
Lampert 2016) and so on. CNNs have become deeper and
deeper (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Szegedy et al. 2015;
He et al. 2015; 2016; Huang et al. 2016), ranging from
tens of layers to thousands of layers to pursue better performance, and have become wider and wider as well, such
as Wide Residual Networks (Zagoruyko and Komodakis
2016).
Another research direction is designing more effective ﬁlters. There have been many works on ﬁlter design, and most
of them can be categorized into two types. One is to decompose the ﬁlter matrix into several low rank matrices (Ioannou et al. 2015; Denton et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2015; Kim
et al. 2015; Tai et al. 2015; Jaderberg, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2014; Mamalet and Garcia 2012), the other is to view
the ﬁlter as a sparse matrix, where some works sparsify the

1. We decouple the standard spatial convolution of CNN into
two parts, an across channel-domain convolution and an
across spatial-domain convolution.
2. We propose the balance decoupling spatial convolution to
relax the sparsity of the ﬁlter in spatial aggregation by
learning a spatial conﬁguration, and to reduce the redundancy of 1 × 1 across channel-domain convolution by re-

∗
This work was done when Guotian Xie was an intern at Microsoft Research, Beijing, P.R. China.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4284

