The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Balancing Lexicographic Fairness and a Utilitarian
Objective with Application to Kidney Exchange
Duncan C. McElfresh†,‡
†

‡

Department of Mathematics
University of Maryland
dmcelfre@math.umd.edu

In this work, we close an open theoretical problem regarding
the price of fairness in modern kidney exchanges. We then
propose a hybrid fairness rule that balances a lexicographic
preference ordering over agents, with a utilitarian objective.
This rule has one parameter which controls a bound on the
price of fairness. We apply this rule to real data from a large
kidney exchange and show that our hybrid rule produces more
reliable outcomes than other fairness rules1 .

Introduction

Chronic kidney disease is a worldwide problem whose societal burden is likened to that of diabetes (Neuen et al. 2013).
Left untreated, it leads to end-stage renal failure and the need
for a donor kidney—for which demand far outstrips supply.
In the United States alone, the kidney transplant waiting list
grew from 58,000 people in 2004 to over 100,000 needy patients (Hart et al. 2016).2
To alleviate some of this supply-demand mismatch, kidney exchanges (Rapaport 1986; Roth, Sönmez, and Ünver
2004) allow patients with willing living donors to trade
donors for access to compatible or higher-quality organs.
In addition to these patient-donor pairs, modern exchanges
include non-directed donors, who enter the exchange without a patient in need of a kidney. Exchanges occur in cycleor chain-like structures, and now account for 10% of living transplants in the United States. Yet, access to a kidney exchange does not guarantee equal access to kidneys
themselves; for example, certain classes of patients may be
particularly disadvantaged based on health characteristics or
other logistical factors. Thus, fairness considerations are an
active topic of theoretical and practical research in kidney
exchange and the matching market community in general.
Intuitively, any enforcement of a fairness constraint or
consideration may have a negative effect on overall economic efﬁciency. A quantiﬁcation of this tradeoff is known
as the price of fairness (Bertsimas, Farias, and Trichakis
2011), which is equal to the relative efﬁciency loss due to

1.1

Our Contributions

Dickerson, Procaccia, and Sandholm (2014) ﬁnds that the
theoretical price of fairness in kidney exchange is small
when only patient-donor pairs participate in the exchange.
They did not include non-directed donors (NDDs). However,
in modern kidney exchanges, non-directed donors (NDDs)
provide many more matches than patient-donor pairs; furthermore, NDDs create more opportunities to expand the fair
matching, potentially increasing the price of fairness. Here,
we prove that adding NDDs to the theoretical model actually decreases the price of fairness, and that—with enough
NDDs—the price of fairness is zero.
Real kidney exchanges are less dense and more uncertain than the (standard) theoretical model in which we prove
our results. Previous approaches to incorporating fairness
into kidney exchange have neglected this fact: they have
been either ad-hoc—e.g., “priority points” decided on by
committee (Kidney Paired Donation Work Group 2013)—or

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
A full version of this paper and supplemental material can be
found at https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.08286
2

Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
john@cs.umd.edu

a fairness constraint. Recent work by Dickerson, Procaccia, and Sandholm (2014) adapted this concept to the kidney exchange case, and presented two fair allocation rules
that strike a balance between fairness and efﬁciency. Yet, as
we show in this work, those rules can “fail” unpredictably,
yielding an arbitrarily high price of fairness.
With this as motivation, we develop a the hybridlexicographic fairness rule, which balances lexicographic
fairness and a utilitarian objective. To do this, we generalize the hybrid utility function proposed by Hooker and
Williams (2012), which chooses between a Rawlsian (or
maximin) objective and a utilitarian objective for multiple classes of agents; instead, our method chooses between a lexicographic objective and a utilitarian objective,
to favor disadvantaged classes when necessary. The hybridlexicographic method is parameterized by a bound on the
price of fairness, as opposed to a set of parameters that may
result in hard-to-predict ﬁnal matching behavior, as in past
work. Furthermore, we generalize the method to the case of
> 2 classes of agents.
We implement our rule in a realistic mathematical programming framework and–on real data from a large, multicenter, ﬁelded kidney exchange–show that our rule effectively balances fairness and efﬁciency without unwanted
outlier behavior.

Abstract

1

John P. Dickerson†,‡

https://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/data/

8119

