The Eighth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence 2018 (EAAI-18)

Introducing Machine Learning Concepts by
Training a Neural Network to Recognize Hand Gestures∗
Alessandro Giusti, David Huber, Luca M. Gambardella
Dalle Molle Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IDSIA), USI-SUPSI, Lugano, Switzerland

Abstract

Activity Description

We present an interactive guided activity to introduce supervised learning by training a deep neural network (treated as a
black box) to recognize “rock paper scissors” hand gestures
from unconstrained images. The audience is actively involved
in acquiring a varied and representative dataset, on which the
rest of the activity is based. Covered concepts include the
training/evaluation split, classiﬁer evaluation, baseline accuracy, overﬁtting, generalization, data augmentation.

1. Initially, a short (5-10 minutes) presentation introduces
what a classiﬁcation problem is, and how a supervised classiﬁcation pipeline works i.e.: we obtain a training dataset
comprised by many instances with known ground truth, use
this dataset to train a classiﬁer, and once this classiﬁer is
trained, apply it to unseen instances to estimate their class.
2. We introduce the problem we want to solve: given a
picture of a hand, estimate its class as one of: rock, paper or
scissors. We show a set of 100 pictures to be classiﬁed (our
evaluation set), and quickly scroll through them to: show
that this problem is generally easy for humans; show that
the three classes are evenly represented, so the baseline accuracy would be 33%; exemplify the expected framing (the
hand is always well centered in the photograph and in the
foreground); show that rotation of the hand is arbitrary, the
background may be uneven, lighting and subjects are heterogeneous (adults and kids, male and female, different skin
colors).
3. In order to train a classiﬁer, we need a training dataset,
which we don’t yet have: so we ask the audience to acquire
it. We underline that for each picture they shoot we need
to know the class, and in practice we want to end up with
three folders full of pictures, one for each. We remark the
importance of having a large, correct, and representative
training dataset: the pictures they shoot should be as varied
as possible and cover the range of conditions represented
in the evaluation pictures. The time required to acquire the
data is at least 10 minutes (motivated users shoot up to 20
pictures per minute per device, but on average we observe
about 5 pictures per minute per device), but can become a
longer assignment if there is a coffee break in the middle or
the activity is split in two days. We show the audience that
we collected their pictures in three folders1 , one for each
class, and show how large the dataset is. We expect between
80 and 200 images per class.
4. We now switch to a Jupyter notebook (Kluyver and others 2016) running Python, in which the rest of the activity
takes place; we don’t write code live nor discuss the code
contents, but we execute one cell at a time and discuss results.

Introduction
Machine Learning (ML) techniques play an increasingly important role in society and everyday life, yet most people,
with the exception of practitioners of the ﬁeld, are unaware
of ML’s main ideas, capabilities and limits. We present an
interactive, guided experimental activity which assumes no
background knowledge, during which the audience is introduced to supervised deep learning and some of its core concepts in a learning-by-doing fashion. The activity consists in
building from scratch a system that solves a challenging visual pattern recognition task, namely classifying “rock paper
scissors” hand gestures from pictures; the process encounters unanticipated setbacks and challenges, which prompt
the discussion of core ML concepts (bold in the description
below).
The activity can be easily tuned to different levels of detail, requires from 30 minutes to 2 hours, and has been tested
successfully on small groups (10-20 people each) ranging
from secondary education students to adults. The audience
participates in the activity by shooting training pictures with
cellphones, and testing the classiﬁer once it’s learned. In
the proposed form, the activity does not involve coding, but
could be easily adapted to a longer, hands-on experience for
university Computer Science students.
Downloads and extra material related to this activity are
available at http://bit.ly/2iW7zaA.
∗

This project has been partially supported by the Swiss National Center of Competence Research (NCCR) Robotics through
the Swiss National Science Foundation
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
supplementary material includes software to facilitate the logistics of this step

7950

