The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

AdaComp: Adaptive Residual Gradient
Compression for Data-Parallel Distributed Training
Chia-Yu Chen, Jungwook Choi, Daniel Brand, Ankur Agrawal,
Wei Zhang, Kailash Gopalakrishnan
IBM Research AI
1101 Kitchawan Rd. Yorktown Heights, New York 10598
{cchen, choij, danbrand, ankuragr, weiz, kailash}@us.ibm.com
while model and pipeline parallelism approaches are more
effective for fully-connected and recurrent layers of a neural net. All 3 techniques necessitate very high interconnect
bandwidth between the GPUs (in order to communicate the
necessary parameters) and impose limits on peak system utilization and model training time. A variety of system topologies have also been explored to efﬁciently implement distributed training using data parallelism techniques ranging
from simple parameter-server based approaches to the recently proposed Wild-Fire technique (Nair and Gupta 2017)
that allows direct exchange of weights during reduction. Recently, ring-based system topologies (Luehr 2016) have been
proposed to maximally utilize inter-accelerator bandwidths
by connecting all accelerators in the system in a ring network. The accelerator then transports its computed weight
gradients (from its local mini-batch) directly to the adjacent accelerator (without the use of centralized parameter
servers). However, as the number of learners increases, distribution of the minibatch data under strong scaling conditions has the adverse effect of signiﬁcantly increasing the
demand for communication bandwidth between the learners
while proportionally decreasing the FLOPs needed in each
learner - creating a severe computation to communication
imbalance.

Abstract
Highly distributed training of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)
on future compute platforms (offering 100 of TeraOps/s of
computational capacity) is expected to be severely communication constrained. To overcome this limitation, new gradient
compression techniques are needed that are computationally
friendly, applicable to a wide variety of layers seen in Deep
Neural Networks and adaptable to variations in network architectures as well as their hyper-parameters. In this paper
we introduce a novel technique - the Adaptive Residual Gradient Compression (AdaComp) scheme. AdaComp is based
on localized selection of gradient residues and automatically
tunes the compression rate depending on local activity. We
show excellent results on a wide spectrum of state of the art
Deep Learning models in multiple domains (vision, speech,
language), datasets (MNIST, CIFAR10, ImageNet, BN50,
Shakespeare), optimizers (SGD with momentum, Adam) and
network parameters (number of learners, minibatch-size etc.).
Exploiting both sparsity and quantization, we demonstrate
end-to-end compression rates of ∼200× for fully-connected
and recurrent layers, and ∼40× for convolutional layers,
without any noticeable degradation in model accuracies.

Introduction
Over the past decade, Deep Learning (DL) has emerged
as the dominant Machine Learning algorithm showing remarkable success in a wide spectrum of application domains
ranging from image processing (He et al. 2016), machine
translation (Wu et al. 2016), speech recognition (Xiong et
al. 2017) and many others. In each of these domains, DNNs
achieve superior accuracy through the use of very large and
deep models - necessitating up to 100s of ExaOps of computation during training (on GPUs) and GBs of model and
data storage.
In order to improve the training time over single-node
systems, distributed algorithms (Chilimbi et al. 2014), (Ho
et al. 2013), (Lian et al. 2015) are frequently employed to
distribute the training data over multiple CPUs or GPUs
- using data parallelism (Gupta, Zhang, and Wang 2016),
model parallelism (Dean et al. 2012) and pipeline parallelism (Wu et al. 2016) techniques. Data parallelism techniques are widely applied to distribute convolutional layers

Simultaneously, there has been a renaissance in the computational throughput (TeraOps per second) of DL training accelerators - with accelerator throughputs exceeding
100s of TeraOps/s expected in the next few years (Durant
et al. 2017), (Merriman 2017). Exploiting hardware architectures based on reduced precision (Gupta et al. 2015),
(Courbariaux, Bengio, and David 2014), these accelerators
promise dramatic reduction in training times in comparison to commercially available GPUs today. For a given DL
network and distribution approach, the bandwidth needed
for inter-accelerator communication (in GB/s) scales up directly with raw hardware performance as well as the number of learners. In order to guarantee high system performance, radically new compression techniques are therefore
needed to minimize the amount of data exchanged between
accelerators. Furthermore, the time required for compression needs to be signiﬁcantly smaller than the computational
time required for back-propagation. Section 2 discusses various prior compression techniques - most of which were applied to Fully Connected (FC) layers of DL networks. But

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2827

