The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Audio Visual Attribute Discovery for
Fine-Grained Object Recognition
Hua Zhang, Xiaochun Cao,∗ Rui Wang
State Key Laboratory of Information Security (SKLOIS), Institute of Information Engineering, CAS, Beijing, China
zhanghua@iie.ac.cn, caoxiaochun@iie.ac.cn , wangrui@iie.ac.cn

Abstract

Visual

Current progresses on ﬁne-grained recognition are mainly focus on learning the discriminative feature representation via
introducing the visual supervisions e.g. part labels. However,
it is time-consuming and needs the professional knowledge
to obtain the accuracy annotations. Different from these existing methods based on the visual supervisions, in this paper,
we introduce a novel feature named audio visual attributes via
discovering the correlations between the visual and audio representations. Speciﬁcally, our uniﬁed framework is training
with video-level category label, which consists of two important modules, the encoder module and the attribute discovery
module, to encode the image and audio into vectors and learn
the correlations between audio and images, respectively. On
the encoder module, we present two types of feed forward
convolutional neural network for the image and audio modalities. While an attention driven framework based on recurrent neural network is developed to generate the audio visual
attribute representation. Thus, our proposed architecture can
be implemented end-to-end in the step of inference. We exploit our models for the problem of ﬁne-grained bird recognition on the CUB200-211 benchmark. The experimental results demonstrate that with the help of audio visual attribute,
we achieve the superior or comparable performance to that of
strongly supervised approaches on the bird recognition.

Audio-Visual attributes

Audio

Figure 1: Visualization of audio visual attributes discovery
model. Given the visual images (the ﬁrst column) and the
speciﬁed audios (the last column), we compute the correlations between these two modalities. In the second column,
we present the visualization of training images via the audio
visual module. And The third column shows the representation of audio visual attribute.

Introduction

Belhumeur 2013; Elhoseiny, Saleh, and Elgammal 2013;
Reed et al. 2016; Vedaldi et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2013;
He and Peng 2017).
Although there exists a great progress on ﬁne-grained
recognition assisted by the use of deep convolutional neural
network, the performance is heavily dependent on the supervised labels to construct the discriminative feature representation, e.g. precise parts (Xie et al. 2013; Zhang et al. 2016a;
2014) or textual annotations (Reed et al. 2016; Vedaldi et al.
2014). However, the learned representation is still far from
solving the ﬁne-grained problems due to the limitations of
supervised labels. For example, the variations of visual appearances would cause the region based representation ambiguous, and then weaken the discrimination of features. In
addition, the textual descriptions are subjective which may
be not consistent across persons. This would let the learned
representation incorrect and limit the performance of ﬁnegrained recognition.
To overcome above limitations of representation caused

Fine-grained recognition is an important research direction
in the ﬁeld of computer vision community, whose goal
is to recognize the subcategories. Much progresses (Branson et al. 2014; Huang et al. 2016; Krause et al. 2015;
Liu et al. 2012; Xie et al. 2013; Zhang et al. 2016a; 2014;
2016b) have been made with the development of deep convolutional neural network. The key challenge of ﬁne-grained
recognition is how to learn the discriminative feature to tell
the subtle visual differences between the subcategories. In
general, we can roughly divide the existing methods into two
groups based on their distinct supervised label, which are
the visual ﬁne-grained annotations, e.g. the visual part label,
(Branson et al. 2014; Huang et al. 2016; Krause et al. 2015;
Liu et al. 2012; Xie et al. 2013; Zhang et al. 2016a; 2014;
2016b) and the text descriptions e.g. attributes (Berg and
∗

corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7542

