The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Meta-Search Through the Space of Representations
and Heuristics on a Problem by Problem Basis
Raquel Fuentetaja,1 Michael Barley,2 Daniel Borrajo,1 Jordan Douglas,2
Santiago Franco,3 Patricia Riddle2
1

Departamento de Informatica. Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Spain
Department of Computer Science. University of Auckland, New Zealand
3
School of Computing and Engineering, University of Huddersﬁeld, United Kingdom
2

An additional and relevant aspect that has been much
less studied in automated planning is the input representation. The same problem can be deﬁned in different ways in
PDDL (Planning Domain Description Language) (Ghallab
et al. 1998), the standard language for compactly representing planning tasks. Each particular deﬁnition of a planning
problem may have an impact on the planner performance.
In fact, given the same combination of heuristics and search
methods some representations will make it harder to solve
the problem while others will facilitate its solution (Howe
et al. 1999; Howe and Dahlman 2002; Riddle et al. 2016;
Fuentetaja and de la Rosa 2016). Also, the best representation may not be the same for different problems within a
domain.

Abstract
Two key aspects of problem solving are representation
and search heuristics. Both theoretical and experimental studies have shown that there is no one best problem representation nor one best search heuristic. Therefore, some recent methods, e.g., portfolios, learn a good
combination of problem solvers to be used in a given
domain or set of domains. There are even dynamic
portfolios that select a particular combination of problem solvers speciﬁc to a problem. These approaches:
(1) need to perform a learning step; (2) do not usually focus on changing the representation of the input
domain/problem; and (3) frequently do not adapt the
portfolio to the speciﬁc problem. This paper describes a
meta-reasoning system that searches through the space
of combinations of representations and heuristics to ﬁnd
one suitable for optimally solving the speciﬁc problem.
We show that this approach can be better than selecting
a combination to use for all problems within a domain
and is competitive with state of the art optimal planners.

Related to the representation is the fact that most
current planners transform the PDDL representation into
more efﬁcient internal representations such as propositional
logic (Hoffmann and Nebel 2001) or SAS+ (Bäckström and
Nebel 1995). Thus, changes of representation can be performed either at the PDDL level, or in the procedure(s) involved in the transformation. For instance, in Fast Downward (FD) (Helmert 2006), one of the most inﬂuential planning platforms, these procedures are the translation and preprocessing steps to generate a SAS+ representation. In SAT
planning, the impact of different encodings has been examined (Kautz and Selman 1992; Rintanen 2012).

Introduction
Automated planning now offers a wide range of domainindependent heuristics and search methods. Theoretical
analysis can shed light on the impact of a single heuristic in different domains (Hoffmann 2005). However, it has
been shown that a combination of heuristics improves the
results over a single one (Helmert 2006). And analysing
a combination of heuristics becomes a much harder task.
Also, there is no known best combination for all problems within a domain and across domains. This has motivated research into techniques for selecting good combinations. There have been proposals to either manually deﬁne
the best combinations (Richter and Westphal 2010), generate portfolios that combine planners (Cenamor, de la Rosa,
and Fernández 2016; Helmert, Röger, and Karpas 2011;
Gerevini, Saetti, and Vallati 2009; Núñez, Borrajo, and
Linares-López 2015), or auto-tune the parameters of planners (Fawcett et al. 2011). Many of these techniques require
off-line training and select combinations that depend on the
planning domain but not on the particular problem to solve.

In this paper, we present Meta-Search for Planning (MSP),
an approach that, given a problem and domain, searches
through the space of representations and heuristics to ﬁnd a
good combination to use in solving the problem. We change
the representation using various techniques as black-boxes.
They range from simple ones like changing the order of actions in the PDDL domain ﬁle, a la (Vallati et al. 2015), to
more complex ones like Baggy (Riddle et al. 2016), that reformulates problems into a bagged representation. We also
vary the procedure to obtain the internal representation.
We make the following claims: (1) it is seldom the case
that a single representation or heuristic is best over all problems within a domain; (2) the choice of representations and
heuristics can be modeled as a meta-level search through a
space of combinations of representations and heuristics; and
(3) this meta-level search can be made efﬁcient enough to be
competitive within the IPC constraints.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6169

