The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

The Structural Afﬁnity Method for Solving the
Raven’s Progressive Matrices Test for Intelligence
Snejana Shegheva, Ashok Goel
Design & Intelligence Laboratory, School of Interactive Computing,
Georgia Institute of Technology
85 Fifth Street NW, Atlanta, GA 30332 USA
sshegheva3@gatech.edu, goel@cc.gatech.edu
started an increasing trend of building computer systems capable of addressing tests of individual human intelligence
(Bringsjord 2011). Hernández-Orallo et al. present an extensive taxonomy of about thirty existing models varying in
purpose, generalization and technology (Hernández-Orallo
et al. 2016). The diversity of of the problems ranges from geometric analogy (Evans 1964) to odd-one-out (Lovett, Lockwood, and Forbus 2008; McGreggor and Goel 2011) and
Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPM) (Carpenter, Just, and
Shell 1990; Lovett, Forbus, and Usher 2010; McGreggor and
Goel 2014; Strannegård, Cirillo, and Ström 2013). In this
paper, we center our attention on RPM because its visual
input, variety of problems, centrality in previous research,
and a correlation with general human intelligence provide a
suitable dataset for analyzing capabilities of a computational
model that focuses on problem solving.
A RPM problem is a clever organization of geometric ﬁgures (see Figure 1 for an illustration). In part because of its
simplicity and partly because of the high correlation with
other measures of intellectual achievement (Carpenter, Just,
and Shell 1990), it is widely adopted in psychometrics, the
science of measuring intelligence and knowledge. The Standard Raven Progressive Matrices (SPM) test consists of ﬁve
sets of twelve problems each, A through E, with the problems typically increasing in difﬁculty both within a set and
across the sets. In this discussion, we will focus on SPM
problems (both, 2x2 and 3x3) that are presented in black
ink on white background. The left-hand side of the Figure 1
shows a 2x2 matrix similar to a problem from the SPM test,
with the missing element in the lower right corner. The righthand side shows a set of six possible answers for ﬁlling in
the blank cell to complete the logical pattern in the matrix.
Early computational models of addressing Raven’s problems did not change the original problem representation, focusing instead on the rules needed to solve the problem.
Carpenter et al, 1990, identiﬁed ﬁve distinct rules - ”constant in a row”, ”distribution of three values”, ”quantitative
pairwise progression”, ”ﬁgure addition”, and ”distribution
of two values”. Their method exempliﬁed heuristic reasoning over propositional representations. The system proposed
by Lovett et al. used prior knowledge of geometric elements
and spatial relations to build qualitative spatial representations of the human generated sketches of RPM problems,
and then performing analogical reasoning on them (Lovett

Abstract
Graphical models offer techniques for capturing the structure of many problems in real-world domains and provide
means for representation, interpretation, and inference. The
modeling framework provides tools for discovering rules for
solving problems by exploring structural relationships. We
present the Structural Afﬁnity method that uses graphical
models for ﬁrst learning and subsequently recognizing the
pattern for solving problems on the Raven’s Progressive Matrices Test of general human intelligence. Recently there has
been considerable work on computational models of addressing the Raven’s test using various representations ranging
from fractals to symbolic structures. In contrast, our method
uses Markov Random Fields parameterized by afﬁnity factors to discover the structure in the geometric analogy problems and induce the rules of Carpenter et al.’s cognitive model
of problem-solving on the Raven’s Progressive Matrices Test.
We provide a computational account that ﬁrst learns the structure of a Raven’s problem and then predicts the solution by
computing the probability of the correct answer by recognizing patterns corresponding to Carpenter et al.’s rules. We
demonstrate that the performance of our model on the Standard Raven Progressive Matrices is comparable with existing
state of the art models.

Introduction
Polya wrote that heuristic reasoning, or ars inveniendi, aims
at discovering rules for solving problems for which an
optimal solution may be impractical or requires a provisional plausible guess (Polya 1945). Newell has written that
Polya’s methods for problem-solving are directly relevant
to mechanizing reasoning with computer programs (Newell
1983). However, heuristic reasoning traditionally has been
used in conjunction with symbolic, propositional representations. With this work, we illustrate the use of heuristic reasoning with Markov Random Fields for addressing problems
on tests of human intelligence. We aim at providing a complementary view on problem solving on the Raven’s test that
exploits statistical reasoning over graphical representations
of the problems.
The need to be able to assess the degree of success for
computational models of human cognitive processes has
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

714

