The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Synthesis of Orchestrations of Transducers for Manufacturing
Giuseppe De Giacomo

Moshe Y. Vardi

Paolo Felli

Sapienza Università di Roma, Italy
degiacomo@dis.uniroma1.it

Rice University, Houston, USA
vardi@cs.rice.edu

Univ. of Bozen-Bolzano, Bolzano, Italy
pfelli@unibz.it

Natasha Alechina

Brian Logan

University of Nottingham, UK
nza@cs.nott.ac.uk

University of Nottingham, UK
bsl@cs.nott.ac.uk
Process planning is traditionally carried out by manufacturing engineers who are experts in the particular processes
used in a speciﬁc factory, and is largely a manual process.
Such a manual process is uneconomic for the small batch
sizes typical of the manufacturing as a service model. Even
when the batch size is large enough to justify a humanauthored process plan, the time required to produce a plan
does not allow manufacturers to bid to manufacture for products in real time. To fully realize the manufacturing as a service vision, process planning must be fully automated.
There is a substantial literature on automation to achieve
ﬂexibility in manufacturing, for example (Browne et al.
1984; Sethi and Sethi 1990; ElMaraghy 2005; Bi et al. 2008;
Koren et al. 1999; Mehrabi, Ulsoy, and Koren 2000; Smale
and Ratchev 2009; Felli, Logan, and Sardina 2016). There
has been little work, however, on the automated synthesis of process plans. An exception is (de Silva et al. 2016;
Felli et al. 2017), where techniques based on AI behavior
composition (De Giacomo, Patrizi, and Sardiña 2013) are
proposed to determine whether a particular product is realizable (can be manufactured by a particular set of manufacturing resources), and how the product should be manufactured
using the resources. Their approach takes as inputs a process recipe and a production topology specifying the available manufacturing resources and their interconnection, and
outputs a process plan controller that speciﬁes the tasks to
be executed by each manufacturing resource in the production line. Process recipes and manufacturing resources are
represented using labelled transition systems, and they deﬁne a special task simulation relation that captures the notion of realizability. Controller synthesis is a byproduct of
computing the simulation relation, and is polynomial in the
size of the topology (which is exponential in the number of
resources and polynomial in their size) and exponential in
the size of the process recipe and number of resources.
The approach proposed in (de Silva et al. 2016; Felli et
al. 2017) involves considerable bookkeeping and is somewhat ad-hoc, which makes it difﬁcult characterize how the
synthesis of controllers for manufacturing relates to the existing rich literature and tools on reactive synthesis, e.g.,
(Grädel, Thomas, and Wilke 2003; De Giacomo et al. 2010;
Ehlers et al. 2017). In particular, materials and unﬁnished
parts are represented explicitly and manufacturing operations transform sets of input parts into sets of output parts.

Abstract
In this paper, we model manufacturing processes and facilities as transducers (automata with output). The problem of
whether a given manufacturing process can be realized by a
given set of manufacturing resources can then be stated as
an orchestration problem for transducers. We ﬁrst consider
the conceptually simpler case of uni-transducers (transducers
with a single input and a single output port), and show that
synthesizing orchestrations for uni-transducers is EXPTIMEcomplete. Surprisingly, the complexity remains the same for
the more expressive multi-transducer case, where transducers
have multiple input and output ports and the orchestration is
in charge of dynamically connecting ports during execution.

1

Introduction

Manufacturing is transitioning from a ‘mass production’
model, in which large volumes of a product are produced
at a time, to a ‘manufacturing as a service’ model where
the products to be manufactured are not known in advance
and each product may differ from the products manufactured
immediately before and immediately after it (TSB 2012;
Rhodes 2015). In ‘manufacturing as a service’, manufacturing resources are advertised and shared between members of
a ‘manufacturing cloud’, and products are manufactured by
different enterprises connected via a dynamically conﬁgured
supply chains (Lu, Xu, and Xu 2014). This trend toward ﬂexible, networked manufacturing systems has been termed the
Fourth Industrial Revolution, or Industry 4.0, and is viewed
as essential to maintain the competitiveness of manufacturing in high-labor cost economies (Kagermann et al. 2013).
Determining the manufacturing and assembly tasks necessary to produce a product and their ordering is termed process planning (Groover 2007). In process planning, manufacturing tasks in a process recipe are matched against manufacturing resources, e.g., computer/numerical-controlled
machines, robots etc., to give an executable process plan that
realizes the process recipe. The process plan speciﬁes the
speciﬁc manufacturing resources to be used for each manufacturing and assembly operation, and how materials and
parts move between the various manufacturing resources.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6161

