The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Variational Recurrent Neural Machine Translation
Jinsong Su,1 Shan Wu, 1,2 Deyi Xiong,3∗
Yaojie Lu,2 Xianpei Han,2 Biao Zhang1

Xiamen University, Xiamen, China1
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China2
Soochow University, Suzhou, China3
jssu@xmu.edu.cn, wushan@stu.xmu.edu.cn, dyxiong@suda.edu.cn
yaojie2017@iscas.ac.cn, xianpei@nfs.iscas.ac.cn, zb@stu.xmu.edu.cn
NMT (VNMT) which incorporates a latent random variable
into NMT, serving as a global semantic signal for generating
good translations. However, the internal transition structure
of RNN is entirely deterministic, and hence, this implementation may not be an effective way to model high variability
observed in structured data, such as language modeling and
machine translation (Chung et al. 2015). Therefore, the potential of VNMT is limited and how to better improve NMT
with latent variables is still open for further exploration.
In this paper, we propose a variational recurrent NMT
(VRNMT) model to deal with the above-mentioned problem, motivated by recent success of the variational recurrent
neural network (VRNN) (Chung et al. 2015). It is illustrated
in Fig. 1. VRNMT explicitly models underlying semantics
of bilingual sentence pairs, which are then exploited to reﬁne translation. However, instead of only employing a single
latent variable to capture the global semantics of each parallel sentence, we assume that there is a continuous latent
random variable sequence z = {z1 , z2 ..., zTy } in the underlying semantic space, where the iteratively generated variable zj participates in the generations of each target word yj
and hidden state sj+1 . Formally, the conditional probability
p(y|x) is decomposed as follows:
Ty
Ty 


p(yj |x, y<j ) =
p(yj , zj |x, y<j )dzj
p(y|x) =

Abstract
Partially inspired by successful applications of variational recurrent neural networks, we propose a novel variational recurrent neural machine translation (VRNMT) model in this paper. Different from the variational NMT, VRNMT introduces
a series of latent random variables to model the translation
procedure of a sentence in a generative way, instead of a single latent variable. Speciﬁcally, the latent random variables
are included into the hidden states of the NMT decoder with
elements from the variational autoencoder. In this way, these
variables are recurrently generated, which enables them to
further capture strong and complex dependencies among the
output translations at different timesteps. In order to deal with
the challenges in performing efﬁcient posterior inference and
large-scale training during the incorporation of latent variables, we build a neural posterior approximator, and equip
it with a reparameterization technique to estimate the variational lower bound. Experiments on Chinese-English and
English-German translation tasks demonstrate that the proposed model achieves signiﬁcant improvements over both the
conventional and variational NMT models.

1. Introduction
Recently, neural machine translation (NMT) has gradually
established state-of-the-art results over statistical machine
translation (SMT) on various language pairs. Most NMT
models consist of two recurrent neural networks (RNNs):
a bidirectional RNN based encoder that transforms source
sentence x = {x1 , x2 ...xTx } into a hidden state sequence,
and a decoder that generates the corresponding target sentence y = {y1 , y2 ...yTy } by exploiting source-side contexts
via an attention network (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015).
This attentional neural encoder-decoder framework has now
become the dominant architecture for NMT.
Within this framework, semantic representations of
source and target sentences are learned in an implicit way.
As a result, the learned semantic representations are far
from being sufﬁcient for capturing all semantic details and
dependencies (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Tu et al.
2016). To complement the insufﬁciency of semantic representations of NMT, Zhang et al. (2016a) present variational

j=1

j=1

zj

Ty 

=



j=1

p(yj |x, y<j , zj )p(zj |x, y<j )dzj

(1)

zj

where zj encodes the semantic contexts at the j-th timestep.
In doing so, we expect these latent variables to efﬁciently
model the strong and complex dependencies between adjacent target words, which may not be effectively and sufﬁciently captured by the conventional NMT or VNMT.
However, the incorporation of latent variables into the
existing NMT models faces two challenges, as mentioned
in (Zhang et al. 2016a): 1) the posterior inference in our
model is intractable; 2) large-scale training, which lays the
ground for the data-driven NMT, is accordingly problematic. To address these two issues, we follow Zhang et al.
(2016a) to use deep neural networks, which are capable of
learning highly nonlinear functions, to ﬁt the latent-variablerelated distributions, i.e. the prior and posterior. The former

∗

Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5488

