The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Feature Enhancement Network: A Reﬁned Scene Text Detector
Sheng Zhang, Yuliang Liu, Lianwen Jin, Canjie Luo
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, South China University of Technology
zsscut90@gmail.com, liu.yuliang@mail.scut.edu.cn, {lianwen.jin, canjie.luo}@gmail.com

is also widely used in the scene text detection ﬁeld. The main
differences between general object detection and scene text
detection have been discussed by some previous published
papers such as ((Tian et al. 2015), (Sun et al. 2015)), which
includes that the scene text are often smaller, thinner and
with rich diversity on the aspect-ratios and so on, which
makes the detection of scene text a very challenging problem
different from general object detection. Besides, for a better
performance, almost all object detection algorithms which
adopt the DCNN framework take the strategy: i.e. training
the proposed network by ﬁne-tuning a model pre-trained on
ImageNet dataset (Russakovsky et al. 2015) which is used
for image recognition, a different task which requires the
extracted features are position-insensitive. Contradictorily,
the task for object detection is position-sensitive. Therefore,
(Dai et al. 2016) proposes the position-sensitive RoI pooling
layer to solve the problem. However, they only use the 3 × 3
sliding-window feature for region proposal and single scale
high level feature for the reﬁnement of object detection,
which is insufﬁcient for general text detection task, specially
for smaller text regions; Meanwhile, their unitary positionsensitive RoI pooling in general object detection is unreasonable for much variable text regions. Motivated by their
work, we propose a reﬁned scene text detection framework
via a novel Feature Enhancement Network (FEN) which can
directly generate word bounding boxes and be end-to-end
trainable.
Our key contributions in this paper are as follows:
• We propose a novel FEN network which promotes the recall rate and accuracy of text detection.
• We present an adaptively weighted position-sensitive Region of Interest (RoI) pooling module to further raise the
accuarcy of the Text Detection Reﬁnement stage.
• We propose a positives mining strategy to solve the sample imbalence problem during the Text Detection Reﬁnement stage.
• Our approach shows state-of-the-art performance on ICDAR 2011 and 2013 robust text detection benchmarks.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a reﬁned scene text detector with
a novel Feature Enhancement Network (FEN) for Region
Proposal and Text Detection Reﬁnement. Retrospectively,
both region proposal with only 3 × 3 sliding-window feature and text detection reﬁnement with single scale high
level feature are insufﬁcient, especially for smaller scene
text. Therefore, we design a new FEN network with taskspeciﬁc, low and high level semantic features fusion to improve the performance of text detection. Besides, since unitary position-sensitive RoI pooling in general object detection is unreasonable for variable text regions, an adaptively weighted position-sensitive RoI pooling layer is devised for further enhancing the detecting accuracy. To tackle
the sample-imbalance problem during the reﬁnement stage,
we also propose an effective positives mining strategy for efﬁciently training our network. Experiments on ICDAR 2011
and 2013 robust text detection benchmarks demonstrate that
our method can achieve state-of-the-art results, outperforming all reported methods in terms of F-measure.

Introduction
Text detection in natural scene is an important component
((Bissacco et al. 2013), (Yin et al. 2014), (Ye and Doermann 2015), (He et al. 2016b), (He et al. 2017)) for various intelligent applications based on computer vision. For
instance, blind navigation, multilingual translation, automotive assistance and image-based geolocation, etc. Different
from conventional OCR technique, scene text detection are
often challenged by perspective distortions, variation of text
size, color or uncontrollable illumination intensity, etc.
In recent years, various methods have been successfully
applied for detecting scene text. However, they usually
comprise several processing steps, e.g. character or word
proposal generation ((Neumann and Matas 2012), (Huang,
Qiao, and Tang 2014), (Jaderberg et al. 2016)), proposals
ﬁltering and clustering. They often entail much effort in designing heuristic rules and tuning parameters to make each
module conduct well, which conversely reduces the speed of
text detection.
Currently, Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNN)
have advanced general object detection substantially, which

Related Works
In general, text spotting in wild scene can be detailedly categorized by two sub-tasks: text detection and text recognition. The former focuses on accurate text localization in

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2612

