The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Discriminant Projection Representation-Based
Classiﬁcation for Vision Recognition
Qingxiang Feng, Yicong Zhou*
Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
fengqx1988@gmail.com, yicongzhou@umac.mo, *Corresponding author.

known to lie on a linear subspace (Basri and Jacobs 2003;
Feng, Zhou, and Lan 2016; Feng and Zhou 2016a). LRC
solves the least square errors and obtain the linear projection
point as the representation for an independent class-speciﬁc
models.
The common objective of existing representation-based
methods is to ﬁnd the best representation for classiﬁcation.
However, they have only obtained a roughly approximated
representation. For example, In ref.(Wright et al. 2009), we
know that the ideal representation of SRC is to solve the
L0 minimum problem. In LRC, the regression projection is
obtained by a matrix’s pseudo-inverse. Therefore, we know
that they only obtain the approximated representation. In
order to ﬁnd a better representation of an image, this paper proposes a projection representation-based classiﬁcation
(PRC) for image recognition. To approximate the ’ideal representation’ of a sample point, PRC utilizes a new mathematical model to iteratively compute the projection point of
the test sample towards a line linking a paired of speciﬁc
points. This mathematical model has been proved by a theorem. According to the theorem, we know that the generated
projection will be almost equal to the ’ideal representation’
after sufﬁcient iterations. Moreover, the discriminant PRC
(DPRC) is further proposed, which obtains the discriminant
information by maximizing the ratio of the between-class
reconstruction error over the within-class re-construction error. The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
 Firstly, we propose a new mathematical model to obtain
the projection of a point on a hyper-space, and we prove this
model mathematically.
 Secondly, with the mathematical model, we propose the
projection representation-based classiﬁcation (PRC) for image recognition tasks. The generated projection by PRC will
be almost equal to the ’ideal representation’ after sufﬁcient
iterations.
 In order to obtain an effective discriminant subspace
for PRC, we propose the discriminant PRC (DPRC). DPRC
utilizes the labeled training samples set to constitute a more
reliable subspace such that the effective discriminant information can be used for classiﬁcation.
 Experiments have been carried out on several challenging databases. The results show that the proposed PRC
and DPRC outperform several state-of-the-art methods.

Abstract
Representation-based classiﬁcation methods such as sparse
representation-based classiﬁcation (SRC) and linear regression classiﬁcation (LRC) have attracted a lot of attentions.
In order to obtain the better representation, a novel method
called projection representation-based classiﬁcation (PRC) is
proposed for image recognition in this paper. PRC is based on
a new mathematical model. This model denotes that the ’ideal
projection’ of a sample point x on the hyper-space H may be
gained by iteratively computing the projection of x on a line
of hyper-space H with the proper strategy. Therefore, PRC
is able to iteratively approximate the ’ideal representation’
of each subject for classiﬁcation. Moreover, the discriminant
PRC (DPRC) is further proposed, which obtains the discriminant information by maximizing the ratio of the betweenclass reconstruction error over the within-class reconstruction
error. Experimental results on ﬁve typical databases show that
the proposed PRC and DPRC are effective and outperform
other state-of-the-art methods on several vision recognition
tasks.

Introduction
Recently, representation-based classiﬁers have attracted increasing attentions of researchers, which can be roughly
divided into two kinds: all-classes-based and single-classbased. In the ﬁrst kind, the well-known method is sparse
representation-based classiﬁcation (SRC) (Wright et al.
2009). It was developed to use the all-class-model to obtain the L1 -based sparse representation for classiﬁcation .
To improve the computation efﬁciency, the collaborative
representation-based classiﬁcation (CRC) (Zhang, Yang,
and Feng 2011) was proposed to address the L2 minimum problem. Later, several improved methods of SRC
were proposed for image recognition (Yang et al. 2012;
Feng and Zhou 2016b; 2017), such as manifold constraint
transfer (MCT) (Zhang et al. 2015) applies a strategy to
produce new data for classiﬁcation. Different from the allclass-model in SRC, some classiﬁers use single class to
obtain its representation. For example, linear regressionbased classiﬁcation (LRC) (Naseem, Togneri, and Bennamoun 2010) was proposed for face identiﬁcation, which
was based on that samples from a speciﬁc object class are
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2208

