The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multiwinner Elections with Diversity Constraints
Robert Bredereck

Piotr Faliszewski

University of Oxford, Oxford, UK;
TU Berlin, Berlin, Germany
robert.bredereck@tu-berlin.de

AGH University, Krakow, Poland
faliszew@agh.edu.pl

Ayumi Igarashi

Martin Lackner

Piotr Skowron

University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
ayumi.igarashi@cs.ox.ac.uk

TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
lackner@dbai.tuwien.ac.at

TU Berlin, Berlin, Germany
p.k.skowron@gmail.com

would still seek researchers with high numbers of strong publications, but they would give priority to making the seminar
more diverse (indeed, junior researchers or representatives
of different subareas of AI can provide new perspectives;
it is also important to understand what people working in
economics have to say, but the organizers would prefer to
learn from established researchers and not from junior ones).
The above example shows a number of key features of
our committee-selection model. First, we assume that there
is some function that evaluates the committees (we refer to
it as the objective function). In the example it was (implicitly) the number of high-quality papers that the members of
the committee published. In other settings (e.g., if we were
shortlisting job candidates) these could be aggregated opinions of a group of voters (the recruitment committee, in the
shortlisting example).
Second, we assume that each prospective committee member (i.e., each researcher in our example) has a number of
attributes, which we call labels. For example, a researcher
can be junior or senior, a male or a female, can work in AI
or in economics or in some other area, etc. Further, the way
in which labels are assigned to the candidates may have a
structure on its own. For example, each researcher is either
male or female and either junior or senior, but otherwise these
attributes are independent (i.e., any combination of gender
and seniority level is possible). Other labels may be interdependent and may form hierarchical structures (e.g., every
researcher based in Germany is also labeled as representing
Europe). Yet other labels may be completely unstructured;
e.g., researchers can specialize in many subareas of AI, irrespective how (un)related they seem.
Third, we assume that there is a formalism that speciﬁes
when a committee is diverse. In principle, this formalism
could be any function that takes a committee and gives an
accept/reject answer. However, in many typical settings it
sufﬁces to consider simple constraints that regard each label
separately (e.g., “at least 30% of the researchers are junior”
or “the number of male researchers is even”). We focus on
such independent constraints, but studying more involved
ones, that regard multiple labels (e.g., “all invited economists
must be senior researchers”) would also be interesting.
Our goal is to ﬁnd a committee of a given size k that is
diverse and has the highest possible score from the objective
function. While similar problems have already been consid-

Abstract
We develop a model of multiwinner elections that combines
performance-based measures of the quality of the committee (such as, e.g., Borda scores of the committee members)
with diversity constraints. Speciﬁcally, we assume that the
candidates have certain attributes (such as being a male or a
female, being junior or senior, etc.) and the goal is to elect a
committee that, on the one hand, has as high a score regarding a given performance measure, but that, on the other hand,
meets certain requirements (e.g., of the form “at least 30%
of the committee members are junior candidates and at least
40% are females”). We analyze the computational complexity
of computing winning committees in this model, obtaining
polynomial-time algorithms (exact and approximate) and NPhardness results. We focus on several natural classes of voting
rules and diversity constraints.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of computing committees (i.e., sets
of candidates) that, on the one hand, are of high quality
(e.g., consist of high-performing individuals) and that, on the
other hand, are diverse (as speciﬁed by a set of constraints).
The following example shows our problem in more concrete
terms.
Consider an organization that wants to hold a research
meeting on some interdisciplinary topic such as, e.g., “AI and
Economics.” The meeting will take place in some secluded
location and only a certain limited number of researchers can
attend. How should the organizers choose the researchers to
invite? If their main criterion were the number of highly inﬂuential AI/economics papers that each person published, then
they would likely end up with a very homogeneous group of
highly-respected AI professors. Thus, while this criterion definitely should be important, the organizers might put forward
additional constraints. For example, they could require that
at least 30% of the attendees are junior researchers, at least
40% are female, at least a few economists are invited (but
only senior ones), the majority of attendees work on AI, and
the attendees come from at least 3 continents and represent
at least 10 different countries.1 In other words, the organizers
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
For example, the Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik that runs
Dagstuhl Seminars gives similar suggestions to event organizers.

933

