The Twenty-Third AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium

Game-Theoretic Threat Screening and
Deceptive Techniques for Cyber Defense
Aaron Schlenker
University of Southern California
aschlenk@usc.edu

a time component for screening resources to model domains
where screening certain objects takes varying amounts of
time, and (3) I allow for attack methods to show up as different alert types with varying probabilities.

Abstract
My research addresses the problem faced by a defender who
must screen objects for potential threats that are coming into
a secure area. The particular domain of interest for my work
is the protection of cyber networks from intrusions given the
presence of a strategic adversary. My thesis work allows for
a defender to use game-theoretical methods that randomize
her protection strategy and introduces uncertainty to the adversary that makes it more difﬁcult to attack the defender’s
network successfully.

Current Results
Threat Screening Games
A threat screening game (TSG) is a Stackelberg game
played between the screener (leader) and an adversary (follower) in the presence of a set of non-player screenees
that pass through a screening checkpoint operated by the
screener. The defender has a set of screening resources
which are used to screen the incoming objects and must
determine a randomized screening strategy to use. In security games the defender can commit to a randomized strategy by computing an optimal mixed strategy q to commit
to. A mixed strategy q for the defender is a commitment
to a probability distribution qP over a set of pure strategies P , where a pure strategy is an integer assignment of
incoming passengers to screening resources. Every mixed
strategy q can be represented compactly by a marginal strategy n, where each entry in the marginal strategy essentially
denotes the expected number of passengers to be screened
by a given resource. Unfortunately, computing the optimal
mixed strategy q is an NP-hard problem in many security
settings due to exponentially many pure strategies and scaling up to handle large problem sizes becomes an issue. In
the security games literature, two approaches are commonly
used to handle scale-up: directly computing marginal strategies (Kiekintveld et al. 2009) and column generation (Jain et
al. 2010). To solve large-scale zero-sum TSGs a marginalbased approach is employed, and it is shown that such an
approach signiﬁcantly outperforms the use of column generation. Hence, my thesis continues to use marginal strategies.
When computing the optimal marginal strategy n the
defender must deal with the issue of implementable. A
marginal strategy n is said to be implementable if there
is a corresponding mixed strategy q which implements the
marginal strategy (which is needed for the real world implementation of a strategy). The issue of implementability
in zero-sum TSGs was resolved by using a special condition on the constraints, called a “bihierarchy”, which can
guarantee when marginals returned for the defender are im-

Introduction
Screening for threats represents a signiﬁcant security challenge, whether it is preventing an attack at on an enterprise
network, a sports complex, or interdicting illicit cargo shipping. For computer network security, automated intrusion
detection and prevention systems (IDPS) and security information and event management tools (SIEM) are used which
generate alerts that must be investigated by human cybersecurity analysts. These analysts assess whether the alerts
were generated by malicious activity, and if so, how to respond. Unfortunately, these automated systems are notorious for generating high rates of false positives. Expert analysts are in short supply, so organizations face a key challenge in managing the enormous volume of alerts they receive using the limited time of analysts. Failing to solve this
problem can render the entire system insecure, e.g., in the
2013 attack on Target, IDPS raised alarms, but they were
missed in the deluge of alerts.
Threat Screening Games (TSGs) (Brown et al. 2016)
have been introduced to model screening domains where the
screener must process a set of people or objects coming into
an secure area, while an adversary tries to sneak in an attack
through screening. The goal of the screener is then to ﬁnd
the most effective way to allocate the incoming objects to
screening resources while ensuring the capacity constraints
of the resources are met. Although TSGs are broadly applicable, in many real world domains TSGs fail to account for
salient features in problem settings like cyber security. In my
thesis work, I have addressed three of these limitations; (1)
I extend TSGs to model general-sum games, (2) I introduce
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8034

