The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Answering Regular Path Queries over SQ Ontologies
Vı́ctor Gutiérrez-Basulto

Yazmı́n Ibáñez-Garcı́a

Jean Christoph Jung

Cardiff University, UK
gutierrezbasultov@cardiff.ac.uk

TU Wien, Austria
yazmin.garcia@tuwien.ac.at

Universität Bremen, Germany
jeanjung@uni-bremen.de

features with other traditional constructors often leads
to undecidability of the standard reasoning tasks (e.g.,
satisﬁability) (Horrocks, Sattler, and Tobies 2000); and
(ii) for those DLs known to be decidable, such as SQ
and SOQ (Kazakov, Sattler, and Zolin 2007; Kaminski
and Smolka 2010), only recently tight complexity bounds
were obtained (Gutiérrez-Basulto, Ibáñez-Garcı́a, and Jung
2017a). Moreover, these features, even with restricted interaction, pose additional challenges for devising decision procedures since they lead to the loss of properties, such as the
tree model property, which make the design of algorithms
for QA simpler. Clearly, these issues are exacerbated if number restrictions are imposed on transitive roles.
Traditionally, most of the research in OBDA has focused on answering conjunctive queries. However, navigational queries have recently gained a lot of attention (Stefanoni et al. 2014; Bienvenu, Ortiz, and Simkus 2015;
Baget et al. 2017) since they are key in various applications.
For instance, in biomedicine they are used to retrieve speciﬁc paths from protein, cellular and disease networks (Dogrusoz et al. 2009; Lysenko et al. 2016). A prominent class
of navigational queries is that of regular path queries (Florescu, Levy, and Suciu 1998), where paths are speciﬁed by
a regular expression. Indeed, motivated by applications in
the semantic web, the latest W3C standard SPARQL 1.1 includes property paths, related to regular expressions.
The objective of this paper is to start the research on query
answering in DLs supporting qualiﬁed number restrictions
over transitive roles. We study the entailment problem of
positive existential two-way regular path queries (Calvanese
et al. 2000) over SQ ontologies, thus generalizing both conjunctive and regular path queries. To this end, we pursue an
automata-based approach for query answering using twoway alternating tree automata (2ATA) (Vardi 1998). This
roughly consists of three steps (Calvanese, Eiter, and Ortiz 2014): (i) show that, if a query ϕ is not entailed by the
knowledge base K, there is a tree-like interpretation witnessing this, (ii) devise an automaton AK which accepts precisely the tree-like interpretations of K, (iii) devise an automaton Aϕ which accepts a tree-like interpretation iff it
satisﬁes ϕ. Query entailment is then reduced to the question whether AK accepts a tree that is not accepted by Aϕ .
In this paper, we signiﬁcantly adapt and extend each step to
SQ, resulting in an algorithm running in 2E XP T IME, even

Abstract
We study query answering in the description logic SQ supporting qualiﬁed number restrictions on both transitive and
non-transitive roles. Our main contributions are a tree-like
model property for SQ knowledge bases and, building upon
this, an optimal automata-based algorithm for answering positive existential regular path queries in 2E XP T IME.

1

Introduction

The use of ontologies to access data has gained a lot of popularity in various research ﬁelds such as knowledge representation and reasoning, and databases. In the ontology-based
data access (OBDA) scenario, ontologies are often encoded
using description logic languages (DLs); as a consequence,
a large amount of research on the query answering problem
(QA) over DL ontologies has been conducted. In particular, several efforts have been put into the study of the query
answering problem in DLs featuring transitive roles and
number restrictions (Glimm, Horrocks, and Sattler 2008;
Glimm et al. 2008; Eiter et al. 2009; Calvanese, Eiter, and
Ortiz 2009; 2014). However, in all these works the application of number restrictions to transitive roles is forbidden. This is also reﬂected in the fact that the W3C ontology language OWL 2 does not allow for this interaction.1
Unfortunately, this comes as a shortcoming in crucial DL
application areas like medicine and biology in which many
terms are deﬁned and classiﬁed according to the number of
components they contain or have as a part, in a transitive
sense (Wolstencroft et al. 2005; Rector and Rogers 2006;
Stevens et al. 2007). For instance, the ontology T below describes that the human heart has as a part (hPt) exactly one
mitral valve (MV), a left atrium (LA) and a left ventricle
(LV); and the latter two (enforced to be distinct) also have as
a part a mitral valve. Thus, the left atrium and left ventricle
have to share the mitral valve.
T = { Heart  (= 1 hPt.MV)  ∃hPt.LA  ∃hPt.LV,
LV  LA  ⊥, LV  ∃hPt.MV, LA  ∃hPt.MV }.
The lack of investigations of query answering in DLs of
this kind is partly because (i) the interaction of these
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.w3.org/TR/webont-req/

1845

