The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Relating Children’s Automatically Detected Facial
Expressions To Their Behavior in RoboTutor
Mayank Saxena

Rohith Krishnan Pillai

Jack Mostow

Delhi Technological University
New Delhi, India
mayank26saxena@gmail.com
+91-9910002161
http://mayank26saxena.github.io/

Carnegie Mellon University
Doha, Qatar
rohithkp@andrew.cmu.edu

Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
jmostow@andrew.cmu.edu

Is it possible to predict the students next action based on
their affective states in a real-time system? The analyses was
conducted in the context of RoboTutor, an open source Android application to teach children aged between 6-12, who
have little or no prior schooling nor access to technology,
math, reading and writing tutor. We discuss our ﬁndings in
the next sections.

Abstract
Can student behavior be anticipated in real-time so that an intelligent tutor system can adapt its content to keep the student
engaged? Current methods detect affective states of students
during learning session to determine their engagement levels,
but apply the learning in next session in the form of intervention policies and tutor responses. However, if students’
imminent behavioral action could be anticipated from their
affective states in real-time, this could lead to much more responsive intervention policies by the tutor and assist in keeping the student engaged in an activity, thereby increasing tutor
efﬁcacy as well as student engagement levels. In this paper we
explore if there exist any links between a student’s affective
states and his/her imminent behavior action in RoboTutor, an
intelligent tutor system for children to learn math, reading and
writing. We then exploit our ﬁndings to develop a real-time
student behavior prediction module.

Data Collection and Processing
RoboTutor consists of multiple educative activities for children such as writing, Akira (a car racing game), bubble pop,
and myriad read-along illustrated stories with speech recognition. As RoboTutor runs on an Android tablet, the front
facing camera is used for affective state detection. The video
feed of children using RoboTutor, along with the log ﬁles
containing all the in-app user actions by the child is stored
on the cloud, using Google Drive. Then the log ﬁles are
parsed and added to respective tables in a database for use
for querying, and analyses.
We use OpenFace (Baltrušaitis, Robinson, and Morency
2016), an open-source facial behavior analysis toolkit to extract facial action units (FAUs) from the video feed. OpenFace was trained on diverse data with respect to age, gender, ethnicity. We identiﬁed a set of pedagogically relevant
emotions such as boredom, confusion, frustration, surprise,
delight, neutral. Next, we created a mapping from FAUs returned by OpenFace to the above mentioned emotions, all
using existing literature on the subject (Craig et al. 2008;
McDaniel et al. 2007). Comprehensive literature on this subject could not be cited here due to lack of space. The affective states from the video were then joined with its respective parsed log data ﬁle, containing behaviors such as
back button presses, completion of activity, correctness, etc.
to create a ﬁle conducive for analysis. We used a total of 17
different video of length ranging between 20 to 30 minutes
log session pairs to conduct the analysis (N = 17). The analysis included visualization of the data, and ﬁnding statistically signiﬁcant correlations between emotions and the students behavior. The validation of detection accuracy for the
emotions were done by spot-checking samples of data, and
testing external validity of detected emotions to see if their
correlations with logged tutor events, e.g. response correctness vs. delight, are statistically reliable and psychologically
plausible.

Introduction
Recently there has been a signiﬁcant amount of research in
trying to make intelligent tutor systems reactive to student’s
responses, to allow for a more intuitive interface with the tutor and also more importantly to be able to keep the student
engaged in the activity for longer periods. Current tutor systems use computer vision and other sensors to detect the affective states of the users (happy, sad, content, disgust, fear,
etc.) to gauge user engagement levels at end of learning activity (Whitehill et al. 2014) (D’mello and Graesser 2010).
However, these systems are deployed mostly on adults and
in controlled environments. Also such systems stop at the
level of discerning the students engagement levels to determine the tutor’s intervention policy, which means that the
policy only has a limited type of input namely the engagement levels. It might be more fruitful to base the policy on
the anticipation of a behavior that the student might exhibit
in the near future, such as when the student might choose to
exit an activity prematurely. Such inferences about the student behavior/actions provide more inputs for an intervention policy to make more nuanced, responsive reactions.
In this research we discuss two main questions, namely,
given the additional information of the students affective
state, what can we infer about the student behavioral action?
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8151

