The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Clustering — What Both Theoreticians
and Practitioners are Doing Wrong
Shai Ben-David
Cheriton School of Coputer Science
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Canada

Here, we focus on the basic case, where the relevant similarity (or distance measure) is given. Furthermore, in this
note, we only consider partitional deterministic clustering,
where each data point ends up in single cluster. Most of the
issues that we raise are relevant to other clustering settings as
well, however, for the sake of concreteness we keep that outside the scope of the current discussion. Finally, it is worthwhile mentioning that we consider the aspect of clustering
that aims to group data in a way that similar points share
a cluster and dissimilar points are separated into different
clusters. The term clustering is sometimes also applied to
the detection of connected components of density level sets
of a probability distribution. This is a somewhat different
interpretation of clustering and will not be addressed here.

Abstract
Unsupervised learning is widely recognized as one of the
most important challenges facing machine learning nowadays.However, in spite of hundreds of papers on the topic
being published every year, current theoretical understanding
and practical implementations of such tasks, in particular of
clustering, is very rudimentary.
This note focuses on clustering. The ﬁrst challenge I address
is model selection - how should a user pick an appropriate
clustering tool for a given clustering problem, and how should
the parameters of such an algorithmic tool be tuned? In contrast with other common computational tasks, for clustering, different algorithms often yield drastically different outcomes. Therefore, the choice of a clustering algorithm may
play a crucial role in the usefulness of an output clustering
solution. However, currently there exists no methodical guidance for clustering tool selection for a given clustering task.
I argue the severity of this problem and describe some recent
proposals aiming to address this crucial lacuna.

The conﬂicts between various desiderata
Arguably the most basic deﬁnition of clustering is “partitioning of data into groups (a.k.a. clusters) so that similar
(or close w.r.t. the underlying distance function) elements
share the same cluster and the members of each cluster are
all similar” (or, equivalently, dissimilar elements are separated into different clusters). A moment reﬂection reveals
that this deﬁnition is problematic. Its two requirements may
well conﬂict with each other. As a simple example, consider
a collection of elements scattered next to each other along a
long line. If we wish to satisfy “every pair of close by elements share the same cluster” we ought to put all of those
points in a single joint cluster. However, such a clustering
violates the second requirement - we will end up with dissimilar elements sharing the same cluster. If you wish, this
is the simplest clustering impossibility theorem. More abstractly, the goal of partitional clustering is to have clusters
such the relation ”x and y belong to the same cluster” is a
good approximation to the input relation ”x is similar to y”.
However, the ﬁrst relation is transitive whereas the relation
”being similar” may well violate transitivity.
The above basic deﬁnition fails to determine how should
such conﬂicts be resolved. Furthermore, this is not the only
potential conﬂict. There are many other clustering properties
that are desirable under some conceivable circumstances.
For example, keeping some balance between the number of
elements in different clusters, or being robust to small data
perturbations, and more. For any pair of such requirements
there are data sets for which those requirements cannot be

Introduction
Clustering is one of the most basic and useful data processing tasks. It is being routinely applied in a wide variety of
applications. Not surprisingly, there exist many clustering
algorithms. However, clustering is an ill deﬁned problem given a data set, it is not clear what a correct clustering for
that set is. Indeed, different algorithms may yield dramatically different outputs for the same input sets. In contrast
with other common learn- ing tasks, like classiﬁcation prediction, clustering does not have a well deﬁned ground truth.
Faced with a concrete clustering task, a user needs to choose
an appropriate clustering algorithm (as well as a concrete
setting for the tuneable parameters of the chosen algorithm).
Currently, such decisions are often made in a very ad hoc, if
not completely random, manner. Given the crucial effect of
the choice of a clustering algorithm on the resulting clustering, this state of affairs is truly regrettable. Can the research
community develop effective tools for helping users make
informed decisions when they come to pick a clustering tool
for their data? How can we help the data analysts in ﬁnding
the cluster structures that will best suit their needs?
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7962

