The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Hypergraph p-Laplacian: A Differential Geometry View
Shota Saito

Danilo P Mandic

Hideyuki Suzuki

The University of Tokyo
ssaito@sat.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Imperial College London
d.mandic@imperial.ac.uk

Osaka University
hideyuki@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp

2015) and construct hypergraph cut algorithms (Bulò and
Pelillo 2009; Ghoshdastidar and Dukkipati 2014). However,
this requires the hypergraph to obey a strict condition of a
k-uniform hypergraph, where each edge connects exactly k
nodes. The second approach is to construct a weighted graph,
which can deal with arbitrary hypergraphs. Rodriguez’s approach deﬁnes Laplacian of arbitrary hypergraph as an adjacency matrix of weighted graph (Rodriguez 2002). Zhou’s
approach deﬁnes a hypergraph from the normalized cut approach, and outperforms Rodriguez’s Laplacian on a clustering problem (Zhou, Huang, and Schölkopf 2006). However,
Rodriguez’s Laplacian does not consider how many nodes
are connected by each edge, and Zhou’s Laplacian is not
consistent with the graph Laplacian. Although all of previous
studies consider the analogue to graph Laplacian, none of
them considers the analogue to the Laplacian from differential geometry. This allows us to further extend to more general
hypergraph p-Laplacian, which is not extensively studied unlike in the case of graph p-Laplacian (Bühler and Hein 2009;
Zhou and Schölkopf 2006).
In this paper, we generalize the analogy between graph
Laplacian and differential geometry to the hypergraph setting, and propose a novel hypergraph p-Laplacian, which
is consistent with the graph Laplacian. We deﬁne gradient
of the function over hypergraph, and induce the divergence
and Laplacian as formulated in differential geometry. Taking advantage of this formulation, we extend our hypergraph
Laplacian to a hypergraph p-Laplacian, which allows us to
better capture hypergraph characteristics. We also propose a
semi-supervised machine learning method based upon this
p-Laplacian. Our experiment on hypergraph semi-supervised
clustering problem shows that our hypergraph p-Laplacian
outperforms the current hypergraph Laplacians.
The versatility of differential geometry allows us to introduce several rigorous interpretations of our hypergraph
Laplacian. A normalized cut formulation is shown to yield
the proposed hypergraph Laplacian in the same manner as
in standard graphs. We further propose a normalized cut
corresponding to our p-Laplacian, which shows better performance than the ones corresponding to current Laplacians
in the experiments. We also explore the physical interpretation of hypergraph Laplacian, by considering the analogue to
the continuous p-Dirichlet problem, which is widely used in
Physics. All proofs are in the supplemental material.

Abstract
The graph Laplacian plays key roles in information processing
of relational data, and has analogies with the Laplacian in
differential geometry. In this paper, we generalize the analogy between graph Laplacian and differential geometry to
the hypergraph setting, and propose a novel hypergraph pLaplacian. Unlike the existing two-node graph Laplacians,
this generalization makes it possible to analyze hypergraphs,
where the edges are allowed to connect any number of nodes.
Moreover, we propose a semi-supervised learning method
based on the proposed hypergraph p-Laplacian, and formalize
them as the analogue to the Dirichlet problem, which often
appears in physics. We further explore theoretical connections
to normalized hypergraph cut on a hypergraph, and propose
normalized cut corresponding to hypergraph p-Laplacian. The
proposed p-Laplacian is shown to outperform standard hypergraph Laplacians in the experiment on a hypergraph semisupervised learning and normalized cut setting.

Introduction
Graphs are a standard way to represent pairwise relationship data on both regular and irregular domains. One of
the most important operators characterizing a graph is the
graph Laplacian, which can be explained in several ways.
For the example of spectral clustering (von Luxburg 2007),
we consider normalized graph cut (Shi and Malik 1997;
Yu and Shi 2003), random walks (Meila and Shi 2001;
Grady 2006), and analogues to differential geometry of
graphs (Branin 1966; Grady and Schwartz 2003; Zhou and
Schölkopf 2006; Bougleux, Elmoataz, and Melkemi 2007).
Hypergraphs are a natural generalization of graphs, where
the edges are allowed to connect more than two nodes (Berge
1984). The data representation with a hypergraph is used in
a variety of applications (Huang, Liu, and Metaxas 2009;
Liu, Latecki, and Yan 2010; Klamt, Haus, and Theis 2009;
Tan et al. 2014). This natural generalization of graphs motivates us to consider a natural generalization of Laplacian to
hypergraphs, which can be applied to hypergraph clustering
problems. However, there is no straightforward approach to
generalize the graph Laplacian to a hypergraph Laplacian.
One way is to model a hypergraph as a tensor, for which we
can deﬁne Laplacian (Cooper and Dutle 2012; Hu and Qi
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3984

