The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

RAN4IQA: Restorative Adversarial Nets
for No-Reference Image Quality Assessment
Hongyu Ren,∗ Diqi Chen,†,∗ Yizhou Wang∗

∗

Nat’l Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center
∗
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MoE), School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University
†
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
†
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
†
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
{rhy, cdq, yizhou.wang}@pku.edu.cn
satisfying results that are concordant with the human visual system (HVS). However, reference images seldom exist in most situations, and thus no-reference image quality assessment (NR-IQA) which evaluates perceptual quality with no access to reference images is highly demanded.
Traditional learning-based IQA methods follow a routine
pipeline, namely extract features ﬁrst then train a model to
estimate ground-truth perceptual score. However, none of
them take into consideration the detailed process in which
humans perceive and assess distorted images, which results
in inconsistency with subjective evaluation.

Abstract
Inspired by the free-energy brain theory (Friston, Kilner,
and Harrison 2006), which implies that human visual system (HVS) tends to reduce uncertainty and restore perceptual details upon seeing a distorted image (Friston 2010),
we propose restorative adversarial net (RAN), a GAN-based
model for no-reference image quality assessment (NR-IQA).
RAN, which mimics the process of HVS, consists of three
components: a restorator, a discriminator and an evaluator.
The restorator restores and reconstructs input distorted image patches, while the discriminator distinguishes the reconstructed patches from the pristine distortion-free patches. After restoration, we observe that the perceptual distance between the restored and the distorted patches is monotonic
with respect to the distortion level. We further deﬁne Gain
of Restoration (GoR) based on this phenomenon. The evaluator predicts perceptual score by extracting feature representations from the distorted and restored patches to measure GoR.
Eventually, the quality score of an input image is estimated
by weighted sum of the patch scores. Experimental results
on Waterloo Exploration, LIVE and TID2013 show the effectiveness and generalization ability of RAN compared to the
state-of-the-art NR-IQA models.

Recent research in brain and neuroscience has brought insights into how HVS works when quantifying the quality
of an image. (Friston 2010) propose a uniﬁed brain theory
based on free-energy principle (Friston, Kilner, and Harrison
2006), which reveals that human brain resists a natural tendency to disorder and HVS is inclined to restore and reconstruct degraded contents when assessing a distorted image.
It shows that human brain will instinctively add textures and
details based on the perceived image in order to simply unveil the mask of distortion and ﬁgure out the pristine content.
After the restoration, human brain compares the distorted
image to the brain-restored image in order to assess perceptual quality. Meanwhile, we also observe the correlation between distortion level and summation of brain-restored details: when people are shown images with higher level distortion, they are able to restore more details, although not all
the complementary details are ground truth.

Introduction
With mobile devices ingrained in the very fabric of people’s
life, capture, transmission and storage of digital images are
ubiquitous nowadays. People are paying closer attention to
the perceptual quality of digital images. This quantitative
evaluation can either be subjective or objective. However,
with such a great load of images, assessing the perceptual
quality merely by the human is next to impossible. Objective image quality assessment (IQA), which measures visual
quality by mimicking human perception, has become an alternative solution.
In cases where the distortion-free image is available, IQA
can be carried out by comparing the distorted image with
the reference image. Current full-reference image quality
assessment (FR-IQA) metrics such as FSIM (Zhang et al.
2011) and VSI (Zhang, Shen, and Li 2014) have achieved

Inspired by how HVS works, we hereby deﬁne Gain of
Restoration (GoR) and assess perceptual quality using it.
Given a distorted image, GoR is the perceptual distance between the distorted image and its restored version. In this
paper, we propose restorative adversarial nets (RAN), an
NR-IQA model which composes of a restorator, a discriminator and an evaluator. The proposed model is shown in
Fig. 1. Different from the original generative adversarial nets
(GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014), the restorator takes a distorted image patch as input instead of Gaussian noise and
it is trained to restore the input. The discriminator aims to
discern whether the input belongs to a restored version or is
originally distortion-free. The evaluator takes restored and
distorted patches as input and outputs perceptually quanti-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7308

