The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Translating Pro-Drop Languages with Reconstruction Models
Longyue Wang

Zhaopeng Tu∗

Shuming Shi

ADAPT Centre, Dublin City Univ.
longyue.wang@adaptcentre.ie

Tencent AI Lab
zptu@tencent.com

Tencent AI Lab
shumingshi@tencent.com

Tong Zhang

Yvette Graham

Qun Liu

Tencent AI Lab
bradymzhang@tencent.com

ADAPT Centre, Dublin City Univ.
yvette.graham@adaptcentre.ie

ADAPT Centre, Dublin City Univ.
qun.liu@adaptcentre.ie

Abstract
Pronouns are frequently omitted in pro-drop languages,
such as Chinese, generally leading to signiﬁcant challenges with respect to the production of complete translations. To date, very little attention has been paid to the
dropped pronoun (DP) problem within neural machine
translation (NMT). In this work, we propose a novel
reconstruction-based approach to alleviating DP translation problems for NMT models. Firstly, DPs within
all source sentences are automatically annotated with
parallel information extracted from the bilingual training corpus. Next, the annotated source sentence is reconstructed from hidden representations in the NMT
model. With auxiliary training objectives, in terms of
reconstruction scores, the parameters associated with
the NMT model are guided to produce enhanced hidden
representations that are encouraged as much as possible to embed annotated DP information. Experimental
results on both Chinese–English and Japanese–English
dialogue translation tasks show that the proposed approach signiﬁcantly and consistently improves translation performance over a strong NMT baseline, which is
directly built on the training data annotated with DPs.

Input
Ref
SMT
NMT

(它) 根本 没 那么 严重
It is not that bad
Wasn ’t that bad
It ’s not that bad

Input
Ref
SMT
NMT

这块 面包 很 美味 ! 你 烤 的 (它 ) 吗 ?
The bread is very tasty ! Did you bake it ?
This bread , delicious ! Did you bake ?
The bread is delicious ! Are you baked ?

Table 1: Examples of translating DPs where words in brackets are dropped pronouns that are invisible in decoding.
NMT model’s successes on translating simple dummy pronoun (upper panel), while fails on a more complicated one
(bottom panel); SMT model fails in both cases.

tion (SMT) models showing promising results (Le Nagard
and Koehn 2010; Xiang, Luo, and Zhou 2013; Wang et
al. 2016a). Modeling DP translation for the more advanced
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) models, however, has
received substantially less attention, resulting in low performance in this respect even for state-of-the-art approaches.
NMT models, due to their ability to capture semantic information with distributed representations, currently only manage to successfully translate some simple DPs, but still fail
when translating anything more complex. Table 1 includes
typical examples of when our strong baseline NMT system
fails to accurately translate dropped pronouns. In this paper, we narrow the gap between correct DP translation for
NMT models to improve translation quality for pro-drop languages with advanced models.
More speciﬁcally, we propose a novel reconstructionbased approach to alleviate DP problems for NMT. Firstly,
we explicitly and automatically label DPs for each source
sentence in the training corpus using alignment information from the parallel corpus (Wang et al. 2016a). Accordingly, each training instance is represented as a triple (x,
y, x̂), where x and y are source and target sentences, and
x̂ is the labelled source sentence. Next, we apply a standard encoder-decoder NMT model to translate x, and obtain two sequences of hidden states from both encoder and

Introduction
In pro-drop languages, such as Chinese and Japanese, pronouns can be omitted from sentences when it is possible to
infer the referent from the context. When translating sentences from a pro-drop language to a non-pro-drop language
(e.g., Chinese to English), machine translation systems generally fail to translate invisible dropped pronouns (DPs).
This problem is especially severe in informal genres such as
dialogues and conversation, where pronouns are more frequently omitted to make utterances more compact (Yang,
Liu, and Xue 2015). For example, our analysis of a large
Chinese–English dialogue corpus showed that around 26%
of pronouns were dropped from the Chinese side of the
corpus. This high proportion within informal genres shows
the importance of addressing the challenge of translation of
dropped pronouns.
Researchers have investigated methods of alleviating the
DP problem for conventional Statistical Machine Transla∗

Zhaopeng Tu is the corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4937

