The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Adapting a Kidney Exchange Algorithm to Align with Human Values
Rachel Freedman

Jana Schaich Borg

Walter Sinnott-Armstrong

Duke University
rachel.freedman@duke.edu

Duke University
js524@duke.edu

Duke University
ws66@duke.edu

John P. Dickerson

Vincent Conitzer

University of Maryland
john@cs.umd.edu

Duke University
conitzer@cs.duke.edu
2016). Another reason could be that each individual decision by itself is too insigniﬁcant to bother a human, even
though all the decisions combined may be highly signiﬁcant
morally—for example, if we were to consider the moral impact of each advertisement shown online. A third reason is
that the moral decision is hard to decouple from a computational problem that apparently exceeds human capabilities.
This is the case in many machine learning applications (e.g.,
should this person be released on bail?), but also in other
optimization problems.
We are interested in one such problem: the clearing house
problem in kidney exchanges. In a kidney exchange, patients
who need a kidney transplant and have a willing but incompatible live donor may attempt to trade their donors’ kidneys (Roth, Sonmez, and Unver 2004). Once these people
appear at an exchange, we face a highly complex problem of
deciding who matches with whom. In some exchanges, this
matching problem is solved using algorithms developed in
the AI community: the United States (Dickerson and Sandholm 2015), the United Kingdom (Manlove and O’Malley
2015), the Netherlands (Glorie, van de Klundert, and Wagelmans 2014), and so on (Biró et al. 2017).
In this paper, we investigate the following issue. Suppose,
in principle, that we prioritize certain patients over others—
for example, younger patients over older patients. To do so
clearly would be a morally laden decision. How should this
affect the role of the AI researcher developing these systems? From a pure algorithmic perspective, it may seem that
there is little more to this than to change some weights in
the objective function accordingly. But we argue that our
job, as AI researchers, does not end with this simple observation. Rather, we should be closely involved with the
process for determining these weights, both because we can
contribute technical insights that are useful for this process
itself, and because it is our responsibility to understand the
consequences to which these weights will lead.

Abstract
The efﬁcient allocation of limited resources is a classical problem in economics and computer science. In kidney
exchanges, a central market maker allocates living kidney
donors to patients in need of an organ. Patients and donors
in kidney exchanges are prioritized using ad-hoc weights decided on by committee and then fed into an allocation algorithm that determines who get what—and who does not. In
this paper, we provide an end-to-end methodology for estimating weights of individual participant proﬁles in a kidney
exchange. We ﬁrst elicit from human subjects a list of patient
attributes they consider acceptable for the purpose of prioritizing patients (e.g., medical characteristics, lifestyle choices,
and so on). Then, we ask subjects comparison queries between patient proﬁles and estimate weights in a principled
way from their responses. We show how to use these weights
in kidney exchange market clearing algorithms. We then evaluate the impact of the weights in simulations and ﬁnd that the
precise numerical values of the weights we computed matter little, other than the ordering of proﬁles that they imply.
However, compared to not prioritizing patients at all, there
is a signiﬁcant effect, with certain classes of patients being
(de)prioritized based on the human-elicited value judgments.

Introduction
As AI is deployed increasingly broadly, AI researchers are
increasingly confronted with moral implications of their
work. The pursuit of simple objectives, such as minimizing error rates, often results in systems that have unintended
consequences when they confront the real world, such as discriminating against certain groups of people (O’Neil 2017).
It would be helpful for AI researchers and practitioners to
have a general set of principles with which to approach these
problems (Wallach and Allen 2008; Tolchinsky et al. 2012;
Greene et al. 2016; Conitzer et al. 2017; Noothigattu et al.
2018).
One may ask why any moral decisions should be left to
computers at all. There are multiple possible reasons. One
is that the decision needs to be made so quickly that calling
in a human for the decision is not feasible, as would be the
case for a self-driving car having to make a split-second decision about whom to hit (Bonnefon, Shariff, and Rahwan

Our Contributions
In this paper, we provide an end-to-end methodology for estimating weights of individual patient proﬁles in a kidney
exchange, where these weights are used only for tiebreaking purposes (i.e., when multiple solutions give the maximal
number of transplants). We execute this methodology in a
limited fashion as a proof of concept, and evaluate the re-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1636

