The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Augmenting End-to-End Dialogue Systems
with Commonsense Knowledge

1

2

Tom Young,1 Erik Cambria,2 Iti Chaturvedi,2
Hao Zhou,3 Subham Biswas,2 Minlie Huang3

School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, China
tom@sentic.net, cambria@ntu.edu.sg, iti@ntu.edu.sg
tuxchow@gmail.com, subham@sentic.net, aihuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

human-computer conversation, where the model is expected
to respond to human utterances in an interesting and engaging way, commonsense knowledge has to be integrated into
the model effectively.
In the context of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), commonsense
knowledge is the set of background information that an individual is intended to know or assume and the ability to
use it when appropriate (Minsky 1986; Cambria et al. 2009;
Cambria and Hussain 2015). Due to the vastness of such
kind of knowledge, we speculate that this goal is better
suited by employing an external memory module containing commonsense knowledge rather than forcing the system
to encode it in model parameters as in traditional methods.
In this paper, we investigate how to improve end-to-end
dialogue systems by augmenting them with commonsense
knowledge, integrated in the form of external memory. The
remainder of this paper is as follows: next section proposes
related work in the context of conversational models and
commonsense knowledge; following, a section describes the
proposed model in detail; later, a section illustrates experimental results; ﬁnally, the last section proposes concluding
remarks and future work.

Abstract
Building dialogue systems that can converse naturally with
humans is a challenging yet intriguing problem of artiﬁcial
intelligence. In open-domain human-computer conversation,
where the conversational agent is expected to respond to human utterances in an interesting and engaging way, commonsense knowledge has to be integrated into the model effectively. In this paper, we investigate the impact of providing commonsense knowledge about the concepts covered in
the dialogue. Our model represents the ﬁrst attempt to integrating a large commonsense knowledge base into end-toend conversational models. In the retrieval-based scenario,
we propose a model to jointly take into account message
content and related commonsense for selecting an appropriate response. Our experiments suggest that the knowledgeaugmented models are superior to their knowledge-free counterparts.

Introduction
In recent years, data-driven approaches to building conversation models have been made possible by the proliferation
of social media conversation data and the increase of computing power. By relying on a large number of messageresponse pairs, the Seq2Seq framework (Sutskever, Vinyals,
and Le 2014) attempts to produce an appropriate response
based solely on the message itself, without any memory
module.
In human-to-human conversations, however, people respond to each other’s utterances in a meaningful way not
only by paying attention to the latest utterance of the conversational partner itself, but also by recalling relevant information about the concepts covered in the dialogue and integrating it into their responses. Such information may contain
personal experience, recent events, commonsense knowledge and more (Figure 1). As a result, it is speculated that
a conversational model with a “memory look-up” module
can mimic human conversations more closely (Ghazvininejad et al. 2017; Bordes and Weston 2016). In open-domain

Related Work
Conversational Models
Data-driven conversational models generally fall into two
categories: retrieval-based methods (Lowe et al. 2015b;
2016a; Zhou et al. 2016), which select a response from a
predeﬁned repository, and generation-based methods (Ritter, Cherry, and Dolan 2011; Serban et al. 2016; Vinyals
and Le 2015), which employ an encoder-decoder framework
where the message is encoded into a vector representation
and, then, fed to the decoder to generate the response. The
latter is more natural (as it does not require a response repository) yet suffers from generating dull or vague responses
and generally needs a great amount of training data.
The use of an external memory module in natural language processing (NLP) tasks has received considerable attention recently, such as in question answering (Weston et

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4970

