The Twenty-Third AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium

Building More Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence with Argumentation
Zhiwei Zeng,1 Chunyan Miao,1 Cyril Leung,2 Chin Jing Jih3
1

Nanyang Technological University, 3 Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore
2
The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
i160001@e.ntu.edu.sg

The second approach, model approximation, involves
model-agnostic methods that infer an explainable model
from any black-box models. Robnik-Šikonja and Kononenko
(2008) decompose a model’s prediction to the level of individual features by comparing the model results when a
feature value is present and absent. More recently, Ribeiro,
Singh, and Guestrin (2016) explain a prediction instance by
constructing interpretable model locally around it, which is
only an accurate approximation of the global model in the
vicinity of that instance.
The third approach, interpretable model, aims to construct
models that are inherently structured and interpretable, such
as rule lists and decision trees. Si and Zhu (2013) use AndOr-Trees to represent the possible component structures of
objects in images, which can be used as compositional models for explaining results of object detection. Lake, Salakhutdinov, and Tenenbaum (2015) learn a generative model of
character images, and explain a character recognition result
using the generation process of that character.
Despite much work having been done in this ﬁeld, I have
identiﬁed several gaps that need to be bridged. Firstly, existing XAI models can answer the question “why this decision or conclusion”, while they cannot answer “Why not”.
Secondly, most of them offer explanations as a form of evidences rather than reasons. Good explanations need to reveal
the underlying reasoning process and are best presented in
human-interpretable terms. To ﬁll these gaps, I decide to
take an argumentation-based approach to XAI, which has the
potential to generate more comprehensive explanations.

Abstract
Currently, much of machine learning is opaque, just like a
“black box”. However, in order for humans to understand,
trust and effectively manage the emerging AI systems, an
AI needs to be able to explain its decisions and conclusions.
In this paper, I propose an argumentation-based approach
to explainable AI, which has the potential to generate more
comprehensive explanations than existing approaches.

Introduction
The advent of big data era has brought great success to machine learning. Together, the abundance of data and the development of various machine learning techniques has led to
an explosion of new AI models and applications. However,
much of machine learning still remains opaque as a “black
box”. The effectiveness of AI systems, especially in critical
applications such as disease diagnosis, stock trading and autonomous vehicles, will be limited by the machines’ inability
to explain their decisions and conclusions to humans. Thus,
it is important to build more explainable AI, so that humans
can understand, trust and effectively manage the emerging
AI systems (Gunning 2016).
Integrating the taxonomies proposed in (Gunning 2016)
and (Biran and Cotton 2017), existing research in explainable
AI (XAI) can be categorized into three broad approaches: (1)
explanations based on features, (2) model approximation and
(3) interpretable models.
For explanations based on features, usually a noninterpretable complex model and its predictions are given.
This approach focuses on generating justiﬁcations for the
predictions by extracting and identifying the features that
have signiﬁcant effects on the prediction results. Martens
et al. (2008) explain the results of an SVM classiﬁer by extracting rules that can produce similar results to the SVM
based on a small subset of features. Landecker et al. (2013)
interpret the classiﬁcation results of hierarchical networks by
studying the degree of importance of different components
to the classiﬁcation results. Hendricks et al. (2016) generate
explanations for image classiﬁcation results of a CNN using
a LSTM, based on both prominent image features and class
discriminative features.

Progress to Date
Argumentation is the study of how reasonable decisions
or conclusions can be reached by constructing for and
against arguments and evaluating these arguments accordingly. Argumentation-based approach to decision making
is expected to be more akin with the way humans deliberate, evaluate alternatives and make decisions. This endows
argumentation-based approach unique beneﬁts, including
transparent decision making process and the ability to offer understandable reasons underlying the decisions made.
Argumentative explanations have also attracted increasing
research interests in recent years. Fan and Toni (2014) study
argumentative explanations for acceptable decisions or conclusions while Fan and Toni (2015) focus on generating ex-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8044

