The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

3D Box Proposals from a Single
Monocular Image of an Indoor Scene
1

Wei Zhuo,1,4 Mathieu Salzmann,2 Xuming He,3 Miaomiao Liu1,4

Australian National University, 2 EPFL, 3 ShanghaiTech University, 4 Data61,CSIRO, Canberra, Australia
wei.zhuo@anu.edu.au, mathieu.salzmann@epﬂ.ch, hexm@shanghaitech.edu.cn, miaomiao.liu@data61.csiro.au

scale. By contrast, (Fidler, Dickinson, and Urtasun 2012;
Chen et al. 2016a) truly reason in 3D. These works, however,
have tackled the class-speciﬁc scenario in outdoor scenes,
and would thus not generalize well to more cluttered environments, such as indoor scenes, and to arbitrary objects.
To the best of our knowledge, all the methods that consider the problem of generating class-independent object
proposals (Chen et al. 2016b; Song and Xiao 2016) assume
the availability of depth information. In particular, (Song and
Xiao 2016) achieved state-of-the-art results in indoor scenes
by encoding a 3D scene with a truncated signed distance
function (TSDF) and developing a region proposal network
(RPN) based on 3D convolutions to generate proposals. In
practice, however, depth is not always available, in which
case these methods are inapplicable.
In this paper, we therefore introduce an approach to generating class-independent 3D box proposals from a single
monocular RGB image. Based on the recent progress in
monocular depth estimation (Eigen, Puhrsch, and Fergus
2014; Eigen and Fergus 2015), the most straightforward way
to doing so would be to rely on a state-of-the-art method to
predict depth, followed by the state-of-the-art depth-based
proposal generation technique of (Song and Xiao 2016).
Here, however, we show that we can signiﬁcantly outperform this two-stage approach by developing an integrated,
fully-differentiable framework that can be trained in an endto-end manner.
More speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst propose a differentiable TSDF
(DTSDF) module that can be appended to a depth-prediction
network and produces an approximate TSDF-based representation. The quality of the resulting 3D representation,
however, is limited by the accuracy of the predicted depth
map and by our approximation of the TSDF, even when
training the network end-to-end. To overcome this, we therefore introduce a residual version of our DTSDF module,
which allows us to compensate for the depth inaccuracies
and thus generate high-quality 3D box proposals.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on the
standard NYUv2 dataset. Our experiments evidence the beneﬁts of the different components of our integrated framework. Furthermore, they show that our approach significantly outperforms the two-stage approach consisting of
successive depth prediction and box proposal generation.

Abstract
Modern object detection methods typically rely on bounding
box proposals as input. While initially popularized in the 2D
case, this idea has received increasing attention for 3D bounding boxes. Nevertheless, existing 3D box proposal techniques
all assume having access to depth as input, which is unfortunately not always available in practice. In this paper, we
therefore introduce an approach to generating 3D box proposals from a single monocular RGB image. To this end, we
develop an integrated, fully differentiable framework that inherently predicts a depth map, extracts a 3D volumetric scene
representation and generates 3D object proposals. At the core
of our approach lies a novel residual, differentiable truncated
signed distance function module, which, accounting for the
relatively low accuracy of the predicted depth map, extracts a
3D volumetric representation of the scene. Our experiments
on the standard NYUv2 dataset demonstrate that our framework lets us generate high-quality 3D box proposals and that
it outperforms the two-stage technique consisting of successively performing state-of-the-art depth prediction and depthbased 3D proposal generation.

Introduction
In the context of 2D scene understanding, generating classindependent object proposals, such as bounding boxes, has
proven key to the success of modern object detectors; it
has led not only to faster runtimes but also to more accurate detections (Ren et al. 2015). Reasoning in 2D, however,
only provides a limited description of the scene. A 3D interpretation would be highly beneﬁcial for many tasks, such
as autonomous navigation, robotics manipulation and Augmented Reality.
In recent years, several works have attempted to provide
such a 3D interpretation by going beyond 2D bounding
boxes. In particular, several methods have been proposed
to model 3D objects with the 2D coordinates of the eight
vertices of their 3D bounding box (Dwibedi et al. 2016;
Hedau, Hoiem, and Forsyth 2010; Payet and Todorovic
2011). While this indeed better captures the shape of the
object, e.g., by better adapting to orientations not parallel
the image axes, it still does not provide a 3D interpretation; each 3D bounding box can only be recovered up to
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7639

