The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Fully Convolutional Network Based Skeletonization
for Handwritten Chinese Characters
1

Tie-Qiang Wang,1,2 Cheng-Lin Liu1,2
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
95 Zhongguancun East Road, Beijing 100190, P.R. China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P.R. China
Email: {tieqiang.wang, liucl}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
studied intensively and many algorithms have been proposed (Zhang and Suen 1984; Arcelli and Di Baja 1985;
Dong, Lin, and Huang 2016).
There are mainly two types of thinning algorithms:
neighbor-based algorithms and distance-based ones. The
former methods execute iteratively to delete pixels on the
boundary strokes until centered lines remain, and the deletion or retention of stroke pixels depends on the connectivity in the neighborhood, such as the ZhangSuen algorithm
(Zhang and Suen 1984). An improved ZhangSuen algorithm
was designed for Odia characters, combining with stroke
correction (Pujari, Mitra, and Mishra 2014). In (Dong et al.
2017), stroke continuity detection serves as a preprocessing
step for thinning. Recently, (Alghamdi and Teahan 2017)
proposes a novel algorithm based on the boundary deletion
with colour coding. The latter ways yield skeletons straightforwardly by using distance transforms to extract the medial
axis of a stroke. Variant methods differ in the distance functions: city block distance (Arcelli and Di Baja 1989), Euclidean distance or constrained Delaunay triangulation technique (Zou and Yan 2001).
These methods are likely to yield unsatisfactory results
when facing: (1) complex shapes, (2) variable stroke widths
and (3) unsmooth edges. Particularly, the extracted lines
are often distorted at the crosses or intersections of strokes
(Dong et al. 2017). These outcomes make stroke extraction
and structural analysis difﬁcult, while fully convolutional
networks (FCNs) (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015) provide an pixel-to-pixel manner to solve these problems. For
example, holistically-nested networks (Xie and Tu 2015)
and scale-associated networks (Shen et al. 2016) successfully predict the contour maps and skeleton maps of generic
objects in natural images, respectively. But these models do
not assure that it is one-pixel width in the output contour or
skeleton.
This paper proposes a FCN-based skeleton extraction
method for handwritten Chinese characters, which are typical of complex structures. The network fuses holisticallynested features at multiple scales (Xie and Tu 2015), to reduce the information loss caused by upsampling operations.
With fewer computational overhead, our method is particularly beneﬁcial for better structure preservation at crossing
areas. For supervised training, it is infeasible to label skeleton pixels for large number of ofﬂine handwritten samples.

Abstract
Structural analysis of handwritten characters relies heavily on
robust skeletonization of strokes, which has not been solved
well by previous thinning methods. This paper presents an
effective fully convolutional network (FCN) to extract stroke
skeletons for handwritten Chinese characters. We combine
the holistically-nested architecture with regressive dense upsampling convolution (rDUC) and recently proposed hybrid
dilated convolution (HDC) to generate pixel-level prediction
for skeleton extraction. We evaluate our method on character images synthesized from the online handwritten dataset
CASIA-OLHWDB and achieve higher accuracy of skeleton
pixel detection than traditional thinning algorithms. We also
conduct skeleton based character recognition experiments using convolutional neural network (CNN) classiﬁers on ofﬂine/online handwritten datasets, and obtained comparable
accuracies with recognition on original character images.
This implies the skeletonization loses little shape information.

Introduction
Recently, deep neural networks have promoted the handwritten character recognition performance signiﬁcantly. Even
the large category set problem, handwritten Chinese character recognition (HCCR) (Zhang, Bengio, and Liu 2017),
has achieved high accuracies as over 97% by using convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Despite the superior feature learning and classiﬁcation capability of CNNs, they do
not offer structural interpretation of characters, say, the composition of strokes and radicals and their inter-relationship.
Structural analysis of handwritten characters has been studied since 1970s (Pritchard and Sondak 1973) but until now,
it is unsolved, partially because of the difﬁculty of stroke extraction and structural model learning. Structural analysis remains an important issue because in many applications, such
as education (Hsiung et al. 2017), human interaction, and
personalized font generation, the interpretation of strokes
and radicals, and the detection of stroke errors are necessary.
Character skeleton conveys key information for shape
recognition, and is particularly important for extracting the
structure of strokes. So, skeletonization or thinning has been
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2540

