The Twenty-Third AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium

Probabilistic Planning with Inﬂuence Diagrams
Junkyu Lee
Donald Bren School of Information and Computer Sciences
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA

Introduction

MAP was shown in (Mauá 2016) , hence any marginal MAP
inference could solve IDs. However, a naive application of
translation often produces larger scope size functions and
larger number of variables.
Online planning considers generating a single action at a
time while interacting with a simulator in the loop of alternating planning and execution phases, hence it avoids exponential complexity for ﬁnding optimal decisions for all possible trajectories. The baseline algorithms and benchmark
problems are available at the previous ICAPS planning competitions.

Motivations and Goal Graphical models provide a powerful framework for reasoning under uncertainty, and an inﬂuence diagram (ID) is a graphical model of a sequential
decision problem that maximizes the total expected utility
of a non-forgetting agent. Relaxing the regular modeling
assumptions, an ID can be ﬂexibly extended to general decision scenarios involving a limited memory agent or multiagents. The approach of probabilistic planning with IDs is
expected to gain computational leverage by exploiting the
local structure as well as representational ﬂexibility of inﬂuence diagram frameworks. My research focuses on graphical model inference for IDs and its application to probabilistic planning, targeting online MDP/POMDP planning
as testbeds in the evaluation.

Current Progress
Generalized Dual Decomposition for IDs Generalized
Dual Decomposition method (GDD) is a generalization of
Lagrangian dual decomposition to Lp space with Hölder’s
inequality (Ping, Liu, and Ihler 2015). I presented a decomposition based approximate inference algorithm in (Lee, Ihler, and Dechter 2018). In this work, an ID is decomposed
as a join-graph, a graph of clusters of subproblems with
bounded number of variables (Dechter, Kask, and Mateescu
2002), Hence, the space and time complexity is bounded by
the maximum cluster size. Then, the GDD is applied to the
join-graph; equality constraints for the variables shared between clusters are augmented to the relaxed problem to enforce local consistency, and non-negative weights for each
variable are distributed to bound MEU by Hölder’s inequality. To optimize the bound, current implementation employs
a gradient based local search, called GDD-ID. Since the
bound from GDD-ID is formulated under the potential representation of IDs, it is free from translation and the bound
can be computed by combining local expected utilities. The
experimental evaluation on random factored MDP/POMDP
instances demonstrated fast convergence to local optima,
and generation of bounds for problem instances that an ofﬂine POMDP planner failed because of the large number of
states.

Related Works The computation of the maximum expected utility (MEU) of IDs involves the sum of utility functions as well as the product of conditional probability functions. Thus, most algorithms for solving IDs use a pair of
probability and utility functions, called a potential, to trace
the partial expected utility while marginalizing or combining functions (Jensen, Jensen, and Dittmer 1994). Previous
works on search algorithms for solving IDs are depth-ﬁrst
AND/OR search exploiting the decomposition of graphical
model (Marinescu 2010), and depth-ﬁrst branch and bound
with a heuristic generated by relaxing the constrained elimination ordering (Yuan, Wu, and Hansen 2010). Although
depth-ﬁrst search only requires linear memory, the space
complexity for ﬁnding the optimal strategy is exponential
in the length of history due to the non-forgetting assumption. Local search algorithms improving a subset of policies
are proposed for IDs with limited memory in (Lauritzen and
Nilsson 2001) and (Mauá and Cozman 2016).
On the other hand, translation based approaches allow applying existing inference algorithms to planning.
MPD/POMDPs are translated as a mixture of ﬁnite horizon dynamic Bayesian networks and planning is formulated
as likelihood maximization in (Toussaint, Harmeling, and
Storkey 2006). Belief propagation algorithms are presented
in (Liu and Ihler 2012) when utilities are multiplicative.
A generic translation scheme between MEU and marginal

Anytime AND/OR Search AND/OR search space for
graphical model captures problem decomposition by conditioning, and it exhibits exponential improvement from OR
search space (Dechter and Mateescu 2007). In collaboration with Radu Marinescu, I investigated several anytime
AND/OR search algorithms. In (Lee et al. 2016), weighted

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8018

