The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Mixed Sum-Product Networks: A Deep Architecture for Hybrid Domains
Alejandro Molina∗

Antonio Vergari*

Nicola Di Mauro

alejandro.molina@tu-dortmund.de
TU Dortmund, Germany

antonio.vergari@uniba.it
University of Bari, Italy

nicola.dimauro@uniba.it
University of Bari, Italy

Sriraam Natarajan

Floriana Esposito

Kristian Kersting

natarasr@indiana.edu
Indiana University, USA

ﬂoriana.esposito@uniba.it
University of Bari, Italy

kersting@cs.tu-darmstadt.de
TU Darmstadt, Germany

such as the Gaussian-Ising mixed model (Lauritzen and
Wermuth 1989), where there are Gaussian and multinomial
random variables, and the continuous variables are conditioned on all conﬁgurations of the discrete variables. Unfortunately, inference in this Gaussian-Ising mixed graphical model scales exponentially with the number of discrete
variables, and only recently, 3-way dependencies have been
realized (Cheng et al. 2014). Therefore it is not surprising that hybrid Bayesian networks (HBNs) have restricted
their attention to simpler parametric forms for the conditional distributions such as conditional linear Gaussian models (Heckerman and Geiger 1995). While extensions based
on copulas aim to provide more ﬂexibility (Elidan 2010),
selecting the best parametric copula distribution for each
application requires signiﬁcant engineering effort. Probably the most recent approach is Manichean graphical models (Yang et al. 2014), and we refer to this paper for an
excellent and current overview of mixed graphical models. Manichean models specify that each of the conditional
distributions is a member of a possibly different univariate exponential family. Although indeed more ﬂexible than
Gaussian-Ising mixed models, Manichean models are still
demanding, in particular when it comes to inference. Alternatively, one may make a piecewise approximation to continuous distributions (Shenoy and West 2011). In their purest
form, piecewise constant functions are often adopted in the
form of histograms or staircase functions, and more expressive approximations comprise mixtures of truncated polynomials (Langseth et al. 2012) and exponentials (Moral,
Rumi, and Salmerón 2001). This has resulted in a number of novel inference approaches for hybrid domains (Sanner and Abbasnejad 2012; Belle, Passerini, and Van den
Broeck 2015; Belle, Van den Broeck, and Passerini 2015;
Morettin, Passerini, and Sebastiani 2017). Although expressive, learning these non-parametric models does not scale.

Abstract
While all kinds of mixed data—from personal data, over
panel and scientiﬁc data, to public and commercial data—are
collected and stored, building probabilistic graphical models
for these hybrid domains becomes more difﬁcult. Users spend
signiﬁcant amounts of time in identifying the parametric form
of the random variables (Gaussian, Poisson, Logit, etc.) involved and learning the mixed models. To make this difﬁcult task easier, we propose the ﬁrst trainable probabilistic
deep architecture for hybrid domains that features tractable
queries. It is based on Sum-Product Networks (SPNs) with
piecewise polynomial leaf distributions together with novel
nonparametric decomposition and conditioning steps using
the Hirschfeld-Gebelein-Rényi Maximum Correlation Coefﬁcient. This relieves the user from deciding a-priori the parametric form of the random variables but is still expressive
enough to effectively approximate any distribution and permits efﬁcient learning and inference. Our experiments show
that the architecture, called Mixed SPNs, can indeed capture
complex distributions across a wide range of hybrid domains.

Introduction
Machine learning has achieved considerable successes in recent years, and an ever-growing number of disciplines rely
on it. Data is now ubiquitous, and there is great value in
understanding the data, building probabilistic models and
making predictions with them. However, in most cases, this
success crucially relies on the data scientists to posit the
right parametric form of the probabilistic model underlying
the data, to select a good algorithm to ﬁt their data, and ﬁnally to perform inference on it. These can be quite challenging even for experts and often go beyond non-experts’
capabilities, speciﬁcally in hybrid domains, consisting of
mixed—continuous, discrete and/or categorical—statistical
types. Building a probabilistic model that is both expressive enough to capture complex dependencies among random variables of different types as well as allows for effective learning and efﬁcient inference is still an open problem.
More precisely, most existing graphical models for hybrid domains—also called mixed models—are limited to
particular combinations of variables of parametric forms

To overcome the difﬁcultness of mixed probabilistic graphical modeling and inspired by the successes of
deep models, we introduce Mixed Sum-Product Networks
(MSPNs). They are a general class of mixed probabilistic
models that, by combining Sum-Product Networks (Poon
and Domingos 2011) and piecewise polynomials, allow for
a broad range of exact and tractable inference without making distributional assumptions. Learning MSPNs from data,
however, requires different decomposition and conditioning

∗

Contributed equally
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3828

