The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Generative Adversarial Networks and Probabilistic
Graph Models for Hyperspectral Image Classiﬁcation
Zilong Zhong, Jonathan Li
Mobile Sensing Lab, University of Waterloo
{z26zhong, junli}@uwaterloo.ca

explicit approximation inference. For instance, a deep convolutional GAN, which consists of a discriminator and a
generator, has been proposed to ﬁnd a Nash equilibrium between the discriminator and the generator through model
optimization (Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2015). Although
GANs were designed for unsupervised learning, they can be
applied for semi-supervised learning framework and delivered promising recognition results (Odena 2016).
Probabilistic graphical models have been widely used for
post-processing image segmentations and exploit the large
amount of unlabeled data to enhance the classiﬁcation performance (Chen et al. 2016). For instance, conditional random ﬁelds (CRF) that adopt a high-order term can consider more complex relationships between different spectral
bands. The adoption of probabilistic graphical models is an
effective way to take the unlabeled samples into account for
HSI classiﬁcation, because this method requires only an initialized pixel-wised prediction and raw unlabeled HSI data.
In this work, to efﬁciently utilize the spectral-spatial features and abundant unlabeled data of HSIs, we tested different GANs and the combined them with conditional random
ﬁelds that follow using 10 training samples for each land
cover classes in two HSI datasets.

Abstract
High spectral dimensionality and the shortage of annotations
make hyperspectral image (HSI) classiﬁcation a challenging problem. Recent studies suggest that convolutional neural networks can learn discriminative spatial features, which
play a paramount role in HSI interpretation. However, most
of these methods ignore the distinctive spectral-spatial characteristic of hyperspectral data. In addition, a large amount
of unlabeled data remains an unexploited gold mine for efﬁcient data use. Therefore, we proposed an integration of generative adversarial networks (GANs) and probabilistic graphical models for HSI classiﬁcation. Speciﬁcally, we used a
spectral-spatial generator and a discriminator to identify land
cover categories of hyperspectral cubes. Moreover, to take
advantage of a large amount of unlabeled data, we adopted
a conditional random ﬁeld to reﬁne the preliminary classiﬁcation results generated by GANs. Experimental results obtained using two commonly studied datasets demonstrate that
the proposed framework achieved encouraging classiﬁcation
accuracy using a small number of data for training.

Introduction
Discriminative deep learning models have been used for
hyperspectral image (HSI) classiﬁcation and achieved very
high classiﬁcation accuracy in commonly studied cases.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been used for
hyperspectral image feature extraction and outperform traditional machine learning methods. However, both these approaches ignored the inherent difference (hundreds of spectral bands in HSIs) in spectral dimensionality between hyperspectral images and common images used in computer
vision tasks (e.g. ILSVRC). Recently, a Spectral-Spatial
Residual Network (SSRN) that considers the spectral-spatial
characteristic of hyperspectral images by consecutively extracting spectral and spatial features and obtained state-ofart classiﬁcation results (Zhong et al. 2017).
Recently, generative adversarial networks (GANs) have
been widely used for generating images that share the same
distribution as real data, and can be used for unsupervised
and semi-supervised learning (Goodfellow et al. 2014). Different from conventional generative methods, generative adversarial networks are not constrained by Markov ﬁelds or

As shown in Fig. 1, the whole framework is composed of
a discriminator, a generator, and a post-processing CRF. Inspired by the semi-supervised GAN, we proposed a spectralspatial convolutional layer to construct both discriminators
and generators. The discriminator identiﬁes the categories
and whether the input hyperspectral cubes are real or false.
Additionally, the generator tries to deceive the discriminator
through implicitly learning representative features and generate synthesized images. Then, a conditional random ﬁeld
reﬁnes the posterior probability given raw HSIs and the preceding HSI classiﬁcation results. If we suppose the X and Z
are feature tensors in discriminators and generators, respectively. Then we can formulate the two phases as follows.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

where LReLU (·) and ReLU (·) denote leaky and normal
rectiﬁed linear unit activation functions, respectively. W

Methodology

8191

X i+1 = LReLU (X i ∗ W i+1 + bi+1 ),

(1)

Z j+1 = ReLU (Z j ∗T W j+1 + bj+1 ),

(2)

