The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Improving Variational Encoder-Decoders in Dialogue Generation
Xiaoyu Shen,1,3∗ Hui Su,4∗ Shuzi Niu,4 Vera Demberg2,3
1

Max Planck Institute Informatics, Germany
Dept of Math & CS and LangSci & Tech, Saarland University, Germany
3
Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
4
Institute of Software, University of Chinese Academy of Science, China

2

ing real data from intermediate latent variables, they are
expected to uncover and disentangle causal factors that are
most important to explain the data. The exact log-likelihood
normally requires integral in high-dimensional space and
cannot be analytically expressed. Current approaches solve
this intractability problem by imposing a recognition network to approximate the real posterior probability. Variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling 2014;
Rezende, Mohamed, and Wierstra 2014) bring scalability and
stability to the training procedure, which introduces a reparameterization trick to reduce the variance when estimating
the backpropagated gradients.
(Serban et al. 2017b) proposed the VHRED structure
which applied the conditional VAE (CVAE) (Sohn, Lee, and
Yan 2015) with RNN encoder-decoders in dialogue generation, in hope of CVAE’s advantage of learning global representations being a good complement of RNN’s power at
modeling local dependencies. However, this simple combination runs into the KL-vanishing problem that the RNN part
ends up explaining all the structures without making use of
the latent representation. The reason is that RNN is a universal approximator with much more ﬂexibility than the simple
gaussian distributed latent variables so that the model lacks
enough motivation to utilize them.
Current approaches normally address this problem by
weakening the RNN decoder to match the simpler latent variable distribution, which essentially sacriﬁces the generating
capacity for better representation learning and is inappropriate when our main goal is to learn a generative model. In this
paper, on the contrary, we take advantage of the universality
of RNNs to help realize a more ﬂexible latent variable distribution. By this means, we can not only add motivation for
utilizing latent variables, but also strengthen the expressiveness of the generating model. Speciﬁcally, we split the whole
structure into a CVAE module and an autoencoder (AE) module. The CVAE module learns to generate latent variables
while the AE module builds the connection between them and
real dialogue utterances. The outputs of the CVAE serve as
input latent variables for the AE module, which is potentially
much more ﬂexible than restricting the latent variables to follow a ﬁxed distribution. As the RNN encoder-decoders in the
AE module are universal approximators, they are adjusted to
extract continuous vectors from the dialogue data that can be
more easily modelled by the CVAE module. Combined with

Abstract
Variational encoder-decoders (VEDs) have shown promising
results in dialogue generation. However, the latent variable
distributions are usually approximated by a much simpler
model than the powerful RNN structure used for encoding and
decoding, yielding the KL-vanishing problem and inconsistent training objective. In this paper, we separate the training
step into two phases: The ﬁrst phase learns to autoencode discrete texts into continuous embeddings, from which the second
phase learns to generalize latent representations by reconstructing the encoded embedding. In this case, latent variables are
sampled by transforming Gaussian noise through multi-layer
perceptrons and are trained with a separate VED model, which
has the potential of realizing a much more ﬂexible distribution. We compare our model with current popular models and
the experiment demonstrates substantial improvement in both
metric-based and human evaluations.

Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Bengio et al. 2003) are
widely used in natural language processing tasks. However,
given the history context, RNNs estimate the probability of
one word at a time and does not work from a holistic sentence representation (Bowman et al. 2016). When applied to
dialogue generation, the corresponding result is that it would
generate either short, boring responses or long, inconsistent
sentences. As the length of generated sentences grows, it
would easily deviate from the original intention as such tokenlevel estimation only considers immediate short rewards
and neglects global structure consistency. In hence, vanilla
RNNs prefer generating generic and safe short responses
to avoid the risk of making errors (Vinyals and Le 2015;
Serban et al. 2016; Shen et al. 2017). One way of improving
this deﬁcient generating process is to introduce a sentencelevel representation, which can be further conditioned on to
ensure the sentence-level consistency.
Deep latent variable models are a popular way to learn
such representations in a generative setting. Latent representations and generators can be jointly trained in an unsupervised way. By learning the probability of synthesiz∗
Authors contributed equally. Correspondence to X. Shen
(xshen@lsv.uni-saarland.de).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5456

