The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Recurrently Aggregating Deep
Features for Salient Object Detection
1

Xiaowei Hu,1,∗ Lei Zhu,2,∗ Jing Qin,2 Chi-Wing Fu,1,3 Pheng-Ann Heng1,3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
2
Centre for Smart Health, School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
3
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality and Human Interaction Technology,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
https:// github.com/ xw-hu/ RADF
et al. 2011) to distinguish salient objects from background.
These hand-crafted features and priors are ineffective to capture the high level semantic knowledge, and are incapable of
producing satisfactory predictions. To improve the detection
accuracy, salient object detection algorithms (Li et al. 2016;
Li and Yu 2015; Zhao et al. 2015) based on fully convolutional neural network (FCN) (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015) have been proposed, aiming at leveraging the
deep features with more semantic information to generate
high-quality saliency maps. However, due to the pooling
operations, the outputs of these FCN-based methods, albeit containing richer high-level semantic information compared with the results of hand-crafted feature based methods, lose much signiﬁcant location information and hence
neglect many ﬁne details. Hence, their results usually suffer from poor localization of salient object boundaries. More
recently, several works (Liu and Han 2016; Li and Yu 2016;
Hou et al. 2017) utilized short connections to combine multilevel features produced from deep convolutional neural networks in order to incorporate semantic information at high
levels and detail structures at low levels. However, their
salient results still tend to contain many non-salient objects
and simultaneously lose some parts (details) of salient object when directly merging multiple level features in those
methods; see the 1st and 3rd rows of Figure 1.

Abstract
Salient object detection is a fundamental yet challenging
problem in computer vision, aiming to highlight the most
visually distinctive objects or regions in an image. Recent
works beneﬁt from the development of fully convolutional
neural networks (FCNs) and achieve great success by integrating features from multiple layers of FCNs. However, the
integrated features tend to include non-salient regions (due
to low level features of the FCN) or lost details of salient
objects (due to high level features of the FCN) when producing the saliency maps. In this paper, we develop a novel
deep saliency network equipped with recurrently aggregated
deep features (RADF) to more accurately detect salient objects from an image by fully exploiting the complementary
saliency information captured in different layers. The RADF
utilizes the multi-level features integrated from different layers of a FCN to recurrently reﬁne the features at each layer,
suppressing the non-salient noise at low-level of the FCN and
increasing more salient details into features at high layers. We
perform experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed network on 5 famous saliency detection benchmarks
and compare it with 15 state-of-the-art methods. Our method
ranks ﬁrst in 4 of the 5 datasets and second in the left dataset.

Introduction
Salient object detection aims to identify the most visually
distinctive objects from an input image. By working as a preprocessing step of many computer vision tasks, detecting
salient objects beneﬁts lots of practical applications, such
as image and video compression (Guo and Zhang 2010),
content-aware image editing (Cheng et al. 2010), object
recognition (Wei et al. 2017), scene classiﬁcation (Siagian
and Itti 2007), object re-targeting (Sun and Ling 2013),
and visual tracking (Hong et al. 2015). However, salient
object detection is a very challenging research problem as
many mutually affected factors contribute to the deﬁnition of
saliency regions, including image structure, object semantic
meaning and context information.
Traditional saliency detection methods employed handcrafted visual features (e.g, color, texture, and contrast) with
heuristic priors (Cheng et al. 2015; Jiang et al. 2013; Liu

In this paper, in order to address these challenges, we propose a novel deep saliency network to recurrently aggregate
deep features (RADF) for salient object detection by fully
exploiting the complementary information encoded in features generated in different layers. Firstly, we combine the
features at multiple layers of a FCN and compress these
multi-level features into one (we call it multi-level integrated
features (MLIF)). Then the compressed MLIF are merged
with the features of each layer of the FCN using a convolutional operation, which is capable of automatically selecting
the discriminative features and suppressing information of
non-salient regions. This convolution enables the MLIF to
reﬁne the features at each layer, where non-salient regions
of low levels are reduced, and salient details at high levels
are enhanced. Moreover, we adopt a recurrent mechanism to
integrate the features at individual layers and the MLIF iteratively for a progressive reﬁnement of both of them. Specifically, we combine the reﬁned features at each layer to generate a new MLIF, which are aggregated to each individual

∗

Both authors contributed equally.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6943

