The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Persuasive Inﬂuence Detection:
The Role of Argument Sequencing
Christopher Hidey

Kathleen McKeown

Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
chidey@cs.columbia.edu

Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
kathy@cs.columbia.edu
Consider the example in Table 1. In this discussion, the
Reddit user “A” states her belief that borders between nations are just a social construct. The user “B” responds with
her own argument that even though borders are not a natural occurrence, it is human nature to require this kind of
organization. The original poster “A” then responds with a
delta and acknowledges that she doesn’t have a legitimate
counter-argument. The overall structure of the argument is
clear: the user begins by introducing evidence, making a
concession as a matter of politeness, and ﬁnally concluding
with a summarization and rhetorical questions.
In this paper, we show that the ordering of arguments is
crucial to persuasion. We present a neural model of persuasive inﬂuence, modeling words, Penn Discourse Tree Bank
(PDTB) relations, and FrameNet semantic frames. The main
contributions of our work are: 1) statistically signiﬁcant improvements over previous work on predicting persuasion by
using features representing argument sequences and 2) experiments showing that we outperform novice humans on
the same data, illustrating the difﬁculty of this task.
In the following sections we ﬁrst discuss prior research in
argumentation, persuasion, and inﬂuence in Section 2. We
then present the Change My View data set and how we preprocess the data for different experiments (Section 3). Section 4 describes the experimental methodology, focusing on
how we model the posts using a neural network. Finally we
present the results of our experiments in Section 5 and provide an error analysis with respect to human judgments on
the same task in Section 6. Code and data for our experiments is available to the research community.1

Abstract
Automatic detection of persuasion in online discussion is key
to understanding how social media is used. Predicting persuasiveness is difﬁcult, however, due to the need to model
world knowledge, dialogue, and sequential reasoning. We focus on modeling the sequence of arguments in social media
posts using neural models with embeddings for words, discourse relations, and semantic frames. We demonstrate signiﬁcant improvement over prior work in detecting successful
arguments. We also present an error analysis assessing novice
human performance at predicting persuasiveness.

1

Introduction

Politicians and voters today are increasingly turning to social media to attract others to their cause. Identifying when
a post will be inﬂuential would be helpful in understanding
the appeal of political candidates and the reaction to current
events and issues. A writer who is successful in changing
the opinions of readers demonstrates inﬂuence over others
and thus detecting persuasive posts that successfully change
opinions is part of the overall solution to inﬂuence detection
(Tan et al. 2016; Jaech et al. 2015).
Predicting persuasion is a difﬁcult task as it requires modeling world knowledge, social interaction, and reasoning.
Understanding the sequence of arguments used in online
posts is crucial to understanding when a reader’s mind has
been changed. Empirically, there is evidence to suggest that
people change their minds, and we provide evidence that this
change is not just caused by new words and concepts but by
the way these concepts are presented.
We conduct experiments on “Change My View”, a speciﬁc “sub-reddit” of the Reddit social media platform, building on previous work using similar data (Tan et al. 2016;
Wei, Liu, and Li 2016). “Change My View” (CMV) is a discussion forum where users post their opinions on a topic and
their reasons for their beliefs. Other users respond by posting arguments attempting to change the view of the initiator of the discussion. If the views of the original posters are
successfully changed, they will indicate this by posting a response with a “delta” character, providing naturally labeled
data.

2

Related Work

Some sociolinguistic theorists suggest that persuasive and
argumentative discourses are distinct but not disjoint (Nettel and Roque 2012). They assert that argumentation gives
reasons in order to provide knowledge about a subject. Persuasion, however, attempts to convince, which may include
other rhetorical devices such as emotionally moving the audience. Persuasive argumentation then has the joint goal of
providing knowledge and convincing. In the Change My
View dataset, all examples are persuasive argumentation, as
their stated goal is to change the views of the original posters

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

5173

https://github.com/chridey/cmv

