The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multi-Rate Gated Recurrent Convolutional Networks
for Video-Based Pedestrian Re-Identiﬁcation
Zhihui Li,1 Lina Yao,2 Feiping Nie,3∗ Dingwen Zhang,4 Min Xu5
1

Beijing Etrol Technologies Co., Ltd.
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales.
3
Centre for OPTical Imagery Analysis and Learning, Northwestern Polytechnical University.
4
School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University.
5
School of Electrical and Data Engineering, University of Technology Sydney.
2

Abstract
Matching pedestrians across multiple camera views has attracted lots of recent research attention due to its apparent
importance in surveillance and security applications. While
most existing works address this problem in a still-image
setting, we consider the more informative and challenging
video-based person re-identiﬁcation problem, where a video
of a pedestrian as seen in one camera needs to be matched to
a gallery of videos captured by other non-overlapping cameras. We employ a convolutional network to extract the appearance and motion features from raw video sequences, and
then feed them into a multi-rate recurrent network to exploit
the temporal correlations, and more importantly, to take into
account the fact that pedestrians, sometimes even the same
pedestrian, move in different speeds across different camera views. The combined network is trained in an end-to-end
fashion, and we further propose an initialization strategy via
context reconstruction to largely improve the performance.
We conduct extensive experiments on the iLIDS-VID and
PRID-2011 datasets, and our experimental results conﬁrm the
effectiveness and the generalization ability of our model.

Figure 1: Person re-identiﬁcation remains a challenging
problem due to background clutter and occlusion, cameraview changes and lighting conditions.

Introduction
Human re-identiﬁcation (re-id), that is, matching pedestrians
across multiple non-overlapping camera views (Farenzena et
al. 2010), has attracted much research attention in the computer vision and machine learning communities due to its apparent critical role in surveillance and security applications
such as people tracking and forensic search. Major challenges in person re-id include camera view changes, poor
lighting conditions, and severe background clutter and occlusion; see some example illustrations in Figure 1. Various
methods have been proposed in recent years to address this
challenging problem, most of which concentrate on staticimage-based person re-id (Jing et al. 2015; Liao et al. 2015)
and can be divided into two groups: feature learning (Kviatkovsky, Adam, and Rivlin 2013; Yang et al. 2014a; 2014b;
Zhang, Chen, and Saligrama 2014) and distance metric
learning (Liao et al. 2015; Liao and Li 2015; Su et al. 2015;
Varior et al. 2016b; Xiong et al. 2014).
Despite of the signiﬁcant progress on still-image-based
person re-identiﬁcation, such existing methods still fall short

of fully meeting the requirements of real-world applications,
due to the following reasons: First, most naturally a pedestrian is captured in a video rather than in a single still image but still-image-based person re-id methods cannot exploit the rich temporal information related to a pedestrian’s
motion, such as his gait and perhaps even the way his clothing moves. Such information, if properly leveraged, can help
disambiguate difﬁcult matchings (McLaughlin, del Rincón,
and Miller 2016). Second, there are signiﬁcantly more and
diverse appearance cues in a video sequence than in a static
image, enabling us to extract more robust and discriminative appearance features. Third, video-based person re-id is
a continuous process hence can largely reduce the negative
effect due to occlusion and background clutter.
As a result, video-based person re-id has gained growing attention, and promising results on recent benchmark
datasets (Hirzer et al. 2011; Wang et al. 2014) have been
achieved. Existing methods in this setting can be divided
into the following categories: (1) Key shot/fragment representation (Wang et al. 2014), which automatically selects the
most discriminative fragments from the ﬂow energy proﬁle.

∗

Corresponding author. Email: feipingnie@gmail.com
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7081

