The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Guiding Search in Continuous State-Action Spaces by
Learning an Action Sampler from Off-target Search Experience
Beomjoon Kim, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Tomás Lozano-Pérez
Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{beomjoon,lpk,tlp}@mit.edu

Abstract
In robotics, it is essential to be able to plan efﬁciently in highdimensional continuous state-action spaces for long horizons.
For such complex planning problems, unguided uniform sampling of actions until a path to a goal is found is hopelessly inefﬁcient, and gradient-based approaches often fall short when
the optimization manifold of a given problem is not smooth.
In this paper, we present an approach that guides search in
continuous spaces for generic planners by learning an action
sampler from past search experience. We use a Generative
Adversarial Network (GAN) to represent an action sampler,
and address an important issue: search experience consists of
a relatively large number of actions that are not on a solution
path and a relatively small number of actions that actually
are on a solution path. We introduce a new technique, based
on an importance-ratio estimation method, for using samples
from a non-target distribution to make GAN learning more
data-efﬁcient. We provide theoretical guarantees and empirical evaluation in three challenging continuous robot planning
problems to illustrate the effectiveness of our algorithm.

(a) An example of the reconﬁguration task. The movable
obstacles are colored green, and the target object is colored with orange.

(b) An example of the bin packing task. The color of
objects indicate the order of placement, and the darker
the earlier.

Figure 1: Examples of reconﬁguration and bin packing. For
both tasks, the robot can only grasp objects from the side.

Introduction
Planning efﬁciently for a long horizon in domains with continuous state and action spaces is a crucial yet challenging problem for a robot. For the classical path-planning
problem of getting from an initial state to a goal state,
random sampling strategies or gradient-based approaches
often work reasonably well (Kuffner and LaValle 2000;
Zucker et al. 2013).
In a variety of important planning problems, however,
these approaches fall short. Consider the problem in Figure 1a, where the robot has to ﬁnd a collision-free inverse
kinematics solution to reach the orange object by reconﬁguring the green objects. An unguided uniform sampling approach performs poorly since the state-space is extremely
high-dimensional, consisting of the combined conﬁguration
spaces of the robot and many objects. A gradient computation is also difﬁcult, since the robot has to make choices that
are both discrete, such as which object to move, and continuous, such as where to place the chosen object, making the
problem’s optimization manifold non-smooth. This type of
hybrid search problem is difﬁcult to solve efﬁciently.

Several task and motion planning (TAMP) algorithms
were devised recently to more effectively deal with such
complex hybrid search problems (Kaelbling and LozanoPérez 2011; Garrett, Lozano-Pérez, and Kaelbling 2014;
Toussaint 2015; Vega-Brown and Roy 2016). In samplebased TAMP algorithms, the usual approach is to sample
from a continuous action space some predeﬁned number of
actions in each state, and then treat the problem as a discrete search problem. This discrete search problem is then
solved using a classical graph-search method or a generic
discrete PDDL-based planning algorithm. The feasibility of
an action, such as picking an object, is veriﬁed using a standard motion planner such as rapidly-exploring random tree
(RRT) and inverse kinematics.
In such approaches, the on-line computational burden imposed by a large continuous search space heavily depends
on the quality of the action sampler: if most of the sampled
actions will not lead to a goal, then a planner will spend most
of its time sampling actions, expanding nodes, and rejecting
them. On the other hand, if the action sampler has positive

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6509

