The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Joint Training for Neural Machine
Translation Models with Monolingual Data
Zhirui Zhang,†∗ Shujie Liu,‡ Mu Li,‡ Ming Zhou,‡ Enhong Chen††
†

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
‡
Microsoft Research
†
zrustc11@gmail.com † cheneh@ustc.edu.cn
‡
{shujliu,muli,mingzhou}@microsoft.com
(Koehn, Och, and Marcu 2003; Chiang 2007), such as little requirements for human feature engineering, or prior
domain knowledge. On the other hand, to train the large
amount of parameters in the encoder and decoder networks,
most NMT systems heavily rely on high-quality parallel
data and perform poorly in resource-poor or domain-speciﬁc
tasks. Unlike bilingual data, monolingual data are usually
much easier to collect and more diverse, and have been attractive resources for improving machine translation models
since 1990’s when data-driven machine translation systems
were ﬁrst built.
Monolingual data play a key role in training SMT systems. Additional target monolingual data are usually required to train a powerful language model, which is an important feature of an SMT system’s log-linear model. Using source-side monolingual data in SMT were also explored. Uefﬁng et al. (2007) introduced a transductive semisupervised learning method, in which source monolingual
sentences are translated and ﬁltered to build pseudo bilingual data, which are added to the original bilingual data to
re-train the SMT model.
For NMT systems, Gulcehre et al. (2015) ﬁrst tried both
shallow and deep fusion methods to integrate an external
RNN language model into the encoder-decoder framework.
The shallow fusion method simply linearly combines the
translation probability and the language model probability,
while the deep fusion method connects the RNN language
model with the decoder to form a new tightly coupled network. Instead of introducing an explicit language model,
Cheng et al. (2016) proposed an auto-encoder-based method
which encodes and reconstructs monolingual sentences, in
which source-to-target and target-to-source NMT models
serve as the encoder and decoder respectively.
Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch (2016a) proposed backtranslation for data augmentation as another way to leverage
the target monolingual data. In this method, both the NMT
model and training algorithm are kept unchanged, instead
they employed a new approach to constructing training data.
That is, target monolingual sentences are translated with a
pre-constructed machine translation system into source language, which are used as additional parallel data to re-train
the source-to-target NMT model. Although back-translation
has been proven to be robust and effective, one major problem for further improvement is the quality of automatically

Abstract
Monolingual data have been demonstrated to be helpful
in improving translation quality of both statistical machine
translation (SMT) systems and neural machine translation
(NMT) systems, especially in resource-poor or domain adaptation tasks where parallel data are not rich enough. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to better leveraging monolingual data for neural machine translation by jointly learning
source-to-target and target-to-source NMT models for a language pair with a joint EM optimization method. The training process starts with two initial NMT models pre-trained on
parallel data for each direction, and these two models are iteratively updated by incrementally decreasing translation losses
on training data. In each iteration step, both NMT models are
ﬁrst used to translate monolingual data from one language
to the other, forming pseudo-training data of the other NMT
model. Then two new NMT models are learnt from parallel
data together with the pseudo training data. Both NMT models are expected to be improved and better pseudo-training
data can be generated in next step. Experiment results on
Chinese-English and English-German translation tasks show
that our approach can simultaneously improve translation
quality of source-to-target and target-to-source models, signiﬁcantly outperforming strong baseline systems which are
enhanced with monolingual data for model training including
back-translation.

Introduction
Neural machine translation (NMT) performs end-to-end
translation based on an encoder-decoder framework (Kalchbrenner and Blunsom 2013; Cho et al. 2014; Sutskever,
Vinyals, and Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014)
and has obtained state-of-the-art performances on many language pairs (Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015; Sennrich,
Haddow, and Birch 2016b; Tu et al. 2016; Wu et al. 2016).
In the encoder-decoder framework, an encoder ﬁrst transforms the source sequence into vector representations, based
on which, a decoder generates the target sequence. Such
framework brings appealing properties over the traditional
phrase-based statistical machine translation (SMT) systems
∗

Contribution during internship at Microsoft Research
Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

555

