The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

MAgent: A Many-Agent Reinforcement Learning Platform
for Artiﬁcial Collective Intelligence
Lianmin Zheng,† Jiacheng Yang,†∗ Han Cai,† Weinan Zhang,† Jun Wang,‡ Yong Yu†
†

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, ‡ University College London

et al. 2013), OpenAI Gym/Universe (Brockman et al. 2016),
Malmo (Johnson et al. 2016), ELF (Tian et al. 2017) and
SC2LE (Vinyals et al. 2017) fail to meet the demand. Although they gradually show the desire to cover multi-agent
scenarios, they are basically designed to take no more than
dozens of agents. Thus there is a signiﬁcant need for a platform dedicated to large population multi-agent reinforcement learning, which is critical for ACI. On the other hand,
the majority of state-of-the-art multi-agent reinforcement
learning algorithms (Lowe et al. 2017) are also limited in
the scale of dozens of agents. Therefore, it is also a great
challenge to the research community.

Abstract
We introduce MAgent, a platform to support research and development of many-agent reinforcement learning. Unlike previous research platforms on single or multi-agent reinforcement learning, MAgent focuses on supporting the tasks and
the applications that require hundreds to millions of agents.
Within the interactions among a population of agents, it enables not only the study of learning algorithms for agents’
optimal polices, but more importantly, the observation and
understanding of individual agent’s behaviors and social phenomena emerging from the AI society, including communication languages, leaderships, altruism. MAgent is highly
scalable and can host up to one million agents on a single
GPU server. MAgent also provides ﬂexible conﬁgurations
for AI researchers to design their customized environments
and agents. In this demo, we present three environments designed on MAgent and show emerged collective intelligence
by learning from scratch.

The MAgent Platform
The MAgent project1 aims to build a many-agent reinforcement learning platform for the research of ACI. With
the idea of network sharing and ID embedding, MAgent
is highly scalable and can host up to one million agents
on a single GPU server. Moreover, MAgent provides environment/agent conﬁgurations and a reward description language to enable ﬂexible environment design. Finally, MAgent provides a simple yet visually effective render to interactively present the state of environment and agents. Users
can also slide or zoom the scope window and even manipulate agents in the game.

Introduction
True human intelligence embraces social and collective wisdom, laying a foundation for general Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AI) (Goertzel and Pennachin 2007). In essence, human intelligence would collectively solve the problem that otherwise is unthinkable by a single person. For instance,
theoretically, Condorcet’s jury theorem (Landemore 2013)
shows that, under certain assumption, adding more voters
in a group would increase the probability that the majority
chooses the right answer.
In parallel, in the coming era of algorithmic economy,
many AI agents work together, artiﬁcially creating their own
collective intelligence. With certain rudimentary abilities,
Artiﬁcial Collective Intelligence (ACI) starts to emerge from
multiple domains, including stock trading (Wang and others
2013), strategic games (Peng et al. 2017) and city transportation optimization (Zhang et al. 2017) etc.
A key technology of ACI is multi-agent reinforcement
learning (RL) but typically requires a scale of hundreds
to millions of agents (Yang et al. 2017). However, existing experimentation platforms, including ALE (Bellemare

Gridworld Fundamentals
A large-scale gridworld is used as the fundamental environment for the large population of agents. Each agent has a
rectangular body with a local detailed perspective and (optional) global information. The actions could be moving,
turning or attacking. A C++ engine is provided to support
fast simulation. Heterogeneous agents can be registered in
our engine. The state space, action space and agents’ attributes can be conﬁgured easily so that various environments can be swiftly developed.

Reward Description Language
In our python interface, users can describe the reward, agent
symbols, and events by a description language we developed. When the boolean expression of an event expression
is true, reward will be assigned to the agents involved in the

∗

The ﬁrst two authors have equal contributions. Correspondence to Weinan Zhang, wnzhang@sjtu.edu.cn, and Jun Wang,
j.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

8222

https://github.com/geek-ai/MAgent

