The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Probabilistic Inference Over Repeated Insertion Models
Batya Kenig

Lovro Ilijasić

Haoyue Ping

Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
batyak@cs.technion.ac.il

Drexel University
lovro@drexel.edu

Drexel University
hp354@drexel.edu

Benny Kimelfeld

Julia Stoyanovich

Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
bennyk@cs.technion.ac.il

Drexel University
stoyanovich@drexel.edu
pairwise comparisons (Lu and Boutilier 2014). Such preferences can be as simple as a single paired comparison: “a
is better than b”, or as complex as any partially ordered set
(poset) over the alternatives.
Computing the marginal probability of a poset over the
Mallows distribution is not only important for probabilistic
inference over arbitrary pairwise comparisons, but also plays
a crucial role in learning model parameters (Lu and Boutilier
2014) (i.e., evaluating the log-likelihood under Mallows
with respect to arbitrary pairwise preferences). Yet, this task
is theoretically and practically intractable (Lu and Boutilier
2014). Therefore, research to date has either resorted to approximation algorithms (Lu and Boutilier 2014), or assumed
very restricted forms of evidence about individual user preferences ranging from complete rankings, to top-t/bottom-t
alternatives, to partitioned preferences (Lebanon and Mao
2008). A simple proof of hardness is via a reduction to the
problem of counting the poset’s linear extensions that is
known to be #P -complete (Brightwell and Winkler 1991).
While this counting problem has been thoroughly investigated, and the properties that determine its complexity are
fairly well understood (Eiben et al. 2016; Kangas et al. 2016;
De Loof, De Meyer, and De Baets 2006), the question of
which parameters govern the complexity of inference over
Mallows remains unexplored. Furthermore, while there exist broad classes of posets that allow for tractable counting,
notably, series-parallel (Möhring 1989) and polytree (Atkinson 1990), to the best of our knowledge, over Mallows, the
only known tractable class of posets is that of the partitioned
preferences (Lebanon and Mao 2008).
The Mallows model represents a population of users by
a reference ranking σ and a dispersion parameter φ, and
expresses the probability of a ranking as a function of its
distance from σ. Doignon et al. (2004) introduced the Repeated Insertion Model (RIM), an efﬁcient generative procedure for the Mallows distribution. RIM considers every
alternative of the reference ranking σ = σ1 , . . . , σm in order, and places each alternative σi at a random position j
inside the current list (consisting of σ1 , . . . , σi−1 ) independently from previous insertions. RIM was shown to be the
generative procedure underlying not only Mallows, but a
large class of subset choice models that include the Generalized Mallows (Fligner and Verducci 1986) and multistage ranking (Fligner and Verducci 1988) models as a spe-

Abstract
Distributions over rankings are used to model user preferences in various settings including political elections and
electronic commerce. The Repeated Insertion Model (RIM)
gives rise to various known probability distributions over
rankings, in particular to the popular Mallows model. However, probabilistic inference on RIM is computationally challenging, and provably intractable in the general case. In this
paper we propose an algorithm for computing the marginal
probability of an arbitrary partially ordered set over RIM. We
analyze the complexity of the algorithm in terms of properties of the model and the partial order, captured by a novel
measure termed the “cover width”. We also conduct an experimental study of the algorithm over serial and parallelized implementations. Building upon the relationship between inference with rank distributions and counting linear extensions,
we investigate the inference problem when restricted to partial orders that lend themselves to efﬁcient counting of their
linear extensions.

Introduction
With the availability and wealth of preference data, it has
become increasingly important to develop statistical models
and techniques that enable the use of this information to reason about unseen preferences and make predictions. Examples include management and analysis of elections (Gormley and Murphy 2008; McElroy and Marsh 2009), and recommendation systems in electronic commerce (Das Sarma
et al. 2010). Once a statistical model has been built, these
applications give rise to the problem of reasoning: how to
efﬁciently use the statistical model to draw probabilistic inferences from observations.
Ranking models from the statistics literature, such as
the Mallows model (Mallows 1957), the Plackett-Luce
model (Plackett 1975; Luce 1959) and others (Marden
1995), play a major role in machine learning applications
for analyzing preference data. Among these, the Mallows
model is perhaps the most popular (Awasthi et al. 2014;
Busse, Orbanz, and Buhmann 2007; Doignon, Pekeč, and
Regenwetter 2004; Lu and Boutilier 2014). Generally, data
about a user’s preferences will take the form of arbitrary
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1897

