The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Asymmetric Deep Supervised Hashing
Qing-Yuan Jiang, Wu-Jun Li
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China
jiangqy@lamda.nju.edu.cn,liwujun@nju.edu.cn

time and dramatically reduce the storage cost for the data
points (Gong and Lazebnik 2011). Hence, hashing has attracted more and more attention for large-scale ANN search.
As the pioneering work, locality sensitive hashing (LSH)
(Kulis and Grauman 2009; Datar et al. 2004) tries to use
random projections as hash functions. LSH-like methods
are always called data-independent methods, because the
random projections are typically independent of training
data. On the contrary, data-dependent methods (Kong and Li
2012), which are also called learning to hash (L2H) methods, aim to learn the hash functions from training data. Datadependent methods usually achieve more promising performance than data-independent methods with shorter binary
codes. Hence, data-dependent methods have become more
popular than data-independent methods in recent years.
Based on whether supervised information is used or not,
data-dependent methods can be further divided into two categories (Kang, Li, and Zhou 2016): unsupervised hashing
and supervised hashing. Representative unsupervised hashing methods include spectral hashing (SH) (Weiss, Torralba, and Fergus 2008), iterative quantization (ITQ) (Gong
and Lazebnik 2011), isotropic hashing (IsoH) (Kong and Li
2012), discrete graph hashing (DGH) (Liu et al. 2014), scalable graph hashing (SGH) (Jiang and Li 2015) and ordinal
embedding hashing (OEH) (Liu et al. 2016b). Unsupervised
hashing learns hash functions that map input data points into
binary codes only using unlabeled data. On the contrary, supervised hashing tries to learn the hash function by utilizing
supervised information. In recent years, supervised hashing
has attracted more and more attention because it can achieve
better accuracy than unsupervised hashing.
Most traditional supervised hashing methods are nondeep methods which cannot perform feature learning from
scratch. Representative non-deep supervised hashing methods include supervised hashing with kernels (KSH) (Liu et
al. 2012), asymmetric hashing with two variants Lin:Lin
and Lin:V (Neyshabur et al. 2013), latent factor hashing (LFH) (Zhang et al. 2014), fast supervised hashing (FastH) (Lin et al. 2014a), supervised discrete hashing (SDH) (Shen et al. 2015b), column-sampling based discrete supervised hashing (COSDISH) (Kang, Li, and Zhou
2016) and asymmetric discrete graph hashing ADGH (Shi et
al. 2017). Recently, deep supervised hashing, which adopts
deep learning (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) to

Abstract
Hashing has been widely used for large-scale approximate
nearest neighbor search because of its storage and search efﬁciency. Recent work has found that deep supervised hashing
can signiﬁcantly outperform non-deep supervised hashing in
many applications. However, most existing deep supervised
hashing methods adopt a symmetric strategy to learn one deep
hash function for both query points and database (retrieval)
points. The training of these symmetric deep supervised hashing methods is typically time-consuming, which makes them
hard to effectively utilize the supervised information for cases
with large-scale database. In this paper, we propose a novel
deep supervised hashing method, called asymmetric deep
supervised hashing (ADSH), for large-scale nearest neighbor
search. ADSH treats the query points and database points in
an asymmetric way. More speciﬁcally, ADSH learns a deep
hash function only for query points, while the hash codes for
database points are directly learned. The training of ADSH is
much more efﬁcient than that of traditional symmetric deep
supervised hashing methods. Experiments show that ADSH
can achieve state-of-the-art performance in real applications.

Introduction
With the explosive growing of data in real applications,
nearest neighbor (NN) search (Gionis, Indyk, and Motwani
1999; Andoni and Indyk 2006; Andoni and Razenshteyn
2015) has attracted much attention from machine learning
community, with a lot of applications in information retrieval, computer vision and so on. However, in big data
applications, the searching time for exact nearest neighbor
is typically expensive or impossible for the given queries.
Hence, approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search (Andoni and Razenshteyn 2015) has become more and more
popular in recent years. As a widely used technique for
ANN search, hashing (Weiss, Torralba, and Fergus 2008;
Zhang et al. 2010; Neyshabur et al. 2013; Liu et al. 2014;
Lin et al. 2014a; Shen et al. 2015b; 2015a; Song et al. 2015;
Xie, Shen, and Zhu 2016; Liu et al. 2016b; 2016a; Shi et
al. 2017; Shen et al. 2017; Dasgupta, Stevens, and Navlakha
2017) aims to encode the data points into compact binary
hash codes. Thanks to the binary hash code representation,
hashing methods can provide constant or sub-linear search
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3342

