The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Dataset Evolver: An Interactive
Feature Engineering Notebook
Fatemeh Nargesian, Udayan Khurana,2 Tejaswini Pedapati,2
Horst Samulowitz,2 Deepak Turaga,2
1

2

University of Toronto, fnargesian@cs.toronto.edu,
IBM Research, {ukhurana, tejaswinip, samulowitz, turaga}@us.ibm.com

conﬁgurations of classiﬁcation and feature selection algorithms (Komer, Bergstra, and Eliasmith 2014). All tools
mentioned above consider feature preprocessing and feature
selection (e.g. scaling and Principal Component Analysis) as
parameters during hyperparameter optimization; however,
they do not explicitly provide any solutions for efﬁcient and
effective interpretable feature engineering.
Building a mixed-initiative data science environment requires feature engineering techniques that allow exploring and pruning of the space of new features interactively
without compromising the quality of constructed features.
Within DATASET E VOLVER, we include two search and
pruning strategies based on meta-learning (Learning Feature
Engineering) and reinforcement learning (Cognito). These
provide different levels of control and interaction with users,
based on their preferences and expertise.
Learning Feature Engineering (LFE) performs feature
space exploration using a meta-learning predictor (Nargesian et al. 2017). It predicts effective transformations for
features without relying on model evaluation or explicit feature expansion and selection. To achieve that, for each transformation function LFE leverages a Multi-Layer Perceptron
classiﬁer, that given class labels predicts whether the transformation and feature(s) that it should be applied to derive
an effective feature. LFE suggests the promising transformations, by combining the predictions across these classiﬁers.
To generalize across datasets, LFE captures the correlations
between feature values and class labels in a data structure
called Quantile Sketch Array, which is a stack of ﬁxed-size
distribution-based summary of feature values per class label. The empirical evaluation of LFE on a large number of
datasets has shown its effectiveness in constructing new features. Moreover, the implementation of LFE integrated with
DATASET E VOLVER has the average response time of one
millisecond for recommending transformations per feature.
Cognito provides a search-based automation to feature engineering (Khurana et al. 2016; Khurana, Samulowitz, and
Turaga 2018). It is based on the hierarchical exploration of a
transformation tree which is a directed acyclic graph, where
nodes are versions of a given dataset and edges are transformations. To steer exploration, Cognito uses model validation score as feedback. Cognito combines greedy heuristic
exploration strategies, handcrafted based on the understanding of the human approach to the process, with strategies

Abstract
We present DATASET E VOLVER, an interactive Jupyter
notebook-based tool to support data scientists perform feature engineering for classiﬁcation tasks. It provides users
with suggestions on new features to construct, based on automated feature engineering algorithms. Users can navigate
the given choices in different ways, validate the impact, and
selectively accept the suggestions. DATASET E VOLVER is
a pluggable feature engineering framework where several
exploration strategies could be added. It currently includes
meta-learning based exploration and reinforcement learning
based exploration. The suggested features are constructed using well-deﬁned mathematical functions and are easily interpretable. Our system provides a mixed-initiative system of a
user being assisted by an automated agent to efﬁciently and
effectively solve the complex problem of feature engineering.
It reduces the effort of a data scientist from hours to minutes.

Feature Engineering
Feature engineering is the task of constructing new features for a dataset by applying transformation functions (e.g.
arithmetic and aggregate operators) on existing features with
the goal of improving prediction performance. It is often a
lengthy process of trial and error, relying heavily on the domain expertise of the data scientist.
Feature engineering is usually coupled with model selection and hyperparameter optimization. In order to assist
users to choose learning algorithms and set hyperparameters
(including feature selection and preprocessing algorithms)
to optimize performance, tools such as Auto-sklearn (Feurer
et al. 2015), Hyperopt-sklearn (Komer, Bergstra, and Eliasmith 2014), and Auto-weka (Thornton et al. 2013) have
been developed on sklearn library and Weka. Auto-weka
leverages Bayesian optimization to ﬁt a probabilistic model
that captures the relationship between hyperparameters and
the measured performance (Feurer et al. 2015). Auto-sklearn
takes into account past performance of algorithms and parameters on similar datasets and constructs ensembles from
the models evaluated during the past optimizations. On the
other hand, Hyperopt-sklearn adopts an evaluation-based
online search strategy to explore the space of possible
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8212

