The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Discriminative Semi-Coupled Projective Dictionary Learning
for Low-Resolution Person Re-Identiﬁcation
†

Kai Li,† Zhengming Ding,† Sheng Li, Yun Fu†‡
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, USA

Adobe Research, USA
‡
College of Computer & Information Science, Northeastern University, Boston, USA
kaili@ece.neu.edu, allanding@ece.neu.edu, sheli@adobe.com, yunfu@ece.neu.edu
There are several attempts targeting for this degenerated
scenario. Li et al. proposed to jointly learn a shared subspace
across different scales and a discriminative distance metric
which minimizes a novel heterogeneous class mean discrepancy criterion (Li et al. 2015). Wang et al. found that the
scale-distance functions between images of the same persons and those of different persons can be distinguished.
Based on this observation, they proposed to learn a discriminating surface to separate the two types of scale-distance
functions, and used it for re-identifying persons (Wang et
al. 2016b). Wang et al. built two coupled marginalized denoising auto-encoders to extract effective feature from low
and high resolution pedestrian images (Wang, Ding, and Fu
2016). Jing et al. proposed a semi-coupled low-rank discriminant dictionary learning (SLD2 L) method by dividing images into patches and learning semi-coupled dictionaries for
corresponding image patch clusters (Jing et al. 2015). Lowrank constraint was enforced on the dictionaries for all clusters to better characterize intrinsic feature spaces of high and
low resolution images. Despite of these sophisticated techniques, the performances of these methods are far from satisfactory, and some of them are too time-consuming.
In this paper, we design a Discriminative Semi-coupled
Projective Dictionary Learning (DSPDL) method to cope
the resolution difference problem in person re-ID. Figure 1
shows the framework of the proposed method. We adopt the
efﬁcient projective dictionary technique, and design a semicoupled cross-view projective dictionary learning framework. To apply it for person re-ID, we design a novel parameterless graph regularizer which incorporates both intraperson similarity and inter-person dissimilarity in a graph
embedding fashion. The main contributions of this paper are
summarized as follows:

Abstract
Person re-identiﬁcation (re-ID) is a fundamental task in automated video surveillance. In real-world visual surveillance
systems, a person is often captured in quite low resolutions. So we often need to perform low-resolution person
re-ID, where images captured by different cameras have
great resolution divergences. Existing methods cope problem
via some complicated and time-consuming strategies, making them less favorable in practice, and their performances
are far from satisfactory. In this paper, we design a novel
Discriminative Semi-coupled Projective Dictionary Learning
(DSPDL) model to effectively and efﬁciently solve this problem. Speciﬁcally, we propose to jointly learn a pair of dictionaries and a mapping to bridge the gap across low(er)
and high(er) resolution person images. Besides, we develop
a novel graph regularizer to incorporate positive and negative image pair information in a parameterless fashion. Meanwhile, we adopt the efﬁcient and powerful projective dictionary learning technique to boost the our efﬁciency. Experiments on three public datasets show the superiority of the
proposed method to the state-of-the-art ones.

Introduction
Matching cross-view pedestrians, known as person reidentiﬁcation (re-ID), is a fundamental task in automated
video surveillance. It is a challenging task due to the great
variations of human poses, light conditions, and image resolutions, etc. In real-world visual surveillance systems, a
person is often captured in low resolutions by cameras, so
that it is often required to perform low-resolution person reID, where images to be matched have great resolution divergences. For example, it is common that cameras in a visual surveillance system are deployed in different places of a
scene, and hence a person could be captured in very different
resolutions by different cameras (Ding, Shao, and Fu 2014),
if the cameras are located separately with a long distance. In
this case, we need to exploit images of great resolution disparities to re-identify persons of interest. Many person re-ID
algorithms have been proposed in recent years and proved
to be effective to perform person re-ID on cross-view images with similar resolutions. However, their performances
are not guaranteed when the images are of great resolution
divergences.

• We propose a semi-coupled projective dictionary learning framework for matching pedestrian images of great
resolution divergences. Our framework adopts the effective projective dictionary learning technique, and jointly
learns a mapping function along with the dictionaries.
Through the introduction of the mapping function, the
stringent correspondence is relaxed between the new codings of cross-view images of the same identity, thereby
leaving the dictionaries more ﬂexibility to maximize the
feature representation ability.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2331

