The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Graph Correspondence Transfer for Person Re-Identiﬁcation
Qin Zhou,1,3 Heng Fan,3 Shibao Zheng,1 Hang Su,4 Xinzhe Li,1 Shuang Wu,5 Haibin Ling2,3,∗
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Digital Media Processing and Transmission,
Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
2
Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
3
Department of Computer & Information Sciences, Temple University, Philadelphia 19122, USA
4
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
5
YouTu Lad, Tencent, Shanghai 200233, China
Abstract
In this paper, we propose a graph correspondence transfer
(GCT) approach for person re-identiﬁcation. Unlike existing
methods, the GCT model formulates person re-identiﬁcation
as an off-line graph matching and on-line correspondence
transferring problem. In speciﬁc, during training, the GCT
model aims to learn off-line a set of correspondence templates from positive training pairs with various pose-pair conﬁgurations via patch-wise graph matching. During testing,
for each pair of test samples, we select a few training pairs
with the most similar pose-pair conﬁgurations as references,
and transfer the correspondences of these references to test
pair for feature distance calculation. The matching score is
derived by aggregating distances from different references.
For each probe image, the gallery image with the highest
matching score is the re-identifying result. Compared to existing algorithms, our GCT can handle spatial misalignment
caused by large variations in view angles and human poses
owing to the beneﬁts of patch-wise graph matching. Extensive experiments on ﬁve benchmarks including VIPeR, Road,
PRID450S, 3DPES and CUHK01 evidence the superior performance of GCT model over other state-of-the-art methods.

1

(a) Spatial misalignment among local patches

(b) Patch-wise correspondences learned by graph matching
Mismatching between local patches
Matching between local patches

Figure 1: Illustration of misalignment problem in Re-ID. Image (a) shows misalignment among local patches caused by
viewpoint changes. The proposed GCT model can capture
the correct semantic matching among patches using patchwise graph matching, as shown in image (b).

Introduction

shown in Fig. 1. Most existing methods (Yang et al. 2014;
Xiong et al. 2014; Chen et al. 2015), nevertheless, focus on
addressing the problem of Re-ID by comparing the holistic differences between images, which ignores spatial misalignment problem. To alleviate this issue, there are some
attempts to apply part-based approaches to handle misalignment (Shen et al. 2015; Oreifej, Mehran, and Shah 2010;
Zhao, Ouyang, and Wang 2013; Yang et al. 2017). These
methods divide objects into local patches and perform an
online patch-level matching for Re-ID. Though these approaches can handle spatial misalignment to some extent,
being in lack of spatial and visual context information
among local patches, they still fail in presence of visually
similar body appearances or occlusions.
In this paper, we propose to learn patch-level matching
templates for positive training pairs via graph matching, and
transfer the learned patch-level correspondences to test pairs
with similar pose-pair conﬁgurations. In the formulation of
graph matching, both spatial and visual context information are utilized to solve misalignment problem. The correspondence transfer in testing pahse is based on the obser-

Person re-identiﬁcation (Re-ID), which aims to associate
a probe image to each individual in a gallery set (usually
across different non-overlapping camera views), plays a crucial role in various applications including video surveillance, human retrieval, etc. Despite great successes in recent years, accurate Re-ID remains challenging due to many
factors such as large appearance changes in different camera views and heavy body occlusions. To deal with these issues, numerous Re-ID approaches are proposed (Farenzena
et al. 2010; Karanam, Li, and Radke 2015; Zhao, Ouyang,
and Wang 2013; Chen et al. 2016; Köstinger et al. 2012;
Li et al. 2013; Liao et al. 2015; Mignon and Jurie 2012;
Paisitkriangkrai, Shen, and van den Hengel 2015; Pedagadi
et al. 2013; Martinel et al. 2016).
For Re-ID task, one major challenge is to deal with the inevitable spatial misalignments between image pairs caused
by large variations in camera views and human poses, as
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7599

