The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Towards Better Variational
Encoder-Decoders in Seq2Seq Tasks
1

2

Xiaoyu Shen,1 Hui Su2

Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Science, China

KL-Vanishing Problem Straightforwardly optimizing
with Eq. 1 suffers from the KL-vanishing problem because
the RNN decoder pθ (x|c, z) is a universal function approximator and tends to represent the density distribution without referring to the latent variable. At the beginning of the
training process, when the approximate posterior qφ (z|x, c)
carries little useful information, it is natural for the model to
blindly set qφ (z|x, c) closer to the Gaussian prior pθ (z|c) so
that the extra cost from the KL divergence can be avoided.
We show there are two ways of alleviating this problem:
weakening the power of decoders or improving the expressiveness of approximated posterior. Details can be found in
the supplementary material.

Abstract
Variational encoder-decoders have shown promising results in
seq2seq tasks. However, the training process is known difﬁcult
to be controlled because latent variables tend to be ignored
while decoding. In this paper, we thoroughly analyze the reason behind this training difﬁculty, compare different ways of
alleviating it and propose a new framework that helps signiﬁcantly improve the overall performance.

Introduction
Conditional variational autoencoder (CVAE) with RNN
encoder-decoders has been applied in several seq2seq tasks.
However, it usually runs into the KL-vanishing problem that
the RNN part ends up explaining everything without making use of the latent representation. In this paper, we take
dialogue generation task as example, analyze why the KLvanishing problem arises and compare different current strategies to tackle this problem. Instead of directly modeling the
discrete dialogue distribution with latent variables, we propose a new framework that ﬁrst extracts continuous vectors
from the dialogue data which follow a simpler distribution,
then establishes the link between them. Combined with a
scheduled sampling trick, it can signiﬁcantly outperform previous approaches. We hope the analysis and proposed framework can facilitate the research of CVAE seq2seq models.

Current Approaches Keeping the ELBO objective, we
can weaken the decoder or improve the approximated posterior. For the former, word drop-out (Bowman et al. 2016) or
Bag-of-word (BOW) loss (Zhao, Zhao, and Eskenazi 2017)
are two popular ways. For the latter, (Serban et al. 2017)
applies a piecewise distribution to replace the Gaussian prior
distribution. (Kingma et al. 2016) used a normalizing ﬂow to
approximate the posterior distributions. All have their own
advantages and disadvantages.
Some other ways modify the ELBO objective like KLannealing, free bits (Kingma et al. 2016) or adversarial encoding (Makhzani et al. 2016). Detailed analysis is in the
supplementary material.

Analysis
CVAE in dialogue generation CVAE generates dialogues
as follows: z, which stands for a high-level latent representation, is sampled from the prior distribution pθ (z|c), then
response x is generated from pθ (x|z, c). Though calculating
the exact log-likelihood is intractable, it can be efﬁciently
trained by optimizing the evidence lower bound (ELBO):

− log pθ (x|c) = − log pθ (z|c)pθ (x|c, z)dz

Model
Our method does not aim at directly modeling the discrete dialogue data, which is difﬁcult to match the distribution family
of continuous latent variables. Instead, we ﬁrst extract continuous variables from dialogue data that follow a simpler distribution and build a conditional variational encoder-decoder
based on them. These continuous variables can reﬂect certain attributes of the dialogue data and can help recover the
original dialogues. Speciﬁcally, we divide the training step
into two phases: a denoising autoencoder (DAE) phase which
aims at extracting continuous representations from dialogue
data and a CVAE phase which builds a normal CVAE based
on the extracted continuous representations.
In the CVAE phase, A sample h is obtained from the DAE
by transforming dialogue texts into a continuous embedding
and is used as a target for the maximum likelihood training

z

≤ −Eqφ (z|c,x) [log pθ (x|c, z)] + KL(qφ (z|c, x)||pθ (z|c))
(1)
qφ (z|c, x) is the approximated posterior distribution and c
is the dialogue context. qφ (z|x, c) and pθ (z|c) are usually set
as Gaussian distributions with diagonal covariance matrix.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8155

