The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Comparing Reward Shaping, Visual Hints, and Curriculum Learning
1

2

Rey Pocius,1 David Isele,2 Mark Roberts,3 David W. Aha3

Oregon State University, School of EECS, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA | pociusr@oregonstate.edu
University of Pennsylvania, School of EAS, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 19104, USA | isele@seas.upenn.edu
3
Naval Research Laboratory, Code 5514; Washington, DC, 20375, USA | {ﬁrst.last}@nrl.navy.mil

When considering how to reduce the learning effort required for Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents on complex
tasks, designers can apply several common approaches. Reward shaping boosts the immediate reward provided by the
environment, effectively encouraging (or discouraging) speciﬁc actions. Curriculum learning (Bengio et al. 2009) aims
to help an agent learn a complex task by learning a sequence
of simpler tasks. Hints may also be provided (e.g., a yellow
brick road), which fall outside the notion of shaping or a
curricula. Despite the prevalence of these approaches, few
studies examine how they compare to (or complement) each
other or when an approach is better.
As a ﬁrst step in this direction, we analyze shaping, hints,
and curricula for a Deep RL agent in Malmo (Johnson et
al. 2016), a research platform for Minecraft. Figure 1 (left)
shows the layouts used in our study, which are distinguished
by the number of rooms, the placement of the target, and
whether color is included. For all rooms, the starting position of the agent is selected from ﬁve blocks at the bottom
of the room (highlighted gray). In one-room situations and
the right-most two-room situation, the target is always chosen from the ﬁve blocks at the top of the room (highlighted
gray). In the left-most two-room situation, the target is set
just beyond the doorway. Visual hints are provided in some
situations by coloring some of the ﬂoor blocks blue.
We seek to answer whether shaping, hints, or the curricula have the most impact on performance, which we measure as the time to reach the target, the distance from the target, the cumulative reward, or the number of actions taken.
For this task, performance is most impacted by the curriculum used and hints while shaping had less impact, suggesting that designing an effective curriculum and providing appropriate hints deserve more attention for similar navigation
tasks with Deep RL agents. Our methodology provides an
evaluation protocol, serving as a foundation for further studies that tease apart when (and why) methods excel or fail.

Figure 1: Example Minecraft room layouts (left) and a
screenshot (right) of the black target and blue ﬂoor coloring.
ing. This type of learning can be done in both discrete and
continuous action spaces. Signiﬁcant advancements in RL
have moved the ﬁeld past discrete action spaces in toy problems toward continuous actions and more challenging domains. As training of agents in these domains have improved
through the use of architectures such as Deep Q-Networks
(DQNs), researchers have been conducting their research in
more realistic simulators (e.g., Malmo, Gazebo).
Several challenges come with these kinds of problems.
Many of the spaces are very large, making it difﬁcult for
agents to fully explore the state-action space during training.
Additionally, larger state spaces increase the reward sparsity.
Methods such as curriculum learning and shaping have been
used to combat these challenges.
Curriculum Learning (Bengio et al. 2009) allows an
agent to learn a complex task (e.g., navigating two rooms to
a target) by learning a sequence of easier tasks (e.g., navigate
in a single room, navigate to a doorway, navigate through
two rooms). It leverages the beneﬁts of transfer learning to
increase the learning speed and robustness of a target task
with the use of many source tasks. Research conducted on
curriculum learning has spanned a number of different domains and problems leading to a plethora of curricula design methodologies. Some of these problems require curriculum learning to be solved efﬁciently. Recently, Narvekar
et al. (2016) examined strategies for decomposing a target
task into easier source tasks and found that domain-speciﬁc
curricula design and reward structure choices are needed to
achieve optimal behavior. Matiisen et al. (2017) proposed a

Reinforcement Learning (RL)
RL agents learn a mapping of world states to actions (i.e., a
policy) through trial and error in dynamic or static environments. Reward signals from the environment guide learnc 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8135

