The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Cascade and Parallel Convolutional Recurrent Neural Networks
on EEG-Based Intention Recognition for Brain Computer Interface
Dalin Zhang,1 * Lina Yao,1 Xiang Zhang,1 Sen Wang,2 Weitong Chen,3 Robert Boots4, 5
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, The University of New South Wales, Australia
2
School of Information and Communication Technology, Grifﬁth University, Australia
3
School of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, The University of Queensland, Australia
4
Thoracic Medicine, Royal Brisbane and Women’s Hospital, Australia
5
Burns Trauma and Critical Care Research Centre, The University of Queensland, Australia
* dalin.zhang@student.unsw.edu.au
al. 2014). When a person imagines moving different parts
of his body or different controlling commands for an instrument, the EEG signals from his scalp ﬂuctuates in different
modes. In this way, human intentions can be recognized by
analyzing the EEG signals. It has been attracting increasing
attentions, and various research has attempted to engage EEG
based BCI in real-world applications such as mind controlled
wheelchairs (Wang et al. 2014), prosthetic (Bright et al. 2016)
and exoskeletons (Qiu et al. 2017).

Abstract
Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) is a system empowering humans to communicate with or control the outside world with
exclusively brain intentions. Electroencephalography (EEG)
based BCIs are promising solutions due to their convenient
and portable instruments. Despite the extensive research of
EEG in recent years, it is still challenging to interpret EEG
signals effectively due to the massive noises in EEG signals
(e.g., low signal-noise ratio and incomplete EEG signals), and
difﬁculties in capturing the inconspicuous relationships between EEG signals and certain brain activities. Most existing
works either only consider EEG as chain-like sequences neglecting complex dependencies between adjacent signals or
requiring preprocessing such as transforming EEG waves into
images. In this paper, we introduce both cascade and parallel
convolutional recurrent neural network models for precisely
identifying human intended movements and instructions by
effectively learning the compositional spatio-temporal representations of raw EEG streams. Extensive experiments on a
large scale movement intention EEG dataset (108 subjects,
3,145,160 EEG records) have demonstrated that both models
achieve high accuracy near 98.3% and outperform a set of
baseline methods and most recent deep learning based EEG
recognition models, yielding a signiﬁcant accuracy increase of
18% in the cross-subject validation scenario. The developed
models are further evaluated with a real-world BCI and achieve
a recognition accuracy of 93% over ﬁve instruction intentions.
This suggests the proposed models are able to generalize over
different kinds of intentions and BCI systems.

However, real-world EEG based BCI systems are still
immature due to diverse open challenges. First, EEG signals usually have a mass of noises. Apart from the common
noises of sensory systems, such as power line interference
or inappropriate electrode connections, EEG signals have
some unique inevitable noises. During the recording process,
physiological activities like eye blinks, muscle activity and
heart beat are all harm to collecting high signal-noise ratio
EEG signals. It is hard to make sure that the participants
concentrate on the performing tasks during the whole experiment period. Also, a typical EEG based BCI system usually
has 8 to 128 signal channels resulting in limited signal resolution compared to image or video related tasks. Second,
the correlations between the EEG signals and their corresponding brain intentions in deep structures are ambiguous.
Unlike the body actions which can be easily explained by
monitoring accelerometers or gyroscopes, it is not straightforward to infer the brain intentions by directly observing
EEG signals. Third, widely utilized brain intention recognition methods heavily rely on handcrafted features, requiring
extensive preprocessing before making a prediction (Sun
and Zhou 2014). Some methods include signal de-noising
(Heydari and Shahbakhti 2015) or feature selection steps
(Yin et al. 2017) followed by ﬁnal recognition model. Such a
two-stage model is inconvenient to train and implement, and
the whole process is time-consuming and highly dependent
on professional knowledge in this domain. Finally, current
work mainly targets either intra-subject (test data and train
data are from the same subject) or binary EEG signal classiﬁcation scenarios. Little research has been carried out on
both cross-subject and multi-class scenarios. However, the
cross-subject and multi-class scenarios are highly desired
for implementing real-world applications. Furthermore, even

Introduction
Brain-computer interface (BCI) enables users to directly communicate with the outside world or to control instruments
using brain intentions alone, thus providing an alternatively
practical way to help people who are suffering from severe
motor disabilities. Recent research has also found its applications for healthy users, such as BCI games in entertainment industries (Ahn et al. 2014). Scalp-recording electroencephalography (EEG) is considered to be one of the most
practical pathways to realize BCI systems due to its portable
acquisition system and convenient implementation (Wang et
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1703

