The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Never Retreat, Never Retract:
Argumentation Analysis for Political Speeches
Stefano Menini,1,3 Elena Cabrio,2 Sara Tonelli,1 Serena Villata2
1

2

Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy
Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, Inria, I3S, France
3
University of Trento, Italy
{menini, satonelli}@fbk.eu
{elena.cabrio, serena.villata}@unice.fr
challenges, the application of computational methods to assist scholars in their qualitative analysis is advisable.
In this work, we tackle the following research question: To
what extent can we apply argument mining models to support and ease the analysis and modeling of past political
speeches? This research question breaks down into the following subquestions:

Abstract
In this work, we apply argumentation mining techniques, in
particular relation prediction, to study political speeches in
monological form, where there is no direct interaction between opponents. We argue that this kind of technique can
effectively support researchers in history, social and political sciences, which must deal with an increasing amount of
data in digital form and need ways to automatically extract
and analyse argumentation patterns. We test and discuss our
approach based on the analysis of documents issued by R.
Nixon and J. F. Kennedy during 1960 presidential campaign.
We rely on a supervised classiﬁer to predict argument relations (i.e., support and attack), obtaining an accuracy of 0.72
on a dataset of 1,462 argument pairs. The application of argument mining to such data allows not only to highlight the
main points of agreement and disagreement between the candidates’ arguments over the campaign issues such as Cuba,
disarmament and health-care, but also an in-depth argumentative analysis of the respective viewpoints on these topics.

• Given a transcription of speeches from different politicians on a certain topic, how can we automatically predict
the relation holding between two arguments, even if they
belong to different speeches?
• How can the output of the above-mentioned automated
task be used to support history and political science scholars in the curation, analysis and editing of such corpora?
This issue is investigated by creating and analysing a new
annotated corpus for this task, based on the transcription of
discourses and ofﬁcial declarations issued by Richard Nixon
and John F. Kennedy during the 1960 US Presidential campaign. Moreover, we develop a relation classiﬁcation system
with speciﬁc features able to predict support and attack relations between arguments (Lippi and Torroni 2016b), distinguishing them from unrelated ones. This argumentation
mining pipeline ends with the visualization of the resulting
graph of the debated topic using the OVA+ tool.1
The main contributions of this article are (1) an annotated corpus consisting of 1,462 pairs of arguments in natural language (around 550,000 tokens) covering 5 topics, (2)
a feature-rich Support Vector Machines (SVM) model for
relation prediction, and (3) an end-to-end workﬂow to analyse arguments that, starting from one or more monological
corpora in raw text, outputs the argumentation graph of userdeﬁned topics.
The paper is organized as follows: ﬁrst, we provide some
basics about the argument mining pipeline and discuss the
related work. Then, we describe the Presidential election
campaign corpus, and we detail our experimental setting together with the obtained results. Finally, we present the visualization interface, and we analyse the argumentation patterns emerging from it. Conclusions end the paper.

Introduction
In recent years, the analysis of argumentation using Natural Language Processing methods, so-called argument mining (Green et al. 2014), has gained a lot of attention
in the Artiﬁcial Intelligence research community and has
been applied to a number of domains, from student essays (Stab and Gurevych 2014) to scientiﬁc articles (Teufel,
Siddharthan, and Batchelor 2009) and online user-generated
content (Wachsmuth et al. 2014; Habernal and Gurevych
2015). However, while some of these approaches have been
proposed to detect claims in political debates, e.g. (Lippi and
Torroni 2016a; Naderi and Hirst 2015), little attention has
been devoted to the prediction of relations between arguments, which could help historians, social and political scientists in the analysis of argumentative dynamics (e.g., supports, attacks) between parties and political opponents. For
example, this analysis could support the study of past political speeches and of the repercussions of such claims over
time. It could also be used to establish relations with the current way of debating in politics. In order to ﬁnd argumentation patterns in political speeches, typically covering a wide
range of issues from international politics to environmental
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

4889

http://ova.arg-tech.org/

