The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning to Detect Pointing Gestures from Wearable IMUs∗
Denis Broggini, Boris Gromov, Alessandro Giusti, Luca Maria Gambardella
Dalle Molle Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IDSIA), USI-SUPSI, Lugano, Switzerland

Abstract
We propose a learning-based system for detecting when a
user performs a pointing gesture, using data acquired from
IMU sensors, by means of a 1D convolutional neural network.
We quantitatively evaluate the resulting detection accuracy,
and discuss an application to a human-robot interaction task
where pointing gestures are used to guide a quadrotor landing.

Figure 1: Application to a human-drone interaction task, in
which the user can take control of a drone by pointing at it

Introduction
Hand gestures are an important device that humans use all
the time to communicate with each other, and represent an
appealing human-robot interaction modality (B. Gromov,
L.M. Gambardella, G.A. Di Caro 2016). In this work we
want to trigger speciﬁc behaviors of the robot(s) with which
the user is interacting detecting the moment in which the onset of a pointing gesture occurs, with as little delay as possible. We use as input a stream of acceleration vectors and
orientation quaternions values measured by two IMUs, located on the forearm and on the upper arm and transmitting
instantaneous values of their accelerometers and gyroscopes
at a rate of 50 Hz.
Instead of using manual rules and thresholds to detect this
event, we adopt a machine-learning based approach based
on a 1D Convolutional Neural Network (Chollet and others
2017) that operates on sequences of samples with a length
of 2.5 seconds; a sequence of n consecutive samples covers
n/50 seconds and is denoted in the following as a window.
A window is the input to our classiﬁer, that learns whether it
contains the onset of a gesture. The window is classiﬁed as
positive (1) in case it contains the onset of a pointing gesture,
negative (0) otherwise.
With multiple users, we gather a set training and testing
datasets using an ad-hoc approach that periodically prompts
the users to perform the pointing gesture, and can therefore
automatically assign ground truth to every window.

Dataset Acquisition
Our dataset is a collection of tuples (window, label). In order to acquire a dataset, we recorded several sessions which
take place as follows: a user wearing the IMUs performs
different movements and actions (such as moving objects,
walking around, climbing a ladder). When the system emits
a sound (at time tstart
i ), the actor immediately performs the
pointing gesture to an arbitrary spot. A second sound tstop
i
indicates the user to stop pointing. The user then continues
its previous task.
A recording session contains two time series: the stream
of data from the sensors and the set of signals (at known
times) that indicate the start and end of each pointing gesture. From a recorded session we can extract many windows:
the nth window contains samples from n to n + 124.
Now we need to match the collected windows with their
label. We consider a reaction time Δr needed by the actor
to hear the sound and start performing the pointing, and a
time Δx that is the estimated time needed by the actor to
completely straighten his arm.
We can use this knowledge to associate each window to
the proper label and add the resulting tuple (window, label)
into the dataset.
+ Δr, ends before tstop
+
A window that starts before tstart
i
i
start
Δr and ends after ti Δx for at least one of the ti sound
pairs is considered a positive (1) window.
− Δr or
On the other hand, a window that starts after tstop
i
+ Δr for all ti sound pairs is considered a
ends before tstart
i
negative (0) window.
The windows that do not match either of these sets of cri-

∗

This project has been partially supported by the Swiss National Center of Competence Research (NCCR) Robotics through
the Swiss National Science Foundation
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8051

