The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Co-Domain Embedding Using Deep Quadruplet
Networks for Unseen Trafﬁc Sign Recognition
Junsik Kim, Seokju Lee, Tae-Hyun Oh,† In So Kweon
KAIST Robotics and Computer Vision Lab., Daejeon, Korea
†
MIT CSAIL, Cambridge, US
{mibastro,seokju91}@gmail.com, taehyun@csail.mit.edu† , iskweon@kaist.ac.kr

single class is limited; hence, we focus on scenarios of challenging one-shot classiﬁcation (Koch, Zemel, and Salakhutdinov 2015; Lake, Salakhutdinov, and Tenenbaum 2015;
Miller, Matsakis, and Viola 2000) with domain adaptation,
where a machine learning model must generalize to new
classes not seen in the training phase given only a few examples of each of these classes but from different domains.
In practice, this type of model is especially useful for
ADAS in that: 1) one can avoid high cost re-training from
scratch, 2) one can avoid annotating large-scale supervised
data, and 3) it is readily possible to adapt the model to other
environments.
Given the success of deep learning, a naive approach for
the few-shot problem would be to re-train a deep learning
model on a new scarce dataset. However, in this limited
data regime, this type of naive method will not work well,
likely due to severe over-ﬁtting (Lake, Salakhutdinov, and
Tenenbaum 2015). While people have an inherent ability to
generalize from only a single example with a high degree of
accuracy, the problem is quite difﬁcult for machine learning
models (Lake, Salakhutdinov, and Tenenbaum 2015).
Thus, our approach is based on the following hypotheses: 1) the existence of a co-embedding space for synthetic
and real data, and 2) the existence of an embedding space
where real data is condensed around a synthetic anchor for
each class. We illustrate the idea in Fig. 1. Taking these into
account, we learn two non-linear mappings using a neural
network. The ﬁrst involves mapping for a real sample into
an embedding space, and the second involves mapping of a
synthetic anchor onto the same metric space. We leverage the
quadruplet relationship to learn non-linear mappings, which
can provide rich information to learn generalized and discriminative embeddings. Classiﬁcation is then performed for
an embedded query point by simply ﬁnding the nearest class
anchor. Despite its simplicity, our method outperforms with
a margin in the unseen data regime.

Abstract
Recent advances in visual recognition show overarching success by virtue of large amounts of supervised data. However,
the acquisition of a large supervised dataset is often challenging. This is also true for intelligent transportation applications,
i.e., trafﬁc sign recognition. For example, a model trained
with data of one country may not be easily generalized to another country without much data. We propose a novel feature
embedding scheme for unseen class classiﬁcation when the
representative class template is given. Trafﬁc signs, unlike
other objects, have ofﬁcial images. We perform co-domain embedding using a quadruple relationship from real and synthetic
domains. Our quadruplet network fully utilizes the explicit
pairwise similarity relationships among samples from different domains. We validate our method on three datasets with
two experiments involving one-shot classiﬁcation and feature
generalization. The results show that the proposed method
outperforms competing approaches on both seen and unseen
classes.

Introduction
Recent advances in the ﬁeld of computer vision have provided
highly cost-effective solutions for developing advanced driver
assistance systems (ADAS) for automobiles. Furthermore,
computer vision components are becoming indispensable
to improve safety and to achieve AI in the form of fully
automated, self-driving cars. This is mostly by virtue of the
success of deep learning, which is regarded to be due to the
presence of large-scale supervised data, proper computation
power and algorithmic advances (Goodfellow, Bengio, and
Courville 2016).
Among all ADAS related problems, in this paper, we tackle
unseen trafﬁc sign recognition. A distinctive difference related to this problem as regards traditional recognition problems is that synthetic trafﬁc-sign templates are exploited as
representative anchors, whereby classiﬁcation can be done
for an actual query image by ﬁnding the minimum distance
to the templates of each class (i.e., few-shot learning with
domain difference).
In reality, trafﬁc signs differ depending on the country,
but one may obtain synthetic templates from trafﬁc-related
public agencies. Nonetheless, the diversity of templates for a

Related work
Our problem can be summarized as a modiﬁed one-shot learning problem that involves heterogeneous domain datasets.
This type of problem has gained little attention. Furthermore,
to the best of our knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst to tackle
unseen trafﬁc sign recognition with heterogeneous domain
data; we therefore summarize the work most relevant to our

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6975

