The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Measuring Conditional Independence by Independent Residuals:
Theoretical Results and Application in Causal Discovery
†

Hao Zhang,† Shuigeng Zhou,†∗ Jihong Guan‡
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China.
‡
Department of Computer Science & Technology, Tongji University, China
†
{haoz15, sgzhou}@fudan.edu.cn; ‡ jhguan@tongji.edu.cn

Generally speaking, independence and CI play a central
role in causal discovery. The CI relationship X ⊥ Y |Z allows us to separate X−Y when constructing a probabilistic
model based on P (X, Y, Z), which results in a parsimonious
representation (Zhang et al. 2011). By using CI tests, the PC
algorithm (Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2000), for example, can return a set of Markov equivalence classes (Pearl
2009). CI testing is much more difﬁcult than marginal independence testing (Bergsma 2004). Most existing methods
are based on explicit estimation of conditional densities or
their variants, or discretize the conditional set Z to a set
of bins, and transform CI to independence in each bin. Due
to the curse of dimensionality, the conditional set becomes
very large, inevitably the required sample size increases dramatically. For example, in (Su and White 2008) the authors
used a characterization of CI, PX|Y Z =PX|Z , to check CI
by measuring the distance between estimates of conditional
density. However, accurate estimation of conditional density
or related quantity is not easy, which deteriorates the testing
result, especially when the conditional set is very large.
Concretely, if Z takes a ﬁnite number of values
{z1 , ..., zk }, then X ⊥ Y |Z if and only if X ⊥ Y |Z = zi
for each value zi . Given a sample of size n, even if the data
points are distributed evenly on the values of Z, we must
show the independence within each subset of the sample
with the same Z value by using only approximately n/k
points in each subset. When Z is real-valued and Pz is continuous, or Z contains several variables, the observed values of Z are almost surely unique. To extend the above procedure to the continuous cases, we must infer conditional
independence using nonidentical but neighboring values of
Z, where “neighboring” is quantiﬁed by some distance metric. Finding neighboring points becomes more difﬁcult as
the dimensionality of Z grows. To approximate CI to unconditional independence between X and Y in each subset,
we need a large number of subsets of Z. However, with too
many subsets, the subsets may have not enough data points
to evaluate independence.
To alleviate these problems, researchers resort to kernelbased methods. With the ability to represent high order moments, mapping of variables into reproducing kernel Hilbert
spaces (RKHSs) allows us to infer properties of distributions, such as independence and homogeneity (Gretton et
al. 2006). In (Fukumizu et al. 2007), the authors proposed

Abstract
We investigate the relationship between conditional independence (CI) x ⊥ y|Z and the independence of two residuals x − E(x|Z) ⊥ y − E(y|Z), where x and y are two
random variables, and Z is a set of random variables. We
show that if x, y and Z are generated by following linear structural equation model and all external inﬂuences follow Gaussian distributions, then x ⊥ y|Z if and only if
x − E(x|Z) ⊥ y − E(y|Z). That is, the test of x ⊥ y|Z
can be relaxed to a simpler unconditional independence test
of x − E(x|Z) ⊥ y − E(y|Z). Furthermore, if all these
external inﬂuences follow non-Gaussian distributions and the
model satisﬁes structural faithfulness condition, then we have
x ⊥ y|Z ⇔ x − E(x|Z) ⊥ y − E(y|Z).
We apply the results above to the causal discovery problem, where the causal directions are generally determined
by a set of V -structures and their consistent propagations,
so CI test-based methods can return a set of Markov equivalence classes. We show that in linear non-Gaussian context, x − E(x|Z) ⊥ y − E(y|Z) ⇒ x − E(x|Z) ⊥ z or
y − E(y|Z) ⊥ z (∀z ∈ Z) if Z is a minimal d-separator,
which implies z causes x (or y) if z directly connects to x (or
y). Therefore, we conclude that CIs have useful information
for distinguishing Markov equivalence classes.
In summary, compared with the existing discretization-based
and kernel-based CI testing methods, the proposed method
provides a simpler way to measure CI, which needs only one
unconditional independence test and two regression operations. When being applied to causal discovery, it can ﬁnd
more causal relationships, which is experimentally validated.

Introduction
Statistical independence and conditional independence (CI)
are important concepts in statistics, artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI) and other related ﬁelds. In causal discovery, causal
relationships are usually revealed by checking CIs among
variables. For example, for two sets of variables X and
Y that are conditional independent given Z (denoted by
X ⊥ Y |Z), it means that given Z, further knowing X (or Y )
does not provide any additional information about Y (or X).
Therefore, we know that X and Y have no directed causality
under faithfulness assumption (Pearl 2009).
∗

Correspondence author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2029

