The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Spectral Word Embedding with Negative Sampling
Behrouz Haji Soleimani, Stan Matwin
Faculty of Computer Science, Dalhousie University
Institute for Big Data Analytics
6050 University Avenue, Halifax, NS, Canada
behrouz.hajisoleimani@dal.ca, st837183@dal.ca

different sentences can have the same representation as long
as they use the same words. N-gram models (Suen 1979;
Brown et al. 1992; Fürnkranz 1998) tried to overcome these
limitations by counting the occurrences of sequences of
words rather than individual words (1 ≤ n ≤ 5). They
consider the word order in a short context but suffer from
the curse of dimensionality since the number of n-grams increases dramatically as n increases. They also do not capture
the semantics of the words or more formally the similarities
between the words (Le and Mikolov 2014).
In recent years, distributed word representations or word
embedding algorithms have shown to be very effective in
capturing certain aspects of similarity between words. Statistical language modeling methods take advantage of the
fact that words that are temporally closer in a sentence are
statistically more dependent, and therefore, model the probability of a word conditioned on the previous words in the
sentence (Bengio et al. 2003). The idea of using a moving context window and assuming words in the same window are semantically similar is widely exploited (Mikolov et
al. 2013b; 2013a; Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014).
GloVe calculates the global co-occurrence statistics ﬁrst using a ﬁxed-size context window, and then minimizes its least
squares objective function using stochastic gradient descent
which is essentially factorizing the log co-occurrence matrix (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014). Many neuralnetwork based approaches have been proposed for learning distributed word representations (Bengio et al. 2006;
Collobert and Weston 2008; Mikolov et al. 2013a; 2013b).
Skip-Gram with Negative Sampling (SGNS) is still the stateof-the-art word embedding algorithm and is successfully applied in a variety of linguistic tasks (Mikolov et al. 2013a;
2013b).
Levy et al. in (Levy, Goldberg, and Dagan 2015) have
studied the effect of various hyper-parameters in different
embedding algorithms and showed that many of these parameters can be transferred to traditional methods (e.g SVD)
to boost their performance. In fact, they showed that explicit matrix factorization methods can provide competitive
results if used properly and there is no signiﬁcant advantage over any of the algorithms. Levy and Goldberg in (Levy
and Goldberg 2014) showed that SGNS is implicitly factorizing a Shifted Positive Point-wise Mutual Information
(SPPMI) matrix and they argue that the shift parameter is

Abstract
In this work, we investigate word embedding algorithms in
the context of natural language processing. In particular,
we examine the notion of “negative examples”, the unobserved or insigniﬁcant word-context co-occurrences, in spectral methods. we provide a new formulation for the word embedding problem by proposing a new intuitive objective function that perfectly justiﬁes the use of negative examples. In
fact, our algorithm not only learns from the important wordcontext co-occurrences, but also it learns from the abundance
of unobserved or insigniﬁcant co-occurrences to improve the
distribution of words in the latent embedded space. We analyze the algorithm theoretically and provide an optimal solution for the problem using spectral analysis. We have trained
various word embedding algorithms on articles of Wikipedia
with 2.1 billion tokens and show that negative sampling can
boost the quality of spectral methods. Our algorithm provides
results as good as the state-of-the-art but in a much faster and
efﬁcient way.

Introduction
In recent years there has been an increasing interest in learning compact representations (i.e embeddings) for a set of input datapoints. In these approaches, input data is mapped to
a low-dimensional latent space with the goal of preserving
the geometrical properties of data with respect to some similarity measure in the input space. That is, similar datapoints
in the input space should be mapped to nearby points in the
latent embedded space. In the embedded space, each input
datapoint is described with a dense d-dimensional continuous vector representing the coordinates of the datapoint in
the latent space.
In natural language processing, embedding algorithms are
particularly used to learn a vector space representation for
words aiming to capture semantic similarities and syntactic
relationships between words. The traditional way of treating individual words as unique symbols and representing
documents by sparse word count vectors, known as Bag-ofWords (BOW) representation (Salton 1971), has strong limitations since it does not exploit countless semantic and syntactic relations encoded in the corpus. Moreover, it does not
take into account the ordering of the words, therefore, two
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5481

