The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Knowledge Graph Embedding with
Iterative Guidance from Soft Rules
Shu Guo,1,2 Quan Wang,1,2,3∗ Lihong Wang,4 Bin Wang,1,2 Li Guo1,2
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
National Computer Network Emergency Response Technical Team & Coordination Center of China
2

Recently, a new research direction termed as knowledge
graph embedding has been proposed and quickly received
massive attention (Nickel, Tresp, and Kriegel 2011; Bordes
et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2014; Lin et al. 2015b; Yang et al.
2015; Nickel, Rosasco, and Poggio 2016; Trouillon et al.
2016). The key idea is to embed entities and relations in a
KG into a low-dimensional continuous vector space, so as
to simplify the manipulation while preserving the inherent
structure of the KG. Such embeddings contain rich semantic
information, and can beneﬁt a broad range of downstream
applications (Weston et al. 2013; Bordes et al. 2014; Zhang
et al. 2016; Xiong, Power, and Callan 2017).
Traditional methods performed embedding based solely
on triples observed in a KG. But considering the power of
logic rules in knowledge acquisition and inference, combining embedding models with logic rules has become a focus
of current research (Rocktäschel et al. 2014; Vendrov et al.
2015; Wang and Cohen 2016; Hu et al. 2016). Wang et al.
(2015) and Wei et al. (2015) tried to use embedding models
and logic rules for KG completion. But in their work, rules
are modeled separately from embedding models, and would
not help to learn more predictive embeddings. Rocktäschel
et al. (2015) and Guo et al. (2016) then devised joint learning
paradigms which can inject ﬁrst-order logic (FOL) into KG
embedding. Demeester et al. (2016) further proposed lifted
rule injection to avoid the costly propositionalization of FOL
rules. Although these joint models are able to learn better
embeddings after integrating logic rules, they still have their
drawbacks and restrictions.
First of all, these joint models made a one-time injection
of logic rules, taking them as additional rule-based training
instances (Rocktäschel, Singh, and Riedel 2015) or regularization terms (Demeester, Rocktäschel, and Riedel 2016).
We argue that rules can better enhance KG embedding, however, in an iterative manner. Given the learned embeddings
and their rough predictions, rules can be used to reﬁne the
predictions and infer new facts. The newly inferred facts, in
turn, will help to learn better embeddings and more accurate
logical inference. Previous methods fail to model such interactions between embedding models and logic rules. Furthermore, they focused only on hard rules which always hold
with no exception. Such rules usually require extensive manual effort to create or validate. Actually, besides hard rules,
a signiﬁcant amount of background information can be en-

Abstract
Embedding knowledge graphs (KGs) into continuous vector
spaces is a focus of current research. Combining such an embedding model with logic rules has recently attracted increasing attention. Most previous attempts made a one-time injection of logic rules, ignoring the interactive nature between
embedding learning and logical inference. And they focused
only on hard rules, which always hold with no exception and
usually require extensive manual effort to create or validate.
In this paper, we propose Rule-Guided Embedding (RUGE),
a novel paradigm of KG embedding with iterative guidance
from soft rules. RUGE enables an embedding model to learn
simultaneously from 1) labeled triples that have been directly
observed in a given KG, 2) unlabeled triples whose labels are
going to be predicted iteratively, and 3) soft rules with various conﬁdence levels extracted automatically from the KG. In
the learning process, RUGE iteratively queries rules to obtain
soft labels for unlabeled triples, and integrates such newly labeled triples to update the embedding model. Through this
iterative procedure, knowledge embodied in logic rules may
be better transferred into the learned embeddings. We evaluate RUGE in link prediction on Freebase and YAGO. Experimental results show that: 1) with rule knowledge injected iteratively, RUGE achieves signiﬁcant and consistent improvements over state-of-the-art baselines; and 2) despite their uncertainties, automatically extracted soft rules are highly beneﬁcial to KG embedding, even those with moderate conﬁdence
levels. The code and data used for this paper can be obtained
from https://github.com/iieir-km/RUGE.

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) such as WordNet (Miller 1995),
Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008), YAGO (Suchanek, Kasneci, and Weikum 2007), and NELL (Carlson et al. 2010)
are extremely useful resources for many AI related applications. A KG is a multi-relational graph composed of entities
as nodes and relations as different types of edges. Each edge
is represented as a triple (head entity, relation, tail entity),
indicating that there is a speciﬁc relation between two entities, e.g., (Paris, CapitalOf, France). Although effective
in representing structured data, the underlying symbolic nature of such triples often makes KGs hard to manipulate.
∗

Corresponding author: Quan Wang (wangquan@iie.ac.cn).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4816

