The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Convolutional 2D Knowledge Graph Embeddings
Tim Dettmers∗
Università della Svizzera italiana
tim.dettmers@gmail.com

Pasquale Minervini, Pontus Stenetorp, Sebastian Riedel
University College London
{p.minervini,p.stenetorp,s.riedel}@cs.ucl.ac.uk
can contain millions of facts; as a consequence, link predictors should scale in a manageable way with respect to
both the number of parameters and computational costs to be
applicable in real-world scenarios.
For solving such scaling problems, link prediction models
are often composed of simple operations, like inner products
and matrix multiplications over an embedding space, and
use a limited number of parameters (Nickel et al. 2016).
DistMult (Yang et al. 2015) is such a model, characterised
by three-way interactions between embedding parameters,
which produce one feature per parameter. Using such simple,
fast, shallow models allows one to scale to large knowledge
graphs, at the cost of learning less expressive features.
The only way to increase the number of features in shallow
models – and thus their expressiveness – is to increase the
embedding size. However, doing so does not scale to larger
knowledge graphs, since the total number of embedding parameters is proportional to the the number of entities and
relations in the graph. For example, a shallow model like
DistMult with an embedding size of 200, applied to Freebase, will need 33 GB of memory for its parameters. To
increase the number of features independently of the embedding size requires the use of multiple layers of features.
However, previous multi-layer knowledge graph embedding
architectures, that feature fully connected layers, are prone
to overﬁt (Nickel et al. 2016). One way to solve the scaling
problem of shallow architectures, and the overﬁtting problem
of fully connected deep architectures, is to use parameter
efﬁcient, fast operators which can be composed into deep
networks.
The convolution operator, commonly used in computer
vision, has exactly these properties: it is parameter efﬁcient
and fast to compute, due to highly optimised GPU implementations. Furthermore, due to its ubiquitous use, robust
methodologies have been established to control overﬁtting
when training multi-layer convolutional networks (Szegedy
et al. 2015; Ioffe and Szegedy 2015; Srivastava et al. 2014;
Szegedy et al. 2016).
In this paper we introduce ConvE, a model that uses 2D
convolutions over embeddings to predict missing links in
knowledge graphs. ConvE is the simplest multi-layer convolutional architecture for link prediction: it is deﬁned by a
single convolution layer, a projection layer to the embedding
dimension, and an inner product layer.

Abstract
Link prediction for knowledge graphs is the task of predicting missing relationships between entities. Previous work on
link prediction has focused on shallow, fast models which
can scale to large knowledge graphs. However, these models
learn less expressive features than deep, multi-layer models –
which potentially limits performance. In this work we introduce ConvE, a multi-layer convolutional network model for
link prediction, and report state-of-the-art results for several
established datasets. We also show that the model is highly parameter efﬁcient, yielding the same performance as DistMult
and R-GCN with 8x and 17x fewer parameters. Analysis of
our model suggests that it is particularly effective at modelling
nodes with high indegree – which are common in highlyconnected, complex knowledge graphs such as Freebase and
YAGO3. In addition, it has been noted that the WN18 and
FB15k datasets suffer from test set leakage, due to inverse
relations from the training set being present in the test set –
however, the extent of this issue has so far not been quantiﬁed.
We ﬁnd this problem to be severe: a simple rule-based model
can achieve state-of-the-art results on both WN18 and FB15k.
To ensure that models are evaluated on datasets where simply
exploiting inverse relations cannot yield competitive results,
we investigate and validate several commonly used datasets
– deriving robust variants where necessary. We then perform
experiments on these robust datasets for our own and several
previously proposed models, and ﬁnd that ConvE achieves
state-of-the-art Mean Reciprocal Rank across all datasets.

Introduction
Knowledge graphs are graph-structured knowledge bases,
where facts are represented in the form of relationships
(edges) between entities (nodes). They have important applications in search, analytics, recommendation, and data
integration – however, they tend to suffer from incompleteness, that is, missing links in the graph. For example, in Freebase and DBpedia more than 66% of the person entries are missing a birthplace (Dong et al. 2014;
Krompaß, Baier, and Tresp 2015). Identifying such missing links is referred to as link prediction. Knowledge graphs
∗
This work was conducted during a research visit to University
College London.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1811

