The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Medical Exam Question Answering
with Large-Scale Reading Comprehension
Xiao Zhang,1 Ji Wu,1 Zhiyang He,1 Xien Liu,2 Ying Su2
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
zhang-xi15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {wuji ee, zyhe ts}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
2
Tsinghua-iFlytek Joint Laboratory, Tsinghua University
{xeliu, yingsu2}@iﬂytek.com

terials. Previous work (Miller et al. 2016) and (Chen et al.
2017) reads from Wikipedia dump to answer questions created from knowledge base entries. Another major challenge
in real-world scenarios is that questions are often harder and
more versatile, and the answer is less likely to be directly
found in text.
We propose the MedQA, our reading comprehension task
on clinical medicine aiming at simulating a real-world scenario. Computers need to read from various sources in aided
diagnosis, such as patients’ medical records and examination reports. They also need to exploit knowledge found in
text materials such as textbooks and research articles. We assembled a large collection of text materials in MedQA as a
source of information, to learn to read large-scale text.
Questions are taken from medical certiﬁcation exams,
where human doctors are evaluated on their professional
knowledge and ability to make diagnosis. Questions in these
exams are versatile and generally requires an understanding
of related medical concepts to answer. A machine learning
model must learn to ﬁnd relevant information from the document collection, reason over them and make decisions about
the answer.
We then propose our solution SeaReader: a large-scale
reading comprehension model based on LSTM network and
dual-path attention architecture. The model addresses challenges of the MedQA task from two main aspects: 1) Leveraging information in large-scale text: we propose a dualpath attention architecture which uses two separate attention
paths to extract relevant information from individual documents as well as compare and extract information across
multiple documents. Extracted information is reasoned over
and integrated together to determine the answer. 2) End-toend training on weak labels: although we only have labels
with very little information, we still managed to train our
model end-to-end. Our SeaReader features a modular design, with a clear interpretation of different levels of language understanding. We also propose a series of novel
techniques that we call Interpretable Reasoning. This increases the interpretability of complex NLP models like our
SeaReader.

Abstract
Reading and understanding text is one important component
in computer aided diagnosis in clinical medicine, also being a
major research problem in the ﬁeld of NLP. In this work, we
introduce a question-answering task called MedQA to study
answering questions in clinical medicine using knowledge in
a large-scale document collection. The aim of MedQA is to
answer real-world questions with large-scale reading comprehension. We propose our solution SeaReader—a modular
end-to-end reading comprehension model based on LSTM
networks and dual-path attention architecture. The novel
dual-path attention models information ﬂow from two perspectives and has the ability to simultaneously read individual documents and integrate information across multiple documents. In experiments our SeaReader achieved a large increase in accuracy on MedQA over competing models. Additionally, we develop a series of novel techniques to demonstrate the interpretation of the question answering process in
SeaReader.

1

Introduction

Natural language understanding is a crucial component in
computer aided diagnosis in clinical medicine. Ideally, a
computer model could read text to communicate with human
doctors and utilize knowledge in text materials. Recent advances in deep-learning-inspired approaches have taken the
state-of-the-art of various NLP tasks to a new level. However, directly reading and understanding text is still a challenging problem, especially in complex real-world scenarios.
Reading comprehension is a task designed for reading text
and answering questions about it. An understanding of natural language and basic reasoning is required to tackle the
task. The task of reading comprehension has been gaining
rapid progress with the proposal of various datasets such as
SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al. 2016) and many successful models.
Real-world scenarios for reading comprehension are usually much more complex. Unlike in most datasets, one does
not have paragraphs of text already labeled as containing the
answer to the question. Rather, one needs to ﬁnd and extract relevant information from possibly large-scale text ma-

2

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Related Work

Our work is closely related to question answering and reading comprehension in the ﬁeld of NLP.

5706

