The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

MixedPeds: Pedestrian Detection in Unannotated Videos
Using Synthetically Generated Human-Agents for Training
Ernest Cheung, Anson Wong, Aniket Bera, Dinesh Manocha
Department of Computer Science
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Project Webpage: http://gamma.cs.unc.edu/MixedPeds
Email: {ernestc, ahtsans, ab, dm}@cs.unc.edu
One recent trend to generate labeled datasets is using
synthetic and simulation approaches. In these methods, the
pedestrian location and appearance in the image are generated using simulation techniques. With the pedestrian’s location given, the resulting rendered image and computed annotations are used for training. Such techniques have also
been used for pedestrian detection and crowd video analysis (Hattori et al. 2015; Cheung et al. 2016). However, current methods are either restricted to a ﬁxed camera in terms
of their usage or have a low detection accuracy. In this paper,
we investigate new methods that can automatically generate
annotated datasets for pedestrian detection by using simulation methods. The main motivation is to develop automated
methods that can be used for a broad set of applications.
Main Results: We present a novel algorithm
(MixedPeds) to generate the corresponding training data
for CNN-based pedestrian detection, given an unannotated
image dataset. Our approach combines real-world background information in a scene with synthetically-generated
pedestrians, whose positions are precisely known. The
annotated dataset is composed of synthetic pedestrians that
can be controlled by different parameters. Our approach is
applicable to videos captured from a moving camera and we
present automatic feature extraction methods to obtain features that are used to place the synthetic agents. We propose
a novel concept, the Spawn Probability Map, to determine
where to overlay the pedestrians on the image. Furthermore,
we present techniques to generate high-quality renderings
and poses for synthetic pedestrians. As compared to prior
methods to perform pedestrian detection on an unannotated
dataset, our approach offers the following beneﬁts:

Abstract
We present a new method for training pedestrian detectors
on an unannotated set of images. We produce a mixed reality dataset that is composed of real-world background images and synthetically generated static human-agents. Our approach is general, robust, and makes few assumptions about
the unannotated dataset. We automatically extract from the
dataset: i) the vanishing point to calibrate the virtual camera,
and ii) the pedestrians’ scales to generate a Spawn Probability Map, which is a novel concept that guides our algorithm
to place the pedestrians at appropriate locations. After putting
synthetic human-agents in the unannotated images, we use
these augmented images to train a Pedestrian Detector, with
the annotations generated along with the synthetic agents.
We conducted our experiments using Faster R-CNN by comparing the detection results on the unannotated dataset performed by the detector trained using our approach and detectors trained with other manually labeled datasets. We showed
that our approach improves the average precision by 5-13%
over these detectors.

Introduction
Accurate pedestrian detection is important for many autonomous systems, including self-driving cars, surveillance,
robot navigation, etc. This problem has been extensively
studied in computer vision, robotics and related areas. Recently, CNN-based pedestrian detectors have gained importance and been applied to different benchmarks (Dollár et
al. 2009; 2012; Geiger, Lenz, and Urtasun 2012; Zhang et
al. 2016; Cai et al. 2016; Jifeng Dai 2016).
The accuracy of CNN-based pedestrian detectors depends on the annotations in the training datasets. In order
to achieve good accuracy, current methods ensure that the
training data is from the same scene as or a similar environment to the testing data. These stipulations include similar camera conﬁgurations, lighting conditions, and backgrounds. This becomes an issue when one applies these
methods to a new, unannotated video. In such cases, annotating training data can be challenging and requires considerable human effort. Overall, we need good pedestrian detection methods that can automatically work on unannotated
videos.

• A generalized framework to produce annotated data for
training scene-speciﬁc pedestrian detectors.
• An automatic technique for feature extraction from images that are used to estimate the camera parameters and
valid positions of pedestrians within an image.
• A data-driven approach to determinate lighting and
clothes color of rendered pedestrians, to blend them into
a real image better.
• An improvement in average precision of 7.8%, 5% and,
13.7% over prior methods on CALTECH, KITTI and
ETHZ datasets, respectively.
• With few assumptions on the input dataset, the method
can be applied on sets of images captured by any vehicle.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6738

