The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Uplink Communication Efﬁcient Differentially Private
Sparse Optimization with Feature-Wise Distributed Data
Jian Lou, Yiu-ming Cheung∗
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University,
Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong SAR, China
{jianlou, ymc}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

real applications, where the information describing an individual is collected and held by different parties which can
be different sets of sensory systems or different organizations. For example, a person’s medical records are sensitive
personal information that can be held by several clinics. Although privacy issue has been considered for these verticallypartitioned datasets (Yunhong, Liang, and Guoping 2009;
Yu, Vaidya, and Jiang 2006; Mangasarian, Wild, and Fung
2008), it has rarely been studied with the more restrict differential privacy notion. It would be ideal to make use of all
attributes kept by different parties in a distributed fashion,
while still ensuring differential privacy.
During distributed training, information sourced from user
nodes to the server node, referred to as uplink communication, are computed based on sensitive individual information.
On the other hand, the information broadcasted by the server
back to users (referred to as downlink communication), by the
post-processing property of the differential privacy (Dwork,
Roth, and others 2014), will maintain differential privacy
even without any privacy protection mechanism as long as
the uplink communication is private. As such, designing privacy mechanism to prevent adversary from inferring sensitive
individual information by spying on the uplink communication is the key to private training for distributed dataset. Intuitively, minimizing the uplink communication complexity
means less exposure of sensitive data and reduced potential
of personal data leakage. Thus, less uplink communication
would generally require less privacy protection budget for
ensuring differential privacy.
To be speciﬁc, we consider
n the constrained ERM model in
this paper as minx∈M i=1 f (x; Di ), where Di represents
the i-th sample of the n × d dataset D, where n is the sample
size and d is the feature dimension. With the feature-wise
distributed setting, the n × d data matrix is partitioned vertically with each disjoint partition held by one of the K user
nodes. f (x) is a smooth convex loss function. We assume
the convex compact constraint set M is coordinate separable
as M1 ×, ..., ×Md . In particular, we elaborate the LASSO
problem, where f (x) is the least square loss and M is the
1 -norm ball. For this problem, (Talwar, Thakurta, and Zhang
2015) proposes a centralized private Frank-Wolfe algorithm
(FW) (Jaggi 2013) by adapting the Report-Noisy-Max mechanism (Dwork, Roth, and others 2014) for ensuring differential
privacy. In particular, they prove that the algorithm has nearly

Abstract
Preserving differential privacy during empirical risk minimization model training has been extensively studied under centralized and sample-wise distributed dataset settings. This paper
considers a nearly unexplored context with features partitioned
among different parties under privacy restriction. Motivated
by the nearly optimal utility guarantee achieved by centralized
private Frank-Wolfe algorithm (Talwar, Thakurta, and Zhang
2015), we develop a distributed variant with guaranteed privacy, utility and uplink communication complexity. To obtain
these guarantees, we provide a much generalized convergence
analysis for block-coordinate Frank-Wolfe under arbitrary
sampling, which greatly extends known convergence results
that are only applicable to two speciﬁc block sampling distributions. We also design an active feature sharing scheme by
utilizing private Johnson-Lindenstrauss transform, which is
the key to updating local partial gradients in a differentially
private and communication efﬁcient manner.

Introduction
Empirical risk minimization (ERM) is a fundamental tool
for learning useful models from data that are collected from
individuals, e.g. see (Cheung 2005; Cheung and Zeng 2009;
Wang et al. 2017). To avoid breaching the privacy of the individuals, privacy protection mechanisms have been considered
to ensure that the adversary cannot infer any individual data
from the output of the learning process. Beginning with the
seminal work (Chaudhuri, Monteleoni, and Sarwate 2011),
which considers private ERM training under the formal statistical differential privacy notion (Dwork, Roth, and others
2014), various differentially private optimization algorithms
have been developed for training the model with centralized datasets (Smith 2011; Kifer, Smith, and Thakurta 2012;
Bassily, Smith, and Thakurta 2014; Talwar, Thakurta, and
Zhang 2014; Jain and Thakurta 2013; Kasiviswanathan and
Jin 2016) and sample-wise distributed datasets (Huang, Mitra, and Vaidya 2015; Nozari, Tallapragada, and Cortés 2016;
Han, Topcu, and Pappas 2017).
Deviating from the above mentioned centralized and
sample-wise distributed settings, we consider the featurewise distributed dataset setting. Such setting appears in many
∗

corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

125

