The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

FR-ANet: A Face Recognition Guided
Facial Attribute Classiﬁcation Network
1

Jiajiong Cao,†,1 Yingming Li,∗ 1 Xi Li,2 Zhongfei Zhang1
College of Information Science & Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
No.38 Zheda Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
{jiajiong, yingming, xilizju, zhongfei}@zju.edu.cn
†
Phone: +86-15957112753
several groups for modeling attribute correlations. Further,
the high-level features are merged at a certain depth as the
input of an auxiliary face identity recognition task. The face
identity recognition task efﬁciently guides the network to
model identity-attribute relationship, since it forces the network to make similar attribute predictions for the same person. The performance of FR-ANet is signiﬁcantly better than
the state-of-the-art methods according to the experimental
results on CelebA and LFWA.

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of facial attribute learning. In particular, we propose a Face Recognition guided facial Attribute classiﬁcation Network, called FR-ANet. All the
attributes share low-level features, while high-level features
are specially learned for attribute groups. Further, to utilize
the identity information, high-level features are merged to
perform face identity recognition. The experimental results
on CelebA and LFWA datasets demonstrate the promise of
the FR-ANet.

Introduction
Facial attribute classiﬁcation has many applications including face identiﬁcation and retrieval. However, facial attribute
classiﬁcation is still very challenging because of large illumination, pose and expression changes. To improve the performance of attribute classiﬁcation, some efforts have been
made to utilize identity information. For example, (Zhong,
Sullivan, and Li 2016) pretrains a face identiﬁcation network
to extract features as the inputs of attribute classiﬁers. However, since the networks are trained as identity classiﬁers,
the performances on identity-free attributes such as Wearing
Necktie, Smiling and Wavy Hair are harmed.
On the other hand, modeling attribute correlations is essential for high performance. For instance, (Hand and Chellappa 2016) designs a Multi-task CNN (MCNN) with a
grouping scheme. In particular, MCNN shares low-level layers for all the 40 attributes before splitting the network into
6 branches, each one of which focuses on a certain attribute
group. By modeling attribute correlations, MCNN has been
the state-of-the-art on this task. However, since the statistics
characteristics of attributes are rather consistent for the same
identity, modeling the relationship between identity and attributes can further improve the performance, which is ignored by MCNN.
We propose a Face Recognition guided facial Attribute
classiﬁcation neural Network, so called FR-ANet, which exploits both attribute correlations and identity information. In
particular, a 10-layer-depth network is proposed to share its
lower layers for all the 40 attributes while being split into

Figure 1: Heat maps for attribute correlations of 35 images
within the same person (left column) and among different
identities (right column).

FR-ANet Architecture
We investigate facial attribute classiﬁcation under a multitask learning scenario. Since multi-task learning assumes
that related tasks should be correlated via a certain structure, we propose to share low-level features for all tasks and
to learn high-level features for strongly correlated tasks. It
is natural to adopt bifurcation strategy in CNNs, so that all
the layers are shared by all the 40 attributes until they are
split into several attribute groups and features are speciﬁcally learned for each group.
Besides, since the identity information of samples usually
exists in the training data, attribute correlations are analyzed
on a collection of 35 images within a person and among different identities respectively. As shown in Fig. 1, we ﬁnd
that most images of the same person have similar attribute
labels, while attributes for different identities are relatively
independent. To model the label consistence for the identity, we develop an auxiliary face identity recognition task

∗

Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8057

