The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Personalized Time-Aware Tag Recommendation
Keqiang Wang,1 Yuanyuan Jin,1 Haofen Wang,2 Hongwei Peng,1 Xiaoling Wang1∗
1

International Research Center of Trustworthy Software
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Computing
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
Shenzhen Gowild Robotics Co. Ltd
sei.wkq2008@gmail.com, sei 12jyy@126.com, wang haofen@gowild.cn
penghongwei phw@163.com, xlwang@sei.ecnu.edu.cn
and offer users the information that meets their preferences.
Tag systems like Delicious, Last.fm and Movielens allow
users to annotate the web pages, songs and movies using
key words, which is called tagging. Tags can make managing and searching web items easier. A tag can be regarded as
a kind of implicit rating, which can identify not only features
of items, but also the users’ personalities. Tag recommendation is to provide the target user tags when he wants to annotate an item. Personalized tag recommendation will analyze
users’ past tagging behaviors to predict the tags being used
in the future, which depends on both users and items. For
instance, if two users have used the same tags to mark the
same items, it’s likely for them to use the same tag for another item. On the other hand, if a certain user recently uses
a tag very frequently, there is a high probability for him to
reuse the same tag. It has also been proved that the personalized approaches outperform the theoretically best unpersonalized method (Rendle et al. 2009a). Hence, in this paper,
we only focus on the personalized tag recommendation.
Some systems utilize tensor factorization techniques to
rank the candidate tags. Tensor factorization based models
decompose the user-item-tag tensor into feature matrices to
represent the latent features of users, items and tags respectively. RTF (Rendle et al. 2009a) is based on Tucker Decomposition, which is cubic in feature dimensionality and thus
unfeasible for mid-sized and large data sets with high factorization dimension. To tackle this problem, Rendle et al.
proposed the Canonical Decomposition based PITF (Rendle
and Schmidt-Thieme 2010) model. As the example in ﬁgure 1(a) shows, given u1 and m1 , PITF utilizes the global
user-item-tag tensor to recommend tags, which is linear in
both the data set size and feature dimensionality. PITF can
process high dimensional factorization well and recommend
new tags. It also won the ECML/PKDD Discovery Challenge 2009 (Rendle and Schmidt-Thieme 2009) for graphbased tag recommendation.
Although the classic tensor factorization methods can ﬁnd
the potential interests of users, they can not depict the temporal dynamics in users’ tagging behaviour. Some studies
(Yin et al. 2011; Charlin et al. 2015; Koren 2010) have
demonstrated that users’ behaviors will change with time,
which indicates that users have their short-term interests
and their recent tagging behaviors will inﬂuence the next
tagging. Therefore, some time and frequency based BLL

Abstract
Personalized tag recommender systems suggest a list of tags
to a user when he or she wants to annotate an item. They
utilize users’ preferences and the features of items. Tensor
factorization techniques have been widely used in tag recommendation. Given the user-item pair, although the classic PITF (Pairwise Interaction Tensor Factorization) explicitly models the pairwise interactions among users, items and
tags, it overlooks users’ short-term interests and suffers from
data sparsity. On the other hand, given the user-item-time
triple, time-aware approaches like BLL (Base-Level Learning) utilize the time effect to capture the temporal dynamics
and the most popular tags on items to handle cold start situation of new users. However, it works only on individual level
and the target resource level, which can not ﬁnd users’ potential interests. In this paper, we propose an uniﬁed tag recommendation approach by considering both time awareness
and personalization aspects, which extends PITF by adding
weights to user-tag interaction and item-tag interaction respectively. Compared to PITF, our proposed model can depict
temporal factor by temporal weights and relieve data sparsity problem by referencing the most popular tags on items.
Further, our model brings collaborative ﬁltering (CF) to timeaware models, which can mine information from global data
and help improving the ability of recommending new tags.
Different from the power-form functions used in the existing
time-aware recommendation models, we use the Hawkes process with the exponential intensity function to improve the
model’s efﬁciency. The experimental results show that our
proposed model outperforms the state of the art tag recommendation methods in accuracy and has better ability to recommend new tags.

Introduction
Nowadays, there is a great amount of information emerging
in the internet every day and it’s difﬁcult for users to ﬁnd
items that are really appealing to them. Recommender system is an effective tool to overcome information overload.
It can model users’ interests by analyzing users’ behavior
∗

Corresponding author. This work was supported by National
Key R&D Program of China (No. 2017YFC0803700), NSFC
grants (No. 61532021 and 61472141), Shanghai Knowledge Service Platform Project (No. ZF1213), and Shanghai Agriculture Applied Technology Development Program (No. G20160201).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

459

