The Twenty-Third AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium

Efﬁciency and Safety in Autonomous Vehicles
through Planning with Uncertainty (Thesis Summary)
Zachary N. Sunberg∗
Aeronautics and Astronautics Dept.
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305

Introduction

1.5

Braking actions per episode

Autonomous vehicles are quickly becoming an important part of human society for transportation, monitoring, agriculture, and other applications. As autonomous
vehicles and robots of all types become ubiquitous, they
will interact more closely with humans, and it will become increasingly important for them to act efﬁciently
in terms of time, energy, and other resources while also
maintaining safety. However, there is a fundamental
tradeoff between safety and efﬁciency because safety
constraints prohibit some actions that are efﬁcient.
A key to maintaining safety without sacriﬁcing efﬁciency is dealing with uncertainty properly. Improper
treatment can result in control systems that are too
aggressive or too conservative, but with proper treatment, autonomous vehicles can be assertive when it
is appropriate and careful in dangerous situations. The
Markov decision process (MDP) and partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) frameworks
provide a systematic way to plan in the presence of uncertainty. However, there are still challenges to using
POMDP and MDP approaches in the real world including scaling solution techniques and maintaining safety
gaurantees.
My research contributes to this goal of safety and efﬁciency by analyzing the effects of safety systems in several domains, quantifying the advantages of reasoning
about uncertainty, and proposing a new algorithm that
is capable of solving problems with continuous state,
action, and observation spaces, a qualitative increase
in capability over the previous leading solution techniques.

0.5

0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Time to target lane
Omniscient
Most Likely

Baseline
POMCP

Figure 1: Pareto performance frontiers of different planning approaches in a lane-changing task.
The thesis will include an approach for planning multiple lane changes on a crowded freeway by modeling
the problem as a POMDP (Sunberg, Ho, and Kochenderfer 2017). In such a POMDP, the sensing systems of
the autonomous vehicle are able to measure all of the
physical states of the other cars perfectly. The partially
observable states of the system are the internal states
of the other drivers, for example their aggressiveness,
attentiveness, and intentions. In the ﬁrst round of study,
the experiments only considered static internal states related to driving style. Speciﬁcally, human drivers behave according to the intelligent driver model (IDM),
and the IDM parameters are the latent internal states.
In order to gauge the importance of planning with
internal states, I established a baseline and an upper
performance bound by planning using two MDPs. The
baseline is determined by solving a naive MDP model
in which all vehicles have the same normal IDM parameters. The upper bound is established by solving an
omniscient MDP in which all parameters are know exactly. The results in Fig. 1 show that inferring trafﬁc
participants’ models online by solving the POMDP formulation can increase both safety and efﬁciency nearly
to the upper bound. All problems were solved with variants of Monte Carlo tree search augmented with a safety
constraint that prevents crashes. Research between now
and my defense will study dynamic intentions as hidden
states.

Planning with internal states in
autonomous driving
Autonomous driving is one of the most important current applications of artiﬁcial intelligence. One challenge
is that it will involve extensive interaction with human
drivers. Human drivers routinely negotiate with one another, for example, when merging and navigating intersections.
∗

1

zsunberg@stanford.edu

8038

