The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

UnFlow: Unsupervised Learning of
Optical Flow with a Bidirectional Census Loss
Simon Meister, Junhwa Hur, Stefan Roth
Department of Computer Science
TU Darmstadt, Germany

easier to obtain in large amounts (Dosovitskiy et al. 2015;
Mayer et al. 2016). However, because of the intrinsic differences between synthetic and real imagery and the limited
variability of synthetic datasets, the generalization to real
scenes remains challenging. We posit that for realizing the
potential of deep learning in optical ﬂow, addressing this issue will be crucial.
In order to cope with the lack of labeled real-world training data, recent work (Ahmadi and Patras 2016; Yu, Harley,
and Derpanis 2016; Ren et al. 2017) has proposed optical ﬂow networks based on unsupervised learning. They
sidestep the need for ground truth motion as only image
sequences are required for training. Though unsupervised
learning seems to be a promising direction for breaking the
dependency on synthetic data, one may argue that these approaches fall short of the expectations so far, as they neither
match nor surpass the accuracy of supervised methods despite the domain mismatch between training and test time.
In this paper, we introduce an end-to-end unsupervised
approach that demonstrates the effectiveness of unsupervised learning for optical ﬂow. Building on recent optical
ﬂow CNNs (Dosovitskiy et al. 2015; Ilg et al. 2017), we replace the supervision from synthetic data by an unsupervised
photometric reconstruction loss similar to (Yu, Harley, and
Derpanis 2016). We compute bidirectional optical ﬂow (i.e.,
both in forward and backward direction, see Fig. 1) by performing a second pass with the two input images exchanged.
Then, we design a loss function leveraging bidirectional ﬂow
to explicitly reason about occlusion (Hur and Roth 2017)
and make use of the census transform to increase robustness
on real images. Through a comprehensive ablation study, we
validate the design choices behind our unsupervised loss.
On the challenging KITTI benchmarks (Geiger, Lenz, and
Urtasun 2012; Menze and Geiger 2015), our unsupervised
model outperforms previous unsupervised deep networks by
a very large margin. Perhaps more surprisingly, it also surpasses architecturally similar supervised approaches trained
exclusively on synthetic data. Similar observations hold, for
example, on the Middlebury dataset (Baker et al. 2011). After unsupervised training on a large amount of realistic domain data, we can optionally make use of sparse ground
truth (if available) to reﬁne our estimates in areas that are inherently difﬁcult to penalize in an unsupervised way, such as
at motion boundaries. Our ﬁne-tuned model achieves lead-

Abstract
In the era of end-to-end deep learning, many advances in
computer vision are driven by large amounts of labeled data.
In the optical ﬂow setting, however, obtaining dense perpixel ground truth for real scenes is difﬁcult and thus such
data is rare. Therefore, recent end-to-end convolutional networks for optical ﬂow rely on synthetic datasets for supervision, but the domain mismatch between training and test
scenarios continues to be a challenge. Inspired by classical
energy-based optical ﬂow methods, we design an unsupervised loss based on occlusion-aware bidirectional ﬂow estimation and the robust census transform to circumvent the
need for ground truth ﬂow. On the KITTI benchmarks, our
unsupervised approach outperforms previous unsupervised
deep networks by a large margin, and is even more accurate
than similar supervised methods trained on synthetic datasets
alone. By optionally ﬁne-tuning on the KITTI training data,
our method achieves competitive optical ﬂow accuracy on the
KITTI 2012 and 2015 benchmarks, thus in addition enabling
generic pre-training of supervised networks for datasets with
limited amounts of ground truth.

Introduction
Estimating dense optical ﬂow is one of the longstanding
problems in computer vision, with a variety of applications.
Though numerous approaches have been proposed over the
past decades, e.g. (Black and Anandan 1991; Bruhn, Weickert, and Schnörr 2005; Brox and Malik 2011; Revaud
et al. 2015), realistic benchmarks such as MPI Sintel (Butler et al. 2012) or KITTI (Geiger, Lenz, and Urtasun 2012;
Menze and Geiger 2015) continue to challenge traditional
energy minimization approaches. Motivated by the recent
successes of end-to-end deep learning, convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) have been suggested for addressing these
challenges, and recently started to outperform many traditional ﬂow methods in public benchmarks (Dosovitskiy et
al. 2015; Gadot and Wolf 2016; Güney and Geiger 2016;
Ilg et al. 2017).
Still, most CNN-based methods rely on the availability of
a large amount of data with ground truth optical ﬂow for supervised learning. Due to the difﬁculty of obtaining ground
truth in real scenes, such networks are trained on synthetically generated images, for which dense ground truth is
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7251

