The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Unsupervised Selection of Negative Examples
for Grounded Language Learning
Nisha Pillai, Cynthia Matuszek

npillai1 | cmat @ umbc.edu
Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
Baltimore, Maryland
Abstract
There has been substantial work in recent years on grounded
language acquisition, in which a model is learned that relates
linguistic constructs to the perceivable world. While powerful, this approach is frequently hindered by ambiguities and
omissions found in natural language. One such omission is
the lack of negative labels on objects. We describe an unsupervised system that learns visual classiﬁers associated with
words, using semantic similarity to automatically choose negative examples from a corpus of perceptual and linguistic
data. We evaluate the effectiveness of each stage as well as
the system’s performance on the overall learning task.

Figure 1: Automatically selected terms and training data for
grounded language learning.

Introduction
In this paper, we use statistical language processing tools
to address two outstanding problems in grounded language
learning. First, we automatically select terms to consider as
candidate labels for visual classiﬁers; second, we use document similarity metrics to select appropriate negative examples from a corpus of training data (see Figure 1). We
evaluate our approach on a new data set of objects and descriptions, and our initial results support the idea that purely
linguistic tools can be used to overcome weaknesses in corpora of perceptual training data.

Semantic representations of real-world environments are a
powerful tool for supporting user interaction and action
planning. Our goal is to obtain such representations from
conversation with users, allowing physically situated agents
to learn appropriate world models “on the ﬂy” for a wide
range of situations. Learning these models from natural language provides a framework for learning such semantics at
the right granularity in an intuitive, natural way.
One promising approach is to treat learning language
about percepts as a joint modeling problem (Matuszek* et
al. 2013; Pillai, Budhraja, and Matuszek 2016), in which descriptive language paired with sensor and actuator data is
used to jointly train visual classiﬁers in conjunction with language models. In this approach, descriptions are treated as
labels for visual percepts, making it possible to learn novel
language describing entirely novel visual concepts.
However, building semantic models from natural language is challenging. People’s use of language is frequently
not a good match for statistical learning systems. For example, descriptions of physical things rarely contain negative
data: It is unusual for people to provide negative examples
without prompting. (Objects are rarely described as “not yellow.”) A lack of a positive label does not imply a negative
grounding; something described as “an apple” is not a good
negative grounding for a “red” classiﬁer. This problem has
an effect on parser learning, (Hastings and Lytinen 1994),
lexical acquisition (Roy 2002), and human grammar acquisition (Bowerman 1988; Lasnik 1989).

Related Work
Much of the work on learning to understand grounded language relies in some part on algorithms that use negative labels as part of learning. The most straightforward approach
is to explicitly collect negative labels (Tellex et al. 2013;
Dindo and Zambuto 2010), possibly through crowdsourcing (Tellex et al. 2014; Knepper et al. 2015) or gameplaying (Thomason 2016). However, this may not be applicable
to all mechanisms for gathering language. Another possibility is to associate randomly chosen groundings with terms
that are not used to describe those images (Silberer, Ferrari,
and Lapata 2016; Chrupala, Gelderloos, and Alishahi 2017).
Because language is not exhaustive, this approach is noisy
and may require manual cleanup (Tellex et al. 2011).
Another practical technique is to design language collection trials that either use objects that have no shared visual
characteristics (Matuszek* et al. 2013), or explicitly design
trials that exhibit negative characteristics (Schenck and Fox
2017). Our work is most similar to the fully unsupervised

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6517

