The Eighth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence 2018 (EAAI-18)

Predictive Modeling of Learning Continuation in
Preschool Education Using Temporal Patterns of Development Tests
Junpei Naito, Yukino Baba, Hisashi Kashima

Takenori Takaki

Department of Intelligence Science
and Technology, Kyoto University
naito.junpei.45m@kyoto-u.jp
{baba, kashima}@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Shimane IT Open-Innovation Center
takaki@s-itoc.jp

Takuya Funo
Shimane Industrial Promotion Foundation
tfuno@joho-shimane.or.jp

Abstract
Learning analytics applies data analysis techniques to learning data in order to support students’ learning processes and
to improve the quality of education. Despite the increasing
attention to learning analytics for higher education, it has not
been fully addressed in primary and preschool education. In
this research, we apply learning analytics to preschool education to predict the continuation of learning of preschool children. Based on our hypothesis that temporal patterns in the
assessment scores of development tests are effective features
for prediction, we extract the temporal patterns using timeseries clustering, and use them as the features of prediction
models. The experimental results using a real preschool education dataset show that the use of the temporal patterns improves the predictive accuracy of future continuation of study.

Introduction

Figure 1: Time-series data of the development test results of
a particular child.

Learning analytics applies data science technologies to education in order to support learners and educators to improve
learning effectiveness and to obtain insights for better education. Typical analyses include predicting future performance
of learning, identifying learners who have problems, and
making recommendations of appropriate materials to learners, based on various kinds of data such as learning time,
teaching materials, and performance scores. In recent years,
the growing adoptions of information technologies to educational ﬁelds including on-line education such as MOOCs
have accelerated collection of large amount of data associated with learning, and learning analytics has been actively
carried out, mainly in higher education (Siemens and Long
2011).
Despite the wide applications of learning analytics in
higher education, learning analytics for early childhood education and primary education has not been addressed thoroughly. A part of the reason is that evaluation metrics such as
learning time and examination scores cannot be interpreted

in the same way as those in higher education. For example,
it is often difﬁcult for children to take written exams, and
interventions by parents or teachers are necessary to conduct exams and to measure the ability of children, and therefore evaluation metrics are often affected by their subjective
judgments. In addition, lectures using the Internet and computers are not performed very often in early childhood education and primary education, and therefore the number of
collectable types of data and the amount of data are limited,
which makes application of learning analytics difﬁcult. Furthermore, when we consider dropout prediction, which is of
great interest in learning analytics in higher education, the
meaning of “dropout” is different in early childhood education and primary education, because decisions on whether or
not a child will continue learning does not depend only on
the child herself, and it is usually her parents who observe
the motivation of children and make judgments on whether
or not the continuation is worthwhile.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7934

