The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Proximal Alternating Direction Network:
A Globally Converged Deep Unrolling Framework
1

Risheng Liu,1,2,∗ Xin Fan,1,2 Shichao Cheng,1,2,3 Xiangyu Wang,1,2 Zhongxuan Luo1,2,3
DUT-RU International School of Information Science & Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
2
Key Laboratory for Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning Province, Dalian, China
3
School of Mathematical Science, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
{rsliu, xin.fan, zxluo}@dlut.edu.cn, shichao.cheng@outlook.com, wxy9326@gmail.com
model and iteration scheme. The main idea is to unroll numerical algorithms and constitute their network architectures based on the resulted iterations. In this way, these approaches successfully incorporate the information of a predeﬁned energy into the network propagation. Nevertheless,
due to the dynamical nature of parameterized iterations, existing theoretical results, especially convergence, from the
optimization area are not valid at all. Furthermore, the unrolled deep models are often with limited ﬂexibility and
adaptability as the basic architectures are restricted by the
particular iteration scheme.
To partially overcome limitations in existing approaches,
this work attempts to develop a simple, ﬂexible and efﬁcient
framework to build deep models for various real-word applications. The launching point of our work is from EnergyBased Models (EBMs) (Teh et al. 2003; Zhao, Mathieu, and
LeCun 2016). EBMs are a series of methods, which associate a scalar energy to each conﬁguration of observations
and their interested perditions. The inference of EBM consists of searching for a conﬁguration of variables that minimizes the energy. In this work, we consider the following
energy minimization formulation

Abstract
Deep learning models have gained great success in many
real-world applications. However, most existing networks are
typically designed in heuristic manners, thus lack of rigorous mathematical principles and derivations. Several recent
studies build deep structures by unrolling a particular optimization model that involves task information. Unfortunately,
due to the dynamic nature of network parameters, their resultant deep propagation networks do not possess the nice convergence property as the original optimization scheme does.
This paper provides a novel proximal unrolling framework to
establish deep models by integrating experimentally veriﬁed
network architectures and rich cues of the tasks. More importantly, we prove in theory that 1) the propagation generated by
our unrolled deep model globally converges to a critical-point
of a given variational energy, and 2) the proposed framework
is still able to learn priors from training data to generate a convergent propagation even when task information is only partially available. Indeed, these theoretical results are the best
we can ask for, unless stronger assumptions are enforced. Extensive experiments on various real-world applications verify
the theoretical convergence and demonstrate the effectiveness
of designed deep models.

inf {F(x) := f (x; y) + r(x)} ,
x

Introduction

(1)

where y and x are the observed and predicted variables, respectively, r reveals the priors of predictions, and f is a measure of compatibility, i.e., ﬁdelity, between x and y.
We establish a novel proximal framework to unroll the
general energy in Eq. (1), and incorporate various experimentally efﬁcient architectures into the resulted deep model.
Promising theoretical properties and practical performance
will be also demonstrated. The main advantages of our
proposed framework against existing optimization-unrolled
deep models can be distilled to the following three points.
Insensitive Unrolling Scheme: Most existing iterationunrolling based deep models are strictly conﬁned to some
special types of energy formulations. For example, architectures in (Schmidt and Roth 2014; Chen and Pock 2017)
are deduced from the ﬁeld-of-experts prior while networks
in (Gregor and LeCun 2010) are based on 1 -regularizations.
In contrast, our unrolling strategy only depends on the separable structure and functional properties of F, but is completely insensitive to particular forms of f and r. We can
even design deep models without knowing the form of r so

In last years, deep models (a.k.a. deep neural networks)
have produced the state-of-the-art performance in many application ﬁelds, such as image processing, object recognition, natural language processing, and bioinformatics. On
the downside, these existing approaches are typically designed based on heuristic understandings of a particular
problem, and trained using engineering experience to implement multi-layered feature propagations, e.g., (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014;
He et al. 2016). Therefore, they lack solid theoretical guidances and interpretations. More importantly, it is challenging to incorporate the mathematical rules and principles of
the considered task into these existing networks.
Alternatively, several recent works, e.g., (Gregor and LeCun 2010; Schmidt and Roth 2014; Andrychowicz et al.
2016), build their networks using a speciﬁc optimization
∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1371

