The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Latent Opinions for Aspect-Level Sentiment Classiﬁcation
Bailin Wang

Wei Lu

College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003, USA
bailinwang@cs.umass.edu

Singapore University of Technology and Design
8 Somapah Road
Singapore, 487372
luwei@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Aspect-level sentiment classiﬁcation aims at detecting the
sentiment expressed towards a particular target in a sentence.
Based on the observation that the sentiment polarity is often
related to speciﬁc spans in the given sentence, it is possible to
make use of such information for better classiﬁcation. On the
other hand, such information can also serve as justiﬁcations
associated with the predictions. We propose a segmentation
attention based LSTM model which can effectively capture
the structural dependencies between the target and the sentiment expressions with a linear-chain conditional random
ﬁeld (CRF) layer. The model simulates human’s process of
inferring sentiment information when reading: when given a
target, humans tend to search for surrounding relevant text
spans in the sentence before making an informed decision on
the underlying sentiment information. We perform sentiment
classiﬁcation tasks on publicly available datasets on online reviews across different languages from SemEval tasks and social comments from Twitter. Extensive experiments show that
our model achieves the state-of-the-art performance while extracting interpretable sentiment expressions.

Figure 1: An example of a review with two target terms
which have different sentiments. The opinions are highlighted with a box and point to their corresponding targets.
opinions as latent variables and learns to focus on different
parts of the sentence given a particular target. However, standard attention mechanism does not model structural dependencies that exist in sentences. For example, as we can see
from the example given in Figure 1, the opinion expression
associated with a target may be in the form of a chunk or a
linear span structure. In general, the opinion expressions can
consist of multiple spans of texts. Accurately modeling and
extracting such structural information can be extremely crucial especially when the sentences contain multiple targets.
Therefore, we propose a model to capture such structural
information so that corresponding opinions can be identiﬁed
to facilitate the sentiment classiﬁcation. Speciﬁcally, we incorporate a layer that is analogous to conditional random
ﬁeld (CRF) (Lafferty, McCallum, and Pereira 2001) in the
attention modeling process to capture the structural dependencies. The resulting new attention mechanism will be able
to perform soft selections of opinion expressions in the form
of word spans. This can be viewed as an extension of the
standard attention mechanism. We call such a novel attention mechanism segmentation attention in this paper.
From the modeling perspective, standard attention mechanism that is widely used in the community can be viewed
as the process of performing soft selections of individual
words independently, whereas our segmentation attention
mechanism essentially captures the dependencies between
adjacent words in the process. As a result, we can understand the mechanism as a process that performs soft selections of a consecutive sequence of words or spans. This is
based on the observation that it is usually a coherent opinion
span rather than individual words scattered in the sentence
that form meaningful information, contributing towards the
sentiment. Standard attention-based models may make the
wrong decision when complex expressions are involved. To
bring positional information to the attention model, previous

Introduction
Aspect-level sentiment analysis (Pang, Lee, and others 2008;
Liu 2012) has been popular recently both in academic communities and industry since it allows the detailed examination of the user-generated text. Several subtasks are deﬁned
to achieve this goal, e.g., extraction of opinion targets, detection of aspect categories, and targeted sentiment classiﬁcation (Pontiki et al. 2014). Aspect-level sentiment classiﬁcation is one of these subtasks that aims at detecting the
sentiment expressed towards a particular target appearing in
a given sentence. Regarding such a task as a simple sentiment classiﬁcation problem at the sentence level (Socher
et al. 2013) is undesirable since different targets in the same
sentence may have different sentiment information. Figure 1
shows a concrete example. One key observation that we can
make here is that typically there is always one or more opinion expressions that contribute to the sentiment of the target.
Unlike the joint models (Li et al. 2010; Zhao et al. 2010;
Wang et al. 2016a) which extract the opinion terms explicitly, attention-based models (Wang et al. 2016b) regard the
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5537

