The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Sentiment Analysis via Deep Hybrid
Textual-Crowd Learning Model
Kamran Ghasedi Dizaji, Heng Huang∗
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, USA
kag221@pitt.edu, heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract
Crowdsourcing technique provides an efﬁcient platform to
employ human skills in sentiment analysis, which is a difﬁcult
task for automatic language models due to the large variations
in context, writing style, view point and so on. However, the
standard crowdsourcing aggregation models are incompetent
when the number of crowd labels per worker is not sufﬁcient
to train parameters, or when it is not feasible to collect labels
for each sample in a large dataset. In this paper, we propose
a novel hybrid model to exploit both crowd and text data for
sentiment analysis, consisting of a generative crowdsourcing
aggregation model and a deep sentimental autoencoder. Combination of these two sub-models is obtained based on a probabilistic framework rather than a heuristic way. We introduce
a uniﬁed objective function to incorporate the objectives of
both sub-models, and derive an efﬁcient optimization algorithm to jointly solve the corresponding problem. Experimental results indicate that our model achieves superior results in
comparison with the state-of-the-art models, especially when
the crowd labels are scarce.

(a) MV-DeepAE

(b) CrowdDeepAE

Figure 1: 2D visualization of CrowdDeepAE (ours) and MVDeepAE features on CrowdFlower dataset using PCA, when
only 20% of the crowd data is available.

task. In order to address this issue, it is common to collect multiple crowd labels for each sample to increase the
credibility of the estimated true labels. Several studies have
proposed different models to aggregate the crowd labels
and estimate the potential true labels, which are also called
truths (Dawid and Skene 1979; Chen, Lin, and Zhou 2013;
Whitehill et al. 2009; Zhou et al. 2014; Ghasedi Dizaji,
Yang, and Huang 2017). But these crowdsourcing aggregation models become drastically incompetent, when the number of crowd labels per worker is not enough to train the
reliability parameters of workers, or a document dataset is
extremely large that collecting crowd labels for all samples
is not practically feasible. In addition, crowdsourcing aggregation models do not utilize text data, and only use crowd
labels as the source of information (i.e. input data).
In this paper, we propose a new hybrid model for sentiment analysis, which utilizes both crowd labels and text
data. In particular, our proposed model, called CrowdDeepAE, consists of a generative aggregation model for
crowd labels and a deep autoencoder for text data. These two
sub-models are coupled in a probabilistic framework rather
than a heuristic approach. Using this probabilistic framework, we introduce a uniﬁed objective function that incorporates the interests of both sub-models. We further derive an
efﬁcient optimization algorithm to solve the corresponding
problem via an alternating approach, in which the parameters are updated while the truths are assumed to be known,
and the truths are estimated when the parameters are ﬁxed.
Therefore, CrowdDeepAE exploits the intelligence of
crowd workers and the underlying informations of text data

Introduction
Recently rapidly growing use of social media has provided
a huge source of public opinions about different topics. Efﬁcient mining of these opinions is very valuable for various industries and businesses. For instance, hotels, airlines,
lenders, banks and even politicians utilize these data to ﬁnd
new costumers, target new products, analyze the personality
of clients and make better decisions. However, exploring the
sentiment of public opinions is a very challenging task for
automatic language models due to different variations in the
texts, such as diverse contexts, genders of authors, writing
styles and varied viewpoints.
Crowdsourcing platforms like Amazon Mechanical Turk1
provide an efﬁcient tool to solve this type of the problems
by using the knowledge of crowd workers in different tasks
at low cost and time. Hence, the human skills in language
understanding can be used to interpret the sentiments of
texts with different variations. However, the collected labels via crowdsourcing are often noisy and inaccurate, because crowd workers are usually inexpert in the assigned
∗
To whom all correspondence should be addressed.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.mturk.com/

1563

