The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Mitigating Overexposure in Viral Marketing
Rediet Abebe

Lada A. Adamic

Jon Kleinberg

Cornell University
red@cs.cornell.edu

University of Michigan
ladamic@umich.edu

Cornell University
kleinber@cs.cornell.edu

objective function monotonically increases in the number of
people reached.
The dangers of overexposure. Separately from this, lines
of research in both marketing and in the dynamics of on-line
information have provided diverse evidence that the beneﬁts of a marketing campaign are not in fact purely increasing in the number of people reached. An inﬂuential example
of such a ﬁnding is the Groupon effect, in which viral marketing via Groupon coupons leads to lower Yelp ratings. In
(Byers, Mitzenmacher, and Zervas 2012), they note the negative effect Groupon has on average Yelp ratings and provide
arguments for the underlying mechanism; one of their central hypotheses is that by using Groupon as a matchmaker,
businesses may be attracting customers from a portion of
the population that is less inclined to like the product. In another example, (Kovcs and Sharkey 2014) discusses a setting
on Goodreads where books that win prestigious awards (or
are short-listed for them) attract more readers following the
announcement, which again leads to a drop in the average
rating of the book on the platform. In (Aizen et al. 2004),
they ﬁnd a similar effect for on-line videos and other media; they receive a discontinuous drop in their ratings when
a popular blog links to them, driving users to the item who
may not be interested in it.
Research in marketing has shown that exposure to different groups and inﬂuence between such groups can help
or hurt adoption (Hu and den Bulte 2014; Joshi, Reibstein,
and Zhang 2016; Berger and Heath 2007). For example, (Hu
and den Bulte 2014) argues that agents adopt products to
boost their status; and so as word-of-mouth effects for a
product become stronger among middle-income individuals,
there might be a negative impact on adoption among higherincome individuals. Similar behavior is observed in health
campaigns. In (Wakeﬁeld et al. 2003), they discuss the importance of segmenting populations and exposing groups to
anti-smoking campaigns whose themes the group is most
susceptible to in order to maximize impact of future campaigns.
We think of these effects collectively as different forms of
overexposure; while reaching many potential customers is
not a concern in and of itself, the empirical research above
suggests that there may exist particular subsets of the population — potentially large subsets — who will react negatively to the product. When a marketing cascade reaches

Abstract
In traditional models for word-of-mouth recommendations
and viral marketing, the objective function has generally been
based on reaching as many people as possible. However, a
number of studies have shown that the indiscriminate spread
of a product by word-of-mouth can result in overexposure,
reaching people who evaluate it negatively. This can lead to
an effect in which the over-promotion of a product can produce negative reputational effects, by reaching a part of the
audience that is not receptive to it.
How should one make use of social inﬂuence when there is
a risk of overexposure? In this paper, we develop and analyze a theoretical model for this process; we show how it captures a number of the qualitative phenomena associated with
overexposure, and for the main formulation of our model, we
provide a polynomial-time algorithm to ﬁnd the optimal marketing strategy. We also present simulations of the model on
real network topologies, quantifying the extent to which our
optimal strategies outperform natural baselines.

Introduction
A rich line of research has studied the effectiveness of marketing strategies based on person-to-person recommendation within a social network — a process often termed viral marketing (Jurvetson 2000) and closely connected to
the broader sociological literature on the diffusion of innovations in social networks (Rogers 1995). A key genre of
theoretical question that emerged early in this literature is
the problem of optimally “seeding” a product in a social
network through the selection of a set of initial adopters
(Domingos and Richardson 2001; Kempe, Kleinberg, and
Tardos 2003; Richardson and Domingos 2002). In this class
of questions, we consider a ﬁrm that has a product they
would like to market to a group of agents on a social network; it is often the case that the ﬁrm cannot target all the
participants in the network, and so they seek to target the
most inﬂuential ones so as to maximize exposure and create
a cascade of adoptions. Approaches to this question have
generally been based on objective functions in which the
goal is to maximize the number of people who are reached
by the network cascade — or more generally, in which the
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

241

