The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Linear and Integer Programming-Based Heuristics
for Cost-Optimal Numeric Planning
†

Chiara Piacentini,† Margarita P. Castro,† Andre A. Cire,‡ J. Christopher Beck†
Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada, ON M5S 3G8
‡
Department of Management, University of Toronto Scarborough, Toronto, Canada, ON M1C 1A4

heuristic values. Given the ability of LP to reason with numeric constraints, its use in numeric planning has shown to
be promising. For example, the planner LPRPG integrates
LP models with Relaxed Planning Graphs (RPG) to calculate upper and lower bounds of numeric resources when
applying actions (Coles et al. 2008). The hybrid landmark
heuristic (Scala et al. 2017) exploits LP models to compute the minimal number of actions required to achieve numeric conditions identiﬁed as landmarks. The result of the
LP model is then used as an admissible estimate to solve
cost-optimal numeric planning problems.
In this paper, we explore the use of IP and LP models to calculate admissible heuristics for numeric planning
problems, where actions modify numeric state variables by
adding constant quantities. We adapt the IP model of the
delete relaxation in classical planning (Imai and Fukunaga
2015) to the interval relaxation for numeric planning. In addition, we extend this model to include constraints from the
classical operator counting framework (Pommerening et al.
2015). We experiment with both IP models and their LP relaxations on a set of benchmark domains. In contrast to classical planning, we ﬁnd that our IP heuristics are preferable to
their LP counterparts as they outperform the state-of-the-art
numeric planners.

Abstract
Linear programming has been successfully used to compute
admissible heuristics for cost-optimal classical planning. Although one of the strengths of linear programming is the ability to express and reason about numeric variables and constraints, their use in numeric planning is limited. In this work,
we extend linear programming-based heuristics for classical planning to support numeric state variables. In particular, we propose a model for the interval relaxation, coupled with landmarks and state equation constraints. We consider both linear programming models and their harder-tosolve, yet more informative, integer programming versions.
Our experimental analysis shows that considering an NPHard heuristic often pays off and that A∗ search using our
integer programming heuristics establishes a new state of the
art in cost-optimal numeric planning.

1

Introduction

Cost-optimal planning is the problem of selecting a
minimal-cost sequence of actions to achieve a set of goals.
Several works (e.g. (Karpas and Domshlak 2009; Pommerening, Röger, and Helmert 2013)) focus on its classical version, in which states are represented by propositional
variables. This classical representation limits the expressive
power of the formalism, as problems with unbounded domain variables cannot be expressed. The encoding of variables with discrete and ﬁnite domains is possible, but arithmetic operations require at least a number of propositions
that is quadratic in the variables’ domain.
Numeric planning is an extension of classical planning in
which state variables can assume numeric values and conditions can be represented as numeric expressions over such
variables. Its higher expressive power makes numeric planning more attractive for real-world applications. However,
this expressivity comes at a price: numeric planning problems are, in the general case, undecidable, while classical
planning is in P-SPACE (Helmert 2002).
Integer and linear programming (IP and LP, respectively)
are optimization techniques for problems that can be formulated over a set of integer or continuous variables subject to
linear constraints and a linear objective function. A number
of works in classical planning use LP models to calculate

2

Notation and Preliminaries

We consider numeric planning with instantaneous actions,
corresponding to a fragment of planning expressible with
PDDL2.1, level 2 (Fox and Long 2003).
A numeric planning task is a 5-tuple Π
=
Vp , Vn , A, I, G, where Vp is the set of propositional
variables, Vn is the set numeric variables, A is the set of
action operators, I is the initial state, and G is a set of goal
conditions. Propositional variables vp ∈ VP assume binary
domains {true, false}, while numeric variables vn ∈ Vn
have numeric domains Q. A state s is a mapping of all the
variables to a value in their respective domains. We denote
s(v) to be the value of a variable v in state s. In particular, I
represents the initial state of the planning task and so I(v)
is the value of v in the initial state.
In numeric planning, conditions can be of two types:
propositional or numeric. A propositional condition corresponds to a variable vp ∈ Vp being true. A numeric condition c is deﬁned as c : ξ  0, where  ∈ {≤, <, =} and ξ is

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6254

