The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Bayesian Verb Sense Clustering
Daniel W. Peterson, Martha Palmer
University of Colorado
{daniel.w.peterson,martha.palmer}@colorado.edu

labels the semantic roles of arguments. VerbNet’s accuracy,
and rich annotation, has made it useful for semantic tasks
like semantic role labeling (Palmer, Gildea, and Xue 2010;
Giuglea and Moschitti 2006).
In practice, it is difﬁcult to get the full value from VerbNet.
It suffers from lack of coverage, despite manual work that
spans over a decade. Verb use and meaning varies widely, and
specialized domains such as legal and medical documents are
poorly covered. It has no coverage for languages other than
English. Expanding coverage to these areas through manual
effort alone is infeasible.
Automated approaches to this problem are promising in
general, and address the main concerns of extending coverage
and domain speciﬁcity. There has been a limited amount of
work in this domain. Mainly it has focused on probabilistic
graphical models, which can give a measure of uncertainty
along with their estimates of cluster membership. Given a
corpus, such a model can output a verb clustering that has full
coverage, tailored speciﬁcally to the domain of interest. For
any sentence, a full description of the possible cluster memberships can be trivially computed, and semantic processing
of documents in the target domain can become much easier.
The state-of-the-art model (Kawahara, Peterson, and Palmer
2014) breaks the problem into two steps: sense induction
and verb clustering. This work includes contributions to each
step.
Our ﬁrst contribution is improved sense induction. Our
new model improves clustering accuracy of verbs into senses
by an absolute F1 of over 20%. These improvements carry
over to direct, across-the-board improvements in the second
step, which is clustering those senses into a VerbNet-like
structure.
Our second contribution is a new model, based on the positive pointwise mutual information (PPMI). This measure
has been shown to be extremely effective at modeling distributional similarity, and has wide applicability on semantic
tasks (Levy and Goldberg 2014b). The main insight behind
this model is that Dirichlet multinomial mixtures, like latent
Dirichlet allocation (LDA) (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003), compute the sufﬁcient statistics of word distributions in each topic.
The PPMI can be computed with the same sufﬁcient statistics,
and is a sparse representation whose vector is semantically
meaningful.
With this new model, we are able to achieve better clus-

Abstract
This work performs verb sense induction and clustering based
on observed syntactic distributions in a large corpus. VerbNet
is a hierarchical clustering of verbs and a useful semantic
resource. We address the main drawbacks of VerbNet, by
proposing a Bayesian model to build VerbNet-like clusters
automatically and with full coverage. Relative to the prior
state of the art, we improve accuracy on verb sense induction
by over 20% absolute F1. We then propose a new model,
inspired by the positive pointwise mutual information (PPMI).
Our PPMI-based mixture model permits an extremely efﬁcient
sampler, while improving performance. Our best model shows
a 4.5% absolute F1 improvement over the best non-PPMI
model, with over an order of magnitude less computation time.
Though this model is inspired by clustering verb senses, it
may be applicable in other situations where multiple items are
being sampled as a group.

1

Introduction

The distributional hypothesis is most eloquantly stated as,
“You shall know a word by the company it keeps” (Firth
1957). Semantic vectors built on this principle (Deerwester et
al. 1990; Mikolov, Yih, and Zweig 2013; Pennington, Socher,
and Manning 2014) have proven to be highly effective representations of words for many natural language processing
tasks. The vectors capture a view of a word’s context, typically representing the words appearing within a reasonably
small, sliding window.
This work builds on a modiﬁed distributional hypothesis for analyzing verb semantics, which states that the distribution of syntactic expressions can play an equally important role in reﬂecting a word’s semantics (Levin 1993).
VerbNet (Kipper-Schuler 2005) is a lexical resource relying on this syntactic version of the distributional hypothesis. It is a hierarchical clustering of verbs, manually built
by linguists, on this theoretical footing. Polysemy, where
a word may have more than one meaning, is important to
verb semantics - “enter a room” is fundamentally different
than “enter a race”, and we should account for this fact.
VerbNet handles polysemy by allowing distinct senses of
verbs to participate in different clusters. VerbNet additionally lists the allowed syntactic patterns for each class, and
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5398

