The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Discriminative Semi-Supervised Feature Selection
via Rescaled Least Squares Regression-Supplement
1

2

Guowen Yuan,1 Xiaojun Chen,1∗ Chen Wang,1 Feiping Nie,2 Liping Jing3

College of Computer Science and Software, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, P.R. China
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTIMAL, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi an 710072, P. R. China
3
School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
243864952@qq.com, xjchen@szu.edu.cn, wangchen6771448@qq.com, feipingnie@gmail.com, lpjing@bjtu.edu.cn
model. Experimental results on four real-life data sets show
the superiority of DSSFS.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a Discriminative Semi-Supervised
Feature Selection (DSSFS) method. In this method, a dragging technique is introduced to the Rescaled Linear
Square Regression in order to enlarge the distances between
different classes. An iterative method is proposed to simultaneously learn the regression coefﬁcients, -draggings matrix
and predicting the unknown class labels. Experimental results
show the superiority of DSSFS.

Discriminative Semi-Supervised Feature
Selection
In semi-supervised learning, a data set X ∈ Rd×n with c
classes consists of two subsets: a set of l labeled objects
XL = (x1 , ..., xl ) which are associated with class labels
YL = {y1 , ..., yl }T ∈ Rl×c , and a set of u = n − l
unlabeled objects XU = (xl+1 , ..., xl+u )T whose labels
YU = {yl+1 , ..., yl+u }T ∈ Ru×c are unknown. Here,
yi ∈ Rc (1 ≤ i ≤ l) is a binary vector in which yij = 1
if xi belongs to the j-th class.
To measure the importances of d features, we introduce
d scale factors θ in which θj > 0(1 ≤ j ≤ d) measures
the importances of the j-th feature. We use θ to evaluate
the importances of the d features and the k most important
features can be selected according the biggest k values in θ.
To learn Θ and YU simultaneously, we form the following
problem

Introduction
With the rapid increase of data size, it is desirable to develop
feature selection methods that are capable of exploiting both
labeled and unlabeled data. During the past ten years, various
semi-supervised feature selection methods have been proposed recently. Most semi-supervised feature selection methods are ﬁlter-based by ranking the features wherein the highly
ranked features are selected and applied to a predictor (Zhao
and Liu 2007; Xu et al. 2016). However, the ﬁlter-based feature selection could discard important features that are less
informative by themselves but are informative when combined with other features. Ren et al. proposed a wrapper-type
forward semi-supervised feature selection framework (Ren
et al. 2008), which performs supervised sequential forward
feature selection on both labeled and unlabeled data. However, this method is time consuming for high-dimensional
data because it involves iterative feature subset searching.
Embedded semi-supervised methods take feature selection as
part of the training process, therefore, are superior to others in
many respects. Recently, Chen et al. proposed a Rescaled Linear Square Regression (RLSR) for semi-supervised feature
selection task (Chen et al. 2017).
In order to select features with discriminative power, it
is often desired that the distances between data points in
different classes are as large as possible after they are transformed. In this paper, we propose a fast Discriminative SemiSupervised Feature Selection (DSSFS). In this method, a
-dragging technique is introduced to the Rescaled Linear
Square Regression to enlarge the distances between different
classes. We propose an iterative method to optimize the new



2


min XT ΘW + 1bT − Y − (2Y − 1) ◦ M + γ W2F
F

T

st. W, b, θ > 0, 1 θ = 1, YU ≥ 0, YU 1 = 1, M ≥ 0
(1)

where Θ ∈ Rd×dis a rescale matrix which is a diagonal
matrix and Θjj = θj . Let E = 2Y − 1, then E ∈ Rn×c
is a constant matrix, in which eil = +1 if the i-th object
belongs to the l-th class, −1 if the i-th object does not belong
to the l-th class, or 0 if l ≤ i ≤ n. M is a -draggings matrix
to be learnt.
According to Theorem (1) in (Chen et al. 2017), problem
(1) is equivalent to the following sparse problem


2


min XT W + 1bT − Y − (2Y − 1) ◦ M + γ W22,1
F

T

st. W, b, θ > 0, 1 θ = 1, YU ≥ 0, YU 1 = 1, M ≥ 0
(2)

∗

Xiaojun Chen is the corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

wj 
where the optimal solution of θ is θj = d w2j  .
j=1

8177

2

