The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Modeling Attention and Memory for
Auditory Selection in a Cocktail Party Environment
Jiaming Xu,1,2 Jing Shi,1,2,3 Guangcan Liu,1,2,3 Xiuyi Chen,1,2,3 Bo Xu1,2,3,4∗
1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA). Beijing, China
2
Research Center for Brain-inspired Intelligence, CASIA
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS. China
{jiaming.xu, shijing2014, liuguangcan2016, chenxiuyi2017, xubo}@ia.ac.cn
the recent years due to the success of deep learning, developing a computational auditory model to solve the cocktail
party problem still has many unresolved issues, such as label ambiguity or permutation problem (Yu et al. 2017) and
output dimension mismatch problem (Chen, Luo, and Mesgarani 2017). The former problem raises due to the fact that
the order of the sources in the mixture is irrelevant, while the
latter problem is usually encountered by a unﬁxed number of
sources in the mixture.
Recently, some researchers have attempted to alleviate
these problems. For example, Yu et al. (2017) proposed a
Permutation Invariant Training (PIT) method to solve the
permutation problem by pooling over all possible permutation for N mixed sources (N ! permutations), and minimize the source reconstruction error no matter how labels
are ordered. In order to solve both permutation and output dimension problems, Hershey et al. (2016) proposed a
Deep Clustering (DC) method which ﬁrst maps the timefrequency units into a embedding space, and then generates a partition of the time-frequency units by employing a
clustering algorithm, such as k-means. Following DC, Chen
et al. (2017) proposed a Deep Attractor Network (DANet)
which ﬁrst forms k attractor points (cluster centers) in the
embedding space and then pulls together the time-frequency
units corresponding to the attractor points. Although DC and
DANet are ﬂexible to conduct speech separation on different number of sources in the mixture without retraining and
produce the state-of-the-art separation, both of them require
a certain cluster number during evaluation to separate all the
speech channels.
Obviously, this assumption to be given a certain cluster number is too strict to offer a satisfactory solution in a
complex auditory scene, where it is difﬁcult to determine
the number of the input sources. From the previous reports on dichotic listening behavior (O’sullivan et al. 2015;
Cherry 1953), human is not able to listen to, and remember two concurrent speech streams, while listeners usually
select the attended speech and ignore other sounds in the
conditions where signals are either mixed or presented to
separate ears. Such manner makes human auditory system
have the ability to attend their interesting speech in a complex auditory scene without considering the number of the
input auditory signals. Thus, developing an auditory attentive selection model to solve the cocktail party problem may

Abstract
Developing a computational auditory model to solve the
cocktail party problem has long bedeviled scientists, especially for a single microphone recording. Although recent deep learning based frameworks have made signiﬁcant
progress in multi-talker mixed speech separation, most existing deep learning based methods, focusing on separating all
the speech channels rather than selectively attending the target speech and ignoring other sounds, may fail to offer a satisfactory solution in a complex auditory scene where the number of input sounds is usually uncertain and even dynamic. In
this work, we employ ideas from auditory selective attention
of behavioral and cognitive neurosciences and from recent
advances of memory-augmented neural networks. Speciﬁcally, a uniﬁed Auditory Selection framework with Attention
and Memory (dubbed ASAM) is proposed. Our ASAM ﬁrst
accumulates the prior knowledge (that is the acoustic feature
to one speciﬁc speaker) into a life-long memory during the
training phase, meanwhile a speech perceptor is trained to
extract the temporal acoustic feature and update the memory
online when a salient speech is given. Then, the learned memory is utilized to interact with the mixture input to attend and
ﬁlter the target frequency out from the mixture stream. Finally, the network is trained to minimize the reconstruction
error of the attended speech. We evaluate the proposed approach on WSJ0 and THCHS-30 datasets and the experimental results demonstrate that our approach successfully conducts two auditory selection tasks: the top-down task-speciﬁc
attention (e.g. to follow a conversation with friend) and the
bottom-up stimulus-driven attention (e.g. be attracted by a
salient speech). Compared with deep clustering based methods, our method conducts competitive advantages especially
in a real noise environment (e.g. street junction). Our code is
available at https://github.com/jacoxu/ASAM.

Introduction
Cocktail party problem describes human’s ability that listeners can easily attend to one speaker in a multi-speaker environment (O’sullivan et al. 2015). Since its ﬁrst description in
1953 by Colin Cherry (1953), many researchers have sought
to understand and model the selective attention process of
multi-talker speech. Despite the signiﬁcant progress made in
∗

Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2564

