The Twenty-Third AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium

Decomposition-Based Solving Approaches
for Stochastic Constraint Optimisation
David Hemmi
Monash University, Data61/CSIRO, Melbourne, Australia
david.hemmi@monash.edu

technologies. This abstract only addresses CP, as it is most
relevant for my research. In CP, modelling frameworks that
allow solver agnostic modelling have been developed, e.g.
MiniZinc (Nethercote et al. 2007). Problems described in
MiniZinc can be solved using standard CP or MIP technology, without tailoring the model for a speciﬁc solver.
The idea is to separate modelling and solving, such that a
model can be expressed without understanding the solving
approach used to determine solutions. To solve SCOPs with
standard MIP or CP technology one has to formalise the deterministic equivalent (DE), a single model composed of all
scenarios. The goal of my research is to develop algorithms
that can be used to solve scenario-based SCOPs modeled in
a problem independent, high-level modelling language, such
as MiniZinc.

Abstract
Combinatorial optimisation problems often contain uncertainty that has to be taken into account to produce realistic
solutions. A common way to describe the uncertainty is by
means of scenarios, where each scenario describes different
potential sets of problem parameters based on random distributions or historical data. While efﬁcient algorithmic techniques exist for speciﬁc problem classes such as linear programs, there are very few approaches that can handle general
Constraint Programming formulations subject to uncertainty.
The goal of my PhD is to develop generic methods for solving
stochastic combinatorial optimisation problems formulated in
a Constraint Programming framework.

Introduction
Machine learning and statistical inference are popular techniques to forecast customer demand, patient ﬂow in healthcare, or travel times. However, to harness the real value of
predictions, one has to understand how to use this information to improve decision making. Importantly, predictions
are always subject to a certain conﬁdence level and in order to make realistic decisions, it is thus crucial to take this
inherent uncertainty into account.
The focus of my work is on stochastic optimisation problems with a combinatorial structure (SCOP), e.g. integer
variables and non-linear constraints. Scenarios are used to
characterise the random variables. Each scenario describes,
with a certain probability, the problem when all the random variables are ﬁxed to a speciﬁc value. Stochastic problems are composed of multiple stages, the simplest being
a two-stage problem. The ﬁrst-stage denotes the problem
before information about the random variables is revealed
and ﬁrst-stage decisions are taken with respect to all scenarios. Second-stage decisions are made once the scenario
parameters are observed. An example is the stochastic facility location problem, where in the ﬁrst-stage we have to
decide which facilities to open, such that the demand of all
customers revealed in the second-stage can be satisﬁed. I
will ﬁrst introduce a contribution for two-stage problems and
then elaborate how the multistage case relates.
Combinatorial optimisation problems can be formulated
using Mixed Integer (MIP) or Constraint Programming (CP)

Background
Multiple methods to solve stochastic programs have been
developed in the past (Schultz 2003). The most straight forward method is to formalise the DE and then use standard
solving technology to ﬁnd solutions. The advantage of the
DE is its generality and ease of use, yet solving the DE
is intractable for all but the smallest problem instances. To
solve more challenging SCOPs various research directions
have been explored, yet a substantial amount of work has
focussed on decomposition algorithms.

Decomposition Methods
An alternative to the DE is to decompose the SCOP, in one of
two ways. The problem can either be relaxed by time stages,
where a master problem describes the ﬁrst-stage and contains an approximation of the second stage. This is similar to
Benders decomposition and named L-Shaped method in the
context of SCOP. Secondly, the problem can be decomposed
by scenarios. For each scenario, a copy of the ﬁrst-stage
variables is introduced. To ensure feasibility, additional consistency constraints that enforce the ﬁrst-stage variables to
agree across all scenarios are added. These consistency constraints can be relaxed by breaking up the model into subparts. Progressive hedging (PH) and the dual decomposition
(DD) method are examples that work based on the scenario
decomposition, both are complete for linear problems with
continuous variables, however not for combinatorial problems (Hemmi, Tack, and Wallace 2017).

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8016

