The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Bernoulli Embeddings for Graphs
Vinith Misra,α Sumit Bhatiaβ ∗
α

β

Netﬂix Inc., Los Gatos, CA, USA
IBM India Research Laboratory, New Delhi, India
vmisra@netﬂix.com, sumitbhatia@in.ibm.com

Abstract

Technique

Preprocess

Query

Just as semantic hashing (Salakhutdinov and Hinton 2009) can
accelerate information retrieval, binary valued embeddings can
signiﬁcantly reduce latency in the retrieval of graphical data.
We introduce a simple but effective model for learning such
binary vectors for nodes in a graph. By imagining the embeddings as independent coin ﬂips of varying bias, continuous
optimization techniques can be applied to the approximate expected loss. Embeddings optimized in this fashion consistently
outperform the quantization of both spectral graph embeddings
and various learned real-valued embeddings, on both ranking
and pre-ranking tasks for a variety of datasets.

Observable features
Real embeddings
Binary embeddings
(sparse similarities)
Real embeddings
(quantized)
Binary embeddings
(dense similarities)

O(1) (slow)
O(ED)

O(N ) (slow)
O(N ) (fast)

O(ED)

O(1)

O(ED)

O(1)

O(N 2 )

O(1)

1

Table 1: Complexity of ﬁve different node retrieval approaches, ranked from highest to lowest accuracy (Table
2). N nodes, E edges, and D latent dimensions.

Introduction

Consider users — perhaps from the research, intelligence,
or recruiting community — who seek to explore graphical data — perhaps knowledge graphs or social networks.
If the graph is small, it is reasonable for these users to
directly explore the data by examining nodes and traversing edges. For larger graphs, or for graphs with noisy
edges, it rapidly becomes necessary to algorithmically aid
users. The problems that arise in this setting are essentially those of information retrieval and recommendation for
graphical data, and are well studied (Hasan and Zaki 2011;
Blanco et al. 2013): identifying the most important edges,
predicting links that do not exist, and the like. The responsiveness of these retrieval systems is critical (Gray and BoehmDavis 2000), and has driven numerous system designs in
both hardware (Hong, Oguntebi, and Olukotun 2011) and
software (Low et al. 2014). An alternative is to seek algorithmic solutions to this latency challenge.
Models that perform link prediction and node retrieval
can be evaluated across two axes: the relevance of the retrieved nodes and the speed of retrieval. The gold standard
in relevance is typically set by trained models that rely on
“observable” features that quantify the connectivity between
two nodes, but these models are often quite slow to evaluate
due to the complexity of the features in question.
At the other extreme, binary-valued embeddings can accelerate the retrieval of graphical data, much in the same

manner that semantic hashing (Salakhutdinov and Hinton
2009) can assist in the efﬁcient retrieval of text and image
data. Roughly speaking, having a binary representation for
each node allows one to search for similar nodes in constant
time directly in the binary embedding space — much faster
than the alternatives (Table 1).
The challenge is that efﬁcient binary representations can be
difﬁcult to learn: for any reasonable metric of accuracy, ﬁnding optimal binary representations is NP-hard. One solution
is to lean on the large body of work around learning continuous embeddings for graphs, and utilize modern quantization
techniques to binarize these continuous representations. The
“catch” with this approach is that the continuous embeddings
are not optimized with their future binarization in mind, and
this hurts the relevance of retrieved nodes (Sec. 4.4).
Our primary contribution, thus, is an end-to-end method
for learning embeddings that are explicitly optimized with
both binarization and their use in link prediction/node retrieval in mind. More concretely: in a manner similar to
Skip-gram (Mikolov et al. 2013), the likelihood of an edge
between two nodes is modeled as a function of the Hamming
distance between their bit embeddings. Rather than directly
optimizing the bit embeddings eij for this task — an NPhard task (Weiss, Torralba, and Fergus 2009) — they are
instead imagined as being drawn from a matrix of independent Bernoulli random variables Eij , parametrized by their
(independent) probabilities of success pij . By minimizing
expected loss over this (product) distribution of embeddings,

∗
Part of this work was conducted while both the authors were at
IBM Almaden Research Center.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3812

