The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Extremely Low Bit Neural Network:
Squeeze the Last Bit Out with ADMM
Cong Leng, Zesheng Dou, Hao Li, Shenghuo Zhu, Rong Jin
Alibaba Group
{lengcong.lc, zesheng.dzs, lihao.lh, shenghuo.zhu, jinrong.jr}@alibaba-inc.com

rameters by exploiting the linear structure of network (Denil et al. 2013), which motivated a series of low-rank matrix/tensor factorization based compression algorithms, e.g.
(Zhang et al. 2016; Denton et al. 2014; Lebedev et al. 2014).
Alternatively, multiple studies were devoted to discritizing
network weights using vector quantization methods (Gong
et al. 2014; Wu et al. 2016), which often outperformed the
matrix/tensor factorization based methods (Wu et al. 2016).
Han et al. presented the deep compression method that integrates multiple compression methods to achieve a large reduction in model size (Han, Mao, and Dally 2015). Another
line of work for model compression is to restrict network
weights to low precision with a few bits. The advantage of
this restriction is that an expensive ﬂoating-point multiplication operation can now be replaced by a sequence of cheaper
and faster binary bit shift operations. This not only reduces
the memory footprints but also accelerates the computation of the network. These approaches work well when pretrained weights are quantized into 4-12 bits (Lin et al. 2015;
Dettmers 2015; Courbariaux, Bengio, and David 2014;
Lin, Talathi, and Annapureddy 2015). When coming to extremely low bit networks, i.e. only one or two bits are used
to represent weights (Courbariaux, Bengio, and David 2015;
Hubara, Soudry, and Yaniv 2016; Cheng et al. 2015), they
only work well on simple datasets (e.g. MNIST and CIFAR10), and usually incur a large loss on challenging
datasets like ImageNet.
In this work, we focus on compressing and accelerating deep neural networks with extremely low bits weights,
and present a uniﬁed strategy for learning such low bits
networks. We overcome the limitation of the existing approaches by formulating it as a discretely constrained nonconvex optimization problem, which is usually referred to as
mixed integer programs (MIP). Given the NP hard nature of
MIPs, we proposed a framework for learning extremely low
bit neural network using the technique of alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) (Boyd et al. 2011).
The main idea behind our method is to decouple the continuous variables from the discrete constraints using an auxiliary variable in the discrete space. This leads to a convenient form of the objective which is amenable to existing nonconvex optimization algorithms. Unlike previous low
bit quantization methods (Courbariaux, Bengio, and David
2015; Rastegari et al. 2016; Li, Zhang, and Liu 2016) that

Abstract
Although deep learning models are highly effective for various learning tasks, their high computational costs prohibit
the deployment to scenarios where either memory or computational resources are limited. In this paper, we focus on compressing and accelerating deep models with network weights
represented by very small numbers of bits, referred to as extremely low bit neural network. We model this problem
as a discretely constrained optimization problem. Borrowing the idea from Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM), we decouple the continuous parameters from
the discrete constraints of network, and cast the original hard
problem into several subproblems. We propose to solve these
subproblems using extragradient and iterative quantization algorithms that lead to considerably faster convergency compared to conventional optimization methods. Extensive experiments on image recognition and object detection verify
that the proposed algorithm is more effective than state-ofthe-art approaches when coming to extremely low bit neural
network.

Introduction
These years have witnessed the success of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) in a wide range computer vision
tasks, such as image classiﬁcation, object detection and segmentation. The success of deep learning largely owes to the
fast development of computing resources. Most of the deep
learning models are trained on high-ended GPUs or CPU
clusters. On the other hand, deeper networks impose heavy
storage footprint due to the enormous amount of network
parameters. For example, the 16-layers VGG involves 528
MBytes of model parameters. Both the high computational
and storage cost become impediments to popularize the deep
neural networks to scenarios where either memory or computational resources are limited. The great interest to deploy
deep learning systems on low-ended devices motives the research in compressing deep models to have smaller computation cost and memory footprints.
Considerable efforts have been mounted to reduce the
model size and speed up the inference of deep models. Denil et al. pointed out that network weights have a signiﬁcant redundancy, and proposed to reduce the number of pac 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3466

