The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Unravelling Robustness of Deep Learning Based
Face Recognition against Adversarial Attacks
Gaurav Goswami,1,2 Nalini Ratha,3 Akshay Agarwal,1 Richa Singh,1 Mayank Vatsa1
1

IIIT-Delhi, India 2 IBM IRL, Bangalore, India, 3 IBM TJ Watson Research Center, USA
{gauravgs, akshaya, rsingh, mayank}@iiitd.ac.in, ratha@us.ibm.com

Abstract

2ULJLQDO
PDWFKHG
SDLU

Deep neural network (DNN) architecture based models have
high expressive power and learning capacity. However, they
are essentially a black box method since it is not easy to mathematically formulate the functions that are learned within
its many layers of representation. Realizing this, many researchers have started to design methods to exploit the drawbacks of deep learning based algorithms questioning their robustness and exposing their singularities. In this paper, we
attempt to unravel three aspects related to the robustness of
DNNs for face recognition: (i) assessing the impact of deep
architectures for face recognition in terms of vulnerabilities
to attacks inspired by commonly observed distortions in the
real world that are well handled by shallow learning methods
along with learning based adversaries; (ii) detecting the singularities by characterizing abnormal ﬁlter response behavior in the hidden layers of deep networks; and (iii) making
corrections to the processing pipeline to alleviate the problem. Our experimental evaluation using multiple open-source
DNN-based face recognition networks, including OpenFace
and VGG-Face, and two publicly available databases (MEDS
and PaSC) demonstrates that the performance of deep learning based face recognition algorithms can suffer greatly in
the presence of such distortions. The proposed method is also
compared with existing detection algorithms and the results
show that it is able to detect the attacks with very high accuracy by suitably designing a classiﬁer using the response of
the hidden layers in the network. Finally, we present several
effective countermeasures to mitigate the impact of adversarial attacks and improve the overall robustness of DNN-based
face recognition.

9** 
2) 

9** 
2) 
*HQXLQH

*HQXLQH
$GGGLVWRUWLRQ

$GGGLVWRUWLRQ
$WWDFNHU
FUHDWHGD
IDOVHUHMHFW

2ULJLQDO
QRQPDWFKHG
SDLU

9** 
2) 
,PSRVWRU

9** 
2) 

9** 
2) 

9** 
2) 

,PSRVWRU

,PSRVWRU

,PSRVWRU
$GGGLVWRUWLRQ

$GGGLVWRUWLRQ
$WWDFNHU
FUHDWHGD
IDOVHDFFHSW

$GGGLVWRUWLRQ

9** 
2) 

9** 
2) 

*HQXLQH

*HQXLQH

Figure 1: We show that deep learning based OpenFace (OF)
and VGG-Face can be deceived even by image processing
operations that mimic real world distortions.

are susceptible to adversaries which can cause the classiﬁer
to yield incorrect results. Most of the time these adversaries
are unintentional and are in the form of outliers. Recently, it
has been shown that fooling images can be generated in such
a manner where humans can correctly classify the images
but deep learning algorithms misclassify them (Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2015), (Nguyen, Yosinski, and Clune
2015). As shown in Table 1, such images can be generated
via evolutionary algorithms (Nguyen, Yosinski, and Clune
2015) or adversarial sample crafting using the fast gradient sign method (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015).
Sharif et al. (2016) explored threat models by creating perturbed eye-glasses to fool face recognition algorithms. An
adversarial attack on face recognition is not acceptable as
face biometric gets used in many high security applications
such as passports, visa, and other law enforcement documents.
It is our assertion that it is not required to attack the system with sophisticated learning based attacks; and attacks
such as adding random noise or horizontal and vertical black
grid lines in the face image cause reduction in face veriﬁcation accuracies. Samples images in Figure 1 show a glimpse
of the effect of image processing operations on two state-ofthe-art deep learning based face recognition algorithms. To

Introduction
Deep learning paradigm has seen signiﬁcant proliferation in
face recognition due to the convenience of obtaining large
training data, availability of inexpensive computing power
and memory, and utilization of cameras at multiple places.
Several algorithms such as DeepFace (Taigman, Y. and
Yang, M. and Ranzato, M. and Wolf, L. 2014), DeepID (Sun,
Wang, and Tang 2015), FaceNet (Schroff, Kalenichenko,
and Philbin 2015), and Liu et al. (2015) are successful examples of the coalesce of deep learning and face recognition.
However, it is also known that machine learning algorithms
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6829

