The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Approximate Vanishing Ideal via Data Knotting
Hiroshi Kera, Yoshihiko Hasegawa
Department of Information and Communication Engineering,
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
kera@biom.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
The vanishing ideal is a set of polynomials that takes zero
value on the given data points. Originally proposed in computer algebra, the vanishing ideal has been recently exploited
for extracting the nonlinear structures of data in many applications. To avoid overﬁtting to noisy data, the polynomials
are often designed to approximately rather than exactly equal
zero on the designated data. Although such approximations
empirically demonstrate high performance, the sound algebraic structure of the vanishing ideal is lost. The present paper
proposes a vanishing ideal that is tolerant to noisy data and
also pursued to have a better algebraic structure. As a new
problem, we simultaneously ﬁnd a set of polynomials and
data points for which the polynomials approximately vanish
on the input data points, and almost exactly vanish on the
discovered data points. In experimental classiﬁcation tests,
our method discovered much fewer and lower-degree polynomials than an existing state-of-the-art method. Consequently,
our method accelerated the runtime of the classiﬁcation tasks
without degrading the classiﬁcation accuracy.

1

Figure 1: (Left panel) Polynomials that approximately vanish on the data points (red dots) in VCA. (Right panel) Vanishing polynomials and data knots (blue circles) obtained by
the proposed method, which almost exactly pass the data
knots.

Introduction

be viewed as a system to be satisﬁed by the input data points;
as such, it holds the nonlinear structure of the data. Exploiting these properties, Livni et al. (2013) proposed Vanishing Component Analysis (VCA), which extracts the compact nonlinear features of the data to be classiﬁed, and enables training by a simple linear classiﬁer. The vanishing
ideal has also identiﬁed the underlying dynamics in limited
observations (Torrente 2008; Robbiano and Abbott 2010;
Kera and Hasegawa 2016). In these applications, monomials
consisting of models are inferred from the vanishing ideal of
the observations.
As the available data in many applications are exposed to
noise, it has been common to compute polynomials that approximately rather than exactly vanish on the data to avoid
the overﬁtting problem (Heldt et al. 2009; Fassino 2010;
Livni et al. 2013; Limbeck 2013). However, this approximation destroys the sound algebraic structure of the vanishing
ideal. For instance, as shown in the left panel of Fig. 1, a
set of approximately vanishing polynomials is no longer an
algebraic system because it possesses no common roots. In
other words, there is a tradeoff between preserving the algebraic soundness of the vanishing ideal and avoiding overﬁtting to noise. Such a tradeoff has not been explicitly consid-

Bridging computer algebra and various applications such as
machine learning, computer vision, and systems biology has
been attracting interest over the past decade (Torrente 2008;
Laubenbacher and Sturmfels 2009; Li et al. 2011; Livni et al.
2013; Vera-Licona et al. 2014; Gao and Wang 2016). Borrowed from computer algebra, the vanishing ideal concept
has recently provided new perspectives and has proven effective in various ﬁelds. Especially, vanishing ideal based
approaches can discover the nonlinear structure of given
data (Laubenbacher and Stigler 2004; Livni et al. 2013;
Hou, Nie, and Tao 2016; Kera and Hasegawa 2016; Kera and
Iba 2016). The vanishing ideal is deﬁned as a set of polynomials that always take zero value, i.e., vanishes, on a set of
given data points:
I(X) = {g ∈ P | g(x) = 0, ∀x ∈ X} ,

(1)

where X is a set of d-dimensional data points, and P is
a set of d-variate polynomials. A vanishing ideal can be
spanned by a ﬁnite set of vanishing polynomials (Cox, Little, and O’shea 1992). This basis of the vanishing ideal can
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3399

