The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Variational Probability Flow for Biologically
Plausible Training of Deep Neural Networks
Zuozhu Liu, Tony Q.S. Quek, Shaowei Lin
Singapore University of Technology and Design
8 Somapah Road, Singapore, 487372

change in the weight of a synapse should depend only on
information that is directly accessible by the synapse, such
as the states and the ﬁring rates of the adjacent neurons. Local rules are also beneﬁcial for machine computation. When
the weight updates are not local, such as in the case of backpropagation, it may be necessary to store all the weights and
activities of a massive neural network in the memory of the
CPU or GPU. Schemes which bypass the need to store all
the weights often pay the price with slower convergence to
the optimal solution (Jaderberg et al. 2016).
Spike-Timing-Dependent Plasticity (STDP) is another attribute of biological networks (Markram and Sakmann 1995;
Gerstner et al. 1996; Bi and Poo 1998; Xie and Seung 2000).
This rule states that the change in the weights increases as
the time interval between the pre-synaptic and post-synaptic
spike decreases, and the sign of the change depends on the
temporal ordering of the two spikes. If the pre-synaptic neuron spikes before the post-synaptic neuron, then the weight
of the synapse increases, almost as if to increase the probability of the post-synaptic spike at the next pre-synaptic
spike. If the order of the spikes is switched, then the synaptic weight decreases. Bengio, et al. (2015) proposed a novel
weight update and showed via simulation that it gives rise
to STDP. This update rule was then justiﬁed using a new
learning framework and energy-based objective function.
The main contribution of this paper is the proposal of a
new learning algorithm, Variational Probability Flow (VPF),
that is biologically plausible in the following ways.

Abstract
The quest for biologically plausible deep learning is driven,
not just by the desire to explain experimentally-observed
properties of biological neural networks, but also by the
hope of discovering more efﬁcient methods for training artiﬁcial networks. In this paper, we propose a new algorithm
named Variational Probably Flow (VPF), an extension of
minimum probability ﬂow for training binary Deep Boltzmann Machines (DBMs). We show that weight updates in
VPF are local, depending only on the states and ﬁring rates
of the adjacent neurons. Unlike contrastive divergence, there
is no need for Gibbs confabulations; and unlike backpropagation, alternating feedforward and feedback phases are not
required. Moreover, the learning algorithm is effective for
training DBMs with intra-layer connections between the hidden nodes. Experiments with MNIST and Fashion MNIST
demonstrate that VPF learns reasonable features quickly, reconstructs corrupted images more accurately, and generates
samples with a high estimated log-likelihood. Lastly, we note
that, interestingly, if an asymmetric version of VPF exists, the
weight updates directly explain experimental results in SpikeTiming-Dependent Plasticity (STDP).

Introduction
With the immense success of deep learning in machine
learning and artiﬁcial intelligence, there has been signiﬁcant interest in determining the extent to which it explains
learning in biological neural networks. For example, Bengio,
et al. (2015) have pointed out several challenges in ﬁnding
biologically plausible implementations of backpropagation,
such as the need for precisely-clocked linear feedback paths
that have exact knowledge of the weights and the derivatives
involved in the feedforward paths. Moreover, backpropagation requires output targets, and passes real-valued signals
rather than binary-valued spikes between neurons (Bengio
et al. 2015; Rumelhart et al. 1988). Contrastive divergence,
on the other hand, trains a binary generative model, but it
involves Gibbs sampling to generate data confabulations for
the computation of a negative gradient (Hinton 2002). It is
unclear how this may be implemented biologically.
Minimally, the update rules for a biologically plausible learning algorithm should be local. More precisely, the

1. The update rule for a given weight wij is local. It only
depends on the binary-valued states yi , yj and the realvalued ﬁring rates δi , δj of the adjacent neurons.
2. An asymmetric version of the update explains STDP.
3. The model neurons are binary-valued, not real-valued.
4. The model is generative so output targets are not required.
5. The updates avoid feedback paths and confabulations.
6. The updates allow intra-layer connections to be trained.
In fact, the asymmetric update that we discovered is
Δwij ∝ yi δj

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

where yi is the pre-synaptic state and δj is the post-synaptic
ﬁring rate. This form is different from the update proposed

3698

