The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Decision Making Over Combinatorially-Structured Domains
Andrea Martin, K. Brent Venable
Department of Computer Science, Tulane University, LA, USA
amartin@tulane.edu and kvenabl@tulane.edu

Introduction and Motivation

utilities and we use a fuzzy constraints. Moreover, our goal
is to model the variability which is observed in human decision making when preferences come from different criteria as opposed to predicting preferences over unseen options
from known (or learned) ones.

Preferences are a very important notion in decision making.
As such they have been studied in multiple disciplines such
as psychology, philosophy and business and especially in
marketing. Recently, it has grown into an important topic in
computer science and speciﬁcally in Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Preference models are currently used in many applications,
such as scheduling and recommendation engines.
On the other hand, in psychology, Decision Field Theory
formalizes the process of deliberation in decision making. In
fact, when a person is confronted with a decision, she will
anticipate each course of action and will try to evaluate all
the possible consequences. While DFT has mainly tackled
the problem of making a single decision, both in real life and
in artiﬁcial intelligence applications, decision are more complex and it can be helpful to organized them in a combinatorial structure over which decisions can be applied sequentially. There are several approaches to modeling preferences
compactly, such as, for example, soft constraints (Meseguer,
Rossi, and Schiex 2005). In this paper we focus on this formalism, in which variables are assigned values from their
domains, and there are constraints, involving subsets of variables and associating to simultaneous assignments of the
constrained variables a preference value. We use soft constraints to support a deliberation process performed through
decision ﬁeld theory and we consider a sequential approach,
where deliberation is applied to each variable. The sequential approach is similar to the one considered in (Pozza et al.
2011) in the context of voting over combinatorial domains.
Our work has two objectives: the ﬁrst one is to provide a
computational model which can help understand human decision making over complex domains; the second one is to
investigate DFT as means of incorporating a form of uncertainty into the soft constraint formalism.
Understanding how humans make decisions over complex
or combinatorial structures is for the most part an unexplored topic. In a recent paper (Samuel J. Gershman 2017)
the authors developed a theory of decision making on combinatorial domains based on probabilistic reasoning. While
the combinatorial structure of the alternatives is shared with
our approach the preference models are different as they use

Background
Soft Constraints A soft constraint (Meseguer, Rossi, and
Schiex 2005) requires a set of variables and associates each
instantiation of its variables to a value form a partially ordered set. More precisely, the underlying structure is a csemiring which consist of the following, A, +, ×, 0, 1,
where A is the set of preference values, + induces an ordering over A (where a ≤ b iff a + b = b), × is used to
combine preference values, and 0 and 1 are respectively the
worst and best element. A Soft Constraint Satisfaction Problem (SCSP) is a tuple V, D, C, A where V is a set of variables, D is the domain of the variables and C is a set of soft
constraints (each one involving a subset of V ) associating
values from A. Solving an SCSP consists of ﬁnding the ordering induced by the constraints over the set of all complete
variable assignments. In the case of FCSPs, such an ordering
is a total order with ties. An optimal solution, say s, of an
SCSP is then a complete assignment with an undominated
preference. Unless certain restrictions are imposed, such as
a tree-shaped constraint graph, ﬁnding an optimal solution
is an NP-hard problem.
Constraint propagation may improve the search for an optimal solution. A particular form of propagation is directional arc-consistent (DAC) (Meseguer, Rossi, and Schiex
2005), which allows to ﬁnd the preference level of an optimal solution in polynomial time on tree-shaped networks.
Such an optimum preference level is the best preference
level in the domain of the root variable. To ﬁnd an optimal
solution, it is then enough to perform a backtrack-free search
which instantiates variables in the same order used for DAC.
Multialternative Decision Field Theory Decision Field
Theory (DFT) attempts to formalize the deliberation process by assuming that a decision maker’s preference for
each option evolves during deliberation and by integrating
a stream of comparisons of evaluations among options on
attributes over time (J.R. Busemeyer 1993). DFT has been

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8117

