The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Non-Discriminatory Machine Learning
through Convex Fairness Criteria
Naman Goel, Mohammad Yaghini, Boi Faltings
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory,
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland, 1015
{naman.goel, mohammad.yaghini, boi.faltings}@epﬂ.ch
classiﬁer is perhaps the one in which prediction is statistically independent of the sensitive attribute (for e.g. race,
gender etc). However, as we discuss in the paper, this objective is not always practical as it may cause considerable
loss in utility. Another less strict non-discrimination criterion that ﬁnds its roots in legal literature and has recently
gained popularity in machine learning literature is the prule criterion. The p-rule criterion requires that the ratio of
the probabilities of favoring two different social groups is
at least p. A solution that looks promising is to omit the
sensitive attribute from both training and decision making
phases. However, this solution doesn’t work (Calders, Kamiran, and Pechenizkiy 2009). The reason being that other
non-sensitive attributes are often correlated with the sensitive attributes (because of historical bias) and algorithms can
learn this bias even without access to sensitive attributes.
The two broad ideas in advanced approaches (Kamishima
et al. 2012), (Zafar et al. 2017b), (Zafar et al. 2017c) are :
i) using a regularizer term that penalizes discrimination; and
ii) enforcing non-discrimination constraints on the learning
objective. A general problem in these approaches is that they
are non-convex in nature or achieve convexity at the cost of
probabilistic interpretation.
The second objective, in this paper, is to offer a fairness
interpretation of the trained classiﬁers. Fairness being a subjective issue, it may not be acceptable to say that a classiﬁer which is non-discriminatory is also fair. The designer of
the systems should, however, be able to offer an explanation
that in what sense her classiﬁer is fair. Fairness in machine
learning is a far less studied issue, with most works using the
terms fairness and non-discrimination interchangeably. Unlike p-rule criterion for non-discrimination, there is no popular notion of fairness in machine learning. Very recently,
there has been some work towards deﬁning the notions of
envy-freeness (Zafar et al. 2017a), Rawlsian and meritocratic fairness (Joseph et al. 2016a),(Joseph et al. 2016b),
(Jabbari et al. 2017) in machine learning.
To meet both these objectives, we propose a novel technique called the weighted sum of logs technique. Instead of
aiming to directly minimize the difference in the probabilities of favoring individuals of different groups to enforce
non-discrimination, we assign different weights to the favoring probabilities and minimize the negative of the weighted
sum of their logs (subject to accuracy constraints). By us-

Abstract
Biased decision making by machine learning systems is increasingly recognized as an important issue. Recently, techniques have been proposed to learn non-discriminatory classiﬁers by enforcing constraints in the training phase. Such
constraints are either non-convex in nature (posing computational difﬁculties) or don’t have a clear probabilistic interpretation. Moreover, the techniques offer little understanding of
the more subjective notion of fairness.
In this paper, we introduce a novel technique to achieve nondiscrimination without sacriﬁcing convexity and probabilistic interpretation. Our experimental analysis demonstrates the
success of the method on popular real datasets including
ProPublica’s COMPAS dataset. We also propose a new notion
of fairness for machine learning and show that our technique
satisﬁes this subjective fairness criterion.

1

Introduction

Algorithmic decision making powered by state of the art
machine learning techniques is quickly gaining popularity in many diverse application areas including the ones
which have larger social impact. Some examples of these
applications are calculating risk scores of criminal recidivism, stop-and-frisk programs, predictive policing, university admissions, bank loan approvals and jobs(salary)
screening/recommendation (Northpointe 2012),(Hvistendahl 2016),(Miller 2015). There have been strong evidences
that the trained systems often show signiﬁcant bias against
certain social groups for e.g. against a certain race while calculating recidivism risk score (ProPublica 2017) or against a
certain gender while recommending jobs and salaries (Datta,
Tschantz, and Datta 2015). This has led to a widespread concern that machine learning systems not only appear discriminatory (which may have legal/ﬁnancial consequences) but
can potentially create (or enhance) imbalance in the society (ACM 2017),(WhiteHouse 2016). Consequently, there
has been a lot of recent research towards making machine
learning fair, accountable and transparent. In this paper, we
focus mainly on the issues of non-discrimination and fairness.
The ﬁrst objective, in this paper, is to design classiﬁers
that are non-discriminatory. An ideal non-discriminatory
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3029

