The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Adversarial Zero-Shot Learning with Semantic Augmentation
Bin Tong,∗ Martin Klinkigt,∗ Junwen Chen,† Xiankun Cui,†
Quan Kong, Tomokazu Murakami, Yoshiyuki Kobayashi
R&D Group, Hitachi, Japan
{bin.tong.hh, martin.klinkigt.ut, quan.kong.xz}@hitachi.com
{tomokazu.murakami.xr, yoshiyuki.kobayashi.gp}@hitachi.com

Abstract
In situations in which labels are expensive or difﬁcult to obtain, deep neural networks for object recognition often suffer
to achieve fair performance. Zero-shot learning is dedicated
to this problem. It aims to recognize objects of unseen classes
by transferring knowledge from seen classes via a shared
intermediate representation. Using the manifold structure of
seen training samples is widely regarded as important to learn
a robust mapping between samples and the intermediate representation, which is crucial for transferring the knowledge.
However, their irregular structures, such as the lack in variation of samples for certain classes and highly overlapping
clusters of different classes, may result in an inappropriate
mapping. Additionally, in a high dimensional mapping space,
the hubness problem may arise, in which one of the unseen
classes has a high possibility to be assigned to samples of different classes. To mitigate such problems, we use a generative adversarial network to synthesize samples with speciﬁed
semantics to cover a higher diversity of given classes and interpolated semantics of pairs of classes. We propose a simple
yet effective method for applying the augmented semantics to
the hinge loss functions to learn a robust mapping. The proposed method was extensively evaluated on small- and largescale datasets, showing a signiﬁcant improvement over stateof-the-art methods.

Figure 1: Visualization of mappings from visual feature
space to semantic space. On top row, for ‘least auklet’, only
a limited number of images are available compared with the
other class ‘sayornis’, making embedding of this class difﬁcult. Its embeddings tend to move away from its semantic representation. The bottom row shows two classes that
have overlapping clusters of their visual representation with
a similar scale. This overlap may remain in semantic space,
which degrades recognition performance. Note that red arrows show the expected direction for embeddings.

Zero-shot learning aims to recognize novel classes for
which no training samples were provided. In other words,
the test and training class sets are disjoint. Such a recognition task can be addressed by using an intermediate semantic representation that is shared between seen and unseen
classes, and knowledge can be transferred from seen classes
to unseen classes. In (Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling
2009), so-called attributes were used as the intermediate representation. For seen and unseen classes, a binary vector expressing their attributes is assigned. Given an example of
such attributes, we can look at animals like cows and horses.
Both share common attributes, such as ‘long legs’ and ‘long
tails’, but also have different attributes, such as ‘horns” for
cows (which horses do not have). However, such attributes
are difﬁcult to obtain and require expert knowledge about
the target domain to design. In (Frome et al. 2013), a socalled word embedding (Bengio et al. 2006) was introduced
as a drop-in replacement for the intermediate representation,
which can currently be efﬁciently trained on a large text cor-

Introduction
The signiﬁcant performance improvement of deep neural
networks in recent years is in part due to the wide availability
of large labeled datasets. However, objects in the wild follow a long-tailed distribution. For some uncommon objects,
only a limited number of samples can be provided, and new
categories of objects may even emerge dynamically. In such
cases, many state-of-the-art methods fail to deliver the same
high performance as when trained with sufﬁciently large labelled datasets. This challenge motivates a different learning
paradigm in which the number of labelled training samples
is limited or the number of new classes to be recognized increases. One such candidate is zero-shot learning (Lampert,
Nickisch, and Harmeling 2009).
∗

contributed equally to this paper.
contributed equally during their internship at Hitachi.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

2476

