The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Deep Embedding for Determining the Number of Clusters
Yiqi Wang,∗1 Zhan Shi,∗2 Xifeng Guo,1 Xinwang Liu,1 En Zhu,1 Jianping Yin3
1

School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, China, 410073, +8618570609961,wangyiqi12a@nudt.edu.cn
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Austin, zshi17@cs.utexas.edu
3
Dongguan University of Technology, jpyin@dgut.edu.cn

Abstract
Determining the number of clusters is important but challenging, especially for data of high dimension. In this paper, we
propose Deep Embedding Determination (DED), a method
that can solve jointly for the unknown number of clusters
and feature extraction. DED ﬁrst combines the virtues of the
convolutional autoencoder and the t-SNE technique to extract
low dimensional embedded features. Then it determines the
number of clusters using an improved density-based clustering algorithm. Our experimental evaluation on image datasets
shows signiﬁcant improvement over state-of-the-art methods
and robustness with respect to hyperparameter settings.

Reshape

10

Conv1
stride=2
kernel=32
size=5*5

Conv2
stride=2
kernel=64
size=5*5

Conv3
stride=2
kernel=128
size=3*3

h




DeConv3
stride=2
kernel=64
size=3*3

DeConv2
stride=2
kernel=32
size=5*5

t-SNE

DeConv1
stride=2
kernel=1
size=5*5

Improved
Density-based
Clustering

Number of clusters

Figure 1: Network Structure of DED

Introduction
The number of clusters K is signiﬁcant to clustering problems. Most clustering algorithms require K as input to build
up precise models based on datasets and to achieve high
clustering accuracy. For deep clustering methods, K is also
required to train speciﬁc deep learning models and to extract
embedded features (Xie, Girshick, and Farhadi 2016). However, obtaining a good estimation of K is not trivial. Prior
work in determining the number of clusters suffers from the
“curse of dimensionality”.
In this paper, we present an effective algorithm for predicting the number of clusters in the high-dimensional
dataset, called Deep Embedding Determination (DED).
DED exploits the advantages of both feature representation
learning techniques and density-based clustering algorithms.
It learns appropriate embedded features using a deep convolutional autoencoder (CAE) (Masci et al. 2011) and t-SNE
(Maaten and Hinton 2008) visualization techniques, and
then predicts the number of clusters by using a new densitybased clustering algorithm (Rodriguez and Laio 2014).
The contributions of our work are summarized as below:
1) DED is the ﬁrst work to determine the number of clusters in high dimensional datasets, which goes a step further
in the joint problem of dealing with the number of clusters
and dealing with the “curse of dimensionality”; 2) DED outputs the number of clusters K of high dimensional datasets,
which enables other deep clustering methods to train speciﬁc models and to improve the clustering results of existing

clustering algorithms; 3) DED provides a better embedded
feature space for cluster visualization.

Deep embedding determination
Consider the problem of predicting the number of clusters of
a set of points {xi }ni=1 ⊂ X when the number of clusters K
is not known a priori. Instead of predicting directly on the
data space X, we propose a nonlinear mapping Fw to transform xi to zi , where Z is the latent feature space. To make Z
appropriate for clustering, the dimension of the feature space
Z should be as low as possible. We aim to ﬁnd a good Fw
to produce embedded points with accurate pairwise distance
in low dimension and an appropriate clustering algorithm to
determine the number of clusters K.
DED has two essential components: the feature extraction
model and the number of clusters estimation algorithm. The
feature extraction model consists of a CAE and t-SNE. The
CAE learns feature representations that preserve intrinsic local structure, and t-SNE further reduces the dimensions of
the learned feature while maintaining the pairwise distances.
DED uses an improved density-based clustering algorithm
to estimate the number of clusters on DED feature space.
The network structure of DED is demonstrated in Figure 1.
We propose to transform data to be suitable for estimating the number of clusters in an unsupervised manner in
two steps. In the ﬁrst step, a CAE is trained to extract 10dimensional features with a reasonable reconstruction loss.
Intuitively, the capability of feature representation decreases
as the dimension of latent feature decreases. Thus, to obtain

∗

these authors contribute equally to this work.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8173

