The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

DeepHeart: Semi-Supervised Sequence
Learning for Cardiovascular Risk Prediction
Brandon Ballinger, Johnson Hsieh,
Avesh Singh,Nimit Sohoni, Jack Wang
Cardiogram
San Francisco, CA

Geoffrey H. Tison, Gregory M. Marcus,
Jose M. Sanchez, Carol Maguire,
Jeffrey E. Olgin, Mark J. Pletcher
Department of Medicine, University of California
San Francisco, CA
Choi et al. 2016; Che et al. 2015). However, purely supervised deep learning requires many labeled examples. No
such database exists for wearable data, and in most hospital systems, recruiting even a hundred patients into a new
medical study is labor-intensive and expensive.
To solve this, we take a two-pronged approach. First, we
employ a mobile phone application to recruit 14,011 participants from across the world, collecting 200 million unlabeled sensor measurements. Data from these participants is
then used in one of two semi-supervised training procedures.
In semi-supervised sequence learning (Dai and Le 2015), an
LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) is pretrained as a
sequence autoencoder; weights from pretraining are used as
initialization for a second supervised phase, making use of
a limited pool of labeled data from participants with known
diagnoses. In heuristic pretraining, the neural network is instead pretrained to compute heart-rate-derived biomarkers
from the medical literature, partially bridging the gap between feature engineering and deep learning.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst
describe a novel data set derived from 14,011 participants
with wearable heart rate monitors, recruited in partnership
with the Health eHeart Study of the University of California, San Francisco. We then describe DeepHeart, our model
architecture, and the semi-supervised training methods used,
semi-supervised sequence learning and heuristic pretraining.
Then we present experimental results showing that semisupervised deep neural networks achieve higher accuracy
in detecting diabetes, sleep apnea, high blood pressure, and
high cholesterol than several strong baselines derived from
biomarkers in the medical literature. We conclude by describing some of the historical barriers to wide-scale deployment of artiﬁcial intelligence in medicine and how we plan
to address them in future work.

Abstract
We train and validate a semi-supervised, multi-task LSTM
on 57,675 person-weeks of data from off-the-shelf wearable heart rate sensors, showing high accuracy at detecting multiple medical conditions, including diabetes (0.8451),
high cholesterol (0.7441), high blood pressure (0.8086), and
sleep apnea (0.8298). We compare two semi-supervised training methods, semi-supervised sequence learning and heuristic pretraining, and show they outperform hand-engineered
biomarkers from the medical literature. We believe our work
suggests a new approach to patient risk stratiﬁcation based
on cardiovascular risk scores derived from popular wearables
such as Fitbit, Apple Watch, or Android Wear.

Introduction
In medicine, each label represents a human life at risk —
for example, a person who recently suffered a heart attack
or experienced an abnormal heart rhythm. As a result, even
widely-used predictive models like CHA2DS2-VASc may
be derived from as few as 25 positive labels (Y H Lip et al.
2009). However, popular wearables, such as Fitbit and Apple
Watch, generate trillions of unlabeled sensor data points per
year, including rich signals like resting heart rate and heart
rate variability, which have been shown to correlate with
health conditions as diverse as diabetes, sleep apnea, atrial
ﬁbrillation, heart failure, sudden cardiac death, and irritable
bowel syndrome (Kamath, Watanabe, and Upton 2012).
Using consumer-grade heart rate sensors in a medical
context presents several challenges. First, the sensors themselves have signiﬁcant error (Gillinov 2016). Second, they
vary the rate of measurement to preserve battery life. Third,
since wearables are used in an ambulatory setting, daily activities like walking, exercise, stress, consuming alcohol, or
drinking coffee (Figure 1) may confuse simple heuristics.
Deep neural networks (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015)
have shown high accuracy at pattern recognition from noisy,
complex inputs, including automated detection of diabetic
retinopathy from images (Gulshan et al. 2016), skin cancer
from mobile phone cameras (Esteva et al. 2017), and the
onset of health conditions from electronic medical records
(Razavian, Marcus, and Sontag 2016; Lipton et al. 2015;

Data and Study Cohort
Electronic medical records contain important discrete
events, such as lab tests and diagnoses, while continuous
wearable data from mobile health platforms, such as Apple
HealthKit or Google Fit, cover the majority of the patient’s
time outside of a medical setting. In order to train a deep
neural network to predict diagnoses given wearable data, we
sought to combine the two data sources.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2079

