The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

When Social Advertising Meets Viral Marketing:
Sequencing Social Advertisements for Inﬂuence Maximization
Shaojie Tang
Naveen Jindal School of Management
University of Texas at Dallas
shaojie.tang@utdallas.edu

candidate ads, they mainly focus on ﬁnding the best ad sequence for a single user so as to maximize the expected revenue. However, in the context of social advertising, users
are not isolated and one click on an ad could trigger a large
cascade of further exposures to other users. Therefore, we
must take into account the network value of each user when
determining the ad sequencing for her. We notice that inﬂuence maximization has been extensively studied in the literature (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003; Tang et al. 2011;
Tong et al. 2017), but none of them considered the sequencing problem on each individual user, and they simply assume that the user will click all ads allocated to her (Tang
and Yuan 2016). To ﬁll this gap, we, for the ﬁrst time, integrate viral marketing into existing ad sequencing model
and develop both non-adaptive and adaptive ad sequencing
policies that can maximize the viral marketing efﬁciency.
The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
• We are the ﬁrst to formulate and study the social ad sequencing problem. Our objective is to determine the best
ad sequence for each arrival user so as to maximize the
expected revenue generated from all inﬂuenced users;
• We ﬁrst study our problem under non-adaptive setting,
where we can not observe the actual inﬂuence generated
from the previously allocated ads. Under this model, we
propose a simple greedy algorithm that can achieve 1/2competitive ratio;
• We then extend our model to adaptive setting, where we
can observe the full or partial inﬂuence from previously
allocated ads, we propose a simple greedy policy that can
achieve a bounded competitive ratio. Although we focus
on ad sequencing in this paper, our results apply to a broad
range of optimization problems that can be formulated as
an adaptive submodular maximization problem.

Abstract
Recent studies reveal that social advertising is more effective
than conventional online advertising. This is mainly because
conventional advertising targets at individual’s interest while
social advertising is able to produce a large cascade of further exposures to other users via social inﬂuence. This motivates us to study the optimal social advertising problem from
platform’s perspective, and our objective is to ﬁnd the best ad
sequence for each user in order to maximize the expected revenue. Although there is rich body of work that has been devoted to ad sequencing, the network value of each customer is
largely ignored in existing algorithm design. To ﬁll this gap,
we propose to integrate viral marketing into existing ad sequencing model, and develop both non-adaptive and adaptive
ad sequencing policies that can maximize the viral marketing
efﬁciency.

Introduction
Social advertising has been proven to be more effective than
conventional online advertising due to the rapid growth of
social networking sites. Different from conventional online
advertising, a typical social advertisement can propagate
across the social network through “reposts” or “shares”. For
example, Facebook allows advertisers to promote their product through promoted posts and boost posts, which could
propagate to other users through a sequence of re-shares.
This motivates us to study the ad sequencing problem in
the context of social advertising, e.g., ﬁnding the best ad
sequence for each user in order to maximize the expected
revenue from all inﬂuenced users.
Although there is rich body of work that has been devoted to ad sequencing, the network value of each customer
is largely ignored in existing algorithm design. Most existing work (Craswell et al. 2008; Kempe and Mahdian 2008;
Tang 2017) in the ﬁeld of ad sequencing adopts a simple
and practical model to capture user’s reaction upon reading
a sequence of ads: the user scans through slots from top
to bottom, she clicks an ad i with (user-speciﬁc) probability qi and continues to read the next ad with (user-speciﬁc)
probability ci . Under the pay-per-click model, each ad has
a pay-per-click revenue and advertiser pays such fee each
time when one of their ads is clicked. Then given a list of

Related Work
Due to the rapid increase in internet users, internet advertising has attracted much attention these days (e.g., (Yang
et al. 2015; Edelman, Ostrovsky, and Schwarz 2005; Lahaie et al. 2007; Varian 2007)). (Aggarwal et al. 2008;
Kempe and Mahdian 2008; Tang 2017) study the ad sequencing problem under the cascade model. Majority of existing works assume that users are isolated from each other,

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

176

