The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

HAN: Hierarchical Association Network
for Computing Semantic Relatedness
Xiaolong Gong, Hao Xu, Linpeng Huang
Department of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{gxl121438, insanelun, lphuang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

1



Measuring semantic relatedness between two words is a signiﬁcant problem in many areas such as natural language
processing. Existing approaches to the semantic relatedness
problem mainly adopt the co-occurrence principle and regard
two words as highly related if they appear in the same sentence frequently. However, such solutions suffer from low
coverage and low precision because i) the two highly related
words may not appear close to each other in the sentences,
e.g., the synonyms; and ii) the co-occurrence of words may
happen by chance rather than implying the closeness in their
semantics. In this paper, we explore the latent semantics (i.e.,
concepts) of the words to identify highly related word pairs.
We propose a hierarchical association network to specify the
complex relationships among the words and the concepts, and
quantify each relationship with appropriate measurements.
Extensive experiments are conducted on real datasets and the
results show that our proposed method improves correlation
precision compared with the state-of-the-art approaches.

Figure 1: A sample Wikipedia page

suffer from low precision and low coverage because i) the
words that appear in the same sentence may not necessarily
be closely related in their semantics but co-occur by chance
and ii) it is very likely that two highly related words appear
far away from each other, e.g., two synonyms seldomly appear in one sentence.
To address the problems, several approaches (Agirre et al.
2010; Rada et al. 1989; Resnik 1995; Peipei, Haixun, and
Kenny 2013) leverage linguistic resources such as WordNet (Miller 1995) and Roget’s Thesaurus (Roget 1852) and
identify the belonging categories of the words following the
isA relationship. These categories are also referred to as the
concepts of the words. The semantic relatedness between
two words is then measured by the closeness of their concepts. Some approaches exploit concepts of every occurrence of the word as a weighted vector (Gabrilovich and
S.Markovitch 2007), or model the semantic meaning of a
word by the salient concepts that frequently co-occur in
the immediate context of the word (Hassan and Mihalcea
2011). While these approaches explore latent semantics for
the words, they suffer from some drawbacks such as word
ambiguity and only focus on identifying concepts for the
noun. This leads to the low coverage problem due to the
fact that many semantically related words are adjectives and
verbs, e.g., “blue” and “unhappy”, “pardon” and “sorry”.
In this paper, we leverage Wikipedia pages as our data

Introduction

Measuring semantic relatedness between words is a fundamental problem in the areas of natural language processing, artiﬁcial intelligence and information retrieval. For example, document summarization and question answering
systems leverage semantic relatedness scores to align sentences (Mogren 2015; Wen-tau et al. 2013); Information retrieval systems perform query expansion (Budanitsky and
Hirst 2006) based on word relatedness scores; Informally,
semantic relatedness reﬂects a free association process1 by
human brains. That is, when mentioning a cue word, the ﬁrst
few words coming into most people’s mind exhibit high relatedness to the cue word. For instance, when a cue word
“tea” is mentioned, the words that are highly related to “tea”
could be “cup”, “drink”, “lemon”, “leaf”, etc.
Various solutions have been proposed to measure semantic relatedness between words. Most of them (Dagan, Lee,
and Pereira 1999; Miller and Charles 1991; Keyang, Kenny,
and Seung-won 2015) adopt the principle of co-occurrence.
That is, the two words are regarded as semantically related
if they co-occur in many sentences. However, such methods
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://web.usf.edu/FreeAssociation

671

