The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

An Optimal Online Method of Selecting
Source Policies for Reinforcement Learning
Siyuan Li, Chongjie Zhang
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
sy-li17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, chongjie@tsinghua.edu.cn

selecting an appropriate source task usually demands quite a
little extra knowledge concerning the domain. For example,
(Perkins, Precup, and others 1999; Lazaric, Restelli, and
Bonarini 2008; Nguyen, Silander, and Leong 2012) need
some prior experience in the target task. In (Ammar et
al. 2014; Song et al. 2016), a well-estimated or known
model is assumed, which is not always available in practice.
Policy Reuse Q-learning (PRQL) (Fernández and Veloso
2013) requires no prior knowledge of target task or MDP
environment, but it may converge to a suboptimal policy. To
address above limitations, we propose an optimal method to
select and reuse source policies online automatically without
extra prior knowledge.
Our contributions in this paper can be claimed as follows.
First, we formulate the source policy selection problem
as a Multi-armed Bandit (MAB) problem where different
source policies are regarded as bandits and enable optimal
online source policy selection. We refer to our approach as
Optimal Policy Selection for Transfer Learning (OPS-TL).
Second, we augment Q-learning with policy reuse, while
maintaining the same theoretical guarantee of convergence
as traditional Q-learning. Finally, our empirical experiments
conducted on a grid-based robot navigation domain verify
that our approach (i) accomplishes the optimal source policy
selection process; (ii) transfers useful knowledge to a target
task and signiﬁcantly speeds up learning process; and (iii)
achieves the same empirical performance as traditional Qlearning in equivalent situations where no source knowledge
is useful.
In the remainder of this paper, we start by reviewing
related work. Then, background knowledge on RL and
problem formulation is described. After that, we present
our approach and theoretical results followed by empirical
results comparing our approach with the state-of-the-art
algorithm. Finally, we conclude and outline directions for
future work.

Abstract
Transfer learning signiﬁcantly accelerates the reinforcement
learning process by exploiting relevant knowledge from previous experiences. The problem of optimally selecting source
policies during the learning process is of great importance
yet challenging. There has been little theoretical analysis of
this problem. In this paper, we develop an optimal online
method to select source policies for reinforcement learning.
This method formulates online source policy selection as a
multi-armed bandit problem and augments Q-learning with
policy reuse. We provide theoretical guarantees of the optimal
selection process and convergence to the optimal policy. In
addition, we conduct experiments on a grid-based robot navigation domain to demonstrate its efﬁciency and robustness by
comparing to the state-of-the-art transfer learning method.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 1998) is
a widely-used framework to learn an optimal control or
decision-making policy. However, RL has a high sample
complexity, since a RL agent gains data via repeated interactions with its environment. Transferring past knowledge to a target task can greatly accelerate reinforcement
learning. The ﬁrst step of transfer in RL is to select useful
knowledge during the reuse process. If an irrelevant source
task is chosen, learning performance could be worse than
learning from scratch, which is called negative transfer (Pan
and Yang 2010). This problem is challenging, because in
practical situation, the environment is mostly unknown and
an agent has no prior knowledge which source task is useful.
So the agent has to do online source task selection.
Transfer learning has been recognized as an important
direction in RL for a long time (Taylor and Stone 2009).
Some works leverage source task knowledge without automatically identifying related source tasks (Parisotto, Ba,
and Salakhutdinov 2015; Barreto et al. 2016; Gupta et al.
2017). However, these methods may suffer from negative
transfer. Others require humans to deﬁne relationships between tasks and relevant source tasks (Torrey et al. 2005;
Taylor, Stone, and Liu 2007; Ammar and Taylor 2011;
Ammar et al. 2015). Under a more general circumstance,
an agent has to do source task selection by itself. But

Related Work
As transfer in RL has received much attention recently,
we now discuss in greater detail the relationship between
our algorithm and others. (Talvitie and Singh 2007) treated
previously learned policies as experts and mediated these
experts intelligently. Since the mixing time of experts is
known in episodic domains, this method is not as effective

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3562

