The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Accelerated Method for Stochastic Composition
Optimization with Nonsmooth Regularization
1

Zhouyuan Huo,1 Bin Gu,1 Ji Liu,2 Heng Huang1∗
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, 14627, USA
zhouyuan.huo@pitt.edu, big10@pitt.edu, jliu@cs.rochester.edu, heng.huang@pitt.edu

represented as follows:

Abstract

n1

1 
Fi
min H(x) = min
x∈RN
x∈RN n1 i=1


Stochastic composition optimization draws much attention recently and has been successful in many emerging applications
of machine learning, statistical analysis, and reinforcement
learning. In this paper, we focus on the composition problem
with nonsmooth regularization penalty. Previous works either
have slow convergence rate, or do not provide complete convergence analysis for the general problem. In this paper, we
tackle these two issues by proposing a new stochastic composition optimization method for composition problem with
nonsmooth regularization penalty. In our method, we apply
variance reduction technique to accelerate the speed of convergence. To the best of our knowledge, our method admits the
fastest convergence rate for stochastic composition optimization: for strongly convex composition problem, our algorithm
is proved to admit linear convergence; for general composition
problem, our algorithm signiﬁcantly improves the state-of-theart convergence rate from O(T −1/2 ) to O((n1 +n2 )2/3 T −1 ).
Finally, we apply our proposed algorithm to portfolio management and policy evaluation in reinforcement learning. Experimental results verify our theoretical analysis.

where it is deﬁned that F (y) = n11
1
n2

n1

j=1

n1

i=1

Fi (y) and G(x) =

Gj (x). Throughout this paper, we mainly focus on the

case that Fi and Gj are smooth. However, we do not require
that Fi and Gj have to be convex.
Minimizing the composition of expected-value functions
(1) or ﬁnite-sum functions (2) is challenging. Classical
stochastic gradient method (SGD) and its variants are well
suited for minimizing traditional ﬁnite-sum functions (Bottou, Curtis, and Nocedal 2016). However, they are not directly applicable to the composition problem. To apply
SGD, we need to compute the unbiased sampling gradient (∇Gj (x))T ∇Fi (G(x)) of problem (2), which is timeconsuming when G(x) is unknown. Evaluating G(x) requires
traversing all inner component functions, which is unacceptable to compute in each iteration if n2 is a large number.
In (Wang, Fang, and Liu 2014), the authors considered the
problem (1) with h(x) = 0 and proposed stochastic compositional gradient descent algorithm (SCGD) which is the
ﬁrst stochastic method for composition problem. In their
paper, they proved that the convergence rate of SCGD for
strongly convex composition problem is O(T −2/3 ), and for
general problem is O(T −1/4 ). They also proposed accelerated SCGD by using Nesterov smoothing technique (Nesterov 1983) which is proved to admit faster convergence rate.
SCGD has constant query complexity per iteration, however,
their convergence rate is far worse than full gradient method
because of the noise induced by sampling gradients. Recently,
variance reduction technique (Johnson and Zhang 2013) was
applied to accelerate the convergence of stochastic composition optimization. (Lian, Wang, and Liu 2016) ﬁrst utilized
the variance reduction technique and proposed two variance
reduced stochastic compositional gradient descent methods
(Compositional-SVRG-1 and Compositional-SVRG-2). Both
methods are proved to admit linear convergence rate. However, the methods proposed in (Wang, Fang, and Liu 2014)

Stochastic composition optimization draws much attention
recently and has been successful in addressing many emerging applications of different areas, such as reinforcement
learning (Dai et al. 2016; Wang and Liu 2016), statistical
learning (Wang, Fang, and Liu 2014) and risk management
(Dentcheva, Penev, and Ruszczyński 2016). The authors
in (Wang, Fang, and Liu 2014; Wang and Liu 2016) proposed composition problem, which is the composition of two
expected-value functions:
min Ei Fi (Ej Gj (x)) +h(x),





n2
1 
Gj (x) +h(x), (2)
n2 j=1



f (x)

Introduction

x∈RN



(1)

f (x)

N

where Gj (x) : R → RM are inner component functions,
Fi (y) : RM → R are outer component functions. The regularization penalty h(x) is a closed convex function but not
necessarily smooth. In reality, we usually solve the ﬁnitesum scenario for composition problem (1), and it can be
∗

To whom all correspondence should be addressed.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3287

