The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

SFCN-OPI: Detection and Fine-Grained Classiﬁcation of
Nuclei Using Sibling FCN with Objectness Prior Interaction
1

Yanning Zhou,1 Qi Dou,1 Hao Chen,1 Jing Qin,2 Pheng-Ann Heng1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Centre for Smart Health, School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{ynzhou,qdou,hchen,pheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, harry.qin@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Cell nuclei detection and ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation have been
fundamental yet challenging problems in histopathology image analysis. Due to the nuclei tiny size, signiﬁcant inter/intra-class variances, as well as the inferior image quality,
previous automated methods would easily suffer from limited accuracy and robustness. In the meanwhile, existing approaches usually deal with these two tasks independently,
which would neglect the close relatedness of them. In this paper, we present a novel method of sibling fully convolutional
network with prior objectness interaction (called SFCN-OPI)
to tackle the two tasks simultaneously and interactively using a uniﬁed end-to-end framework. Speciﬁcally, the sibling
FCN branches share features in earlier layers while holding
respective higher layers for speciﬁc tasks. More importantly,
the detection branch outputs the objectness prior which dynamically interacts with the ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation sibling branch during the training and testing processes. With
this mechanism, the ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation successfully
focuses on regions with high conﬁdence of nuclei existence
and outputs the conditional probability, which in turn beneﬁts the detection through back propagation. Extensive experiments on colon cancer histology images have validated the
effectiveness of our proposed SFCN-OPI and our method has
outperformed the state-of-the-art methods by a large margin.

A

B

C

D

A

B

C

D

A

B

C

D

Figure 1: Examples of the histopathology images for nuclei
detection and ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation. For clearer illustration, different sub-categories of the nuclei are zoomed in
with the larger boxes, i.e., A. epithelial nuclei, B. ﬁbroblast
nuclei, C. inﬂammatory nuclei, D. miscellaneous nuclei.

ther analysis such as classifying the detected nuclei into ﬁnegrained sub-categories (Park et al. 2013; Xie et al. 2017).
However, development of automatic digital histopathology image analysis approach is difﬁcult. Firstly, the size of
nuclei is quite small in histopathology images, with radius
usually only a few pixels. Secondly, sub-categories among
the nuclei have signiﬁcant inter-/intra-class variances in their
shape and chromatin texture, which are related to different
histopathology grades. Thirdly, the tumorigenic cells tend to
clutter together and hold erratic morphology changes, which
would lead to complicated contexts with degenerated glandular structures and hence bring obstacles to cell nuclei identiﬁcation. These challenges are shown in Fig. 1. In addition,
the presence of inferior image quality caused by poor staining, unfocused photoing or failed digital sampling further increases the difﬁculty of automatic nuclei detection and ﬁnegrained classiﬁcation.
Early nuclei analysis methods relied on handcrafted features based on the intensity (Wang et al. 2007; Li et al. 2010)
as well as morphology (Al-Kofahi et al. 2010; Park et al.
2013). Unfortunately, these low-level features would suffer
from limited representation capability and robustness, leading to inaccurate detections especially on hard cases such as
densely adhesive cells and malignant cells with highly heterogeneous shape (Xing and Yang 2016).
Recent revolution of the deep convolutional neural network (CNN) has achieved great success on object detection (Girshick 2015; Ren et al. 2015) in natural images. The
state-of-the-art methods usually ﬁrst suppress the majority

Introduction
In digital histopathology image analysis, cell nuclei detection and ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation are crucial prerequisites for cellular morphology processing, such as computation of size, texture, shape, as well as other imagenomics (Xing and Yang 2016), and furthermore assisting
the cancer malignancy diagnosis (Hamilton and Aaltonen
2000). Take the colon cancer, commonly originating from
the glandular epithelial cells, as an example, recognizing
the epithelial cells and assessing their morphologic changes
are important for grading the cancer levels and providing
guidance for therapeutic procedures (Fleming et al. 2012;
Ricci-Vitiani et al. 2007). Given that manual nuclei detection
is extremely time-consuming and suffers from high interobserver variance, researchers have been dedicated to exploring automatic methods to efﬁciently and accurately detect the nuclei from histopathology images and conduct furc 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2652

