The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Self-Reinforced Cascaded Regression for Face Alignment
1

Xin Fan,1,2,∗ Risheng Liu,1,2 Kang Huyan,1,2 Yuyao Feng,1,2 Zhongxuan Luo1,2,3
DUT-RU International School of Information Science & Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
2
Key Laboratory for Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning Province, Dalian, China
3
School of Mathematical Science, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
{xin.fan, rsliu, zxluo}@dlut.edu.cn, huyankang@hotmail.com yyaofeng@gmail.com

cascaded regression. One typical treatment is to divide the
original shape space into smaller sub-spaces (Zhu et al.
2016; Tuzel, Marks, and Tambe 2016). Researchers also attempt to group relevant input features for mitigating mismatches (Cao et al. 2014; Ren et al. 2014). The cascade
Gaussian process (GP) regression trees ﬁnd input features
showing consistent appearance through GP kernel functions (Lee, Park, and Yoo 2015). The common strategy of
these methods lies in that they ‘tighten’ the correlation between input feature and target shape from the perspective of
local appearance.
Alternatively, researchers resort to the global geometry
(shape) among facial landmarks in order to address the
discrepancy issue. Martinez et al. embed nonparametric
Markov networks (Martinez et al. 2013), while Liu et al.
incorporate sparse shape constraints into regression (Liu,
Deng, and Tao 2016). In addition to these explicit shape
models, Li et al. discover the common geometry shared by
human faces using a projective invariant, called characteristic number (CN), and append this geometric regression to
appearance (Li et al. 2015). These various forms of facial geometric representation are able to regularize the regression,
and thus improve the robustness of alignment.
It is commonly accepted in the machine learning (ML)
community that training examples are central to any ML algorithms including regression. Unfortunately, the aforementioned alignment algorithms pay more attention to the regression mechanism, instead of data itself, to tackle the issue
arisen from data discrepancy. Targeting at data preparation
for training and validating regressors, Sagonas et al. develop
a semi-automatic tool to annotate facial landmarks (Sagonas
et al. 2013), but how these annotations may affect regression
is untouched in their study. Antonakos et al. generate bounding boxes as face labels and validate these labels in the context of linear parametric models but not more complex cascade regression (Antonakos and Zafeiriou 2014). Recently,
Zhang et al. develop a complicated deep network to leverage
face annotations across data sets (Zhang et al. 2015). Nevertheless, a general framework is still highly demanded to fuse
the discovering and upgrading training examples of low discrepancy into cascaded regression for face alignment.
Self-reinforcement refers to “a process whereby individuals control their own behavior by rewarding themselves
when a certain standard of performance has been attained

Abstract
Cascaded regression is prevailing in face alignment thanks to
its accuracy and robustness, but typically demands manually
annotated examples having low discrepancy between shapeindexed features and shape updates. In this paper, we propose
a self-reinforced strategy that iteratively expands the quantity
and improves the quality of training examples, thus upgrading
the performance of cascaded regression itself. The reinforced
term evaluates the example quality upon the consistence on
both local appearance and global geometry of human faces,
and constitutes the example evolution by the philosophy of
“survival of the ﬁttest”. We train a set of discriminative classiﬁers, each associated with one landmark label, to prune those
examples with inconsistent local appearance, and further validate the geometric relationship among groups of labeled landmarks against the common global geometry derived from a
projective invariant. We embed this generic strategy into typical cascaded regressions, and the alignment results on several
benchmark data sets demonstrate its effectiveness to predict
good examples starting from a small subset.

Introduction
Face alignment, aiming at accurately and robustly localizing facial landmarks, plays a key role to many automatic
facial analysis tasks including face recognition, expression
recognition, attribute analysis, and animation. Recently, cascaded regression has become one of the most popular approaches to face alignment due to its accuracy and robustness (Ren et al. 2014; Xiong and De la Torre 2013;
Kowalski, Naruniec, and Trzcinski 2017). This approach
learns a series of regressors between shape-indexed features
and shape updates or gradients from a set of manually labeled face images. Inevitably, the performance of cascaded
regression highly depends on the quantity and quantity of
training examples. The quantity of unlabeled facial images
is not a problem in this ’big-data’ era, but example labeling
and the quality of labels are still critical. In this study, we
focus on these critical issues for cascaded regression.
Despite of its great success, the discrepancy or mismatch
between limited training examples and the huge solution
space typically downgrades the stability and accuracy of
∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6813

