The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Deep Reinforcement Learning that Matters
Peter Henderson,1∗ Riashat Islam,1,2∗ Philip Bachman,2
Joelle Pineau,1 Doina Precup,1 David Meger1
1

McGill University, Montreal, Canada
Microsoft Maluuba, Montreal, Canada
{peter.henderson,riashat.islam}@mail.mcgill.ca, phbachma@microsoft.com
{jpineau,dprecup}@cs.mcgill.ca, dmeger@cim.mcgill.ca
2

Abstract
In recent years, signiﬁcant progress has been made in solving
challenging problems across various domains using deep reinforcement learning (RL). Reproducing existing work and
accurately judging the improvements offered by novel methods is vital to sustaining this progress. Unfortunately, reproducing results for state-of-the-art deep RL methods is seldom
straightforward. In particular, non-determinism in standard
benchmark environments, combined with variance intrinsic
to the methods, can make reported results tough to interpret.
Without signiﬁcance metrics and tighter standardization of
experimental reporting, it is difﬁcult to determine whether improvements over the prior state-of-the-art are meaningful. In
this paper, we investigate challenges posed by reproducibility,
proper experimental techniques, and reporting procedures. We
illustrate the variability in reported metrics and results when
comparing against common baselines and suggest guidelines
to make future results in deep RL more reproducible. We aim
to spur discussion about how to ensure continued progress in
the ﬁeld by minimizing wasted effort stemming from results
that are non-reproducible and easily misinterpreted.

Figure 1: Growth of published reinforcement learning papers.
Shown are the number of RL-related publications (y-axis)
per year (x-axis) scraped from Google Scholar searches.

fects of random seeds or environment properties). We investigate these sources of variance in reported results through
a representative set of experiments. For clarity, we focus
our investigation on policy gradient (PG) methods in continuous control. Policy gradient methods with neural network function approximators have been particularly successful in continuous control (Schulman et al. 2015a; 2017;
Lillicrap et al. 2015b) and are competitive with value-based
methods in discrete settings. We note that the diversity of
metrics and lack of signiﬁcance testing in the RL literature
creates the potential for misleading reporting of results. We
demonstrate possible beneﬁts of signiﬁcance testing using
techniques common in machine learning and statistics.
Several works touch upon evaluating RL algorithms. Duan
et al. (2016) benchmark several RL algorithms and provide
the community with baseline implementations. Generalizable RL evaluation metrics are proposed in (Whiteson et al.
2011). Machado et al. (2017) revisit the Arcade Learning
Environment to propose better evaluation methods in these
benchmarks. However, while the question of reproducibility
and good experimental practice has been examined in related
ﬁelds (Wagstaff 2012; Boulesteix, Lauer, and Eugster 2013;
Stodden, Leisch, and Peng 2014; Bouckaert and Frank 2004;
Bouckaert 2004; Vaughan and Wawerla 2012), to the best of
our knowledge this is the ﬁrst work to address this important
question in the context of deep RL.
In each section of our experimental analysis, we pose questions regarding key factors affecting reproducibility. We ﬁnd
that there are numerous sources of non-determinism when
reproducing and comparing RL algorithms. To this end, we

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is the study of how an agent
can interact with its environment to learn a policy which
maximizes expected cumulative rewards for a task. Recently,
RL has experienced dramatic growth in attention and interest
due to promising results in areas like: controlling continuous
systems in robotics (Lillicrap et al. 2015a), playing Go (Silver
et al. 2016), Atari (Mnih et al. 2013), and competitive video
games (Vinyals et al. 2017; Silva and Chaimowicz 2017).
Figure 1 illustrates growth of the ﬁeld through the number
of publications per year. To maintain rapid progress in RL
research, it is important that existing works can be easily
reproduced and compared to accurately judge improvements
offered by novel methods.
However, reproducing deep RL results is seldom straightforward, and the literature reports a wide range of results
for the same baseline algorithms (Islam et al. 2017). Reproducibility can be affected by extrinsic factors (e.g. hyperparameters or codebases) and intrinsic factors (e.g. ef∗

These two authors contributed equally
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3207

