The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Adversary Is the Best Teacher: Towards Extremely Compact Neural Networks
Ameya Prabhu,* Harish Krishna,* Soham Saha
Center for Visual Information Technology
Kolhi Center for Intelligent Systems
IIIT-Hyderabad
{ameya.prabhu,harishkrishna.v,soham.saha} @ research.iiit.ac.in
asterisk indicates equal contribution

between the student network and an adversary. Simply
stated, the adversarial network takes a point in a manifold
as its input with the objective is to classify whether this
point is from the manifold of the teacher or of the student.
The goal of the student network is to try fool the adversary
into believing that it is the teacher, and in this process,
learn the manifold. To the best of our knowledge, it is
the ﬁrst time an adversarial setting is used to learning
how to mimic and provides signiﬁcant improvement in
accuracy over supervised loss functions and traditional reconstruction loss used typically in student-teacher networks.

Abstract
With neural networks rapidly becoming deeper, there
emerges a need for compact models. One popular approach
for this is to train small student networks to mimic larger
and deeper teacher models, rather than directly learn from the
training data. We propose a novel technique to train studentteacher networks without directly providing label information
to the student. However, our main contribution is to learn how
to learn from the teacher by a unique strategy - having the student compete with a discriminator.

Introduction

Why is our contribution important to the community?
Learning without any explicit supervision for a task ipso
facto provides interesting properties to our approach. An example is that the learning method is domain and task independent, since instead of learning a given task, we learn
a way to learn that from the teacher. Hence, it should be
well suited to classiﬁcation, retrieval, clustering or any other
method across domains. Another interesting fact about this
approach is that humans learn in a similar way too - they
learn by mimicking those they consider teachers while being motivated by a critic (healthy competition). In our experiments, we are able to achieve competing accuracies with
the state-of-the-art student-teacher methods in the domain
usually used for benchmarking these approaches, with upto
40% lesser parameters and no supervision, when compared
to the state-of-the-art compressed student-teacher networks
and over 16x compression when compared to other methods.

The recent boom in deep neural networks has resulted in
their being used for a wide variety of applications, many of
which ﬁnd signiﬁcance when run on memory-constrained
environments. Popular methods for neural network compression aim to achieve a reduction in the number of parameters while retaining state-of-the-art results. A seminal work
on model compression was by Hinton et al [2] who introduced a technique in which a small student network learns
from a large teacher network that is trained to saturation.
The teacher network has to learn to represent complex structures in the data and in a way, pass its understanding to the
student model thereby enabling it to perform better than if
trained in a plain supervised fashion. Any neural network
for classiﬁcation in essence transforms an input from the
space of the input to a point on the manifold of dimension of
the n classes. The student-teacher networks try to penalize
the distance between the points common to manifolds of the
teacher and student networks.

Loss function
If t(x) denotes the output of the teacher network for input x
and f (x|θ) the output of a student network parameterized by
θ, our loss function LT is a weighted sum of the following
terms:
Reconstruction loss This matches function values and
forces both the networks to produce the same output,

Our Contributions
Our ﬁrst contribution is to learning a manifold by a student
neural network from a corresponding point in the manifold
of its teacher network, i.e without any direct supervision.
We train student networks purely with a similarity loss,
and are able to achieve accuracies comparable to that of
student network trained in a supervised manner. We build
on this by our second and our main contribution which is
learning how to learn the manifold of the student itself.
We achieve this modeling the learning problem as a game

LR =

1
||f (x|θ) − t(x)||2
2

Derivative loss The reconstruction loss is often insufﬁcient;
since multiple manifolds can ﬁt through the same set of
points. This problem can be relieved by augmenting the
loss function with derivative loss i.e. penalizing the mean-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8137

