The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

DF2 Net: A Discriminative Feature Learning and Fusion
Network for RGB-D Indoor Scene Classiﬁcation
Yabei Li,1,2 Junge Zhang,1,2 Yanhua Cheng,3 Kaiqi Huang,1,2,4 Tieniu Tan1,2,4

1

CRIPAC & NLPR, CASIA 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Tencent Wechat AI
4
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
yabei.li@cripac.ia.ac.cn, {jgzhang, kqhuang, tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, breezecheng@tencent.com

Abstract
This paper focuses on the task of RGB-D indoor scene classiﬁcation. It is a very challenging task due to two folds. 1)
Learning robust representation for indoor scene is difﬁcult
because of various objects and layouts. 2) Fusing the complementary cues in RGB and Depth is nontrivial since there
are large semantic gaps between the two modalities. Most existing works learn representation for classiﬁcation by training
a deep network with softmax loss and fuse the two modalities by simply concatenating the features of them. However,
these pipelines do not explicitly consider intra-class and interclass similarity as well as inter-modal intrinsic relationships.
To address these problems, this paper proposes a Discriminative Feature Learning and Fusion Network (DF2 Net) with
two-stage training. In the ﬁrst stage, to better represent scene
in each modality, a deep multi-task network is constructed to
simultaneously minimize the structured loss and the softmax
loss. In the second stage, we design a novel discriminative
fusion network which is able to learn correlative features of
multiple modalities and distinctive features of each modality.
Extensive analysis and experiments on SUN RGB-D Dataset
and NYU Depth Dataset V2 show the superiority of DF2 Net
over other state-of-the-art methods in RGB-D indoor scene
classiﬁcation task.

Figure 1: The difﬁculties of RGB-D indoor scene classiﬁcation. 1) indoor scene images have large intra-class variation
and small inter-class variation. 2) RGB and Depth image
have semantic gaps. Sample images are from SUN RGB-D
Dataset.

view of classroom is similar to other scene categories such
as lecture theatre. Secondly, although it’s an opportunity to
utilize the additional depth cues to beneﬁt indoor scene classiﬁcation, there are large semantic gaps between the RGB
and Depth modality. As shown in Figure 1, RGB image gives
appearance cues while Depth image provides geometric priors. How to exhaustively use the complementary cues in the
RGB and Depth modalities remains an open problem.
The ideal multimodal representation for RGB-D indoor
scene ought to have small distances between the same class
and large distances between the different classes, as shown
in Figure 2(a). One of the most popular pipelines (Eitel et al.
2015) is to learn representation for RGB and Depth image
with softmax loss separately and directly concatenate them,
illustrated as in Figure 2(b). However, for scene images that
have large intra-class variation and small inter-class variation, it’s hard to obtain discriminative enough RGB and
Depth representation. It leads to the concatenated multimodal representation far from ideal. To ease this situation,
we design a discriminative feature learning network which
can explicitly model the intra-class and inter-class similarity

Introduction
Scene classiﬁcation is one of the basic problems in computer
vision research. Recently, with the release of cost-affordable
depth sensors, e.g. Kinect, which provide strong illumination and color invariant geometric cues, some intrinsic challenges in indoor scene classiﬁcation such as various illumination, diverse objects and layouts are promising to be partially solved.
Compared with the standard object-centric image classiﬁcation problem, the task of RGB-D indoor scene classiﬁcation has several challenges. Firstly, obtaining robust representation for scene classiﬁcation in single modality is difﬁcult. To understand a scene, people not only recognize the
objects in the scene, but also consider the correlations of
the objects. As for indoor scenes, they are usually cluttered
with diverse objects and various layouts, resulting in large
intra-class variation and sever inter-class overlap. As we illustrated in Figure 1, the classroom has various views. Some
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7041

