The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Long-Term Image Boundary Prediction
Apratim Bhattacharyya, Mateusz Malinowski, Bernt Schiele, Mario Fritz
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
{abhattac, mmalinow, schiele, mfritz}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
Boundary estimation in images and videos has been a very active topic of research, and organizing visual information into
boundaries and segments is believed to be a corner stone of
visual perception. While prior work has focused on estimating boundaries for observed frames, our work aims at predicting boundaries of future unobserved frames. This requires our
model to learn about the fate of boundaries and corresponding
motion patterns – including a notion of “intuitive physics”.
We experiment on natural video sequences along with synthetic sequences with deterministic physics-based and agentbased motions. While not being our primary goal, we also
show that fusion of RGB and boundary prediction leads to
improved RGB predictions.

Last Observation: t

Prediction

Figure 1: Predicted future boundary images, from t + 1 (Yellow) to t + 8 (Row 1), t + 18 (Row 2) (Red), superimposed.

Introduction
Recently, full future frame predication of observed scenes
has been studied (Mathieu, Couprie, and LeCun 2016;
Liu et al. 2017). But up to now, only very short range
predictions of few frames have been shown, where blurriness/distortion artifacts occur in the predicted future frames
– losing/incorrectly propagating high-frequency information. This high frequency information is crucial for meaningful predictions about the future, e.g. on a billiard table the
location of a ball and table boundaries are necessary to infer the future state of the table. Boundaries capture this crucial high frequency information and are also known to reveal
important structures of the visual scene (Wertheimer 1923;
Arbelaez et al. 2011; Galasso et al. 2013). Therefore, we argue that the task of future boundary prediction is a more suitable benchmark for understanding and predicting physics or
agent-based motion.

Humans possess the skill to imagine future states of observed scenes in diverse scenarios. This supports various different tasks ranging from planning to object manipulation,
e.g. a goalkeeper jumping to intercept the ball or reaching
out for a handshake. Humans can readily perform such complex and versatile tasks because they can anticipate motions
including an intuitive understanding of physical laws from
the early age (Baillargeon 1994; 2004).
In this work, we propose the task of predicting future
scene boundaries. Scene boundaries capture the important
structure and extents of objects. Moreover, they can be accurately estimated (Khoreva et al. 2016). Prediction of future
scene boundaries requires understanding of object dynamics
and motion patterns including an intuitive understanding of
physical laws or “intuitive physics”. In this work, we focus
on two particular scenarios involving motion and local interactions. The ﬁrst one, which we call physics-based motion,
can fully be described by the laws of physics, e.g. dynamics
of billiard balls. The second one, which we call agent-based
motion, also involves understanding of intentions, e.g. dynamics of an ice-skater. Therefore, our methods have to deal
with diverse situations, work on raw pixels, and should be
capable of long-term predictions. Figure 1 shows example
results of our method that accurately predicts future scene
boundaries.

Our main contributions are as follows, 1. We propose the
novel task of future boundary prediction. 2. We propose
the ﬁrst method that predicts future boundaries based only
on the raw pixels. 3. We evaluate our model on two scenarios involving physics-based (synthetic and real billiard
sequences) and agent-based motion (VSB100, (Galasso et
al. 2013)). 4. Under the physics-based scenario, the method
shows for the ﬁrst time long-term predictions. 5. Under the
agent-based scenario on VSB100 and UCF101, we show
that the predicted boundaries can be used in a fusion scheme
that improves RGB video prediction in the longer-term.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2720

