The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

CRM Sales Prediction Using
Continuous Time-Evolving Classification
Mohamoud Ali, Yugyung Lee
School of Computing and Engineering
University of Missouri - Kansas City
Kansas City, Missouri
mali@mail.umkc.edu, leeyu@umkc.edu

salesmanship and its success patterns are equally important
and need appropriate research attention. Success patterns of
salespeople can be turned into a product that can help the
average salesperson stay on the road to a sale with more
efficient continuity in a consumer relationship. With a
greater focus on salespeople’s activities to drive insights
about success factors, we believe we are addressing a
predictive analytics gap in the sales domain.

Abstract
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) systems play an
important role in helping companies identify and keep sales
and service prospects. CRM service providers offer a range
of tools and techniques that will help find, sell to and keep
customers. To be effective, CRM users usually require
extensive training. Predictive CRM using machine learning
expands the capabilities of traditional CRM through the
provision of predictive insights for CRM users by combining
internal and external data. In this paper, we will explore a
novel idea of computationally learning salesmanship, its
patterns and success factors to drive industry intuitions for a
more predictable road to a vehicle sale. The newly discovered
patterns and insights are used to act as a virtual guide or
trainer for the general CRM user population.

Our research also shows that timeline data with complex and
evolving customer relationships do not fit well with current
learning algorithms. In a CRM system, it is important for a
salesperson to know what customers to contact. It is even
more important to know when to contact them. In this paper,
we present challenges and approaches for time-evolving
classification problems.

Introduction
Apart from human capital and financial assets, data are now
considered one of the highly regarded assets for any
successful company. More and more companies are tapping
into their ample data and translating them into actionable
insights for market success. In this paper, we will explore a
novel idea of computationally learning salesmanship, its
patterns and success factors, to drive industry intuitions for
a more predictable road to a vehicle sale.

Relevance and Significance
Predictive CRM is a newly emerging technology. It
augments traditional CRM, which helps users sell or interact
with known customers, with the identification of to whom
or what to sell at the right time. Microsoft included AI
capabilities in their Dynamics 365 CRM with the integration
of Mintigo’s Predictive Sales Couch (Mintigo 2017).
SalesForce announced an AI-enabled, predictive CRM
feature entitled ‘Einstein’ to make customer interactions
smarter and help their clients focus on what matters the most
at any given time (Salesforce 2017; Mintigo 2017).
(Villacampa 2015) compares classification methods to
identify potential buyers of new vehicles based on their
vehicle service history. The trend, both in business and
academia, shows artificial intelligence will continue to play

Current predictive analytics research in the sales domain
revolves around products or consumers. Recommendation
systems and machine learning models for predicting product
cross-sell, up-sell and deep-sell opportunities are examples
of product centric analytics. On the other hand, consumer
segmentation based on prior- or value-based attributes for
targeted marketing campaigns is an example of consumercentric analytics. Predictive analytics based on

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7727

