The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Optimal Margin Distribution Clustering∗
Teng Zhang, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
Collaborative Innovation Center of
Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing 210023, China
{zhangt, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

data. Since the resultant minimax problem involves labeling each instance from the set {+1, −1}, it’s no longer a
convex optimization problem but a mixed-integer programming which is much more difﬁcult to handle. From then
on, a lot of efforts have been devoted to solve this problem, which can be roughly classiﬁed into two groups. The
ﬁrst group applies various convex relaxation techniques. Xu
et al. (2005) ﬁrst relaxed it as a convex semi-deﬁnite programming (SDP), in which a positive semi-deﬁnite matrix with linear constraints is used to approximate the matrix of label outer product. Soon after, Valizadegan and
Jin (2006) introduced a new formulation, whose number
of variables is signiﬁcantly reduced, although it’s still a
SDP problem. Finally, Li et al. (2009; 2013) proposed a
tighter minimax relaxation than SDP formulation, which
can be solved by iteratively generating the most violated labels and then combining them via multiple kernel learning.
The second group directly optimizes the original problem
via variants of non-convex optimization. Examples include
alternative optimization (Zhang, Tsang, and Kwok 2007;
2009), in which clustering is preformed by sequentially ﬁnding labels and optimizing a support vector regression (SVR),
and constrained convex-concave procedure (CCCP) (Zhao,
Wang, and Zhang 2008; Wang, Zhao, and Zhang 2010), in
which the non-convex objective function or constraints are
expressed as the a difference between two convex functions,
and the latter is further replaced by a linear approximation
so that the whole is convex. Moreover, several researchers
also tried to extend MMC to more general learning settings.
For example, Zhou et al. (2013) assumed that the data has
latent variables and developed the LMMC framework. Niu
et al. (2013) showed an alternative principle to MMC, called
maximum volume clustering (MVC), is more theoretically
advantageous. The incremental version of MMC is also proposed (Vijaya Saradhi and Charly Abraham 2016).

Abstract
Maximum margin clustering (MMC), which borrows the
large margin heuristic from support vector machine (SVM),
has achieved more accurate results than traditional clustering
methods. The intuition is that, for a good clustering, when
labels are assigned to different clusters, SVM can achieve a
large minimum margin on this data. Recent studies, however,
disclosed that maximizing the minimum margin does not necessarily lead to better performance, and instead, it is crucial
to optimize the margin distribution. In this paper, we propose a novel approach ODMC (Optimal margin Distribution
Machine for Clustering), which tries to cluster the data and
achieve optimal margin distribution simultaneously. Specifically, we characterize the margin distribution by the ﬁrstand second-order statistics, i.e., the margin mean and variance, and extend a stochastic mirror descent method to solve
the resultant minimax problem. Moreover, we prove theoretically that ODMC has the same convergence rate with state-ofthe-art cutting plane based algorithms but involves much less
computation cost per iteration, so our method is much more
scalable than existing approaches. Extensive experiments on
UCI data sets show that ODMC is signiﬁcantly better than
compared methods, which veriﬁes the superiority of optimal
margin distribution learning.

Introduction
Clustering is an important research area in machine learning,
data mining and pattern recognition that aims at grouping
data points which are similar. It arises in a wide range of
domains including information retrieval, computer version,
bioinformatics, etc., and various clustering algorithms have
been proposed over past decades (Jain and Dubes 1988; Xu
and Wunsch 2005; Jain 2010).
A recently proposed method for clustering, referred to as
maximum margin clustering (MMC), is based on the large
margin heuristic of support vector machine (SVM) (Cortes
and Vapnik 1995; Vapnik 1995). The intuition is that, for a
good clustering, when labels are assigned to different clusters, SVM can achieve a large minimum margin on this

Aforementioned MMC algorithms are all based on the
large margin principle, i.e., trying to maximize the minimum margin of training instances. However, recent studies on margin theory (Gao and Zhou 2013) disclosed that
maximizing the minimum margin does not necessarily lead
to better performance, and instead, it is crucial to optimize
the margin distribution. Inspired by this recognition, Zhang
and Zhou (2014; 2016; 2017) proposed optimal margin distribution machine (ODM) which can achieve better gen-

∗

This research was supported by the 973 Program and NSFC
(61333014) and the Program B for outstanding PhD candidate of
Nanjing University.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4474

