The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Fairness in Decision-Making —
The Causal Explanation Formula
Junzhe Zhang, Elias Bareinboim
Purdue University
{zhang745,eb}@purdue.edu

broadly, supporting large-scale decision-making infrastructure to solve society’s most challenging problems. Issues
of unfairness and discrimination are pervasive when decisions are being made by humans, which, unfortunately, are
not automatically solved, and can even be ampliﬁed, when
machines are put in control. For instance, an AI system designed to decide incarceration of recidivist criminals may be
trained with data that contains historical biases of judges that
discriminated against certain races, which potentially may
lead to even more discriminatory practices without much
transparency or accountability. If our goal is to design systems that are ethical and fair, it is imperative to have a
more reﬁned understanding of the properties of automated
decision-making in complex and uncertain scenarios.
Discrimination can be broadly partitioned into two components: direct and indirect (Council 2004). The former is
concerned with settings where individuals receive less favorable treatments on the basis of a protected attribute X
such as race, religion, or gender. Some extreme cases of direct discrimination include voting rights and unequal payment based on race and gender (Altonji and Blank 1999;
Derfner 1973). The latter is concerned with individuals who
receive treatments on the basis of inadequately justiﬁed factors that are somewhat related with (but not the same as)
the protected attribute. These cases are arguably more complex to characterize, and require a more reﬁned reasoning.
One well-known example is redlining, where ﬁnancial institutions (e.g., banks, insurance companies) deny services
to residents of geographic areas in different rates, which
wouldn’t be necessarily a problem by itself, if not for the fact
that these areas have considerably different racial and ethnic
compositions. In practice, this may entail that the given institution is using the location of the applicants as a proxy to
an obviously discriminatory attribute (e.g., race).
These types of discrimination (direct and indirect) are
supported by two legal frameworks applied in large bodies
of cases throughout the US and the EU – disparate treatment
and disparate impact (Council 2004; Barocas and Selbst
2016). The disparate treatment framework enforces procedural fairness, namely, the equality of treatments that prohibits the use of the protected attribute in the decision process. The disparate impact framework guarantees outcome
fairness, namely, the equality of outcomes among protected
groups. Disparate impact discrimination occurs if a facially

Abstract
AI plays an increasingly prominent role in society since decisions that were once made by humans are now delegated
to automated systems. These systems are currently in charge
of deciding bank loans, criminals’ incarceration, and the hiring of new employees, and it’s not difﬁcult to envision that
they will in the future underpin most of the decisions in society. Despite the high complexity entailed by this task, there
is still not much understanding of basic properties of such
systems. For instance, we currently cannot detect (neither explain nor correct) whether an AI system is operating fairly
(i.e., is abiding by the decision-constraints agreed by society) or it is reinforcing biases and perpetuating a preceding
prejudicial practice. Issues of discrimination have been discussed extensively in legal circles, but there exists still not
much understanding of the formal conditions that a system
must adhere to be deemed fair. In this paper, we use the language of structural causality (Pearl, 2000) to ﬁll in this gap.
We start by introducing three new ﬁne-grained measures of
transmission of change from stimulus to effect, which we
called counterfactual direct (Ctf-DE), indirect (Ctf-IE), and
spurious (Ctf-SE) effects. We then derive the causal explanation formula, which allows the AI designer to quantitatively
evaluate fairness and explain the total observed disparity of
decisions through different discriminatory mechanisms. We
apply these results to various discrimination analysis tasks
and run extensive simulations, including detection, evaluation, and optimization of decision-making under fairness constraints. We conclude studying the trade-off between different
types of fairness criteria (outcome and procedural), and provide a quantitative approach to policy implementation and the
design of fair decision-making systems.

Introduction
Automated systems based on artiﬁcial intelligence, machine learning, and statistics have been increasingly applied
throughout a wide range of real-world decision-making scenarios, including in healthcare, law enforcement, education, and ﬁnance (Mahoney and Mohen 2007; Brennan,
Dieterich, and Ehret 2009; Khandani, Kim, and Lo 2010;
Sweeney 2013; Angwin et al. 2016). It is no longer farfetched to envision a future where fully autonomous AI systems will be driving entire business decisions and, more
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2037

