The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Compressed Sensing MRI Using a Recursive Dilated Network
Liyan Sun,† Zhiwen Fan,† Yue Huang, Xinghao Ding, John Paisley,‡
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, Xiamen University, Fujian, China
†
The co-ﬁrst authors contributed equally.

Correspondence: dxh@xmu.edu.cn.
‡
Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA

learning will require no new optimizations, and so be very
fast.
CS-MRI was pioneered by SparseMRI (Lustig, Donoho,
and Pauly 2007). Since then, contributions have been made
to efﬁcient optimization of the SparseMRI objective, such
as TVCMRI (Ma et al. 2008), RecPF (Yang, Zhang, and Yin
2010), and FCSA (Huang, Zhang, and Metaxas 2011). Other
objectives choose different wavelet regularizations based on
geometric information, such as PBDW/PBDWS (Qu et al.
2012; Ning et al. 2013) and GBRWT (Lai et al. 2016), or dictionary learning techniques such as DLMRI (Ravishankar
and Bresler 2011) and BPTV (Huang et al. 2014).
Three potential issues arise with these methods:
1. Most methods are performed “in situ,” meaning only information from the MRI of interest is used and any other
potential MRI data ignored. While some methods are able
to consider recurrent structure across MRI, such as NLR
(Dong et al. 2014), PANO (Qu et al. 2014) and BM3DMRI (Eksioglu 2016), they are usually implemented on a
single MRI.
2. Data complexity is not sufﬁciently modeled. For example, with dictionary learning methods (Ravishankar and
Bresler 2011; Huang et al. 2014) the patches of MRI are
reconstructed using linear combinations of learned atoms
and sparse coefﬁcients. While structural sparsity has been
introduced toward ﬁxing this problem (Chen and Huang
2012), linear-based models are inherently less complex.
3. Optimizing the objective function for new MRI may timeconsuming because they require iterative procedures. This
may limit their use for real applications.
To address these limitations, deep learning models have
been adopted for CS-MRI to exploit the large amount of synthetically available training data. Deep neural networks can
also help model the intricate structures across various MRI.
Finally, after training the network, the feed-forward testing
of new MRI does not require new iterations and is extremely
fast. The ﬁrst work devoted to introducing deep learning to
CS-MRI is (Wang et al. 2016). In their paper, a vanilla CNN
model is directly used to learn the mapping from a zeroﬁlled input MRI to the fully-sampled output MRI, which is
also corrected with an additional data ﬁdelity term. Subsequent papers have proposed a modiﬁed U-Net architecture
(Lee, Yoo, and Ye 2017), and deep cascading of the CNN

Abstract
Compressed sensing magnetic resonance imaging (CS-MRI)
is an active research topic in the ﬁeld of inverse problems.
Conventional CS-MRI algorithms usually exploit the sparse
nature of MRI in an iterative manner. These optimizationbased CS-MRI methods are often time-consuming at test
time, and are based on ﬁxed transform bases or shallow
dictionaries, which limits modeling capacity. Recently, deep
models have been introduced to the CS-MRI problem. One
main challenge for CS-MRI methods based on deep learning
is the trade-off between model performance and network size.
We propose a recursive dilated network (RDN) for CS-MRI
that achieves good performance while reducing the number of
network parameters. We adopt dilated convolutions in each
recursive block to aggregate multi-scale information within
the MRI. We also adopt a modiﬁed shortcut strategy to help
features ﬂow into deeper layers. Experimental results show
that the proposed RDN model achieves state-of-the-art performance in CS-MRI while using far fewer parameters than
previously required.

Introduction
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a non-invasive medical imaging technique with the advantages of being high
resolution and low radiation. The major limitation of MRI
is its relatively slow imaging speed. This problem is critical because patients must remain still in the scanner for long
periods of time to reduce motion artifacts. Different hardware and software strategies exist to accelerate MRI. Among
them, compressed sensing (CS-MRI) is popular because no
additional hardware is required, thus reducing extra costs.
According to compressed sensing theory (Candès,
Romberg, and Tao 2006; Donoho 2006), for MRI signals
that can be sparsely represented in an appropriate transform basis, far fewer k-space (Fourier transform) measurements are necessary for accurate MRI reconstruction than
suggested by the traditional Nyquist sampling theorem. In
previous work on CS-MRI, focus has been on proposing better objective functions and efﬁcient optimization algorithms
to exploit this fact. Our contribution will be to the former
task, but we observe that processing of new MRI using deep
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2444

