The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

PixelLink: Detecting Scene
Text via Instance Segmentation
1

Dan Deng,1,3∗ Haifeng Liu,1 Xuelong Li,4 Deng Cai1,2

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
2
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies
3
CVTE Research
4
Xi’an Institute of Optics and Precision Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences
dengdan.zju@gmail.com {haifengliu,dcai}@zju.edu.cn xuelong li@opt.ac.cn
as conﬁdences on regression results (e.g., TextBoxes,
SegLink, EAST).

Abstract
Most state-of-the-art scene text detection algorithms are deep
learning based methods that depend on bounding box regression and perform at least two kinds of predictions: text/nontext classiﬁcation and location regression. Regression plays a
key role in the acquisition of bounding boxes in these methods, but it is not indispensable because text/non-text prediction can also be considered as a kind of semantic segmentation that contains full location information in itself. However,
text instances in scene images often lie very close to each
other, making them very difﬁcult to separate via semantic segmentation. Therefore, instance segmentation is needed to address this problem. In this paper, PixelLink, a novel scene text
detection algorithm based on instance segmentation, is proposed. Text instances are ﬁrst segmented out by linking pixels
within the same instance together. Text bounding boxes are
then extracted directly from the segmentation result without
location regression. Experiments show that, compared with
regression-based methods, PixelLink can achieve better or
comparable performance on several benchmarks, while requiring many fewer training iterations and less training data.

1

2. Location regression. Locations of text instances, or their
segments/slices, are predicted as offsets from reference
boxes (e.g., TextBoxes, SegLink, CTPN), or absolute locations of bounding boxes (e.g., EAST).
In methods like SegLink, linkages between segments are
also predicted. After these predictions, post-processing that
mainly includes joining segments together (e.g., SegLink,
CTPN) or Non-Maximum Suppression (e.g., TextBoxes,
EAST), is applied to obtain bounding boxes as the ﬁnal output.
Location regression has long been used in object detection, as well as in text detection, and has proven to be effective. It plays a key role in the formulation of text bounding
boxes in state-of-the-art methods. However, as mentioned
above, text/non-text predictions can not only be used as the
conﬁdences on regression results, but also as a segmentation
score map, which contains location information in itself and
can be used to obtain bounding boxes directly. Therefore,
regression is not indispensable.
However, as shown in Fig. 1, text instances in scene images usually lie very close to each other. In such cases, they
are very difﬁcult, and are sometimes even impossible to separate via semantic segmentation (i.e., text/non-text prediction) only; therefore, segmentation at the instance level is
further required.
To solve this problem, a novel scene text detection algorithm, PixelLink, is proposed in this paper. It extracts text
locations directly from an instance segmentation result, instead of from bounding box regression. In PixelLink, a Deep
Neural Network (DNN) is trained to do two kinds of pixelwise predictions, text/non-text prediction, and link predic-

Introduction

Reading text in the wild, or robust reading has drawn great
interest for a long time (Ye and Doermann 2015). It is usually divided into two steps or sub-tasks: text detection and
text recognition.
The detection task, also called localization, takes an image as input and outputs the locations of text within it. Along
with the advances in deep learning and general object detection, more and more accurate as well as efﬁcient scene text
detection algorithms have been proposed, e.g., CTPN (Tian
et al. 2016), TextBoxes (Liao et al. 2017), SegLink (Shi, Bai,
and Belongie 2017) and EAST (Zhou et al. 2017). Most of
these state-of-the-art methods are built on Fully Convolutional Networks (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015), and
perform at least two kinds of predictions:
1. Text/non-text classiﬁcation. Such predictions can be taken
as probabilities of pixels being within text bounding boxes
(Zhang et al. 2016). But they are more frequently used

original image

∗

Part of this work was done when Dan Deng was an intern at
Visual Computing Group, CVTE Research.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

semantic segmentation

Figure 1: Text instances often lie close to each other, making
them hard to separate via semantic segmentation.

6773

