The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Weakly Supervised Collective
Feature Learning from Curated Media
Yusuke Mukuta,1,3 Akisato Kimura,1,2 David B. Adrian,1,4 Zoubin Ghahramani2,5
1. NTT Communication Science Laboratories, Japan.
2. Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom.
3. The University of Tokyo, Japan. 4. Technical University of Munich, Germany. 5. Uber AI Labs, USA.
mukuta@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp, akisato@ieee.org, david.adrian@tum.de, zoubin@eng.cam.ac.uk
of available data. With the steadily increasing popularity of
SNSs, large quantities of unlabeled and weakly labeled data
are created every day. Most existing research on image feature learning without relying on fully labeled image datasets
utilizes community contributed text tags that can be easily collected through image search platforms (Sukhbaatar et
al. 2015) or content sharing platforms (Joulin et al. 2016).
However, the concepts underlying a single text tag depend
strongly on the users who provide the text tag. Different
users may annotate the same text tag for different concepts,
but we cannot distinguish those different concepts solely
from the text tag, which may make it difﬁcult to train discriminative features.
Instead, we present a new paradigm for learning visual
features by making the full use of the human curation process on SNSs. During the process of content curation, images are manually collected from many sources such as
photo sharing services and other SNSs, grouped by concept,
and provided with textual descriptions in the form of text
tags or sentences (Duh et al. 2012; Zhong, Karamshuk, and
Sastry 2015). The concept of each image group is deﬁned by
the curating user, allowing for a wide range of very speciﬁc
semantic concepts, such as ”Green/Blue Ferrari” or ”Gadgets for Lazy People”, as shown in Figure 2. Previous research (Zhong, Karamshuk, and Sastry 2015) focusing on
Pinterest, which is one of the most popular content curation
platform for images, has demonstrated that most of the images collected in the same curated group can be assumed to
share the same semantic concept. This readily implies that
we can treat each human-curated group as a pseudo category that shares a consistent semantic concept compared
with noisy community-contributed text tags. However, employing curated groups as weak labels still presents several
technical problems. First, we have to handle a large number
of curated groups, as when using community-contributed
text tags. Second, the number of images in a curated group
is much smaller than what is required to fully capture the
characteristics of the curated group.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework for weakly
supervised image feature learning that fully exploits the
properties underlying human curated content. Figure 1
shows an overview of the proposed method. We introduce
another property of socially curated data that results from
the fact that curated groups sharing several images are ex-

Abstract
The current state-of-the-art in feature learning relies on the
supervised learning of large-scale datasets consisting of target
content items and their respective category labels. However,
constructing such large-scale fully-labeled datasets generally
requires painstaking manual effort. One possible solution to
this problem is to employ community contributed text tags as
weak labels, however, the concepts underlying a single text
tag strongly depends on the users. We instead present a new
paradigm for learning discriminative features by making full
use of the human curation process on social networking services (SNSs). During the process of content curation, SNS
users collect content items manually from various sources
and group them by context, all for their own beneﬁt. Due
to the nature of this process, we can assume that (1) content items in the same group share the same semantic concept
and (2) groups sharing the same images might have related
semantic concepts. Through these insights, we can deﬁne human curated groups as weak labels from which our proposed
framework can learn discriminative features as a representation in the space of semantic concepts the users intended
when creating the groups. We show that this feature learning
can be formulated as a problem of link prediction for a bipartite graph whose nodes corresponds to content items and
human curated groups, and propose a novel method for feature learning based on sparse coding or network ﬁne-tuning.

Introduction
Accuracy in image recognition and other related computer vision tasks strongly depends on the choice of image features. Learning a discriminative feature representation is thus an essential step in handling these tasks. Before
the breakthrough brought by convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), most of the approaches were based on hand-crafted
feature representations. However in the current state-of-theart, this has changed to supervised feature learning from
well-organized large-scale datasets consisting of millions of
images and assigned labels fully annotated by experts (He
et al. 2015). However, constructing such large-scale datasets
generally requires a huge amount of manual effort and poses
one of the biggest challenges in feature learning. Instead,
training features in a weakly supervised or completely unsupervised fashion allows us to utilize a very large amount
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7260

