The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Continuous Relaxation of Beam Search for
End-to-End Training of Neural Sequence Models
Kartik Goyal

Graham Neubig

Carnegie Mellon University
kartikgo@cs.cmu.edu

Carnegie Mellon University
gneubig@cs.cmu.edu

Chris Dyer

Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick

Deepmind
cdyer@google.com

Carnegie Mellon University
tberg@cs.cmu.edu
Cho et al. 2014). These negative results are not unexpected.
The training procedure was not search-aware: it was not able
to consider the effect that changing the model’s scores might
have on the ease of search while using a beam decoding,
greedy decoding, or otherwise.

Abstract
Beam search is a desirable choice of test-time decoding algorithm for neural sequence models because it potentially avoids
search errors made by simpler greedy methods. However, typical cross entropy training procedures for these models do not
directly consider the behaviour of the ﬁnal decoding method.
As a result, for cross-entropy trained models, beam decoding
can sometimes yield reduced test performance when compared with greedy decoding. In order to train models that can
more effectively make use of beam search, we propose a new
training procedure that focuses on the ﬁnal loss metric (e.g.
Hamming loss) evaluated on the output of beam search. While
well-deﬁned, this “direct loss” objective is itself discontinuous
and thus difﬁcult to optimize. Hence, in our approach, we
form a sub-differentiable surrogate objective by introducing
a novel continuous approximation of the beam search decoding procedure. In experiments, we show that optimizing this
new training objective yields substantially better results on
two sequence tasks (Named Entity Recognition and CCG Supertagging) when compared with both cross entropy trained
greedy decoding and cross entropy trained beam decoding
baselines.

1

We hypothesize that the under-performance of beam search
in certain scenarios can be resolved by using a better designed
training objective. Because beam search potentially offers
more accurate search when compared to greedy decoding,
we hope that appropriately trained models should be able
to leverage beam search to improve performance. In order
to train models that can more effectively make use of beam
search, we propose a new training procedure that focuses
on the ﬁnal loss metric (e.g. Hamming loss) evaluated on
the output of beam search. While well-deﬁned and a valid
training criterion, this “direct loss” objective is discontinuous
and thus difﬁcult to optimize. Hence, in our approach, we
form a sub-differentiable surrogate objective by introducing
a novel continuous approximation of the beam search decoding procedure. In experiments, we show that optimizing this
new training objective yields substantially better results on
two sequence tasks (Named Entity Recognition and CCG Supertagging) when compared with both cross-entropy trained
greedy decoding and cross-entropy trained beam decoding
baselines.

Introduction

Sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) models have been successfully used for many sequential decision tasks such
as machine translation (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014;
Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015), parsing (Dyer et al. 2016;
2015), summarization (Rush, Chopra, and Weston 2015),
dialog generation (Serban et al. 2015), and image captioning (Xu et al. 2015). Beam search is a desirable choice of
test-time decoding algorithm for such models because it potentially avoids search errors made by simpler greedy methods. However, the typical approach to training neural sequence models is to use a locally normalized maximum likelihood objective (cross-entropy training) (Sutskever, Vinyals,
and Le 2014). This objective does not directly reason about
the behaviour of the ﬁnal decoding method. As a result,
for cross-entropy trained models, beam decoding can sometimes yield reduced test performance when compared with
greedy decoding (Koehn and Knowles 2017; Neubig 2017;

Several related methods, including reinforcement learning (Ranzato et al. 2016; Bahdanau et al. 2017), imitation
learning (Daumé, Langford, and Marcu 2009; Ross, Gordon,
and Bagnell 2011; Bengio et al. 2015), and discrete search
based methods (Wiseman and Rush 2016; Andor et al. 2016;
Daumé III and Marcu 2005; Gormley, Dredze, and Eisner
2015), have also been proposed to make training searchaware. These methods include approaches that forgo direct
optimization of a global training objective, instead incorporating credit assignment for search errors by using methods
like early updates (Collins and Roark 2004) that explicitly
track the reachability of the gold target sequence during the
search procedure. While addressing a related problem – credit
assignment for search errors during training – in this paper,
we propose an approach with a novel property: we directly
optimize a continuous and global training objective using
backpropagation. As a result, in our approach, credit assign-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3045

