The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Efﬁcient Test-Time Predictor Learning with Group-Based Budget
Li Wang

Dajiang Zhu

Yujie Chi

Department of Mathematics
University of Texas at Arlington
li.wang@uta.edu

Department of Computer Science
and Engineering
University of Texas at Arlington
dajiang.zhu@uta.edu

Physics Department
University of Texas at Arlington
yujie.chi@uta.edu

number of tests are usually requested to be performed and
the test results are used by doctors to give an accurate prediction. The costs of tests can greatly vary in terms of money
and valuable time. Thus, it is important to be able to diagnose as well as possible without performing unnecessary
tests (Reyzin 2011). It is well known that one test usually
generates a group of features for the purpose of diagnosis,
which is associated to a single cost to perform the test. In
computer vision, the groups of features are commonly extracted from a single image by taking a number of visual
descriptors so as to describe elementary characteristics of
images such as the distribution of edges, dense and sparse
visual words (Vedaldi et al. 2009). Accessing these characteristics has varying cost, and each one of them is generally
represented by a set of features (or group). The setting with
a uniform cost on each group of features is widely studied in
multiple kernel learning (MKL) (Sonnenburg et al. 2006).
To solve the test-time efﬁcient prediction problems, we
propose to learn a linear predictor by imposing a budget constraint over the costs of selected features. By introducing an
indicator variable for each group of features, the total cost
for test-time prediction can be easily modeled and the groups
involved in the prediction can be selected simultaneously. In
addition, the cost based on single feature is the special case
of the cost for groups if each group only contains one feature. Instead of solving the integer programming, we solve a
convex relaxation of the proposed problem. Experiments on
various datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and efﬁciency
of the proposed method by comparing with baselines. The
contributions of this paper are as follows:

Abstract
Learning a test-time efﬁcient predictor is becoming important
for many real-world applications for which accessing the necessary features of a test data is costly. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to learn a linear predictor by introducing binary indicator variables for selecting feature groups and
imposing an explicit budget constraint to up-bound the total
cost of selected groups. We solve the convex relaxation of
the resulting problem, with the optimal solution proved to be
integers for most of the elements at the optima and independent of the speciﬁc forms of loss functions used. We propose
a general and efﬁcient algorithm to solve the relaxation problem by leveraging the existing SVM solvers with various loss
functions. For certain loss functions, the proposed algorithm
can further take the advantage of SVM solver in the primal to
tackle large-scale and high-dimensional data. Experiments on
various datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and efﬁciency
of the proposed method by comparing with various baselines.

Machine learning algorithms have been widely used in
many real-world applications, ranging from web-search
engines (Chapelle and Chang 2011), medical diagnosis
(Kononenko 2001) and computer vision (Vedaldi et al.
2009). A learning algorithm is able to achieve a good model
in the training phase by leveraging all the admissible time
and computational resources, but it can be costly to predict
a new example whose features are difﬁcult to access. In this
paper, we are interested in the setting where the test-time
cost consists of the time to extract features for learning models of various tasks (e.g., classiﬁcation and regression), the
extraction costs are associated to groups of features, and they
vary highly across groups.
The test-time efﬁcient prediction problem is becoming
important in various domains (Reyzin 2011; Xu et al. 2013;
Hu et al. 2016). In the Yahoo! Learning to Rank Challenge (Chapelle and Chang 2011), each query-document
pair consists of 519 features. In the extraction phase, each
feature has an acquisition cost as a discrete value in the set
[1, 5, 20, 50, 100, 150, 200]. The cheapest features with cost
1 are those that can be acquired by looking up a table (such
as the statistics of a given document), while the most expensive ones typically involve term proximity scoring (Xu,
Weinberger, and Chapelle 2012). In medical diagnosis, a

• We propose a novel formulation based on SVMs to learn
a test-time efﬁcient predictor with an upper bound on the
total cost used to access groups of features in the test sample. The formulation directly handles groups of features,
which is naturally applied to the costs of single features.
• We theoretically prove that the proposed relaxed problem
has a solution pattern where most of variables are integers
at optima. This makes the budget constraint close to the
original constraint deﬁned on the integer variables.
• The solution pattern of the indicator variables is independent of loss functions, so the same pattern is applied to
different learning problems such as classiﬁcation and regression. Our theoretical results hold for general losses.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4187

