The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Budget-Constrained Multi-Armed
Bandits with Multiple Plays
Datong P. Zhou,1 Claire J. Tomlin2
1

Dept. of Mechanical Engineering, 2 Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720
{datong.zhou, tomlin}@berkeley.edu

auctions (Rusmevichientong and Williamson 2005) and adexchange platforms (Chakraborty et al. 2010), channel selection in radio networks (Huang, Liu, and Ding 2008), or
learning to rank web documents (Radlinski, Kleinberg, and
Joachims 2008). As acknowledged by (Ding et al. 2013),
taking an action (playing an arm) in practice is inherently
costly, yet the vast majority of existing bandit-related work
used to analyze such examples forgoes any notion of cost.
Furthermore, the above-mentioned applications rarely proceed in a strictly sequential way. A more realistic scenario is
a setting in which, at each round, multiple actions are taken
among the set of all possible choices.
These two shortcomings motivate the theme of this paper, as we investigate the MAB problem under a budget
constraint in a setting with time-varying rewards and costs
and multiple plays. More precisely, given an a-priori deﬁned budget B, at each round the decision maker selects
a combination of K distinct arms from N available arms
and observes the individual costs and rewards, which corresponds to the semi-bandit setting. The player pays for the
materialized costs until the remaining budget is exhausted,
at which point the algorithm terminates and the cumulative reward is compared to the theoretical optimum and
deﬁnes the weak regret, which is the expected difference
between the payout under the best ﬁxed choice of arms
for all rounds and the actual gain. In this paper, we investigate both the stochastic and the adversarial case. For
the stochastic case, we derive an upper bound on the expected regret of order O(N K 4 log B), utilizing Algorithm
UCB-MB inspired by the upper conﬁdence bound algorithm
UCB1 ﬁrst introduced by (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer
2002). For the adversarial case, Algorithm
 Exp3.M.B upN B log(N/K))
per and lower-bounds
the
regret
with
O(

and Ω((1 − K/N )2 N B/K), respectively. These ﬁndings
extend existing results from (Uchiya, Nakamura, and Kudo
2010) and (Auer et al. 2002), as we also provide an upper
bound that holds with high probability. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst case that addresses the adversarial budget-constrained case, which we therefore consider to
be the main contribution of this paper.

Abstract
We study the multi-armed bandit problem with multiple plays
and a budget constraint for both the stochastic and the adversarial setting. At each round, exactly K out of N possible
arms have to be played (with 1 ≤ K ≤ N ). In addition
to observing the individual rewards for each arm played, the
player also learns a vector of costs which has to be covered
with an a-priori deﬁned budget B. The game ends when the
sum of current costs associated with the played arms exceeds
the remaining budget.
Firstly, we analyze this setting for the stochastic case, for
which we assume each arm to have an underlying cost and
reward distribution with support [cmin , 1] and [0, 1], respectively. We derive an Upper Conﬁdence Bound (UCB) algorithm which achieves O(N K 4 log B) regret.
Secondly, for the adversarial case in which the entire sequence of rewards and costs is ﬁxed in advance,
we derive

an upper bound on the regret of order O( N B log(N/K))
utilizing an extension of the well-known Exp3 algorithm. We
also provide upper bounds that hold with
high probability and
a lower bound of order Ω((1 − K/N )2 N B/K).

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem has been extensively studied in machine learning and statistics as a means
to model online sequential decision making. In the classic setting popularized by (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer
2002), (Auer et al. 2002), the decision-maker selects exactly one arm at a given round t, given the observations
of realized rewards from arms played in previous rounds
1, . . . , t − 1. The goal is to maximize the cumulative reward over a ﬁxed horizon T , or equivalently, to minimize
regret, which is deﬁned as the difference between the cumulative gain achieved, had the decision-maker always played
the best arm, and the realized cumulative gain. The analysis
of this setting reﬂects the fundamental tradeoff between the
desire to learn better arms (exploration) and the possibility
to play arms believed to have high payoff (exploitation).
A variety of practical applications of the MAB problem include placement of online advertising to maximize
the click-through rate, in particular online sponsored search

Related Work

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

In the extant literature, attempts to make sense of a cost component in MAB problems occur in (Tran-Thanh et al. 2010)

4572

