The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Spatial Temporal Graph Convolutional Networks
for Skeleton-Based Action Recognition
Sijie Yan, Yuanjun Xiong, Dahua Lin
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{ys016, dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, bitxiong@gmail.com

Abstract
Dynamics of human body skeletons convey signiﬁcant information for human action recognition. Conventional approaches for modeling skeletons usually rely on hand-crafted
parts or traversal rules, thus resulting in limited expressive
power and difﬁculties of generalization. In this work, we
propose a novel model of dynamic skeletons called SpatialTemporal Graph Convolutional Networks (ST-GCN), which
moves beyond the limitations of previous methods by automatically learning both the spatial and temporal patterns
from data. This formulation not only leads to greater expressive power but also stronger generalization capability. On two
large datasets, Kinetics and NTU-RGBD, it achieves substantial improvements over mainstream methods.

Figure 1: The spatial temporal graph of a skeleton sequence used

1

in this work where the proposed ST-GCN operate on. Blue dots
denote the body joints. The intra-body edges between body joints
are deﬁned based on the natural connections in human bodies.
The inter-frame edges connect the same joints between consecutive frames. Joint coordinates are used as inputs to the ST-GCN.

Introduction

Human action recognition has become an active research
area in recent years, as it plays a signiﬁcant role in video
understanding. In general, human action can be recognized
from multiple modalities(Simonyan and Zisserman 2014;
Tran et al. 2015; Wang, Qiao, and Tang 2015; Wang et al.
2016; Zhao et al. 2017), such as appearance, depth, optical ﬂows, and body skeletons (Du, Wang, and Wang 2015;
Liu et al. 2016). Among these modalities, dynamic human
skeletons usually convey signiﬁcant information that is complementary to others. However, the modeling of dynamic
skeletons has received relatively less attention than that of
appearance and optical ﬂows. In this work, we systematically study this modality, with an aim to develop a principled and effective method to model dynamic skeletons and
leverage them for action recognition.
The dynamic skeleton modality can be naturally represented by a time series of human joint locations, in the form
of 2D or 3D coordinates. Human actions can then be recognized by analyzing the motion patterns thereof. Earlier methods of using skeletons for action recognition simply employ
the joint coordinates at individual time steps to form feature
vectors, and apply temporal analysis thereon (Wang et al.
2012; Fernando et al. 2015). The capability of these methods
is limited as it does not explicitly exploit the spatial relationships among the joints, which are crucial for understanding

human actions. Recently, new methods that attempt to leverage the natural connections between joints have been developed (Shahroudy et al. 2016; Du, Wang, and Wang 2015).
These methods show encouraging improvement, which suggests the signiﬁcance of the connectivity. Yet, most existing
methods rely on hand-crafted parts or rules to analyze the
spatial patterns. As a result, the models devised for a speciﬁc application are difﬁcult to be generalized to others.
To move beyond such limitations, we need a new method
that can automatically capture the patterns embedded in the
spatial conﬁguration of the joints as well as their temporal dynamics. This is the strength of deep neural networks.
However, as mentioned, the skeletons are in the form of
graphs instead of a 2D or 3D grids, which makes it difﬁcult to use proven models like convolutional networks. Recently, Graph Neural networks (GCNs), which generalize
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to graphs of arbitrary structures, have received increasing attention and successfully been adopted in a number of applications, such as
image classiﬁcation (Bruna et al. 2014), document classiﬁcation (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016), and
semi-supervised learning (Kipf and Welling 2017). However, much of the prior work along this line assumes a ﬁxed

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7444

