The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Knowledge-Based Policies for Qualitative Decentralized POMDPs
Abdallah Safﬁdine

François Schwarzentruber

Bruno Zanuttini

University of New South Wales,
Sydney, Australia

Univ. Rennes,
CNRS, IRISA
France

Normandie Univ
UNICAEN, ENSICAEN,
CNRS, GREYC
14000 Caen, France

other agents’ knowledge in Multi-Agent KBPs (MAKBPs),
we provide more succinct representations. The counterpart
is that executing MAKBPs requires reasoning, hence they do
not constitute reactive policies. However, in many scenarios
some reasoning at execution time may be affordable. Typical examples are applications in which executing atomic actions is not instantaneous (like in extraterraneous missions),
so that deliberation can be performed in parallel.
Knowledge-based policies have been considered in other
planning settings than that of QDec-POMDPs, in particular, they arise naturally in epistemic planning (Bolander and
Andersen 2011). Other works have taken inspiration from
reasoning about knowledge to design approaches for multiagent (classical) planning (Kominis and Geffner 2015).
However, the originality of the (qualitative) Dec-PODMP
model is that it assumes decentralized execution, but centralized planning. This makes it a challenging problem, as it
requires to be able to plan ofﬂine a joint plan which can be
executed in a decentralized fashion. The challenge is visible
in the large body of work about the resolution of quantitative
(stochastic) Dec-POMDPs (see Oliehoek and Amato (2016),
Dibangoye et al. (2016) for instance).
Centralized planning with decentralized execution means
that agents agree on a policy ofﬂine, then execute it independently of each other. Hanabi is a ﬂagship example of such
settings. In this cooperative card game with partial observability and limited communication, players typically agree
on conventions before the game takes places. Researchers
have started building computer players for Hanabi, notably
by encoding human-designed policies (van den Bergh 2015;
Cox et al. 2015). Furthermore, describing and using policies that involve epistemic reasoning to determine the next
action is seen as a gateway to high-performance automated
players (Osawa 2015). Yet, no formal frameworks allowing
such policies have been put forward.

Abstract
Qualitative Decentralized Partially Observable Markov Decision Problems (QDec-POMDPs) constitute a very general
class of decision problems. They involve multiple agents, decentralized execution, sequential decision, partial observability, and uncertainty. Typically, joint policies, which prescribe
to each agent an action to take depending on its full history
of (local) actions and observations, are huge, which makes it
difﬁcult to store them onboard, at execution time, and also
hampers the computation of joint plans.
We propose and investigate a new representation for joint
policies in QDec-POMDPs, which we call Multi-Agent
Knowledge-Based Programs (MAKBPs), and which uses
epistemic logic for compactly representing conditions on histories. Contrary to standard representations, executing an
MAKBP requires reasoning at execution time, but we show
that MAKBPs can be exponentially more succinct than any
reactive representation.

Introduction
Knowledge-Based Programs (KBPs) (Fagin et al. 2003)
describe policies that agents should perform according to
their knowledge, such as ‘if Ki Φ then κ’ where Ki is
the knowledge modality for agent i, Φ is a formula, and
κ is a program. As shown by Lang and Zanuttini (2012;
2013) for the single-agent case, KBPs offer compact representations of policies for planning problems. Moreover, arguably, they provide a natural level of expressivity for experts to design policies for autonomous agents.
We are interested here in multi-agent decision problems,
for which we generalize KBPs. Precisely, we consider Qualitative Decentralized Partially Observable Markov Decision Problems (QDec-POMDPs), as formalized by Brafman,
Shani, and Zilberstein (2013). Such problems involve multiple agents, decentralized execution, sequential decision, partial observability, and uncertainty.
A single agent executing a policy for such a problem must
reason about what the other agents are executing, what they
have observed, and what they believe or know. However,
this is taken into account only indirectly by standard representations of policies. A drawback of this is that such policies are typically huge. By expliciting the reasoning about

Example 1 (running) As a running example, assume Alice
wants to meet Bob. She may take a train or a ﬂight from her
place to his, but there is a risk of air crew strike. Alice and
Bob may call each other beforehand (centralized planning
phase) to agree on the following plan.
Alice tries to ﬂy. If there is a strike, she takes the train and
listens to the radio to know whether Bob can know this. If
the strike is not announced on the radio (hence Bob cannot
know), after arriving at the station she will reach the airport

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6270

