The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

MathDQN: Solving Arithmetic Word
Problems via Deep Reinforcement Learning
Lei Wang,# Dongxiang Zhang,# ∗ Lianli Gao,# Jingkuan Song,# Long Guo,† Heng Tao Shen#
#

Center for Future Media and School of Computer Science & Engineering, UESTC, China
Key Lab of High Conﬁdence Software Technologies (MOE), Peking University, China
demolei@outlook.com, {zhangdo,lianli.gao}@uestc.edu.cn, jingkuan.song@gmail.com
guolong@pku.edu.cn, shenhengtao@hotmail.com

†

Abstract
Designing an automatic solver for math word problems
has been considered as a crucial step towards general
AI, with the ability of natural language understanding
and logical inference. The state-of-the-art performance
was achieved by enumerating all the possible expressions from the quantities in the text and customizing a
scoring function to identify the one with the maximum
probability. However, it incurs exponential search space
with the number of quantities and beam search has to be
applied to trade accuracy for efﬁciency.
In this paper, we make the ﬁrst attempt of applying deep
reinforcement learning to solve arithmetic word problems. The motivation is that deep Q-network has witnessed success in solving various problems with big
search space and achieves promising performance in
terms of both accuracy and running time. To ﬁt the math
problem scenario, we propose our MathDQN that is
customized from the general deep reinforcement learning framework. Technically, we design the states, actions, reward function, together with a feed-forward
neural network as the deep Q-network. Extensive experimental results validate our superiority over state-ofthe-art methods. Our MathDQN yields remarkable improvement on most of datasets and boosts the average
precision among all the benchmark datasets by 15%.

Figure 1: Expression tree for multi-step arithmetic problem.

and their values and extracts verb-related features for SVMbased categorization. An alternative template-based method
was proposed in (Mitra and Baral 2016). It deﬁnes three
types of formulas for common scenarios in Add-Sub problems and maps the identiﬁed variables and their attributes
to the formulas. Unfortunately, the generality of these two
methods is rather limited as they only support two types
of operators (i.e., addition and subtraction). The tag-based
approach (Liang et al. 2016) maps rules to convert identiﬁed variables and values into logic forms, which are further
transformed into logic statements for inference. It shows better generality but still requires considerable human intervention in tag annotation and rule generation.
The state-of-the-art methods for simple arithmetic problems are algorithmic and tree-based. In (Roy and Roth
2015), the multi-step arithmetic problem is decomposed into
an expression tree, as illustrated in Figure 1. It builds two
types of classiﬁers, one to identify relevant quantities as leaf
nodes and the other for iterative operator selection to construct the tree in a bottom-up manner. In this example, relevant quantities (13, 4, 9) are ﬁrst identiﬁed and the operators
in the higher level are determined by an SVM classiﬁer. A
scoring function is presented to identify the best expression
tree as the result. (Koncel-Kedziorski et al. 2015) adopts a
more brutal fashion by enumerating all the possible equa-

Introduction
Automatically solving math word problems (MWP) has a
long history dating back to 1960s (Bobrow 1964) and still
continues to attract researchers’ attention in recent years. It
requires mapping the human-readable words into machineunderstandable logic forms, followed by an inference procedure, and cannot be simply solved by pattern matching or
end-to-end classiﬁcation techniques. Thus, designing an automatic MWP solver, with semantic understanding and inference capability, has been considered as a crucial step towards general AI.
As an early attempt, ARIS (Hosseini et al. 2014) considers that verbs play an important role for operator calssiﬁcation. It uses syntatic analysis to identify relevant entities
∗

Corresponding Author: Dongxiang Zhang
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5545

