The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Jointly Extracting Event Triggers and Arguments
by Dependency-Bridge RNN and Tensor-Based Argument Interaction
Lei Sha,∗ Feng Qian,∗ Baobao Chang, Zhifang Sui

∗ Contributed equally
Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Ministry of Education
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University
{shalei, nickqian, chbb, szf}@pku.edu.cn
extract underlying features. Chen et al. (2015) explore convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and Nguyen, Cho, and
Grishman (2016) explore recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
in the event extraction task. A potential limitation of the
above methods is that they do not make use of syntactic
features during the design of neural architectures. Nguyen,
Cho, and Grishman (2016) use a binary vector to model dependency relations, but the method is still weak in terms
of syntactic modeling. Another limitation in existing approaches is the lack of argument-argument interaction. The
observation is that jointly modeling all argument candidates enables a more global view of the relationship among
arguments, which is beneﬁcial to argument identiﬁcation
and classiﬁcation. In Figure 1, for example, when deciding the role of Palestine Hotel with the trigger fire,
we ﬁnd that American tank and the Palestine
Hotel have the common dependency parent fire. Therefore, if American tank is an argument, then the probability of the Palestine Hotel also being an argument is increased.
In this paper, we propose a dependency bridge recurrent
neural network (dbRNN) for event extraction. Our model is
built upon a bidirectional recurrent neural network (RNN)
with long short term memory (LSTM) units, but we enhance
it with dependency bridges to connect syntactically related
words. We then build a tensor layer on each pair of two candidate arguments, enabling intensive argument-level information interaction. During training, we adopt a max-margin
criterion to jointly extract event triggers and arguments.
We evaluated dbRNN on the ACE 2005 dataset. Experimental results show that our model outperforms previous
state-of-the-art approaches in terms of all subtasks. We also
made efforts in visualizing tensor features to better understand our model.

Abstract
Event extraction plays an important role in natural language
processing (NLP) applications including question answering
and information retrieval. Traditional event extraction relies
heavily on lexical and syntactic features, which require intensive human engineering and may not generalize to different
datasets. Deep neural networks, on the other hand, are able
to automatically learn underlying features, but existing networks do not make full use of syntactic relations. In this paper, we propose a novel dependency bridge recurrent neural
network (dbRNN) for event extraction. We build our model
upon a recurrent neural network, but enhance it with dependency bridges, which carry syntactically related information
when modeling each word. We illustrates that simultaneously
applying tree structure and sequence structure in RNN brings
much better performance than only uses sequential RNN. In
addition, we use a tensor layer to simultaneously capture the
various types of latent interaction between candidate arguments as well as identify/classify all arguments of an event.
Experiments show that our approach achieves competitive results compared with previous work.

Introduction
Event extraction plays an important role in various NLP applications including question answering and information retrieval (Yang et al. 2003; Glavaš and Šnajder 2014). Figure 1
shows an example of the event extraction task, which aims to
discover events (die and attack) with triggering words (died
and ﬁred) and their corresponding arguments (e.g., Baghdad, cameraman). Typically, event extraction can be divided
into several subtasks: trigger identiﬁcation, argument identiﬁcation, and argument role classiﬁcation, as deﬁned by the
ACE 2005 dataset, a benchmark for event extraction (Grishman, Westbrook, and Meyers 2005).
In early years, researchers have designed various features,
e.g., lexical and contextual ones, for event extraction (Grishman, Westbrook, and Meyers 2005; Ji and Grishman 2008;
Lu and Roth 2012). Such methods, however, require extensive human engineering, which also largely affects model
performance.
Recently, neural networks are widely applied in NLP
tasks including event extraction, as they can automatically

Task Description
We describe the event extraction task by following the convention in Automatic Content Extraction (ACE) 20051 ; Table 1 summarizes relevant terminologies. As said, there are
three subtasks in event extraction:
• Trigger identiﬁcation, which aims to identify the most important word that characterizes an event and to classify it

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

5916

https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/ldc2006t06

