The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Dictionary Learning Inspired
Deep Network for Scene Recognition
1

Yang Liu,∗1 Qingchao Chen,∗2 Wei Chen,3 Ian Wassell1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge, UK
2
Department of Security and Crime Science, University College London, UK
3
State Key Laboratory of Rail Trafﬁc Control and Safety, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
{yl504, ijw24}@cam.ac.uk, qingchao.chen.13@ucl.ac.uk, weich@bjtu.edu.cn
features extracted from the early convolution and pooling
layer. (Sun, Wang, and Tang 2015) observed that the nonlinear property inherent in the ReLu unit leads to sparsity in
the neural activations, consequently improving the performance of deep learning methods. Normally, for each training image, around half of the neurons in the hidden layer are
activated. They argued that moderate sparse on neuron activation can not only make each neuron has maximum discrimination ability, but also make images of different class
maximally distinguishable. However, there is no effective
mechanism to automatically adjust the sparsity level of the
intermediate hidden units based on the training set.
It would be beneﬁcial to take advantage of the sparse
model to adjust the sparsity level and enforce different categories to have different subsets of neurons activated, consequently maximizing discriminative power. As an extension
of the standard reconstructive dictionary (Aharon, Elad, and
Bruckstein 2006), discriminative dictionary learning (DL)
methods (Jiang, Lin, and Davis 2013)(Yang et al. 2014)
aim to ﬁnd the optimal dictionary that simultaneously improves the sparse representation and maximizes its discriminative capability. However, the current DL methods cannot achieve state of the art performance in large-scale image
classiﬁcation, especially in scene recognition, in part since
most DL models have only been evaluated with traditional
handcrafted features, e.g., BOF (Yang et al. 2009) and SIFT
(Lowe 2004).
One way to utilize DL to improve scene recognition performance produced by CNN features is to apply DL as
a post-processing step trained separately from the training
of the CNN, an approach that is adopted in (Xie et al.
2017)(Liu et al. 2014). Arguably, this does not fully harness
the strength of DL since it is not integrated with the deep network. It is also worth noting that although the work in (Wang
et al. 2016) addresses object detection, it does combine the
DL and conventional CNN layers into the end-to-end training framework by simply replacing the softmax classiﬁer by
a DL classiﬁer. However, the DL classiﬁer has not been used
to replace any fully connected layers before the classiﬁer. In
addition, without an explicit parameter for sparsity control
of the sparse coding step in the DL classiﬁer, it is difﬁcult to
know whether the sparsity of the total network is best optimized and further, to say that the sparseness will be a good
regularization for training the low-level layers in the entire

Abstract
Scene recognition remains one of the most challenging problems in image understanding. With the help of fully connected layers (FCL) and rectiﬁed linear units (ReLu), deep
networks can extract the moderately sparse and discriminative feature representation required for scene recognition.
However, few methods consider exploiting a sparsity model
for learning the feature representation in order to provide enhanced discriminative capability. In this paper, we replace
the conventional FCL and ReLu with a new dictionary learning layer, that is composed of a ﬁnite number of recurrent
units to simultaneously enhance the sparse representation and
discriminative abilities of features via the determination of
optimal dictionaries. In addition, with the help of the structure of the dictionary, we propose a new label discriminative regressor to boost the discrimination ability. We also propose new constraints to prevent overﬁtting by incorporating
the advantage of the Mahalanobis and Euclidean distances
to balance the recognition accuracy and generalization performance. Our proposed approach is evaluated using various
scene datasets and shows superior performance to many stateof-the-art approaches.

Introduction
Scene recognition remains one of the most challenging problems in image understanding due to illumination changes,
high intra-class variance, and background occlusion. To
tackle these issues, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) (Simonyan and
Zisserman 2014) trained on the large scale Places dataset
(Places-CNNs) (Zhou et al. 2014) have yielded improved
performance for the scene recognition task. The power of
CNNs is achieved by learning a strong feature representation in an end-to-end manner for the classiﬁcation task, instead of hand-crafting features with heuristic parameter tuning. The CNN can be considered as a universal feature extractor, which learns a new representation of the data that
permits computationally easier and more effective classiﬁer
design. Many deep CNN architectures have been proposed,
but fully connected layers (FCL) followed by rectiﬁed linear
units (ReLu) are now prevalently used to combine the local
∗

Authors contributed equally.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7178

