The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Label Distribution Learning by Optimal Transport∗
Peng Zhao, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing 210023, China
{zhaop, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

LDL has been successfully applied in many real-world
scenarios in recent years, such as facial age estimation (Geng, Yin, and Zhou 2013; Gao et al. 2017), head
pose estimation (Kong and Mbouna 2015; Xu and Zhou
2017), emotion recognition (Zhou, Xue, and Geng 2015)
and text mining (Zhou et al. 2016). Although LDL has been
wildly applied in different scenarios and achieves a great
success, most of previous LDL approaches cannot automatically exploit the label correlations to boost the learning performance. An exception is a recent work (Zhou et al. 2016)
dealing with emotion analysis from texts. It exploits the relationship between different emotions by adding a speciﬁcdesigned regularization term based on prior domain knowledge. However, in many other applications, there is usually
no such prior knowledge or additional structure information
on label correlations. Moreover, the speciﬁc-designed regularizer needs to be redesigned for new applications.
In this work, we aim to simultaneously learn the label distribution and explore label correlations. Thus, we proposed
an algorithm called LALOT, short for LAbel Distribution
Learning by Optimal Transport. This method is based on
Optimal Transport (OT) theory (Villani 2008). On one hand,
we adopt optimal transport distance to measure the quality
of prediction. OT distance provides a more meaningful distance in LDL tasks, because it could capture the geometric
information of the underlying label space. On the other hand,
we cast the label correlations exploration as a ground metric
learning problem. The ground metric is also called cost matrix, playing an important role in the performance of optimal
transport. Previous work mainly assumed that there exists
some prior knowledge as cost matrix (Frogner et al. 2015;
Rolet, Cuturi, and Peyré 2016). However, this may not hold
in many real-world applications, since there may not be a direct or simple semantic information among labels. LALOT
could automatically learn the ground metric, i.e., the label
correlations, and improve the label distribution learning performance. It is also noteworthy to mention that most previous work on LDL do not have any theoretical analysis, and
we provide perhaps the ﬁrst risk bound analysis for label
distribution learning in this work.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized in
following three points,

Abstract
Label distribution learning (LDL) is a novel learning
paradigm to deal with some real-world applications, especially when we care more about the relative importance of
different labels in description of an instance. Although some
approaches have been proposed to learn the label distribution,
they could not explicitly learn and leverage the label correlation, which plays an importance role in LDL. In this paper,
we propose an approach to learn the label distribution and
exploit label correlations simultaneously based on the Optimal Transport (OT) theory. The problem is solved by alternatively learning the transportation (hypothesis) and ground
metric (label correlations). Besides, we provide perhaps the
ﬁrst data-dependent risk bound analysis for label distribution
learning by Sinkhorn distance, a commonly-used relaxation
for OT distance. Experimental results on real-world datasets
comparing with several state-of-the-art methods validate the
effectiveness of our approach.

Introduction
In traditional machine learning paradigm, an instance is in
general associated to a single label. Single-label learning
(SLL) is established to deal with this case. However, as
is often the case, multiple labels might be linked with the
same instance simultaneously. Taking the image classiﬁcation as an example, an image can be complicated and have
multiple semantic meanings. Consequently, it can be tagged
with several different categories/tags. To handle such kind of
tasks, multi-label learning (MLL) paradigm is proposed and
has achieved a lot of success (Zhang and Zhou 2007; 2014;
Zhou et al. 2012).
SLL and MLL only answer the question which label/labels should the instance belong to, but not the relative importance of different labels in description of the instance. However, various labels may be associated to an
instance with different degrees in many real-world applications. Thus, it is more reasonable to use a soft label
description rather a hard one. Label distribution learning
(LDL) (Geng 2016) is a new learning paradigm to describe
supervision as a histogram or probability distribution.
∗
This research was supported by NSFC (61333014) and the 973
Program (2014CB340501).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1) We cast LDL as solving an optimal transport problem,
and handle label correlations exploration by ground met-

4506

