The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

On the Optimal Bit Complexity of Circulant Binary Embedding
Saehoon Kim

Jungtaek Kim, Seungjin Choi

AItrics, Korea and
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Pohang University of Science and Technology
77 Cheongam-ro, Nam-gu, Pohang 37673, Korea
kshkawa@postech.ac.kr

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Pohang University of Science and Technology
77 Cheongam-ro, Nam-gu, Pohang 37673, Korea
{jtkim,seungjin}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract

Table 1: Comparison of the analysis for BE with unstructured projection and circulant projection in terms of bit complexity and conditions necessary to build the analysis, where
 is a distortion rate and n is the number of data points.

Binary embedding refers to methods for embedding points in
Rd into vertices of a Hamming cube of dimension k, such
that the normalized Hamming distance well preserves the
pre-deﬁned similarity between vectors in the original space.
A common approach to binary embedding is to use random
projection with unstructured projection, followed by one-bit
quantizationto produce binary codes, which has been proven
that k = O −2 log n is required to approximate the angle
up to -distortion, where n is the number of data. Of particular interest in this paper is circulant binary embedding (CBE)
with angle preservation, where a random circulant matrix is
used for projection. It yields comparable performance while
achieving the nearly linear time and space complexities, compared to embedding methods relying on unstructured projection. To support promising empirical results, several nonasymptotic analysis have been introduced to establish conditions on the number of bits to meet -distortion embedding,
where one of state-of-the-art
achieves the optimal sample

complexity k = O −3 log n while the distortion rate −3


is far from the optimality, compared to k = O −2 log n . In
this paper, to support promising empirical results of CBE, we
extend the previous theoretical framework to address the optimal condition
on the
 number of bits, achieving that CBE with

k = O −2 log n approximates the angle up to -distortion
under mild assumptions. We also provide numerical experiments to support our theoretical results.

Methods
Unstructured BE
Our analysis
(Oymak 2016) (Near-optimal)
(Yu et al. 2015) (Near-optimal)

Bit Complexity

O −2 log n
−2
O  log n
O −3 log n 
O −2 log2 n

Conditions
small inﬁnity norm
small inﬁnity norm
small inﬁnity norm

been proposed, including the method preserving the similarity speciﬁed by shift-invariant kernels (Raginsky and Lazebnik 2009; Kim and Choi 2015) and the maximum inner product search (Shrivastava and Li 2014).
Most of binary embedding methods involving random
projection require long codes to achieve satisfactory performance, so time and space complexities become serious concerns. In the case where the code length is O(d), both time
and space complexities require O(d2 ) to construct a single
binary code, which becomes expensive when the dimension
of data d is large. In order to improve the scalability, both in
terms of computational cost and space complexity, a few fast
binary embedding methods have been recently developed by
accelerating matrix-vector multiplication with some structured matrices: a randomized Hadamard matrix (Dasgupta,
Kumar, and Sarlós 2011), the Kronecker product of multiple small matrices (Gong et al. 2013; Kim and Choi 2015;
Zhang et al. 2015), a circulant matrix (Yu et al. 2014), and
two consecutive structured matrices (Yi, Caramanis, and
Price 2015; Choromanska et al. 2016). These can be interpreted as nonlinear extensions of random projection with
Walsh-Hadamard matrix (Ailon and Chazelle 2009), the
Kronecker product of two small matrices (Eftekhari, BabaieZadeh, and Moghaddam 2011), and a circulant matrix (Hinrichs and Vybı́ral 2011).
Of particular interest is the circulant binary embedding
(CBE) (Yu et al. 2014), which yields comparable performance while reducing time complexity from O(d2 ) to
O(d log d) and the space complexity from O(d2 ) to O(d)
by employing the randomized circulant matrix. To support such promising results, several theoretical guarantees
(Oymak 2016; Yu et al. 2015; Choromanska et al. 2016;

Introduction
Binary embedding (BE) is a nonlinear dimensionality reduction method, where a mapping is determined to relate
high-dimensional points in Rd to binary codes of length
O(d) whose normalized Hamming distance preserves the
pre-deﬁned distance in the original space Rd . It becomes a
ubiquitous tool for large-scale data analysis, including approximate nearest neighbor search (Charikar 2002), largescale machine learning (Gong et al. 2013; Yu et al. 2014),
and so on. A notable method is angle-preserving binary embedding (Charikar 2002), where an embedding function is
constructed by random projection followed by one-bit quantization such that the angular distance between two points is
preserved by the normalized Hamming distance. Besides the
angle-preserving binary embedding, various methods have
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3423

