The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

AMR Parsing with Cache Transition Systems
Xiaochang Peng, Daniel Gildea

Giorgio Satta

Department of Computer Science
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
{xpeng, gildea}@cs.rochester.edu

Department of Information Engineering
University of Padua
Via Gradenigo 6/A, 35131 Padova, Italy
satta@dei.unipd.it

Abstract


In this paper, we present a transition system that generalizes
transition-based dependency parsing techniques to generate
AMR graphs rather than tree structures. In addition to a buffer
and a stack, we use a ﬁxed-size cache, and allow the system to build arcs to any vertices present in the cache at the
same time. The size of the cache provides a parameter that
can trade off between the complexity of the graphs that can
be built and the ease of predicting actions during parsing. Our
results show that a cache transition system can cover almost
all AMR graphs with a small cache size, and our end-to-end
system achieves competitive results in comparison with other
transition-based approaches for AMR parsing.



 









 

Introduction
In recent years, graph-based representations of semantic
structures and the algorithms for producing them have
gained renewed interest as deeper representations are investigated by statistical natural language processing systems.
These algorithms usually take as input a sentence, and produce a graph representation of the semantics of the sentence
itself as the output.
Abstract Meaning Representation (AMR) (Banarescu et
al. 2013) is a semantic formalism where the meaning of a
sentence is encoded as a rooted, directed graph. Figure 1
shows an example of an AMR in which the nodes represent the AMR concepts and the edges represent the relations
between the concepts. AMR concepts consist of predicate
senses, named entity annotations, and in some cases, simply
lemmas of English words. AMR relations consist of core semantic roles drawn from the Propbank (Palmer, Gildea, and
Kingsbury 2005) as well as very ﬁne-grained semantic relations deﬁned speciﬁcally for AMR. These properties render
the AMR representation useful in applications like question
answering and semantics-based machine translation.
Stack-based transition systems have been widely used for
syntactic parsing as the performance of transition systems
has improved, while speed becomes increasingly important
for different applications. There are also a number of extensions of stack-based transition systems which deal with nonprojective trees; see for instance (Attardi 2006; Nivre 2009;

Figure 1: An example of AMR graph representing the meaning of: “John wants to go”

Choi and McCallum 2013; Gómez-Rodrı́guez and Nivre
2013; Pitler and McDonald 2015).
The task of AMR graph parsing is to map natural language strings to AMR semantic graphs. Different parsers
have been developed to tackle this problem (Flanigan et
al. 2014; Wang, Xue, and Pradhan 2015b; Artzi, Lee, and
Zettlemoyer 2015; Peng, Song, and Gildea 2015; Peng et
al. 2017; van Noord and Bos 2017; Konstas et al. 2017).
Recently, stack-based transition systems have been used for
parsing the set of AMR graphs (Wang, Xue, and Pradhan
2015b; 2015a; Damonte, Cohen, and Satta 2016; Wang and
Xue 2017). In these systems, special transition actions are
added separately to deal with local re-entrancies which are
siblings in the generated AMR graph.
Gildea, Satta, and Peng (2018) present an extension of the
existing stack-based transition framework to generate the set
of semantic graphs. More speciﬁcally, they adapt the stackbased parsing system by adding a working set, which they
refer to as a cache, to the traditional stack and buffer. They
theoretically prove that the class of graphs that can be successfully constructed by this parsing system can be analyzed
using the graph-theoretic notion of treewidth. The treewidth
of a graph gives a measure of how tightly interconnected it

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4897

