The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Inexact Proximal Gradient Methods for
Non-Convex and Non-Smooth Optimization
1

Bin Gu,1 De Wang,2 Zhouyuan Huo,1 Heng Huang1 *

Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, USA
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Texas at Arlington, USA
big10@pitt.edu, wangdelp@gmail.com, zhouyuan.huo@pitt.edu, heng.huang@pitt.edu
2

the proximal operator as following:
1
2
Proxγh (y) = arg minx∈RN
x − y + h(x)
2γ

Abstract
In machine learning research, the proximal gradient methods
are popular for solving various optimization problems with
non-smooth regularization. Inexact proximal gradient methods are extremely important when exactly solving the proximal operator is time-consuming, or the proximal operator
does not have an analytic solution. However, existing inexact
proximal gradient methods only consider convex problems.
The knowledge of inexact proximal gradient methods in the
non-convex setting is very limited. To address this challenge,
in this paper, we ﬁrst propose three inexact proximal gradient
algorithms, including the basic version and Nesterov’s accelerated version. After that, we provide the theoretical analysis to the basic and Nesterov’s accelerated versions. The theoretical results show that our inexact proximal gradient algorithms can have the same convergence rates as the ones
of exact proximal gradient algorithms in the non-convex setting. Finally, we show the applications of our inexact proximal gradient algorithms on three representative non-convex
learning problems. Empirical results conﬁrm the superiority
of our new inexact proximal gradient algorithms.

where γ is the stepsize.1 If the function h(x) is simple
enough, we can obtain the solution of the proximal operator analytically. For example, if h(x) = x1 , the solution of the proximal operator can be obtained by a shrinkage
thresholding operator (Beck and Teboulle 2009). If the function h(x) is complex such that the corresponding proximal
operator does not have an analytic solution, a speciﬁc algorithm should be designed for solving
 the proximal operator.
For example, if h(x) = x1 + c i<j max{|xi |, |xj |} as
used in OSCAR (Zhong and Kwok 2012) for the sparse regression with automatic feature grouping, (Zhong and Kwok
2012) proposed an iterative group merging algorithm for exactly solving the proximal operator.
However, it would be expensive to solve the proximal
operators when the function h(x) is complex. Once again,
take OSCAR as an example, when the data is with high dimensionality (empirically larger than 1,000), the iterative
group merging algorithm would become very inefﬁcient.
Even worse, there would be no solver for exactly solving the
proximal operators when the function h(x) is over complex.
For example, (Grave, Obozinski, and Bach 2011) proposed
the trace Lasso norm to take into account the correlation of
the design matrix to stabilize the estimation in regression.
However, due to the complexity of trace Lasso norm, there
still have no solver for solving the corresponding proximal
operator, to the best of our knowledge.
To address the above issues, (Schmidt, Le Roux, and Bach
2011) ﬁrst proposed the inexact proximal gradient methods (including the basic version (IPG) and Nesterov’s accelerated version (AIPG)), which solves the proximal operator approximately (i.e., tolerating an error in the calculation of the proximal operator). They proved that the inexact proximal gradient methods can have the same convergence rates as the ones of exact proximal gradient methods,
provided that the errors in computing the proximal operator decrease at appropriate rates. Independently, (Villa et al.
2013) proposed AIPG algorithm and proved the corresponding convergence rate. In the paper of (Villa et al. 2013),

Introduction
Many machine learning problems involve non-smooth regularization, such as the machine learning models with a
variety of sparsity-inducing penalties (Bach et al. 2012).
Thus, efﬁciently solving the optimization problem with nonsmooth regularization is important for many machine learning applications. In this paper, we focus on the optimization
problem of machine learning model with non-smooth regularization as:
min f (x) = g(x) + h(x)

x∈RN

(2)

(1)

where g : RN → R corresponding to the empire risk is
smooth and possibly non-convex, and h : RN → R corresponding to the regularization term is non-smooth and possibly non-convex.
Proximal gradient methods are popular for solving various optimization problems with non-smooth regularization.
The pivotal step of the proximal gradient method is to solve
* To whom all correspondence should be addressed.
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
The stepsize γ is set manually or automatically determined by
a backtracking line-search procedure (Beck and Teboulle 2009).

3093

