The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A New Benchmark and Evaluation Schema
for Chinese Typo Detection and Correction∗
Dingmin Wang,‡ Gabriel Pui Cheong Fung,‡†
Maxime Debosschere,‡† Shichao Dong,‡ Jia Zhu,∓ Kam-Fai Wong‡†
‡

†

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
MoE Key Laboratory of High Conﬁdence Software Technologies (Sub-Laboratory, CUHK), Hong Kong, China

Tsinghua University, Beijing, China ∓ South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China
{dmwang, pcfung, dmaxime, scdong, kfwong}@se.cuhk.edu.hk, jzhu@m.scnu.edu.cn
one error. The average number of errors in a sentence is 2.7,
and the maximum is 5. Since our benchmark dataset also requires positive examples, we manually added 3,110 entirely
correct sentences for a round total of 10,000.
Our benchmark dataset contains the following types of errors: (1) Typo – Similar shape (e.g., in the word 辨論, 辨 is
a typo and should be written as 辯. 辨 and 辯 have similar
shapes); (2) Typo – Similar pronunciation (e.g., in the word
合諧, 合 is a typo and should be replaced by 和. 合 and 和
have similar pronunciations in Cantonese); (3) Colloquialism – Incorrect character (e.g., the character 佢 is colloquial
and should be changed into 他); (4) Colloquialism – Incorrect phrase (e.g., the word 撞返 is colloquial even though the
characters 撞 and 返 both are not. Here, 撞返 should be replaced by 碰見); (5) Incorrect word ordering (no characters
or phrases are colloquial, but the ordering of some characters
or words results in colloquial language. E.g., in the sentence
“我走先了” the word 走先 is colloquial and should be written as 先走); (6) Mixing Simpliﬁed Chinese and Traditional
Chinese (e.g., for the word 词語, 词 is simpliﬁed Chinese
and should be replaced by its traditional counterpart 詞); (7)
Errors in poems and idioms (e.g., in the idiom 天生我才必有
用, 才 should be replaced by 材).
Note that it is possible to have any mixture of the above
cases. For example, consider the sentence 大家討論緊這件
事. In this context the character 緊 is a colloquial word which
means 正在 (error type 3). Yet simply replacing 緊 with 正在
is still wrong since it then triggers error type 4. Instead, the
correction should be 大家正在討論這件事.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no publicly available benchmark dataset that takes into account error types 3
to 7. We are the ﬁrst to release such dataset, and it can be
obtained from the CUHK MOE lab website.1
For the NLPTEA 2017 Shared Task on Chinese Spelling
Check (Fung et al. 2017), we assembled two sets of 1,000
randomly selected sentences from the benchmark dataset.
Each of these two sets then had a corresponding gold standard: the best solution that any spell checking system can
possibly give. The gold standard includes as many valid corrections as possible for each error. To the best of our knowledge, these are the ﬁrst datasets with this property.

Abstract
Despite the vast amount of research related to Chinese typo
detection, we still lack a publicly available benchmark dataset
for evaluation. Furthermore, no precise evaluation schema for
Chinese typo detection has been deﬁned. In response to these
problems: (1) we release a benchmark dataset to assist research on Chinese typo correction; (2) we present an evaluation schema which was adopted in our NLPTEA 2017 Shared
Task on Chinese Spelling Check; and (3) we report new improvements to our Chinese typo detection system ACT.

1

Introduction

Automatic typo detection is an important prerequisite step
for many Natural Language Processing (NLP) applications
to better understand the underlying semantics of sentences.
Error detection applications for Chinese are not yet well developed, unlike applications for alphabet-based languages
such as English and French. This is partly due to a lack of
benchmark data, and due to the absence of a precise evaluation schema. Our contributions described in this paper are:
• Constructed and released a benchmark dataset for Chinese
typo detection;
• Proposed a new schema for evaluating the performance of
a typo detection system;
• Improved a system for automatically detecting typos in
Chinese, which is an extension of our previous work
(Dong et al. 2016).

2

Benchmark Dataset

The Hong Kong Applied Science and Technology Research
Institute ﬁrst collected more than 5,000 writings by Hong
Kong primary students. We then invited researchers from the
Department of Chinese Language and Literature at CUHK
to help us mark and annotate these writings. Next, we selected a total of 6,890 sentences of a reasonable length (50–
150 characters, including punctuation) which contain at least
∗

This work was partially supported by the MoE Key Laboratory of High Conﬁdence Software Technologies (Sub-Laboratory,
CUHK), NSFC (61772211, 61750110516), S&T Projects of
Guangdong Province (2016A030303055, 2016B030305004,
2016B010109008) and Guangzhou S&T Project (201604046017).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

8169

www1.se.cuhk.edu.hk/∼moelab/act/act-dataset.zip

