The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A General Formulation for Safely
Exploiting Weakly Supervised Data∗
Lan-Zhe Guo, Yu-Feng Li
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{guolz, liyf}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

search progresses (Chapelle et al. 2006; Pan and Yang 2010;
Frénay and Verleysen 2014; Zhou 2017).
It is often expected that, machine learning techniques exploiting weakly supervised data are able to improve learning performance. However, recent studies show that machine
learning techniques with the use of weakly supervised data
may sometimes lead to performance degradation. That is,
the learning performance is even worse than that of baseline
method without using weakly supervised data. For example, label noise learning may be worse than learning from
only a small number of high-quality labeled data (Frénay
and Verleysen 2014); domain adaptation methods may have
the phenomenon of negative transfer (Pan and Yang 2010)
that the source domain data contribute to the reduced performance of learning in the target domain; semi-supervised
learning using unlabeled data may degenerate learning performance, which has been reported in a number of studies (Chapelle et al. 2006; Chawla and Karakoulas 2005;
Li and Zhou 2015). How to safely exploit weakly supervised data so that machine learning technology often outperforms and never be worse than the simple baseline, has
become an important yet unsolved problem. Recently there
is a few effort, but they typically work on a speciﬁc scenario of weakly supervised learning (Li and Zhou 2015;
Balsubramani and Freund 2015; Li, Zha, and Zhou 2017;
Wei et al. 2017). The proposal on generic formulation for
various weakly supervised data, to our best knowledge, has
not been thoroughly studied.
In this paper, we present a scheme that builds the ﬁnal
prediction results by integrating several weakly supervised
learners. The resultant formulation brings some advantages.
Firstly, for multiple commonly used convex loss functions
(e.g., square loss, hinge loss) in both regression and classiﬁcation tasks of weakly supervised learning, it has safeness
guarantees under a mild condition. Secondly, it can ﬂexibly embed uncertain prior knowledge about the weights of
weakly supervised learners in regression and classiﬁcation
tasks. Moreover, our formulation can be addressed globally
via simple convex quadratic program or linear program in
an efﬁcient manner. Experiments on multiple weakly supervised learning tasks such as label noise learning, domain
adaptation and semi-supervised learning validate the effectiveness of our proposed algorithms.
This paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst review related

Abstract
Weakly supervised data is an important machine learning data
to help improve learning performance. However, recent results indicate that machine learning techniques with the usage
of weakly supervised data may sometimes cause performance
degradation. Safely leveraging weakly supervised data is important, whereas there is only very limited effort, especially
on a general formulation to help provide insight to guide
safe weakly supervised learning. In this paper we present a
scheme that builds the ﬁnal prediction results by integrating
several weakly supervised learners. Our resultant formulation
brings two advantages. i) For the commonly used convex loss
functions in both regression and classiﬁcation tasks, safeness
guarantees exist under a mild condition; ii) Prior knowledge
related to the weights of base learners can be embedded in a
ﬂexible manner. Moreover, the formulation can be addressed
globally by simple convex quadratic or linear program efﬁciently. Experiments on multiple weakly supervised learning tasks such as label noise learning, domain adaptation and
semi-supervised learning validate the effectiveness.

Introduction
Weakly supervised data is commonly appear in real applications (Zhou 2017). Compared to the data in traditional
supervised learning, weakly supervised data does not require a large amount of precise label information. Examples includes label noise learning (Frénay and Verleysen
2014) where label information contains noise; domain adaptation (Pan and Yang 2010) where label information in target domain is not sufﬁcient and one needs to exploit further label information from other domains; semi-supervised
learning (Chapelle et al. 2006) where label information is
scarce and one needs to leverage a number of additional
unlabeled data. Because weakly supervised data loosens
the constraint for the label information in learning tasks,
it has a broad application prospect, such as image classiﬁcation (Krishna et al. 2017), natural language processing (Alfonseca et al. 2012) and so on. Taking advantage of
weakly supervised data to help build effective learning methods has gained extensive attention and obtained a lot of re∗
This research was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (61772262, 61403186, 61422304).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3126

