The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Robust Collaborative Discriminative
Learning for RGB-Infrared Tracking
Xiangyuan Lan,† Mang Ye,† Shengping Zhang,‡ Pong C. Yuen†∗
†

Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
xiangyuanlan@life.hkbu.edu.hk, mangye@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, s.zhang@hit.edu.cn, pcyuen@comp.hkbu.edu.hk
‡

Abstract
Tracking target of interests is an important step for motion
perception in intelligent video surveillance systems. While
most recently developed tracking algorithms are grounded
in RGB image sequences, it should be noted that information from RGB modality is not always reliable (e.g. in a dark
environment with poor lighting condition), which urges the
need to integrate information from infrared modality for effective tracking because of the insensitivity to illumination
condition of infrared thermal camera. However, several issues encountered during the tracking process limit the fusing
performance of these heterogeneous modalities: 1) the crossmodality discrepancy of visual and motion characteristics, 2)
the uncertainty of degree of reliability in different modalities,
and 3) large target appearance variations and background distractions within each modality. To address these issues, this
paper proposes a novel and optimal discriminative learning
framework for multi-modality tracking. In particular, the proposed discriminative learning framework is able to: 1) jointly
eliminate outlier samples caused by large variations and
learn discriminability-consistent features from heterogeneous
modalities, and 2) collaboratively perform modality reliability measurement and target-background separation. Extensive
experiments on RGB-infrared image sequences demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Illustration of some video frames from RGB and
infrared modalities. Top: RGB Bottom: infrared

surveillance are equipped with dual cameras, including one
RGB camera and one thermal camera. Infrared thermal cameras can capture the infrared radiation of a subject for imaging, and they are more effective than visible spectrum cameras under poor lighting conditions. Therefore, to develop a
robust object tracking system for practical applications, it is
very necessary to integrate information from infrared modality with that of RGB modality for effective tracking.
However, several key issues encountered during tracking process may limit the modality fusing performance,
which should be addressed for robust multi-modality tracking. Firstly, images from RGB and infrared modalities are
intrinsically distinct in their visual characteristic (e.g. intensity, texture), as shown in Fig. 1(a). Such cross-modality discrepancy may lead to signiﬁcant difference between the statistical properties of features from different modalities even
if the features represent the same subject. Therefore, traditional homogeneous feature fusion methods (e.g. concatenation (Wu et al. 2011), multiple kernel learning (Xu, Wang,
and Lu 2012), etc.), which do not explicitly consider the
discrepancy issue, is unsuitable for multi-modality tracking.
As such, bridging the gap between heterogeneous modalities during modality fusion process is essential. In addition,
not all modalities are reliable all the time, and reliability of
different modalities are erratically changed under different
scenarios. As shown in Fig. 1(b), the blue car can be differentiated from the background based on color information
of RGB modality while it is ambiguous in infrared modal-

Introduction

As a key component for intelligent motion perception in intelligent video surveillance systems (Ye et al. 2015; 2016;
2017; Wang et al. 2016b), tracking target of interests has received great research interests and signiﬁcant progress has
been achieved recently (Zhang et al. 2013a; 2013b; 2015;
2017a; 2017b). Most recently developed tracking algorithms
are grounded on RGB image sequences captured by visible
spectrum cameras, and they construct the appearance model
using visual cues from RGB information (Liu et al. 2016;
Lan, Yuen, and Chellappa 2017), which may disable them
to be applied in some practical scenarios, especially when
information from RGB imaging is not reliable (e.g.in a dark
environment with poor lighting conditions).
With the development of multispectral imaging techniques, more and more vision systems of robotics and video
∗

Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7008

