The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Plan Recognition in Continuous Domains
Gal A. Kaminka, Mor Vered, Noa Agmon
Computer Science Department
Bar Ilan University, Israel
{galk,veredm,agmon}@cs.biu.ac.il

show below that once discretization is ﬁxed, there are always
cases where the information loss will degrade performance.
One approach to avoid such early commitment is to apply
PAIR methods based on domain theories, rather than plan libraries. Such methods dynamically generate recognition hypotheses as needed, thus in principle avoid the early commitment made in plan libraries. In particular, Plan Recognition
as Planning (PRP) (Ramı́rez and Geffner 2010; Sohrabi,
Riabov, and Udrea 2016; Freedman and Zilberstein 2017;
Vered, Kaminka, and Biham 2016), uses off-the-shelf (OTS)
planners in recognition. Thus potentially, using a motion
planner such as RRT* (Nieto et al. 2010) in PRP could enable direct recognition in continuous spaces. However, current PRP methods are limited to discrete classical-planning
domains, and cannot use OTS motion planners.
We present Mirroring, an alternative formulation of plan
recognition as planning suitable for continuous domains, as
well as discrete domains. The Mirroring formulation relies
on an extension of classical planning to continuous domains,
which includes discrete settings as a special case. We empirically evaluate the recognition formulation in over a thousand
plan recognition problems, spread across three continuous
domains and six classical planning domains, often used for
benchmarking plan recognition methods.

Abstract
Plan recognition is the task of inferring the plan of an agent,
based on an incomplete sequence of its observed actions.
Previous formulations of plan recognition commit early to
discretizations of the environment and the observed agent’s
actions. This leads to reduced recognition accuracy. To address this, we ﬁrst provide a formalization of recognition
problems which admits continuous environments, as well as
discrete domains. We then show that through mirroring—
generalizing plan-recognition by planning—we can apply
continuous-world motion planners in plan recognition. We
provide formal arguments for the usefulness of mirroring, and
empirically evaluate mirroring in more than a thousand recognition problems in three continuous domains and six classical
planning domains.

Introduction
Plan, activity, and intent recognition (PAIR) (Schmidt, Sridhan, and Goodson 1978; Sukthankar et al. 2014) is a fundamental research area in artiﬁcial intelligence, tackling the
problem of inferring the hidden mental attitudes of an observed agent. Given a partial sequence of observations of an
agent, PAIR algorithms infer one or more of the following:
a complete sequence of the agent’s actions and their effects,
future actions, a classiﬁcation of the observed activity, and
the intended goal(s).
To date, PAIR approaches have focused on discrete descriptions of the agent’s interactions with its environment,
via plan libraries. Continuous domains were traditionally addressed by a separate discretization component, translating
angles, positions, motions—sometimes entire trajectories—
into discrete symbols. This facilitates the use of powerful algorithms that use a variety of recognition algorithms
that utilize plan libraries: hierarchical graphs (Kautz and
Allen 1986; Avrahami-Zilberbrand and Kaminka 2005), deterministic and probabilistic grammars (Pynadath and Wellman 2000; Geib and Goldman 2011; Sadeghipour and Kopp
2011; Mirsky and Gal 2016), and other probabilistic models (Charniak and Goldman 1993; Bui 2003; Pynadath and
Marsella 2005; Ramırez and Geffner 2011).
Unfortunately, early commitment to a ﬁxed discretization
within the plan library leads to inherent information loss. We

Motivation
Most past approaches to plan recognition utilize a given plan
library representing all known plans to achieve known goals.
In this manner the observations are matched against existing
plans to determine the most likely plan candidate (see (Sukthankar et al. 2014) for a thorough recent survey). A common theme is that they address continuous domains only
through ﬁxed, a priori discretization.
However, as shown also in related tasks (such as path
planning) the loss of information inherent in discretization
can be detrimental (Nash and Koenig 2013).
As an example, consider the 2D recognition problem in
Figure 1. The initial agent position is represented by the letter I and the problem is to recognize towards which one of
two goals A, B the agent is heading. The space has been discretized using a grid, and thus observations are of grid cells
of size  × . The actual trajectory of the agent (shown in
the dark line, starting at top-left corner) clearly favors goal
B (under assumption of rationality). The discretized obser-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6202

