The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Combining Rules and Ontologies
into Clopen Knowledge Bases∗
Labinot Bajraktari, Magdalena Ortiz, Mantas Šimkus
Institute of Information Systems, TU Wien, Austria
lbajrakt@kr.tuwien.ac.at ortiz@kr.tuwien.ac.at simkus@dbai.tuwien.ac.at

Knorr, Alferes, and Hitzler 2011)). However, the progress on
understanding the relationship between different hybrid languages, and their relationship with more standard languages
like plain ASP, has been limited, as has the development of
efﬁcient reasoning algorithms and implementations.
These and related problems are investigated in this paper for a new hybrid language called Clopen Knowledge
Bases (CKBs), which generalizes and improves the prominent r-hybrid language (Rosati 2005), and DL+LOG (Rosati
2006). Each CKB is a triple H = (P, ϕ, Σ), where P is a
disjunctive Datalog program with “not” literals in rule bodies (Datalog¬,∨ ), ϕ is a theory (e.g., in ﬁrst-order logic),
and Σ is a set of predicate symbols. Intuitively, Σ speciﬁes
the predicates that should be interpreted under the OWA; the
remaining predicates should be interpreted under the CWA.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We introduce CKBs and deﬁne for them a stable
model semantics, inspired by the semantics given by Rosati
to r-hybrid and DL+LOG KBs. In a nutshell, the major difference between the latter formalisms and CKBs is that
CKBs allow to use CWA predicates in the theory. This allows for more convenient knowledge representation, but also
causes technical challenges.
• We study automated reasoning in CKBs. To this end,
we ﬁrst provide a general decidability result for checking entailment of ground atoms and consistency testing in CKBs
H = (P, ϕ, Σ), where ϕ is expressed in the guarded negation fragment of FO (GNFO) (Bárány, Cate, and Segouﬁn
2015). This is a very expressive fragment that subsumes the
more prominent guarded fragment of FO, as well as many
expressive DLs. We give a NE XP T IME2E XP T IME upper bound
for inference from GNFO-based CKBs (we note that satisﬁability of GNFO formulas is 2E XP T IME-hard).
• We next study the reasoning in CKBs H = (P, ϕ, Σ)
where ϕ is expressed in the very expressive DL ALCHOI,
which extends the basic DL ALC with role hierarchies, inverse roles, and nominals. We show that the (combined)
complexity of reasoning in such CKBs is not higher than in
standard (non-ground) ASP. If we assume bounded predicate
arities in rules, the basic reasoning problems are E XP T IMEcomplete, which coincides with the complexity of standard
problems in plain ALCHOI.
• We study the relationship between CKBs and other
existing hybrid languages. We deﬁne a restricted class of

Abstract
We propose Clopen Knowledge Bases (CKBs) as a new formalism combining Answer Set Programming (ASP) with
ontology languages based on ﬁrst-order logic. CKBs generalize the prominent r-hybrid and DL+LOG languages of
Rosati, and are more ﬂexible for speciﬁcation of problems
that combine open-world and closed-world reasoning. We argue that the guarded negation fragment of ﬁrst-order logic
(GNFO)—a very expressive fragment that subsumes many
prominent ontology languages like Description Logics (DLs)
and the guarded fragment—is an ontology language that can
be used in CKBs while enjoying decidability for basic reasoning problems. We further show how CKBs can be used with
expressive DLs of the ALC family, and obtain worst-case optimal complexity results in this setting. For DL-based CKBs,
we deﬁne a fragment called separable CKBs (which still
strictly subsumes r-hybrid and DL+LOG knowledge bases),
and show that they can be rather efﬁciently translated into
standard ASP programs. This approach allows us to perform
basic inference from separable CKBs by reusing existing efﬁcient ASP solvers. We have implemented the approach for
separable CKBs containing ontologies in the DL ALCH, and
present in this paper some promising empirical results for
real-life data. They show that our approach provides a dramatic improvement over a naive implementation based on a
translation of such CKBs into dl-programs.

Introduction
Answer Set Programming (ASP) and ontology languages
like Description Logics (DLs) play leading roles in Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR&R). ASP and DLs
have largely orthogonal features because they make very
different assumptions regarding the completeness of information, and thus reasoning techniques and algorithms that
are deployed in ASP are signiﬁcantly different from the
ones used in DLs. Combining ASP, which makes the closedworld assumption (CWA), with DLs, which make the openworld assumption (OWA), into expressive hybrid languages
that would enjoy the positive features of both has received
signiﬁcant attention in the last decade (see, e.g., (Rosati
2005; 2006; Eiter et al. 2008; Motik and Rosati 2010;
∗
This work was supported by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF)
via projects P30360, P25207, P25518, and W1255.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1728

