The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Dialogue Act Sequence Labeling
Using Hierarchical Encoder with CRF
Harshit Kumar, Arvind Agarwal,
Riddhiman Dasgupta, Sachindra Joshi
IBM Research, India
{harshitk, arvagarw, riddasgu, jsachind}@in.ibm.com

Utterance
U: Hi
S: Hi, How are you?
U: I recently visited canary island
S: I am sure you had a nice time.
U: yes, but it is an expensive place,
S: Aren't all tourist places expensive?
U: yes, most are
U: but
U: i liked the food, especially curry

Abstract
Dialogue Act recognition associate dialogue acts (i.e., semantic labels) to utterances in a conversation. The problem of
associating semantic labels to utterances can be treated as
a sequence labeling problem. In this work, we build a hierarchical recurrent neural network using bidirectional LSTM
as a base unit and the conditional random ﬁeld (CRF) as the
top layer to classify each utterance into its corresponding dialogue act. The hierarchical network learns representations
at multiple levels, i.e., word level, utterance level, and conversation level. The conversation level representations are input to the CRF layer, which takes into account not only all
previous utterances but also their dialogue acts, thus modeling the dependency among both, labels and utterances, an
important consideration of natural dialogue. We validate our
approach on two different benchmark data sets, Switchboard
and Meeting Recorder Dialogue Act, and show performance
improvement over the state-of-the-art methods by 2.2% and
4.1% absolute points, respectively. It is worth noting that the
inter-annotator agreement on Switchboard data set is 84%,
and our method is able to achieve the accuracy of about 79%
despite being trained on the noisy data.

DA
Greeting
Greeting
Statement
Statement
Opinion
Y/N question
Ack
Abandon
Statement

Table 1: A snippet of a conversation showing few dialogues
between a User (U) and System(S).

several different approaches ranging from multi-class classiﬁcation to structured prediction have been applied to it (Grau
et al. 2004; Ang, Liu, and Shriberg 2005; Stolcke et al. 2006;
Lendvai and Geertzen 2007; Tavaﬁ et al. 2013). These approaches use handcrafted features, often designed keeping
in mind the characteristics of the underlying data, and therefore do not scale well across datasets. Furthermore, in a
natural conversation, there is a strong dependency among
consecutive utterances, and consecutive DAs, as is evident
from the previous Greeting example, so it is important that
any model should account for these dependencies. However,
the standard multi-class classiﬁcation such as Naı̈ve Bayes
does not account for any of these dependencies, and classify DAs independently, whereas structured prediction algorithms such as HMM only take into account the label dependency, not the dependencies among utterances. For the DA
recognition task, one of the earlier works (Grau et al. 2004)
used Naı̈ve Bayes and reported an accuracy of 66% on the
Switchboard (SwDA) corpus. The SwDA corpus has since
become the standard corpus for DA recognition task because of its wide-spread use, and has been used as a benchmark data to compare different algorithms. Furthermore,
structured prediction algorithms such as HMM (Stolcke et
al. 2006) and SVM-HMM (Lendvai and Geertzen 2007;
Tavaﬁ et al. 2013) though have reported an accuracy of 71%
and 74.32%, respectively, they are are still far from the human reported inter-annotator agreement of 84% on SwDA
corpus.
The emergence of deep learning has dramatically improved

Introduction
Dialogue Acts (DA) are semantic labels attached to utterances in a conversation that serve to concisely characterize
speakers’ intention in producing those utterances. The identiﬁcation of DAs ease the interpretation of utterances and
help in understanding a conversation. One of primary applications of DAs (Higashinaka et al. 2014) is in building a
natural language dialogue system, where knowing the DAs
of the past utterances helps in the prediction of the DA of the
current utterance, and thus, limiting the number of candidate
utterances to be generated for the current turn. For example,
if the previous utterance is of type Greeting then the next
utterance is most likely going to be of the same type, i.e.,
Greeting. Table 1 shows a snippet of a conversation showing such dependency among DAs. Another application of
DA identiﬁcation is in building a conversation summarizer
where DAs can be used to generate a summary of a conversation by collecting pair of utterances that have speciﬁc DA
labels. DA recognition is a well-understood problem, and
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3440

