The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

DID: Distributed Incremental Block Coordinate
Descent forNonnegative Matrix Factorization
Tianxiang Gao, Chris Chu
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Iowa State University, Ames, IA, 50011, USA
{gaotx, cnchu}@iastate.edu

spect to variables B and C. Finding the global minimum is
NP-hard (Vavasis 2009). Thus, a practical algorithm usually
converges to a local minimum.
Many algorithms have been proposed to solve NMF such
as multiplicative updates (MU) (Lee and Seung 2001),
hierarchical alternating least square (HALS) (Cichocki,
Zdunek, and Amari 2007; Li and Zhang 2009), alternating
direction multiplier method (ADMM) (Zhang 2010), and alternating nonnegative least square (ANLS) (Kim and Park
2011). Amongst those algorithms, ANLS has the largest reduction of objective value per iteration since it exactly solves
nonnegative least square (NNLS) subproblems using a block
principal pivoting (BPP) method (Kim and Park 2011).
Unfortunately, the computation of each iteration is costly.
The algorithm HALS, on the other hand, solves subproblems inexactly with cheaper computation and has achieved
faster convergence in terms of time (Kim and Park 2011;
Gillis and Glineur 2012). Instead of iteratively solving the
subproblems, ADMM obtains closed-form solutions by using auxiliary variables. A drawback of ADMM is that it is
sensitive to the choice of the tuning parameters, even to the
point where poor parameter selection can lead to algorithm
divergence (Sun and Fevotte 2014).
Most of the proposed algorithms are intended for centralized implementation, assuming that the whole data matrix
can be loaded into the RAM of a single computer node. In
the era of massive data sets, however, this assumption is often not satisﬁed, since the number of samples is too large
to be stored in a single node. As a result, there is a growing need to develop algorithms in distributed system. Thus,
in this paper, we assume the number of samples is so large
that the data matrix is collected and stored distributively.
Such applications can be found in e-commerce (e.g., Amazon), digital content streaming (e.g., Netﬂix) (Koren, Bell,
and Volinsky 2009) and technology (e.g., Facebook, Google)
(Tan, Cao, and Fong 2016), where they have hundreds of
millions of users.
Many distributed algorithms have been published recently. The distributed MU (Liu et al. 2010; Yin, Gao, and
Zhang 2014) has been proposed as the ﬁrst distributed algorithm to solve NMF. However, MU suffers from slow and
ill convergence in some cases (Lin 2007). Kannan, Ballard,
and Park (Kannan, Ballard, and Park 2016) proposed high
performance ANLS (HPC-ANLS) using 2D-grid partition

Abstract
Nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) has attracted much
attention in the last decade as a dimension reduction method
in many applications. Due to the explosion in the size of data,
naturally the samples are collected and stored distributively in
local computational nodes. Thus, there is a growing need to
develop algorithms in a distributed memory architecture. We
propose a novel distributed algorithm, called distributed incremental block coordinate descent (DID), to solve the problem. By adapting the block coordinate descent framework,
closed-form update rules are obtained in DID. Moreover, DID
performs updates incrementally based on the most recently
updated residual matrix. As a result, only one communication
step per iteration is required. The correctness, efﬁciency, and
scalability of the proposed algorithm are veriﬁed in a series
of numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) (Lee and Seung
1999) extracts the latent factors in a low dimensional subspace. The popularity of NMF is due to its ability to learn
parts-based representation by the use of nonnegative constraints. Numerous successes have been found in document
clustering (Xu and Gong 2004; Lu, Hong, and Wang 2017a),
computer vision (Lee and Seung 1999), signal processing
(Gao, Olofsson, and Lu 2016; Lu, Hong, and Wang 2017b),
etc.
Suppose a collection of N samples with M nonnega×N
,
tive measurements is denoted in matrix form X ∈ RM
+
where each column is a sample. The purpose of NMF is to
approximate X by a product of two nonnegative matrices
×K
and C ∈ RK×N
with a desired low dimenB ∈ RM
+
+
sion K, where K  min{M, N }. The columns of matrix
B can be considered as a basis in the low dimension subspace, while the columns of matrix C are the coordinates.
NMF can be formulated as an optimization problem in (1):
1
2
f (B, C) = X − BCF
(1a)
minimize
B,C
2
subject to
B, C ≥ 0,
(1b)
where “≥ 0” means element-wise nonnegative, and ·F is
the Frobenius norm. The problem (1) is nonconvex with reCopyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2991

