The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Allocation Problems in Ride-Sharing Platforms:
Online Matching with Ofﬂine Reusable Resources
John P. Dickerson

Karthik A. Sankararaman∗

University of Maryland, College Park, USA
john@cs.umd.edu

University of Maryland, College Park, USA
kabinav@cs.umd.edu

Aravind Srinivasan†

Pan Xu‡

University of Maryland, College Park, USA
srin@cs.umd.edu

University of Maryland, College Park, USA
panxu@cs.umd.edu
lem, we are given a bipartite graph G = (U, V, E) where U
represents the ofﬂine vertices (advertisers) and V represents
the online vertices (keywords or impressions). There is an
edge e = (u, v) if advertiser u bids for a keyword v. When
a keyword v arrives, a central clearinghouse must make an
instant and irrevocable decision to either reject v or assign v
to one of its “neighbors” (i.e., set of incident edges) u and obtain a proﬁt we for the match e = (u, v). When an advertiser
u is matched, it is no longer available for matches with other
keywords (in the most basic case) or its budget is reduced.
The goal is to design an efﬁcient online algorithm such that
the expected total weight (proﬁt) of the matching obtained is
maximized. Following the seminal work of Karp, Vazirani,
and Vazirani (1990), there has been a large body of research
on related variants (overviewed by Mehta (2012)). One particular ﬂavor of problems is online matching with known
identical independent distributions (OM-KIID) (Feldman et
al. 2009; Haeupler, Mirrokni, and Zadimoghaddam 2011;
Manshadi, Gharan, and Saberi 2012; Jaillet and Lu 2013;
Brubach et al. 2016). In this ﬂavor, agents arrive over T
rounds, and their arrival distributions are assumed to be identical and independent over all T rounds; additionally, this
distribution is known to the algorithm beforehand.

Abstract
Bipartite matching markets pair agents on one side of a
market with agents, items, or contracts on the opposing
side. Prior work addresses online bipartite matching markets, where agents arrive over time and are dynamically
matched to a known set of disposable resources. In this paper, we propose a new model, Online Matching with (ofﬂine)
Reusable Resources under Known Adversarial Distributions
(OM-RR-KAD), in which resources on the ofﬂine side are
reusable instead of disposable; that is, once matched, resources
become available again at some point in the future. We show
that our model is tractable by presenting an LP-based adaptive
algorithm that achieves an online competitive ratio of 12 − 
for any given  > 0. We also show that no non-adaptive algorithm can achieve a ratio of 12 + o(1) based on the same
benchmark LP. Through a data-driven analysis on a massive
openly-available dataset, we show our model is robust enough
to capture the application of taxi dispatching services and ridesharing systems. We also present heuristics that perform well
in practice.

1

Introduction

In bipartite matching problems, agents on one side of a
market are paired with agents, contracts, or transactions
on the other. Classical matching problems—assigning students to schools, papers to reviewers, or medical residents
to hospitals—take place in a static setting, where all agents
exist at the time of matching, are simultaneously matched,
and then the market concludes. In contrast, many matching
problems are dynamic, where one side of the market arrives
in an online fashion and is matched sequentially to the other
side.
Online bipartite matching problems are primarily motivated by Internet advertising. In the basic version of the prob-

Apart from the Internet advertising application, online
bipartite matching models have been used to capture a wide
range of online resource allocation and scheduling problems.
Typically we have an ofﬂine and an online party representing,
respectively, the service providers (SP) and online users; once
an online user arrives, we need to match it to an ofﬂine SP
immediately. In many cases, the service is reusable in the
sense that once an SP is matched to a user, it will be gone
for some time, but will then rejoin the system afterwards.
Besides that, in many real settings the arrival distributions of
online users do change from time to time (i.e., they are not
i.i.d.). Consider the following motivational examples.

∗
Supported in part by NSF Awards CNS 1010789 and CCF
1422569
†
Supported in part by NSF Awards CNS-1010789, CCF1422569 and CCF-1749864, and by research awards from Adobe,
Inc
‡
Supported in part by NSF Awards CNS 1010789 and CCF
1422569
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Taxi Dispatching Services and Ride-Sharing Systems.
Traditional taxi services and rideshare systems like Uber
and Didi Chuxing match drivers to would-be riders (Tong
et al. 2016a; Lowalekar, Varakantham, and Jaillet 2016;
Lee et al. 2004; Seow, Dang, and Lee 2010). Here, the ofﬂine SPs are different vehicle drivers. Once an online request
(potential rider) arrives, the system matches it to a nearby

1007

