The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Norm Conﬂict Resolution in Stochastic Domains
Daniel Kasenberg, Matthias Scheutz
Human-Robot Interaction Laboratory
Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA

ing with the intrinsic norm conﬂicts in human social interactions. Logic-based approaches have to avoid normative
explosion, i.e., the logical implication that anything is obligated resulting from a deontic contraction (Goble 2009).
Moreover, purely logic-based approaches typically deal with
deterministic environments and do not take into account the
uncertainty involved in real-world perception and action.
Reward-based approaches, on the other hand, have no way
of telling what normative alternatives exist in a given situation, since their action policies do not explicitly represent normative principles. What is needed is an approach
for handling norm conﬂicts that combines the advantages
of explicit logic-based norm representations for reasoning
with and communicating about norms with the advantages
of stochastic action models underwriting Markov decision
processes (MDPs) which are well-suited for real-world action execution.
In this paper, we propose a hybrid model that is specifically developed to deal with norm conﬂicts in a systematic manner while drawing on the advantages of both logicbased norm representations and policy-based action representations. We start by discussing the functional requirements for norm processing in artiﬁcial agents and brieﬂy
argue why previous approaches are insufﬁcient for handling
norm conﬂicts in real-world domains. We then introduce our
technical approach to dealing with norm conﬂicts, which
combines explicit norm representations in Linear Temporal
Logic (LTL) with MDPs in ways that allow the agent to suspend the smallest set of applicable norms weighted by their
priority in a given context for the shortest possible time in
order to be able to obey the remaining norms. A proof-ofconcept implementation of the proposed algorithms in a simulated vacuum cleaning domain demonstrates the capability
and viability of the approach. We then assess the strengths
and weaknesses of our solution in the discussion section,
and propose ways for addressing the shortcomings in future
work. Finally, we conclude with a summary of our accomplishments and reiterate why they are an important contribution to current discussion of ethical AI.

Abstract
Artiﬁcial agents will need to be aware of human moral and
social norms, and able to use them in decision-making. In
particular, artiﬁcial agents will need a principled approach to
managing conﬂicting norms, which are common in human
social interactions. Existing logic-based approaches suffer
from normative explosion and are typically designed for deterministic environments; reward-based approaches lack principled ways of determining which normative alternatives exist in a given environment. We propose a hybrid approach, using Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) representations in Markov
Decision Processes (MDPs), that manages norm conﬂicts in a
systematic manner while accommodating domain stochasticity. We provide a proof-of-concept implementation in a simulated vacuum cleaning domain.

Introduction
Human culture is based on social and moral norms, which
guide both individual behaviors and social interactions.
Hence, artiﬁcial agents embedded in human social domains
will not only have to be aware of human norms, but also able
to use them for decision-making, action selection, and ultimately natural language justiﬁcations of their choices and
behaviors.
Endowing artiﬁcial agents with mechanisms for normative processing is, however, a challenging endeavor, for several reasons: (1) we currently do not yet have sufﬁcient
knowledge about how humans represent and process norms;
(2) the human norm network is large and complex, containing many types of context-dependent moral and social norms
at different levels of abstraction; and, most importantly, (3)
the norm network is not a consistent set of principles that can
be easily formalized and reasoned with. In fact, normative
conﬂicts are more the “norm” than the exception in everyday life; handling them in ways that are socially acceptable
requires an understanding both of why certain norms are applicable and of why violating some of them in the case of
norm conﬂicts was the right thing to do.
Recent work in AI and multi-agent systems has focused
either on logic-based approaches to normative reasoning
or reward-based learning approaches to normative behavior. Yet neither approach is particularly well-suited for deal-

Motivation and Background
As artiﬁcial agents are increasingly being considered for
roles that require complex social and moral decision-making
skills, they will need to be able to represent and use moral

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

85

