The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Adversarial 3D Model
Generation with 2D Image Enhancer
Jing Zhu, Jin Xie, Yi Fang ∗
NYU Multimedia and Visual Computing Lab
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, NYU Abu Dhabi, UAE
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, NYU Tandon School of Engineering, USA
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, NYU Tandon School of Engineering, USA
By mapping a low-dimensional vector into a much more
complex target space, GANs have been proved its powerful generative ability with a number of applications mostly
in 2D image or text domain. 3D-GAN (Wu et al. 2016) and
PrGANs (Gadelha, Maji, and Wang 2016) are the ﬁrst two
attempts to apply GANs technique on addressing 3D model
generation problem. Though their works are inspiring, most
of their generated models are incomplete with some holes or
multiple fragments. The causes might be that 1) they limit
their generators to be trained only on a single domain data
(3D models or projected images), and 2) their generators
are driven by uninformative random vectors. Different from
their works, we propose to learn an image-enhancer-driven
3D model generator from both 2D image (learned) features
and 3D volumetric data.
In this paper, we build our framework on 3D generative adversarial networks with an enhancer network for better training a 3D model generator. The enhancer contains
two deep convolutional neural networks, and learns features from images in an adversarial manner. The high-level
learned image features from the enhancer are fed into the
3D model generator for better generation. We train the two
networks together, so that our 3D model generator can be
learned from 3D data and 2D data simultaneously. Once the
framework has been trained, given a random vector, the enhancer ﬁrst generates corresponding high-level image features, and then the 3D model generator can synthesize a volumetric 3D model based on the image features.
To comprehensively validate the performance of our proposed method, we conduct experiments on two large-scale
datasets for different tasks, including 3D model generation, shape classiﬁcation and shape retrieval. For the generation task, we train our proposed framework on 3D models and their rendered images from ShapeNet, and then
use the trained generator and partial enhancer to synthesize volumetric models. The generation results suggest that
our proposed method is able to generate high-quality 3D
models. For shape classiﬁcation and shape retrieval tasks,
we train the framework on models and rendered images
from major categories of ShapeNet, but test it on ModelNet
dataset by extracting deep learned features from the trained
discriminator as shape representations. We report quantitative analysis of shape classiﬁcation and shape retrieval
on two popular subsets of ModelNet dataset (ModelNet10

Abstract
Recent advancements in generative adversarial nets (GANs)
and volumetric convolutional neural networks (CNNs) enable
generating 3D models from a probabilistic space. In this paper, we have developed a novel GAN-based deep neural network to obtain a better latent space for the generation of 3D
models. In the proposed method, an enhancer neural network
is introduced to extract information from other corresponding
domains (e.g. image) to improve the performance of the 3D
model generator, and the discriminative power of the unsupervised shape features learned from the 3D model discriminator. Speciﬁcally, we train the 3D generative adversarial networks on 3D volumetric models, and at the same time, the enhancer network learns image features from rendered images.
Different from the traditional GAN architecture that uses uninformative random vectors as inputs, we feed the high-level
image features learned from the enhancer into the 3D model
generator for better training. The evaluations on two largescale 3D model datasets, ShapeNet and ModelNet, demonstrate that our proposed method can not only generate highquality 3D models, but also successfully learn discriminative
shape representation for classiﬁcation and retrieval without
supervision.

In the recent decades, 3D model generation has attracted
increasing interests in computer vision community with applications in a wide range of ﬁelds, e.g. engineering, product
design. In early 3D model generation systems, new models were usually generated by mixing up several parts from
the existing models. With the emergence of depth sensors,
such as Microsoft Kinect and 3D LiDAR, it becomes possible to reconstruct 3D models from lower-cost captured
RGB-D images or point clouds. However, processing the
sensor captured images or point clouds is kind of complicated and time-consuming, especially in some state-of-theart methods that infer 3D models from multi-view images or
depth maps. In this work, we consider constructing a generative model that could effectively synthesize high-quality
3D models without any image or depth map inputs.
The success of generative adversarial networks (GANs)
(Goodfellow et al. 2014) in computer vision ﬁeld provides
us a hint to learn a generator via an adversarial process.
∗

Corresponding Author (Email: yfang@nyu.edu)
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7615

