The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

S KIP F LOW: Incorporating Neural Coherence Features
for End-to-End Automatic Text Scoring
Yi Tay,1 Minh C. Phan,2 Luu Anh Tuan,3 Siu Cheung Hui4
1, 2, 4

Nanyang Technological University
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Singapore
3
Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore

A wide assortment of features may commonly extracted
from essays. Simple and intuitive features may include essay length, sentence length. On the other hand, intricate and
complex features may also be extracted, e.g.., features such
as grammar correctness (Attali and Burstein 2004), readability (Zesch, Wojatzki, and Scholten-Akoun 2015) and textual
coherence (Chen and He 2013). However, these handcrafted
features are often painstakingly designed, require a lot of human involvement and usually require laborious implementation for every new feature.
Deep learning based ATS systems have recently been proposed (Dong and Zhang 2016; Taghipour and Ng 2016;
Alikaniotis, Yannakoudakis, and Rei 2016). A comprehensive study has been done in (Taghipour and Ng 2016) which
demonstrated that neural network architectures such as the
long short-term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) and convolutional neural network (CNN) are
capable of outperforming systems that extensively require
handcrafted features. However, all of these neural models
do not consider transition of an essay over time, i.e., logical
ﬂow and coherence over time. In particular, mainly semantic
compositionality is modeled within the recursive operations
in the LSTM model which compresses the input text repeatedly within the recurrent cell. In this case, the relationships
between multiple points in the essay cannot be captured
effectively. Moreover, essays are typically long sequences
which pushes the limits of the memorization capability of
the LSTM.
Hence, the objective of this work is a uniﬁed solution to
the above mentioned problems. Our method alleviates two
problems. The ﬁrst is targeted at alleviating the inability
of current neural network architectures to model ﬂow, coherence and semantic relatedness over time. The second is
aimed at easing the burden of the recurrent model. In order
to do so, we model the relationships between multiple snapshots of the LSTM’s hidden state over time. More speciﬁcally, as our model reads the essay, it models the semantic
relationships between two points of an essay using a neural
tensor layer. Eventually, multiple features of semantic relatedness are aggregated across the essay and used as auxiliary
features for prediction.
The intuition behind our idea is as follows. Firstly, semantic relationships across sentences are commonly used as
an indicator of writing ﬂow and textual coherence (Wiemer-

Abstract
Deep learning has demonstrated tremendous potential for
Automatic Text Scoring (ATS) tasks. In this paper, we describe a new neural architecture that enhances vanilla neural network models with auxiliary neural coherence features.
Our new method proposes a new S KIP F LOW mechanism that
models relationships between snapshots of the hidden representations of a long short-term memory (LSTM) network
as it reads. Subsequently, the semantic relationships between
multiple snapshots are used as auxiliary features for prediction. This has two main beneﬁts. Firstly, essays are typically
long sequences and therefore the memorization capability of
the LSTM network may be insufﬁcient. Implicit access to
multiple snapshots can alleviate this problem by acting as
a protection against vanishing gradients. The parameters of
the S KIP F LOW mechanism also acts as an auxiliary memory. Secondly, modeling relationships between multiple positions allows our model to learn features that represent and
approximate textual coherence. In our model, we call this
neural coherence features. Overall, we present a uniﬁed deep
learning architecture that generates neural coherence features
as it reads in an end-to-end fashion. Our approach demonstrates state-of-the-art performance on the benchmark ASAP
dataset, outperforming not only feature engineering baselines
but also other deep learning models.

Introduction
Automated Text Scoring (ATS) systems are targeted at both
alleviating the workload of teachers and improving the feedback cycle in educational systems. ATS systems have also
seen adoption for several high-stakes assessment, e.g., the
e-rater system (Attali and Burstein 2004) which has been
used for TOEFL and GRE examinations. A successful ATS
system brings about widespread beneﬁts to society and the
education industry. This paper presents a novel neural network architecture for this task.
Traditionally, the task of ATS has been regarded as a machine learning problem (Larkey 1998; Attali and Burstein
2004) which learns to approximate the marking process
with supervised learning. Decades of ATS research follow the same traditional supervised text regression methods in which handcrafted features are constructed and subsequently passed into a machine learning based classiﬁer.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5948

