The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Risk-Aware Proactive Scheduling via Conditional Value-at-Risk
Wen Song, Donghun Kang, Jie Zhang,a Hui Xib
a

Rolls-Royce@NTU Corp Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
b
Rolls-Royce Singapore Pte Ltd, Singapore
{songwen, donghun.kang, a zhangj}@ntu.edu.sg, b hui.xi@rolls-royce.com

and Fu et al. (2012) use sampling and simulation to evaluate solutions. State-of-the-art approaches (Varakantham, Fu,
and Lau 2016; Fu, Varakantham, and Lau 2016) consider αrobust makespan minimization as a probabilistic constrained
problem, which can be approximated by Sample Average
Approximation (SAA) with the guarantee of converging to
the optimal solution (Luedtke and Ahmed 2008). However,
these approaches result in Mixed Integer Linear Programs
(MILP) which are computationally prohibitive even with
sophisticated solvers. To scale up the MILPs, the summarization heuristic is applied to aggregate the samples into a
representative one. However, this heuristic compromises the
convergence guarantee, and decreases solution quality.
In this paper, we propose to optimizing the α-robust
makespan via Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR), a popular measure in risk-sensitive applications (Rockafellar and
Uryasev 2002). Our approach scales up to hundreds of samples without the need of sample summarization, hence can
provide better robust makespan and better control of the risk
parameter α. Based on the expectation form of CVaR minimization, we approximate the proactive problem using SAA.
However, we show that the resulting problem is NP-hard due
to the combinatorial nature of RCPSP. This also excludes
the traditional CVaR minimization approaches that assume
the decision space is linear (Hong, Hu, and Liu 2014). Thus,
we design a general branch-and-bound framework for CVaR
minimization in combinatorial space. We then instantiate
this framework to develop a branch-and-bound algorithm
based on constraint propagation and the network ﬂow theory,
by extending the related components in (Leus and Herroelen
2004) designed for single resource problems. Our algorithm
shares similarities with the Precedence Constraint Posting
(PCP) approaches in (Laborie 2005; Lombardi, Milano, and
Benini 2013). However, existing PCP approaches are designed for deterministic RCPSP where temporal reasoning
can be applied for branching and constraint propagation. In
contrast, our problem is built on multiple duration samples,
which makes temporal reasoning very difﬁcult. Thereby, our
algorithm purely reasons with resource constraints, except
the lower bound computation.
Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on benchmark
instances and commonly used uncertainty models. The results show that our approach scales well to a large number
of samples, and can produce solutions with lower α-robust

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the challenging problem of riskaware proactive scheduling with the objective of minimizing
robust makespan. State-of-the-art approaches based on probabilistic constrained optimization lead to Mixed Integer Linear
Programs that must be heuristically approximated. We optimize the robust makespan via a coherent risk measure, Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR). Since traditional CVaR optimization approaches assuming linear spaces does not suit our
problem, we propose a general branch-and-bound framework
for combinatorial CVaR minimization. We then design an
approximate complete algorithm, and employ resource reasoning to enable constraint propagation for multiple samples.
Empirical results show that our algorithm outperforms stateof-the-art approaches with higher solution quality.

1

Introduction

Real-world scheduling applications often face dynamic situations due to the existence of considerable amounts of
uncertainty, such as equipment breakdowns, delays of certain tasks, unforeseen weather conditions, etc. Therefore,
practical scheduling approaches should take uncertainty into
account. Speciﬁcally, the scheduling problem we consider
is the challenging Resource-Constrained Project Scheduling Problem (RCPSP) with uncertain activity durations. In
line with (Beck and Wilson 2007; Fu et al. 2012; Varakantham, Fu, and Lau 2016; Fu, Varakantham, and Lau 2016),
we investigate proactive scheduling approaches for optimizing a risk-aware objective, i.e. minimization of the α-robust
makespan, which focuses on controlling the probability that
the actual makespan exceeds the α-robust makespan within
a predeﬁned risk parameter α ∈ (0, 1). Compared to the
expected makespan as adopted in (Lombardi, Milano, and
Benini 2013; Creemers 2015; Song et al. 2017), α-robust
makespan is more practical since the actual makespan may
be much worse than the expected value with a high chance.
The incorporation of uncertainty brings additional challenges to the already intractable RCPSP, since it is hard to
even evaluate a solution (Beck and Wilson 2007). Existing
approaches often resort to sampling-based techniques to mitigate the complexity. For example, Beck and Wilson (2007)
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6278

