The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

cw2vec: Learning Chinese Word Embeddings
with Stroke n-gram Information
Shaosheng Cao,1,2 Wei Lu,2 Jun Zhou,1 Xiaolong Li1
1

2

AI Department, Ant Financial Services Group
Singapore University of Technology and Design
{shaosheng.css, jun.zhoujun, xl.li}@antﬁn.com
luwei@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
We propose cw2vec, a novel method for learning Chinese
word embeddings. It is based on our observation that exploiting stroke-level information is crucial for improving the
learning of Chinese word embeddings. Speciﬁcally, we design a minimalist approach to exploit such features, by using stroke n-grams, which capture semantic and morphological level information of Chinese words. Through qualitative analysis, we demonstrate that our model is able to extract semantic information that cannot be captured by existing methods. Empirical results on the word similarity, word
analogy, text classiﬁcation and named entity recognition tasks
show that the proposed approach consistently outperforms
state-of-the-art approaches such as word-based word2vec and
GloVe, character-based CWE, component-based JWE and
pixel-based GWE.

Figure 1: Radical v.s. components v.s. stroke n-gram
Bojanowski et al. 2016; Cao and Lu 2017). While these approaches were shown effective, they largely focused on European languages such as English, Spanish and German that
employ the Latin script in their writing system. Therefore
the methods developed are not directly applicable to languages such as Chinese that employ a completely different
writing system.
In Chinese, each word typically consists of less characters than English1 , where each character conveys fruitful semantic information (Wieger 1915; Liu et al. 2010). Given
the rich internal structures of Chinese words and characters,
approaches that exploit character level information (Chen et
al. 2015) have been proposed for learning Chinese word embeddings. However, is such information sufﬁcient for properly capturing the semantic information of words? Does
there exist other useful information that can be extracted
from words and characters to better model the semantics of
words?
For internal structural information of words, we argue that
characters alone are not sufﬁcient for capturing the semantic information. For instance, as shown in Figure 2, two
words “timber” and “forest” are semantically closely related. However, “timber” is composed of two characters
“wood” and “material”, while “forest” is made up of “trees”
and “jungle”. If only character level information is considered, there is no information that is shared across these two
words as they consist of distinct characters.
While certain manually deﬁned rules for extracting subword information such as radicals2 (Sun et al. 2014; Li et

1. Introduction
Word representation learning has recently received a signiﬁcant amount of attention in the ﬁeld of natural language processing (NLP). Unlike traditional one-hot representations for words, low-dimensional distributed word representations, also known as word embeddings, are able to
better capture semantics of natural language words. Such
representations were shown useful in certain down-stream
NLP tasks such as text classiﬁcation (Conneau et al. 2016;
Xu et al. 2016), named entity recognition (Turian, Ratinov,
and Bengio 2010; Collobert et al. 2011; Sun et al. 2015),
machine translation (Devlin et al. 2014; Meng et al. 2015;
Jean et al. 2015) and measuring semantic textual similarity
(Shen et al. 2014; Wieting et al. 2015). It is therefore vital
to design methods for learning word representations that can
capture word semantics well.
Existing approaches only concentrated on learning such
representations based on contextual information (Mikolov
et al. 2010; 2013b; Ling et al. 2015; Levy, Goldberg, and
Ramat-Gan 2014; Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014)
where words are regarded as atomic tokens. Recently, researchers also have started looking into incorporating subword level information to better capture word semantics
(Bian, Gao, and Liu 2014; Cotterell and Schütze 2015;

1
Most modern Chinese words consist of only one or two characters (Chen, Liang, and Liu 2015).
2
A component primarily used for indexing characters.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5053

