The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Face Sketch Synthesis from Coarse to Fine
Mingjin Zhang,1 Nannan Wang,1∗ Yunsong Li,1 Ruxin Wang,2 Xinbo Gao3
1

State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks,
School of Telecommunications, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
2
Yunnan Union Vision Innovations Technology Company Limited, Kunming 650000, China
3
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China

Abstract
Synthesizing ﬁne face sketches from photos is a valuable yet
challenging problem in digital entertainment. Face sketches
synthesized by conventional methods usually exhibit coarse
structures of faces, whereas ﬁne details are lost especially
on some critical facial components. In this paper, by imitating the coarse-to-ﬁne drawing process of artists, we propose a novel face sketch synthesis framework consisting of
a coarse stage and a ﬁne stage. In the coarse stage, a mapping relationship between face photos and sketches is learned
via the convolutional neural network. It ensures that the synthesized sketches keep coarse structures of faces. Given the
test photo and the coarse synthesized sketch, a probabilistic graphic model is designed to synthesize the delicate face
sketch which has ﬁne and critical details. Experimental results on public face sketch databases illustrate that our proposed framework outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in
both quantitive and visual comparisons.

Imitation

Imitation

Coarse
to
Fine

Figure 1: Imitating the coarse-to-ﬁne drawing process of
artists. First, we synthesize a coarse sketch which imitates
an initial draft containing the coarse structure of face. Then,
in the light of the second drawing step where the artist divides the draft into squares and paints the sketch detail by
detail, we divide the coarse sketch into patches and synthesize the ﬁnal ﬁne face sketch.

Introduction
Face sketch synthesis from photos is a popular and userdesired function in many applications such as on blogs and
social media websites (e.g., Twitter, Instagram, Facebook,
and LinkedIn), where users would like to use vivid face
sketches as their proﬁle pictures and share their delicate
face sketches with friends and family. Face sketch synthesis techniques enable users to effortlessly get sketch faces
immediately after taking a photo or selecting a photo from
gallery. Delicate and distinctive face sketches synthesized
by the these techniques help users stand out and build their
“personal brands”. Thus, the requirement of ﬁne details in
the synthesized sketches is put forward.
However, existing methods fail to synthesize the face
sketches with ﬁne and delicate details especially on important facial components, such as eyebrows, eyes, nose and
mouth. Regarding the architectures of the designed models,
shallow models focus on how to transfer the common structure of training faces to a test face, while deep models pay
more attention on how to keep speciﬁc structures of the test
photo face. A critical issue is that the ﬁne details of critical

facial components in synthesized sketches are overlooked by
almost all conventional methods.
Targeting on the above problem, we imitate the drawing
process in which artists initially draws the coarse structure
of face as a draft, and then divides it into squares and paint
the face sketch detail by detail (Fig.1). Inspired by this, we
propose a coarse-to-ﬁne face sketch synthesis process. The
method can be decomposed into two stages: a coarse stage
and a ﬁne stage. In the ﬁrst stage, we employ the convolutional neural network which is used to synthesize a coarse
face sketch. The structure of the synthesized face is approximated, i.e., the spatial positions and sizes of facial components and the part-to-whole relationship are recovered. However, this process may loss or distort details on some facial
components, which could play a signiﬁcant role in specifying the characteristics of face sketches and which enable
users to build personal brands. Taking eyes for example, all
eyes are balls set in sockets, surrounded by lower and upper
lid, but different eyes have different shapes. They are teardrop shaped or almond. In the second stage, inspired by the
polishing process, we propose a probabilistic graphic model
to recover the missing details and correct or adjust the distortions generated in the ﬁrst stage. The candidate patches of
the test photo and the coarse sketch synthesized in the ﬁrst

∗
Corresponding
author:
Nannan
Wang
(nnwang@xidian.edu.cn)
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7558

