The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Coupled Deep Learning for Heterogeneous Face Recognition
Xiang Wu, Lingxiao Song, Ran He,∗ Tieniu Tan
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC),
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P. R. China, 100190

ject may differ in appearance due to the changes between
VIS images and NIR images. This difference introduces
high intra-class variations, which generally make a direct
comparison between samples have poor matching accuracy. Some research efforts have been devoted to addressing this challenge (Li et al. 2013; Lin and Tang 2006;
Socolinsky and Selinger 2002; Yi et al. 2007), and mainly
focus on transforming data from different modalities onto a
common comparable space. Since the changes of face appearance are often inﬂuenced by many factors (e.g. identities, illuminations and expressions) and noise information
in different modalities show diverse distributions, reducing
the intra-class variations of heterogeneous face data is more
complex than that of homogeneous face data.
Motivated by these observations, this paper proposes a
deep learning framework, named coupled deep learning
(CDL), to address the VIS-NIR heterogeneous matching
problem. It transfers the deep representation learnt on a
large-scale VIS dataset (Wu et al. 2016) to adapt to NIR domain by introducing a novel VIS-NIR objective function for
convolution neural networks. It seeks a deep feature space in
which the heterogeneous face matching problem can be approximately treated as a homogeneous face matching problem. Inspired by the relevance constraints in cross-modal
learning (Wang et al. 2013), we introduce a trace norm and
a block-diagonal prior to the softmax loss. These relevance
constraints can enhance the relevance of projection matrices of NIR and VIS images so that the difference between
modalities is reduced and identity information is reserved,
especially for the small number of training samples. On the
account of making use of the massive VIS face images, a
cross modal ranking loss deﬁned on a set of NIR-VIS triplets
is introduced. Based on the alternative formulation for the
trace norm, an iterative solution is developed and combined
it into the convolutional neural network. Due to the limited
pairwise VIS-NIR images, the parameters of shallow network layers are shared among different modalities. Experimental results on several heterogeneous face databases verify the effectiveness of each part in the CDL loss function.
The main contributions are summarized as follows:
• Two novel relevance constraints on fully connected layer,
as regularizers, are used not only to enforce the relevance
between different modalities, but also to constrain the parameter space, which can alleviate overﬁtting especially

Abstract
Heterogeneous face matching is a challenge issue in face
recognition due to large domain difference as well as insufﬁcient pairwise images in different modalities during training.
This paper proposes a coupled deep learning (CDL) approach
for the heterogeneous face matching. CDL seeks a shared feature space in which the heterogeneous face matching problem can be approximately treated as a homogeneous face
matching problem. The objective function of CDL mainly includes two parts. The ﬁrst part contains a trace norm and a
block-diagonal prior as relevance constraints, which not only
make unpaired images from multiple modalities be clustered
and correlated, but also regularize the parameters to alleviate
overﬁtting. An approximate variational formulation is introduced to deal with the difﬁculties of optimizing low-rank constraint directly. The second part contains a cross modal ranking among triplet domain speciﬁc images to maximize the
margin for different identities and increase data for a small
amount of training samples. Besides, an alternating minimization method is employed to iteratively update the parameters of CDL. Experimental results show that CDL achieves
better performance on the challenging CASIA NIR-VIS 2.0
face recognition database, the IIIT-D Sketch database, the
CUHK Face Sketch (CUFS), and the CUHK Face Sketch
FERET (CUFSF), which signiﬁcantly outperforms state-ofthe-art heterogeneous face recognition methods.

Introduction
The performance of real-world face recognition systems suffers a lot from illumination variations, which is a traditional
challenge in face recognition. The technique of near infrared
(NIR) imaging provides a low-cost and effective solution
to acquire high-quality images in conditions of low light
or complete darkness, for which NIR imaging is widely
adopted in video surveillance and user authentication applications. However, many applications require that the enrollment of face templates is based on visual (VIS) images,
such as online registration and pre-enrollment using passport or ID card. Therefore, face matching between NIR and
VIS images has drawn much attention in recent decades.
One major challenge in matching faces from VIS-NIR
heterogeneous conditions is that images of the same sub∗

corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1679

