The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Abduction under Partial Observability
Brendan Juba, Zongyi Li, Evan Miller
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
{bjuba, zli, evan.a.miller} @wustl.edu

MAP inference. McIlraith (1998) provides a critical review
of this work: both approaches have shortcomings. Namely,
the syntactic measures are tantamount to assuming that the
attributes in question represent either independent or mutually exclusive events. As for the Bayesian methods, abduction relies to an unusual degree on the quality of the prior
that is used. Note that unlike in standard, inductive inference, in abduction we are speciﬁcally interested in inference
tasks in which the observed data do not essentially determine the best hypothesis. Therefore, such approaches must
directly confront the problem of choosing a highly informative prior, which is hard.
In this work, we consider a learning to reason (Khardon
and Roth 1997) or PAC-learning (Valiant 1984; 2000) formulation of the combined task of learning to abduce, introduced by Juba (2016). In this formulation, one is given
a collection of examples drawn from the prior distribution
(i.e., example jointly sampled values of attributes) together
with a condition to explain, represented as a Boolean formula c on the attributes. The task is then to propose a formula h, which essentially must be a k-DNF (k = O(1)) for
computational reasons, satisfying the following two criteria:
1. Plausibility: the probability that h is satisﬁed on the prior
distribution must be at least some (given) minimum value
μ>0
2. Entailment: the probability that the condition to explain,
c, is satisﬁed conditioned on the hypothesis h holding, is
at least 1 −  for some given error tolerance  > 0.
By casting the task as operating directly on examples, Juba
avoids the problem of explicitly learning and representing
the prior distribution. The main shortcoming of this formulation is that it assumes access to complete information, so any
attributes to be invoked in the explanation must be recorded
in all of the examples. This is a problem, for example, when
we wish to infer the intentions of characters in stories, which
are frequently either left ambiguous or are assumed to be
clear from the given context. It is also a problem if, for example, we would like to use the abduced hypothesis to guide
further exploration that may include attributes that we previously were not measuring.

Abstract
Juba recently proposed a formulation of learning abductive
reasoning from examples, in which both the relative plausibility of various explanations, as well as which explanations
are valid, are learned directly from data. The main shortcoming of this formulation of the task is that it assumes access to
full-information (i.e., fully speciﬁed) examples; relatedly, it
offers no role for declarative background knowledge, as such
knowledge is rendered redundant in the abduction task by
complete information. In this work we extend the formulation to utilize such partially speciﬁed examples, along with
declarative background knowledge about the missing data.
We show that it is possible to use implicitly learned rules together with the explicitly given declarative knowledge to support hypotheses in the course of abduction. We also show how
to use knowledge in the form of graphical causal models to reﬁne the proposed hypotheses. Finally, we observe that when
a small explanation exists, it is possible to obtain a muchimproved guarantee in the challenging exception-tolerant setting. Such small, human-understandable explanations are of
particular interest for potential applications of the task.

Introduction
Abduction is the task of inferring a plausible hypothesis to
explain an observed or hypothetical condition. Although it is
most prominently observed in scientiﬁc inquiry as the step
of proposing a hypothesis to be investigated, it is also an
everyday mode of inference. Simple tasks such as understanding stories (Hobbs et al. 1990) and images (Cox and
Pietrzykowski 1986; Poole 1990) involve a process of abduction to infer an interpretation of the larger events, context, and motivations that are only partially depicted. Its signiﬁcance to AI was ﬁrst recognized by Charniak and McDermott (1985).
Abduction has been formalized in several different ways.
The oldest formulations simply tried to minimize syntactic
criteria such as the number of literals (e.g., in ATMS (Reiter and de Kleer 1987)) or more generally, a weighted
cost per literal (Hobbs et al. 1990). Another prominent approach is to assume that a prior distribution over potential
explanations is given (Bylander et al. 1991; Pearl 1988;
Poole 1993) and treat the problem essentially as one of

Our Results

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

In this work, we make the following contributions:
1. We extend Juba’s formulation of the abduction task to

1888

