The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Expected Utility with Relative Loss Reduction: A Unifying Decision
Model for Resolving Four Well-Known Paradoxes
Wenjun Ma,1 Yuncheng Jiang,1∗ Weiru Liu,2 Xudong Luo,3† Kevin McAreavey2
1

School of Computer Science, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China.
2
Merchant Venturers School of Engineering, University of Bristol, UK.
3
Department of Information and Management Science, Guangxi Normal University, Guilin, China.

decisions under risk. It gives a normative interpretation for
researchers in economics and artiﬁcial intelligence to model
applications related to rational agents.
Unfortunately, recent empirical studies, such as the Allais
paradox (Allais and Hagen 2013), the St. Petersburg paradox (Joyce 2011), the Ellsberg paradox (Ellsberg 1961), and
the Machina paradox (Machina 2009), have observed a number of violations (i.e., humans’ choices in reality deviated
from those predicted by classic expected utility theory (Neumann and Morgenstern 1944)). At the same time, in many
artiﬁcial intelligence applications such as recommendation
system, supply chain management, policy making, humancomputer negotiation, and security surveillance system, human decision-making behaviour indeed is an essential concern and computers often need to predict precisely human
decisions under uncertainty. For example, if a government
policy-making support system cannot understand how the
people will respond to a policy, it is questionable to recommend the policy to the government (Zhan et al. 2018).
Since the classic expected utility theory cannot predict human decisions observed in these paradoxes, various generalised expected utility theories and ambiguity decision models have been proposed to account the paradoxes. However, most of them can only resolve parts of the paradoxes,
and some of them (e.g., (Tversky and Kahneman 1992;
Quiggin 2012; Gul and Pesendorfer 2014)) can only solve
the paradoxes by adding some extra parameters, which
means that these models only work in cases that the bounds
of parameter variations are already known. Unfortunately,
this makes it hard to evaluate the predication power of the
models in a new decision-making problem (more detailed
discussion can be found in related work section).
To address this issue, this paper introduces a new concept, called relative loss reduction, which is based on the
human nature of loss aversion, which has been convincingly conﬁrmed by many psychological and economic experiments (Kahneman 2003). In psychology, loss aversion
refers to people’s tendency to prefer avoiding losses to acquiring equivalent gains (Kahneman 2003). In this paper, we
interpret the meaning of loss in two cases: (i) the difference
between the minimum utilities of any two choices; and (ii)
the span of the expected utility interval of a choice. In the
ﬁrst case, the loss aversion means a decision maker prefers
a choice with higher minimum utility, ceteris paribus; and

Abstract
Some well-known paradoxes in decision making (e.g., the Allais paradox, the St. Petersburg paradox, the Ellsberg paradox, and the Machina paradox) reveal that choices conventional expected utility theory predicts could be inconsistent
with empirical observations. So, solutions to these paradoxes
can help us better understand humans decision making accurately. This is also highly related to the prediction power of a
decision-making model in real-world applications. Thus, various models have been proposed to address these paradoxes.
However, most of them can only solve parts of the paradoxes,
and for doing so some of them have to rely on the parameter
tuning without proper justiﬁcations for such bounds of parameters. To this end, this paper proposes a new descriptive
decision-making model, expected utility with relative loss reduction, which can exhibit the same qualitative behaviours
as those observed in experiments of these paradoxes without
any additional parameter setting. In particular, we introduce
the concept of relative loss reduction to reﬂect people’s tendency to prefer ensuring a sufﬁcient minimum loss to just a
maximum expected utility in decision-making under risk or
ambiguity.

Introduction
Decision-making is a process of selecting one among available choices (Russell et al. 2010). In real-world applications,
decisions often have to be made under risk or ambiguity
(Ma, Xiong, and Luo 2013; Luo, Zhong, and Leung 2015).
Here, decision making under risk means that the consequence of a decision is uncertain but the probability of each
possibility is known, while decision making under ambiguity means even the probability of each possibility is unclear.
Since such uncertainties are inevitable in real-world applications, this topic is a central concern in decision science
(Tversky and Kahneman 1992; Gul and Pesendorfer 2014)
and artiﬁcial intelligence (Dubois, Fargier, and Perny 2003;
Luo and Jennings 2007; Ma, Luo, and Jiang 2017). Perhaps
the most well-known theory for decision-making under uncertainty is expected utility theory (Neumann and Morgenstern 1944). Speciﬁcally, it is about how to make optimal
∗

The corresponding author: ycjiang@scnu.edu.cn
The corresponding author: luoxd@mailbox.gxnu.edu.cn
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

687

