The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Efﬁcient Support Vector Machine Training Algorithm on GPUs
Jiashuai Shi,†‡ Zeyi Wen,‡ Bingsheng He,‡ Jian Chen,†∗
†

South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
‡
National University of Singapore, Singapore
shijiashuai@gmail.com, wenzy@comp.nus.edu.sg, hebs@comp.nus.edu.sg, ellachen@scut.edu.cn

Though these studies achieve signiﬁcant speed-up over
LIBSVM, they have two major limitations. First, they still
do not make efﬁcient use of GPUs. We conducted experiments using the three existing GPU SVM implementations
on a mid-range and a high-end GPU, and the results on the
mid-range GPU are almost the same as those on the high-end
GPU. Second, they only support either SVC or SVR. We
summarize the functionalities of existing SVM implementations. Existing GPU SVM implementations are mainly for
binary SVM classiﬁcation, and do not support multi-class
classiﬁcation or regression problems. These drawbacks result
in users’ unwillingness to use SVMs for their applications.
In this work, we propose a simple and effective parallel
SVM training algorithm on GPUs. Our initial experimental
results show that our algorithm outperforms existing ones.
To help users easily apply GPU SVMs to their applications,
we plan to develop an easy-to-use SVM library for GPUs,
supporting multi-class SVMs, SVM regression, one-class
SVM, cross-validation and various programming interfaces
like Python, R and MATLAB.

Abstract
Support Vector Machines (SVMs) are popular for many machine learning tasks. With rapid growth of dataset size, the
high cost of training limits the wide use of SVMs. Several
SVM implementations on GPUs have been proposed to accelerate SVMs. However, they support only classiﬁcation (SVC)
or regression (SVR). In this work, we propose a simple and
effective SVM training algorithm on GPUs which can be used
for SVC, SVR and one-class SVM. Initial experiments show
that our implementation outperforms existing ones. We are in
the process of encapsulating our algorithm into an easy-to-use
library which has Python, R and MATLAB interfaces.

Introduction
Support Vector Machines (SVMs) show great generalization
performance in various machine learning tasks including
classiﬁcation (SVC), regression (SVR) and distribution estimation (one-class SVM). Sequential Minimal Optimization
(SMO) is the most popular algorithm to train SVMs. First
proposed by Platt (1999), and improved by Fan et al. (2005),
SMO has been implemented in the widely used library LIBSVM (Chang and Lin 2011), making SVMs into a practical algorithm. With rapid growth of dataset size, training SVMs by
simply using LIBSVM takes signiﬁcant amount of time (e.g.
days or weeks). Besides, in order to choose hyper-parameters
for best performance, SVMs are often trained hundreds of
times by using grid-search and cross-validation. The high
training cost limits the wide use of SVMs.
To accelerate SVMs, many researchers have applied distributed and parallel techniques to SVMs. Approximation
techniques have to be used for distributed SVM training,
because training SVMs needs to access the whole training
data and the communication cost is extremely high. So majority of the existing studies focus on how to train SVMs
on a single machine efﬁciently. Graphic Processing Units
(GPUs) are probably the best hardware to accelerate SVMs.
Catanzaro (2008) ﬁrst proposed to train SVMs by using SMO
on GPUs. Cotter (2011) used a clustering method to tailor
SMO on GPUs for better memory coalescing access. Vanek
(2017) pointed out the limited bandwith of modern GPUs,
and implemented OHD-SVM tailored for GPUs.

Support Vector Machine
An instance xi is attached with label yi ∈ {+1, −1}. n is
the number of instances. Training SVMs is to solve a dual
optimization problem deﬁned by α, where αi denotes the
weight of xi , K(xi , xj ) is a kernel value computed from a
kernel function. The kernel values of all the training instances
form a kernel matrix. Since the kernel matrix is too large to ﬁt
in memory, SMO-type algorithms iteratively select a working
set W consisting of some instances to optimize.

Technical Challenges
Calculation of kernel value is the most computational expensive part in SVM training. Caching techniques are commonly
used to avoid repeat kernel value calculation (Catanzaro,
Sundaram, and Keutzer 2008; Chang and Lin 2011). They
store individual rows of kernel matrix in cache for reusing.
However, on GPUs, we ﬁnd that iteratively calculating individual rows has low GPU utilization. With a large working
set, we can calculate multiple rows of kernel matrix at one
time, which is efﬁcient on GPUs. However, using a large
working set with the ﬁrst-order heuristic (Joachims 1998;
Cotter, Srebro, and Keshet 2011) brings much more sub-

∗

Jian Chen is the corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8157

