The Twenty-Third AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium

Sequential Decision Making in Artiﬁcial Musical Intelligence
Elad Liebman
Supervisor: Prof. Peter Stone
University of Texas at Austin
Computer Science Department
Austin, TX
eladlieb@cs.utexas.edu

be properly framed as sequential decision-making problems,
and propose novel solutions that bring us closer to the creation of such complete musical agents.

Abstract
My main research motivation is to develop complete autonomous agents that interact with people socially. For an
agent to be social with respect to humans, it needs to be able
to parse and process the human cultural experience. That in
itself gives rise to many fascinating learning problems. Music, as a general target domain, serves as an excellent testbed
for these research ideas. Musical skills involve extremely advanced knowledge representation and problem solving tools.
Creating agents that can interact richly with people in the music domain is a challenge that will advance social agents research and contribute important and broadly applicable AI
knowledge. This belief is fueled not just by my background
in computer science and artiﬁcial intelligence, but also by my
deep passion for music as well as my extensive musical training. One key aspect of musical intelligence which hasn’t been
sufﬁciently studied is that of sequential decision-making. My
thesis strives to answer the following question: How can a sequential decision making perspective guide us in the creation of better music agents, and social agents in general?
More speciﬁcally, this thesis focuses on two aspects of musical intelligence: music recommendation and multiagent interaction in the context of music.

Completed Work
As part of my current research toward the goal of large scale
autonomous music agents, I have tackled several closelyrelated issues. I will now brieﬂy survey two of them, which
I consider completed work.

Autonomous Playlist Generation through
Reinforcement Learning
A speciﬁc domain in which intelligent agents, music analysis, and preference elicitation connect is in the construction
of musical recommender systems. To the best of my knowledge, most of these systems focus on predicting the preference of individual songs independently based on a learned
model of a listener (see (Barrington, Oda, and Lanckriet
2009; Kreitz and Niemela 2010), for example). However, a
relatively well known fact in the subﬁeld of cognitive neuroscience which studies music cognition is that music is experienced in temporal context and in sequence. In two recent
publications (Liebman, Saar-Tsechansky, and Stone 2015;
Liebman et al. 2017), we focus on learning to adaptively
build music playlists based on user interaction. We employ a
reinforcement learning approach to music recommendation
that does not recommend songs individually but rather song
sequences based on a learned model of preferences for both
individual songs and song transitions. To reduce exploration
time, the algorithm actively initializes its model based on
user feedback. The resulting agent has been tested on human
participants and been shown to increase the expected enjoyment of listeners from the selected song sequence, compared to a greedy approach that only tries to select individual
songs.

Introduction
In recent years, the application of algorithmic tools in cultural domains has become increasingly prevalent. Focusing
on music, computers have accompanied both the creation
and the analysis of music almost since they ﬁrst came into
existence. Over the last decade, many researchers have applied computational tools to carry out tasks such as genre
identiﬁcation (Burred and Lerch 2003; McKay and Fujinaga 2004), music summarization (Dubnov, McAdams, and
Reynolds 2006), music database querying (Lu et al. 2001)
and melodic segmentation (Pearce, Müllensiefen, and Wiggins 2008). My main long-term goal is the creation of largescale autonomous musical agents, i.e., computational entities capable of high level musical reasoning. To achieve this
goal, several crucial sub-problems must be dealt with. A
key insight, which has not been sufﬁciently studied, is the
roll of sequential decision-making and reasoning in the development of such musical agents. In my thesis, I am exploring how several key aspects of musical intelligence can

Learning to Model Responses to Musical Stimuli
and Musical Preferences
One of the key issues in building a successful social agent
with respect to music is its ability to model and predict human responses to musical cues. This motivation is central
to a current research effort, in which we study how different
music stimuli affect human decision making. To this end, we

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8022

