The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Predicting Links in Plant-Pollinator Interaction Networks
Using Latent Factor Models with Implicit Feedback
1

Eugene Seo,1 Rebecca A. Hutchinson1,2

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science; 2 Dept. of Fisheries and Wildlife
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97331
{seoe,rah}@oregonstate.edu
Data on pollination networks is collected through visual
ﬁeld observations by recording every visit from a pollinator to a plant as a link between the species. These records
are necessarily incomplete since it is impossible to detect
every interaction that occurs. Current work studying plantpollinator systems relies primarily on descriptive statistics of
the structure of observed networks (e.g. connectance, nestedness (Pawar 2014; Bascompte et al. 2003)), despite evidence that these statistics are affected by incomplete sampling of the networks (Fründ, Mccann, and Williams 2016;
Nielsen and Bascompte 2007). Models that estimate the true
network from imperfect observations could allow scientists a
more complete view of these systems in studies of the structure and function of pollination networks.
In this paper, we study a set of models for predicting the
interactions in pollination networks. We explore network
models developed in the context of recommendation systems, which are generally formulated with users and items.
One of the most popular examples is the Netﬂix challenge
dataset, which shows users’ ratings for movies that they have
watched (Bell and Koren 2007). In the analogy to pollination networks, the users are the pollinator species (instead of
movie watchers, shoppers, etc.) and the items are the plant
species (instead of movies, products, etc.). Since observers
are unable to detect every interaction in the ﬁeld, we seek
to ‘recommend’ which plants may be of interest to which
pollinators.
Analyses of movie rating matrices and plant-pollinator
interaction networks are similar in that they both aim to
capture underlying mechanisms such as preferences. These
preferences can determine relationships between two disjoint sets of entities. Both datasets can be represented as bipartite graphs with links between two types of nodes. Based
on the links of the graph, both domains try to predict the unobserved hidden links and the most likely links to appear by
solving a recommendation problem.
Although movie recommendation and pollination domains share some structure and goals, there are also important differences. First, the movie ratings are provided by active users providing explicit feedback, while the pollination
data are recorded by observers. As such, the pollination data
are more similar to recommendation system domains that
use implicit feedback, like the amount of time watching a
television program or the number of times a crowdsourc-

Abstract
Plant-pollinator interaction networks are bipartite networks
representing the mutualistic interactions between a set of
plant species and a set of pollinator species. Data on these networks are collected by ﬁeld biologists, who count visits from
pollinators to ﬂowers. Ecologists study the structure and function of these networks for scientiﬁc, conservation, and agricultural purposes. However, little research has been done to
understand the underlying mechanisms that determine pairwise interactions or to predict new links from networks describing the species community. This paper explores the use
of latent factor models to predict interactions that will occur
in new contexts (e.g. a different distribution of the set of plant
species) based on an observed network. The analysis draws
on algorithms and evaluation strategies developed for recommendation systems and introduces them to this new domain.
The matrix factorization methods compare favorably against
several baselines on a pollination dataset collected in montane meadows over several years. Incorporating both positive
and negative implicit feedback into the matrix factorization
methods is particularly promising.

Introduction
Animal pollinators provide essential ecosystem services
for agriculture (Bailes et al. 2015). While concerns about
honeybee colony collapse receive more media attention,
many wild pollinator species also play an important role in
this system, and their populations are declining (Tylianakis
2013). Pollination systems can be represented by bipartite networks of interactions between species of two types:
plants and pollinators. Nodes in the network correspond to
species, and the links between them indicate how frequently
the pollinator species visits the plant species; a small example is presented in Figure 11 . The scientiﬁc questions
about pollination systems revolve around the topological
structure of these networks and their resilience to perturbations like species extinctions, invasive species, and temporal
shifts in ﬂowering and ﬂying periods due to climate change
(Pawar 2014; Burkle and Alarcón 2011; Olesen et al. 2007;
Memmott, Waser, and Price 2004).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Photos from www.discoverlife.org, Wikipedia, Hartmut
Wisch, Greg Lief, www.joycreek.com, science.halleyhosting.com,
Robert Pavlis.

808

