The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Uniﬁed Implicit Dialog Framework for Conversational Commerce
Song Feng, R. Chulaka Gunasekara, Sunil Shashidhara,
Kshitij P. Fadnis, Lazaros C. Polymenakos
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY, USA 10598

and share common building blocks across various domains.
We assume that a domain knowledge base is available, or
can be obtained from the corresponding commercial website. Some of the schema of such websites are illustrated
at schema.org. The combination of the domain knowledge
base, the permitted queries to the knowledge base, and the
application logic can be applied to infer the dialog activities. In particular, we ﬁrst scan the knowledge base and build
a central knowledge representation that can semantically
ground multiple dialog subtasks, such as intent labeling,
state tracking, and issuing API calls to the domain database.
The resulting framework is end-to-end modular and trainable, in line with recently proposed approaches for building
conversational agents (rasa.ai 2017), (Truong, Parthasarathi,
and Pineau 2017). Those frameworks typically require application developers to code their own dialog logic and provide
the training data for dialog subtasks (rasa.ai 2017). However,
both the design of dialog management, and annotating the
chat data are costly. Our framework is integrated with a dialog simulating module that allows the conversational agent
to take advantage of the expertise of a wide variety of stakeholders: end users, domain experts, and human annotators.
The module is automatically updated based on the central
knowledge representation. It aims to collect targeted feedback that can be directly consumed by the learning modules
for continuous improvement of the conversational systems.
We demonstrate the proposed framework on two different
domains: apartment renting in NYC and restaurant ﬁnding.

Abstract
We propose a uniﬁed Implicit Dialog framework for goaloriented, information seeking tasks of Conversational Commerce applications. It aims to enable the dialog interactions
with domain data without replying on the explicitly encoded
rules but utilizing the underlying data representation to build
the components required for the interactions, which we refer as Implicit Dialog in this work. The proposed framework
consists of a pipeline of End-to-End trainable modules. It
generates a centralized knowledge representation to semantically ground multiple sub-modules. The framework is also
integrated with an associated set of tools to gather end users’
input for continuous improvement of the system. This framework is designed to facilitate fast development of conversational systems by identifying the components and the data
that can be adapted and reused across many end-user applications. We demonstrate our approach by creating conversational agents for several independent domains.

Introduction
The demands for accessing existing commercial services
through chat applications, a.k.a, Conversational Commerce
(CC), are increasing rapidly. It is largely pertaining to exchanging information with end users based on the underlying knowledge base of domain services (e.g., car insurance
and apartment renting). However, interacting with a knowledge base to fulﬁll tasks can become very challenging. The
developers still have to deal with numerous hand-crafted
query rules that are fused with various statistical components
repetitively for every single domain. One of the signiﬁcant
yet overlooked drawbacks is the tangling of generic and domain speciﬁc knowledge, which makes it nearly impossible
in practice to transfer or adapt the existing CC applications
to new domains. To address these challenges, we propose a
uniﬁed Implicit Dialog framework for goal-oriented,
information seeking conversation systems. It aims to enable
the dialog interactions with domain data without replying on
the explicitly encoded rules but utilizing the underlying data
representation to build the components required for the interactions. The framework is designed for facilitating domainagnostic, fast prototyping of the interactive search of a domain; more importantly enabling the developers to identify

System Overview
As depicted in Figure 1, the proposed framework includes
several core modules such as Natural Language Understanding (intent labeler), Inference (state tracker and query generator), a prompt generator and a dialog environment simulator for data collections. The input of these components are
all initialized by the relevant part of the Central Knowledge
Representation.

Central Knowledge Representation
We introduce a Central Knowledge Representation (CKR),
generated based on the domain knowledge base. It covers
the domain entities (e.g., “apartment), a set of semantic relations “has-attribute between the entities. In
particular, CKR provides additional generic characteristics

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8200

