The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Open-World Knowledge
Graph Completion
Baoxu Shi, Tim Weninger
University of Notre Dame
{bshi,tweninge}@nd.edu

(or probability) of relationships. This task is often called
Knowledge Graph Completion (KGC). Continuing the example from above, suppose the relationship capitalOf is
missing between Indianapolis and Indiana; the KGC task
might predict this missing relationship based on the topological similarity between this part of the KG and the part
containing Springﬁeld and Illinois.
Progress in vector embeddings originating with word2vec
has produced major advancements in the KGC task. Typical
embedding-based KGC algorithms like TransE (Bordes et
al. 2013) and others learn low-dimensional representations
(i.e., embeddings) for entities and relationships using topological features. These models are able to predict the existence of missing relationships thereby “completing” the KG.
Existing KGC models implicitly operate under the
Closed-World Assumption (Reiter 1978) in which all entities and relationships in the KG cannot be changed – only
discovered. We formally deﬁne the Closed-word KGC task
as follows:

Abstract
Knowledge Graphs (KGs) have been applied to many tasks
including Web search, link prediction, recommendation, natural language processing, and entity linking. However, most
KGs are far from complete and are growing at a rapid pace.
To address these problems, Knowledge Graph Completion
(KGC) has been proposed to improve KGs by ﬁlling in its
missing connections. Unlike existing methods which hold a
closed-world assumption, i.e., where KGs are ﬁxed and new
entities cannot be easily added, in the present work we relax
this assumption and propose a new open-world KGC task.
As a ﬁrst attempt to solve this task we introduce an openworld KGC model called ConMask. This model learns embeddings of the entity’s name and parts of its text-description
to connect unseen entities to the KG. To mitigate the presence of noisy text descriptions, ConMask uses a relationshipdependent content masking to extract relevant snippets and
then trains a fully convolutional neural network to fuse the extracted snippets with entities in the KG. Experiments on large
data sets, both old and new, show that ConMask performs
well in the open-world KGC task and even outperforms existing KGC models on the standard closed-world KGC task.

Deﬁnition 1 Given an incomplete Knowledge Graph G =
(E, R, T), where E, R, and T are the entity set, relationship set, and triple set respectively, Closed-World Knowledge Graph Completion completes G by ﬁnding a set of
missing triples T = {h, r, t|h ∈ E, r ∈ R, t ∈
E, h, r, t ∈
/ T} in the incomplete Knowledge Graph G.

Introduction
Knowledge Graphs (KGs) are a special type of information
network that represents knowledge using RDF-style triples
h, r, t, where h represents some head entity and r represents some relationship that connects h to some tail entity t. In this formalism a statement like “Springﬁeld is
the capital of Illinois” can be represented as Springﬁeld,
capitalOf, Illinois. Recently, a variety of KGs, such as
DBPedia (Lehmann et al. 2015), and ConceptNet (Speer,
Chin, and Havasi 2017), have been curated in the service
of fact checking (Shi and Weninger 2016), question answering (Lukovnikov et al. 2017), entity linking (Hachey et al.
2013), and for many other tasks (Nickel et al. 2016). Despite
their usefulness and popularity, KGs are often noisy and incomplete. For example, DBPedia, which is generated from
Wikipedia’s infoboxes, contains 4.6 million entities, but half
of these entities contain less than 5 relationships.
Based on this observation, researchers aim to improve the
accuracy and reliability of KGs by predicting the existence

Closed-world KGC models heavily rely on the connectivity of the existing KG and are best able to predict relationships between existing, well-connected entities. Unfortunately, because of their strict reliance on the connectivity
of the existing KG, closed-world KGC models are unable to
predict the relationships of poorly connected or new entities.
Therefore, we assess that closed-world KGC is most suitable
for ﬁxed or slowly evolving KGs.
However, most real-world KGs evolve quickly with new
entities and relationships being added by the minute. For example, in the 6 months between DBPedia’s October 2015
release and its April 2016 release 36, 340 new English entities were added – a rate of 200 new entities per day. Recall
that DBPedia merely tracks changes to Wikipedia infoboxes,
so these updates do not include newly added articles without
valid infobox data. Because of the accelerated growth of online information, repeatedly re-training closed-world models
every day (or hour) has become impractical.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1957

