The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Efﬁcient-UCBV: An Almost Optimal Algorithm Using Variance Estimates
Subhojyoti Mukherjee,1 K. P. Naveen,2 Nandan Sudarsanam,3,4 Balaraman Ravindran1,4
1

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Tirupati
3
Department of Management Studies, Indian Institute of Technology Madras
4
Robert Bosch Centre for Data Science and AI (RBC-DSAI), Indian Institute of Technology Madras
1
subho@cse.iitm.ac.in, 2 naveenkp@iittp.ac.in, 3 nandan@iitm.ac.in, 4 ravi@cse.iitm.ac.in

stochastic bandit problem is to minimize the cumulative regret, which is deﬁned as follows:

Abstract
We propose a novel variant of the UCB algorithm (referred to
as Efﬁcient-UCB-Variance (EUCBV)) for minimizing cumulative regret in the stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) setting. EUCBV incorporates the arm elimination strategy proposed in UCB-Improved (Auer and Ortner 2010), while taking into account the variance estimates to compute the arms’
conﬁdence bounds, similar to UCBV (Audibert, Munos, and
Szepesvári 2009). Through a theoretical analysis we establish
 a gap-dependent regret bound of
 that EUCBV incurs
O

2
log(T Δ2 /K)
Kσmax
Δ

RT = r ∗ T −

ri zi (T ),

i=1

where T is the number of timesteps, and zi (T ) is the number
of times the algorithm has chosen arm i up to timestep T .
The expected regret of an algorithm after T timesteps can
be written as,

after T trials, where Δ is the min-

E[RT ] =

imal gap between optimal and sub-optimal arms; the above
bound is an improvement over that of existing state-of-theart UCB algorithms (such as UCB1, UCB-Improved, UCBV,
MOSS). Further,
incurs a gap-independent regret
√ EUCBV

bound of O KT which is an improvement over that of
UCB1, UCBV and UCB-Improved, while being comparable with that of MOSS and OCUCB. Through an extensive
numerical study we show that EUCBV signiﬁcantly outperforms the popular UCB variants (like MOSS, OCUCB, etc.)
as well as Thompson sampling and Bayes-UCB algorithms.

K


E[zi (T )]Δi ,

i=1

where Δi = r∗ − ri is the gap between the means of the
optimal arm and the i-th arm.
In recent years the MAB setting has garnered extensive
popularity because of its simple learning model and its practical applications in a wide-range of industries, including,
but not limited to, mobile channel allocations, online advertising and computer simulation games.

1.1

1

K


Related Work

Bandit problems have been extensively studied in several
earlier works such as Thompson (1933), Robbins (1952)
and Lai and Robbins (1985). Lai and Robbins (1985) established an asymptotic lower bound for the cumulative regret. Over the years stochastic MABs have seen several algorithms with strong regret guarantees. For further reference an interested reader can look into Bubeck and CesaBianchi (2012). The upper conﬁdence bound algorithms
balance the exploration-exploitation dilemma by linking
the uncertainty in estimate of an arm with the number of
times an arm is pulled, and therefore ensuring sufﬁcient
exploration. One of the earliest among these algorithms
is UCB1 (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002),
 which

T
has a gap-dependent regret upper bound of O K log
,
Δ
where Δ = mini:Δi >0 Δi . This result is asymptotically
order-optimal for the class of distributions considered. But,
the worst case gap-independent
regret bound of UCB1 is

√
found to be O KT log T . In the later work of Audibert and Bubeck (2009), the authors propose the MOSS algorithm and showed that theworst case
 gap-independent re√
KT which improves upon
gret bound of MOSS is O

Introduction

In this paper, we deal with the stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) setting. In its classical form, stochastic MABs
represent a sequential learning problem where a learner is
exposed to a ﬁnite set of actions (or arms) and needs to
choose one of the actions at each timestep. After choosing
(or pulling) an arm the learner receives a reward, which is
conceptualized as an independent random draw from stationary distribution associated with the selected arm. The
mean of the reward distribution associated with an arm i
is denoted by ri whereas the mean of the reward distribution of the optimal arm ∗ is denoted by r∗ such that
ri < r∗ , ∀i ∈ A, where A is the set of arms such that
|A| = K. With this formulation the learner faces the task
of balancing exploitation and exploration. In other words,
should the learner pull the arm which currently has the best
known estimates or explore arms more thoroughly to ensure
that a correct decision is being made. The objective in the
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6417

