The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

CA-RNN: Using Context-Aligned Recurrent Neural
Networks for Modeling Sentence Similarity
1

2

Qin Chen,1 Qinmin Hu,1 Jimmy Xiangji Huang,2 Liang He1

Department of Computer Science & Technology, East China Normal University, China
Information Retrieval & Knowledge Management Research Lab, York University, Canada
qchen@ica.stc.sh.cn, {qmhu, lhe}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, jhuang@yorku.ca

salient information for better sentence representations, the
attention based RNN models that produce a weight for each
hidden state start to arouse more interest. (Santos et al. 2016)
proposed the attentive pooling networks, which incorporated
the word-by-word interactions for the attentive sentence representations. In (Tan et al. 2015), the representation of the
question was utilized for the attentive weight generation for
the answer.
To the best of our knowledge, most attention based RNNs
focus on generating the attentive weights after obtaining all
the hidden states, while the contextual information from the
other sentence is not well studied during the internal hidden state generation (Santos et al. 2016; Tan et al. 2015;
Hermann et al. 2015). Noting that the inner activation units
in RNN controls the information ﬂow over a sentence,
(Wang, Liu, and Zhao 2016) proposed an IARNN-GATE
model, which incorporated the question representation into
the active gates to inﬂuence the hidden state generation for
the answer. However, it utilized all the information of the
question sentence, which would bring noises if the current
hidden state was not relevant to the question. To alleviate
this problem, (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014) presented
an alignment model, which measured how well the input at
each position matched the output for neural machine translation. Whereas, the alignment model in fact implemented
the attention mechanism, and also leveraged all the input
information to generate the output. Moreover, it is still unknown how to integrate the alignment information into RNN
for sentence similarity modeling.
In this paper, we propose a context-aligned RNN (CARNN) model, where the context information of the aligned
words is incorporated into the hidden state generation. To be
speciﬁc, we ﬁrst perform word alignment detection to identify the aligned words that are potentially relevant in a sentence pair. Then, a context alignment gating mechanism is
presented and embedded into our model, which consists of
two steps, namely relevance measurement and context absorption. The relevance measurement step aims to determine
how much context can be absorbed, by measuring the relevance between the other sentence and the current hidden
state. In the context absorption step, the context information of the aligned words in the other sentence is absorbed
for the current hidden state generation. It is worth noting
that the absorbed context will be naturally propagated across

Abstract
The recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have shown good performance for sentence similarity modeling in recent years.
Most RNNs focus on modeling the hidden states based on
the current sentence, while the context information from the
other sentence is not well investigated during the hidden state
generation. In this paper, we propose a context-aligned RNN
(CA-RNN) model, which incorporates the contextual information of the aligned words in a sentence pair for the inner
hidden state generation. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst perform word
alignment detection to identify the aligned words in the two
sentences. Then, we present a context alignment gating mechanism and embed it into our model to automatically absorb
the aligned words’ context for the hidden state update. Experiments on three benchmark datasets, namely TREC-QA and
WikiQA for answer selection and MSRP for paraphrase identiﬁcation, show the great advantages of our proposed model.
In particular, we achieve the new state-of-the-art performance
on TREC-QA and WikiQA. Furthermore, our model is comparable to if not better than the recent neural network based
approaches on MSRP.

Introduction and Motivation
Sentence similarity modeling plays an important role in various Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks, such as answer selection and paraphrase identiﬁcation. For the answer
selection task, all the candidate answers are ranked by the
sentence similarity with the given question (Wang, Smith,
and Mitamura 2007; Yang, Yih, and Meek 2015). As to paraphrase identiﬁcation, sentence similarity is used to determine whether two sentences have the same meaning (Yin
and Schütze 2015; He, Gimpel, and Lin 2015).
Most traditional methods rely on the feature engineering
and linguistic tools, which are labour consuming and prone
to the errors of NLP tools such as dependency parsing (Yih
et al. 2013; Wan et al. 2006). Recently, the recurrent neural
network (RNN) based approaches have attracted more attention due to the good performance and less human interventions. Speciﬁcally, a sequential hidden states were generated
and aggregated for each sentence with RNN, and the similarity score was calculated according to the hidden representations (Mueller and Thyagarajan 2016). To capture the
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

265

