The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Empower Sequence Labeling with
Task-Aware Neural Language Model
†

Liyuan Liu,† Jingbo Shang,† Xiang Ren,
Frank F. Xu,‡ Huan Gui, Jian Peng,† Jiawei Han†

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, {ll2, shang7, jianpeng, hanj}@illinois.edu

University of Southern California, xiangren@usc.edu
‡
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, frankxu@sjtu.edu.cn

Facebook, huangui@fb.com
could be difﬁcult to apply them to new tasks or shift to
new domains. To overcome this drawback, neural networks
(NNs) have been proposed to automatically extract features
during model learning. Nevertheless, considering the overwhelming number of parameters in NNs and the relatively
small size of most sequence labeling corpus, annotations
alone may not be sufﬁcient to train complicated models. So,
guiding the learning process with extra knowledge could be
a wise choice.
Accordingly, transfer learning and multi-task learning
have been proposed to incorporate such knowledge. For example, NER can be improved by jointly conducting other related tasks like entity linking or chunking (Luo et al. 2015;
Peng and Dredze 2016). After all, these approaches would
require additional supervision on related tasks, which might
be hard to get, or not even existent for low-resource languages or special domains.
Alternatively, abundant knowledge can be extracted from
raw texts, and enhance a variety of tasks. Word embedding
techniques represent words in a continuous space (Mikolov
et al. 2013; Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014) and
retain the semantic relations among words. Consequently,
integrating these embeddings could be beneﬁcial to many
tasks (Liu et al. 2017; Lample et al. 2016). Nonetheless,
most embedding methods take a word as a basic unit,
thus only obtaining word-level knowledge, while character
awareness is also crucial and highly valued in most state-ofthe-art NN models.
Only recently, character-level knowledge has been leveraged and empirically veriﬁed to be helpful in numerous sequence labeling tasks (Peters et al. 2017; Rei 2017). Directly adopting pre-trained language models, character-level
knowledge can be integrated as context embeddings and
demonstrate its potential to achieve the state-of-the-art (Peters et al. 2017). However, the knowledge extracted through
pre-training is not task-speciﬁc, thus containing a large irrelevant portion. So, this approach would require a bigger
model, external corpus and longer training. For example,
one of its language models was trained on 32 GPUs for more
than half a month, which is unrealistic in many situations.
In this paper, we propose an effective sequence labeling
framework, LM-LSTM-CRF, which leverages both wordlevel and character-level knowledge in an efﬁcient way. For
character-level knowledge, we incorporate a neural language

Abstract
Linguistic sequence labeling is a general approach encompassing a variety of problems, such as part-of-speech tagging and named entity recognition. Recent advances in neural networks (NNs) make it possible to build reliable models without handcrafted features. However, in many cases, it
is hard to obtain sufﬁcient annotations to train these models. In this study, we develop a neural framework to extract
knowledge from raw texts and empower the sequence labeling task. Besides word-level knowledge contained in pretrained word embeddings, character-aware neural language
models are incorporated to extract character-level knowledge.
Transfer learning techniques are further adopted to mediate
different components and guide the language model towards
the key knowledge. Comparing to previous methods, these
task-speciﬁc knowledge allows us to adopt a more concise
model and conduct more efﬁcient training. Different from
most transfer learning methods, the proposed framework does
not rely on any additional supervision. It extracts knowledge
from self-contained order information of training sequences.
Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of leveraging character-level knowledge and
the efﬁciency of co-training. For example, on the CoNLL03
NER task, model training completes in about 6 hours on a
single GPU, reaching F1 score of 91.71±0.10 without using
any extra annotations.

Introduction
Linguistic sequence labeling is a fundamental framework.
It has been applied to a variety of tasks including part-ofspeech (POS) tagging, noun phrase chunking and named entity recognition (NER) (Ma and Hovy 2016; Sha and Pereira
2003). These tasks play a vital role in natural language
understanding and fulﬁll lots of downstream applications,
such as relation extraction, syntactic parsing, and entity linking (Liu et al. 2017; Luo et al. 2015).
Traditional methods employed machine learning models
like Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) and Conditional Random Fields (CRFs), and have achieved relatively high performance. However, these methods have a heavy reliance on
handcrafted features (e.g., whether a word is capitalized) and
language-speciﬁc resources (e.g., gazetteers). Therefore, it
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5253

