The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Computation Error Analysis of Block Floating Point Arithmetic
Oriented Convolution Neural Network Accelerator Design
1

Zhourui Song,1 Zhenyu Liu,2 Dongsheng Wang2
School of Cyberspace Security, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, 100876, China
2
RIIT, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
Email: songzr@bupt.edu.cn liuzhenyu73@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn wds@tsinghua.edu.cn

off-chip SDRAM. The frequent accesses to these datum induces no-trivial bandwidth requirements. Secondly, as the
hardwired ﬂoating-point modules are not always equipped
in FPGA, employing the ﬂoating point operations in FPGA
CNN accelerator degrades both of the throughput and the
energy efﬁciency severely.
In this paper, we proposed a block ﬂoating point (BFP)
based convolution implementation. BFP representation can
be attributed as a special case of ﬂoating point representation
where numbers within a block share a common exponent.
Hence, BFP possesses the high dynamic range of ﬂoating
point representation as it has exponent part. On the other
hand, the computation complexity of two BFP blocks is reduced to the degree of integer representation. Experiments
in our paper revealed that even with 7-bit mantissa, we can
sacriﬁce less than 0.3% accuracy loss when implementing
the large scale network models, such as VGG-16(Simonyan
and Zisserman 2014), ResNet-18, ResNet-50(He et al. 2016)
and GoogLeNet(Szegedy et al. 2015). It should be noted
that, no retraining is required in our experiments. That is
the original models can be deployed in our BFP based accelerator directly. Finally, this paper proposed an analytical
model to derive the NSR upper bound of the ﬁnite wordlength BFP arithmetics, which supports the veriﬁcation of
hardwired CNN accelerator design efﬁciently .
The rest of this paper is organized as follow. Section 2
presented related works. Section 3 discussed the details of
applying BFP in CNNs. Section 4 expounded the theoretical NSR model of BFP. Section 5 veriﬁed the performance
of BFP oriented CNN on GoogLeNet, VGG-16, ResNet-18,
ResNet-50, mnist and cifar10. We also illustrated the efﬁciency of our NSR model by using VGG-16 network. Section 6 summarized the whole paper.

Abstract
The heavy burdens of computation and off-chip trafﬁc impede deploying the large scale convolution neural network
on embedded platforms. As CNN is attributed to the strong
endurance to computation errors, employing block ﬂoating
point (BFP) arithmetics in CNN accelerators could save the
hardware cost and data trafﬁcs efﬁciently, while maintaining
the classiﬁcation accuracy. In this paper, we verify the effects
of word width deﬁnitions in BFP to the CNN performance
without retraining. Several typical CNN models, including
VGG16, ResNet-18, ResNet-50 and GoogLeNet, were tested
in this paper. Experiments revealed that 8-bit mantissa, including sign bit, in BFP representation merely induced less
than 0.3% accuracy loss. In addition, we investigate the computational errors in theory and develop the noise-to-signal ratio (NSR) upper bound, which provides the promising guidance for BFP based CNN engine design.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved stateof-art performance in many artiﬁcial intelligence tasks,
especially in image recognition (Ciregan, Meier, and
Schmidhuber 2012) (Russakovsky et al. 2015b), nature
language processing(Kim 2014)(Goldberg 2016), strategic
planning(Silver et al. 2016), etc. This success is partially
facilitated by the advance of computation infrastructure.
With GPU clusters, large-scale CNNs can be deployed
eventhough they are attributed as memory-and-computationintensive and resource-consuming(Li et al. 2016). However,
when deploying CNNs in data center, GPU clusters is not
the ﬁrst preference because of the low power efﬁciency of
GPU. Therefore, promoting energy efﬁciency became one
prominent target in CNN accelerator design. Researchers
have been committed to exploring how to deploy CNNs on
FPGAs (Ovtcharov et al. 2015) , or designing AISCs(Jouppi
et al. 2017), as they prossesses higher energy efﬁciency due
to their speciﬁc architecture.
To transplant CNNs on FPGA, two serious issues, i.e.,
off-chip trafﬁc bottleneck and huge amount of ﬂoating-point
arithmetics overhead, need to be addressed. The off-chip
trafﬁc stems from that, for large scale networks, the feature maps and the network parameters must be stored in the

2

Related Works

Methods like data reusing, compression and trimming have
been developed to meet the bandwidth requirement of
FPGA. (Chen et al. 2017) (Karam et al. 2017) proposed a
row stationary data ﬂow on 168 processing elements that improve the energy efﬁciency by reusing data locally. (Zhang et
al. 2015) develop the rooﬂine model to analyze the computation and memory requirements of a speciﬁed CNN model,
and then to identify the optimal solution on the provided
FPGA platform. Sparsifying CNN model’s parameters is an-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

816

