The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Geographic Differential Privacy for
Mobile Crowd Coverage Maximization
Leye Wang,1 Gehua Qin,2 Dingqi Yang,3 Xiao Han,4 Xiaojuan Ma1
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
University of Fribourg, 4 Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
wly@cse.ust.hk, qingehua@gmail.com, dingqi@exascale.info, xiaohan@mail.shufe.edu.cn, mxj@cse.ust.hk

users’ historical mobility traces, which may seriously compromise user privacy. For example, users’ exposed location
data may reveal sensitive information about their identities
and social relationships (Cho, Myers, and Leskovec 2011;
Rossi et al. 2015). Despite the importance of location privacy,
as far as we know, there is little research effort combining
location privacy, mobility proﬁling, and crowd coverage maximization up to date.
To ﬁll this gap, this paper aims to explore how to protect
the crowds’ location privacy, while still optimizing their expected coverage of a set of locations. To achieve this goal, we
propose a mobile crowd coverage maximization framework
with a rigorous privacy protection scheme — geographic
differential privacy (Andrés et al. 2013). A geographic differential privacy policy obfuscates a user’s actual location
to another with carefully designed probabilities, such that
adversaries, regardless of their prior knowledge, can learn
little about the user’s true location after observing the obfuscated locations. However, with differential privacy protection,
crowd coverage maximization can only be performed based
on the obfuscated (inaccurate) locations, which leads to inevitable loss of the quality of the selected users. Therefore,
we propose a method to generate the optimal location obfuscation policy which satisﬁes geographic differential privacy
while minimizing such loss.
In summary, this paper has the following contributions:
(1) To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work
studying the mobile crowd coverage maximization problem
with location privacy protection.
(2) In our approach, users only need to upload one of
their frequently visited locations, and more importantly, the
uploaded location is obfuscated using the rigorous privacy
policy — geographic differential privacy. We further formulate an optimization problem to obtain the optimal obfuscation policy that can maximize the expected future crowd
coverage over a set of locations under a guaranteed level of
differential privacy protection. As the optimization problem
is non-convex, we ﬁrst mathematically analyze the scenario
when only one location needs to cover and then derive an
optimal solution. Then, we extend this setting to the multilocation coverage scenario and propose a practical algorithm
to obtain the optimal obfuscation policy.
(3) Experiments on real human mobility datasets verify
that, by selecting the same number of users under the same

Abstract
For real-world mobile applications such as location-based
advertising and spatial crowdsourcing, a key to success is targeting mobile users that can maximally cover certain locations
in a future period. To ﬁnd an optimal group of users, existing methods often require information about users’ mobility
history, which may cause privacy breaches. In this paper, we
propose a method to maximize mobile crowd’s future location coverage under a guaranteed location privacy protection
scheme. In our approach, users only need to upload one of
their frequently visited locations, and more importantly, the
uploaded location is obfuscated using a geographic differential privacy policy. We propose both analytic and practical
solutions to this problem. Experiments on real user mobility
datasets show that our method signiﬁcantly outperforms the
state-of-the-art geographic differential privacy methods by
achieving a higher coverage under the same level of privacy
protection.

Introduction
Crowd coverage maximization is a classical problem in mobile computing: how to select m users from a candidate
pool to maximize the probability of covering a set of target locations in a coming time period (e.g., one day or one
week). This problem and its variants have a wide spectrum of
applications in location-based advertising (Dhar and Varshney 2011), spatial crowdsoucing (Chen and Shahabi 2016;
Zhang et al. 2014), urban computing (Zheng et al. 2014),
etc. For example, it can help shop owners to offer electronic
coupons to the set of mobile app users who may physically
visit the region around the shop soon; it can also help crowdsourcing organizers to recruit the participants to cover the
task area with the highest probability (Xiong et al. 2016).
One of the key steps in crowd coverage maximization is
mobility proﬁling, i.e., predicting the probability of a user
appearing at a certain location. A common practice is ﬁrst
dividing an area into ﬁne-grained grids or sub-areas, and
then counting the frequency of a user appearing in each
grid based on trajectory history (Guo et al. 2017). One can
use more sophisticated models like Poisson process to estimate users’ occurrence distribution (Xiong et al. 2016).
Existing mobility proﬁling methods often require access to
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

200

