The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Improving Language Modelling
with Noise Contrastive Estimation
Farhana Ferdousi Liza, Marek Grzes
School of Computing, University of Kent
Canterbury, CT2 7NF, UK
{ﬂ207, m.grzes}@kent.ac.uk

or noise contrastive estimation (Mnih and Teh 2012), aim at
computing an unnormalised statistical model.
In this paper, we investigate noise contrastive estimation
(NCE) because of its statistical consistency, and the fact that
its potential has not been sufﬁciently explored in the literature on language models (LMs). NCE has also achieved
promising results in machine translation (Vaswani et al.
2013; Baltescu and Blunsom 2015) which indicates that its
performance on language models could be better than what
is known in current research.
NCE was ﬁrst proposed in (Gutmann and Hyvärinen
2010) as an estimation principle for unnormalised statistical models. Unnormalised statistical models compute values which, in contrast to formal probabilities, do not add
up to one. In order to normalise those values so that they
become valid probabilities, they can be divided by the partition function. However, the partition function is computationally expensive to compute when the number of outcomes
is large. Therefore, instead of calculating the partition function, NCE converts the original estimation problem into a
nonlinear logistic regression problem which discriminates
the noise samples generated from a known (noise) distribution from the original data samples. NCE is statistically
consistent and more stable than other Monte Carlo methods
such as importance sampling (Mnih and Teh 2012). In (Gutmann and Hyvärinen 2010), NCE achieved the best trade-off
between computational and statistical efﬁciency when compared against importance sampling, contrastive divergence
(Hinton 2002), and score matching (Hyvärinen 2005). This
method has also been applied in language modelling and machine translation (Mnih and Teh 2012; Vaswani et al. 2013;
Baltescu and Blunsom 2015; Zoph et al. 2016).
Many features of NCE are not understood, especially the
hyperparameters in deep learning when NCE is used at the
output layer. Also, comparisons against standard LSTMbased single-model softmax have never shown that NCE can
compete with softmax on those tasks on which softmax is
feasible.
Our results are clearly surprising in the face of the existing literature which generally indicates that NCE is an inferior method. For example, studying language modelling in
(Józefowicz et al. 2016), the authors argued that importance
sampling (IS) may be better than NCE as IS optimises a multiclass classiﬁcation task whereas NCE is solving a binary

Abstract
Neural language models do not scale well when the vocabulary is large. Noise contrastive estimation (NCE) is a
sampling-based method that allows for fast learning with
large vocabularies. Although NCE has shown promising performance in neural machine translation, its full potential has
not been demonstrated in the language modelling literature.
A sufﬁcient investigation of the hyperparameters in the NCEbased neural language models was clearly missing. In this paper, we showed that NCE can be a very successful approach
in neural language modelling when the hyperparameters of
a neural network are tuned appropriately. We introduced the
‘search-then-converge’ learning rate schedule for NCE and
designed a heuristic that speciﬁes how to use this schedule.
The impact of the other important hyperparameters, such as
the dropout rate and the weight initialisation range, was also
demonstrated. Using a popular benchmark, we showed that
appropriate tuning of NCE in neural language models outperforms the state-of-the-art single-model methods based on
standard dropout and the standard LSTM recurrent neural
networks.

1

Introduction

Language models (LMs), which predict the probability of a
next word given its context, play an important role in many
downstream applications such as machine translation, question answering and text summarisation. Neural language
models that apply various neural architectures (Bengio et al.
2003; Mikolov et al. 2010; Józefowicz et al. 2016) have recently demonstrated signiﬁcant achievements.
In real applications, the vocabulary size is large and the
language models have to estimate a probability distribution
over many words. The need for a normalised probability distribution becomes a computational bottleneck because the
normalisation constant (i.e. the partition function) has to be
computed for the output layer.
Many solutions have been proposed to address the computational complexity of the partition function. Several approaches try to make it more efﬁcient, e.g., hierarchical
softmax (Mnih and Hinton 2009), a shortlisting method
(Schwenk 2007), or self-normalisation techniques (Chen,
Grangier, and Auli 2015). The other methods, such as importance sampling (Bengio and Sénécal 2003; Jean et al. 2014)
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5277

