The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multi-Task Learning for Parsing the
Alexa Meaning Representation Language
Vittorio Perera

Tagyoung Chung

Thomas Kollar

Emma Strubell

Carnegie Mellon
University
vdperera@cs.cmu.edu

Amazon Inc.
tagyoung@amazon.com

Amazon Inc.
kollart@amazon.com

University of
Massachusetts Amherst
strubell@cs.umass.edu

Abstract

“play ray of light by madonna”

The Alexa Meaning Representation Language (AMRL) is a
compositional graph-based semantic representation that includes ﬁne-grained types, properties, actions, and roles and
can represent a wide variety of spoken language. AMRL increases the ability of virtual assistants to represent more complex requests, including logical and conditional statements
as well as ones with nested clauses. Due to this representational capacity, the acquisition of large scale data resources
is challenging, which limits the accuracy of resulting models.
This paper has two primary contributions. The ﬁrst contribution is a linearization of the AMRL parses that aligns it to a
related task of spoken language understanding (SLU) and a
deep neural network architecture that uses multi-task learning
to predict AMRL ﬁne-grained types, properties and intents.
The second contribution is a deep neural network architecture
that leverages embeddings from the large-scale data resources
that are available for SLU. When combined, these contributions enable the training of accurate models of AMRL parsing,
even in the presence of data sparsity. The proposed models,
which use the linearized AMRL parse, multi-task learning,
residual connections and embeddings from SLU, decrease the
error rates in the prediction of the full AMRL parse by 3.56%
absolute.

3OD\EDFN$FWLRQ
REMHFW

0XVLF5HFRUGLQJ

1DPH

YDOXH

³UD\RIOLJKW´

E\$UWLVW

0XVLFLDQ

1DPH

YDOXH

³PDGRQQD´

Figure 1: Meaning representation of a sentence using AMRL.
“play ray of light by madonna”
Domain:
Intent:
Slots:

MusicApp
ListenMediaIntent
play [ray of light]Song by [madonna]Singer

Figure 2: Example of the spoken language understanding
(SLU) representation.

Introduction
As intelligent assistants become more open and connected,
there is a need to expand their capacity to understand taskoriented language. Expanding this capacity requires a representation that can handle many forms of spoken language and
models that can predict this representation. This paper uses a
new representation that can support a wide variety of spoken
language called the Alexa Meaning Representation Language
(AMRL). AMRL is a compositional, graph-based semantic
representation that is backed by a large-scale ontology. An
AMRL parse contains actions, ﬁne-grained types, properties,
and verb roles (as in Figure 1). AMRL provides the representational capacity to not only understand simple requests to a
virtual assistant, but also complex logical, conditional, and
nested statements.
An alternative representation to AMRL are those used for
spoken language understanding (SLU), which categorize requests into domains, intents and slots (Figure 2). A domain

is a general category for a request (e.g., music, calendar), an
intent is an action within that domain (e.g., play, search) and
slots are mentions within the utterance (e.g., “ray of light” is
the song to be played). By factoring the problem this way,
each SLU domain may have its own unique set of intents
and slots. In contrast, AMRL provides a common semantic representation for spoken language (Figure 3). There are
three primary beneﬁts to this common representation. The
ﬁrst beneﬁt is that intents and slots that have the same meaning have the same labels. For example, “order me an echo
dot” and “Alexa, order me a taxi” fall into distinct domains
(e.g., shopping and taxi), resulting in distinct intents for each
domain (e.g., OrderProduct and OrderTaxi). The fact that requests such as these, which have a similar surface form, can
appear in different domains also makes it challenging to add
new features without degrading SLU accuracy. The second
beneﬁt of AMRL is that cross-domain utterances are directly
supported. For example, “ﬁnd me a restaurant near the shark
game” would belong to both the SLU local search and the

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5390

