The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Riemannian Stein Variational Gradient
Descent for Bayesian Inference
Chang Liu, Jun Zhu∗
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., TNList Lab; Center for Bio-Inspired Computing Research
State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Systems, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
chang-li14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn

Recently, a set of particle-based VIs (P-VIs) have been
proposed. P-VIs use a certain number of samples, or particles, to represent the variational distribution, and update
the particles by solving an optimization problem. Similar
to MCs, this non-parametric particle form gives them great
ﬂexibility to reduce the gap of M-VIs, and beyond MCs, the
optimization-based update rule makes them effective in iteration: every iteration is guaranteed to make progress. Although there are convergence analyses for some particular
MCMCs from non-stationary to stationary, the principle of a
general MCMC only guarantees that the sampler will remain
in the stationary distribution. Moreover, MCs usually require a large sample size to take effect, while P-VIs achieve
similar performance with much fewer particles, since their
principle aims at ﬁnite sample performance. This particleefﬁciency would save the storage of the inference result, and
reduce the time for tasks afterwards such as test and prediction. Table 1 presents a comparison of the three kinds of
inference methods.
Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD) (Liu and Wang
2016) is an outstanding example of P-VIs. SVGD updates
particles by imposing a continuous-time dynamics on them
that leads the variational distribution to evolve towards the
posterior. Although the dynamics is restricted in a kernelrelated space for tractability, the theory of SVGD makes
no assumption on the variational distribution, indicating the
best ﬂexibility. SVGD has been applied to develop advanced
inference methods (Wang and Liu 2016; Pu et al. 2017) as
well as reinforcement learning (Liu et al. 2017; Haarnoja
et al. 2017). Other instances of P-VIs include normalizing
ﬂows (NF) (Rezende and Mohamed 2015) and particle mirror descent (PMD) (Dai et al. 2016). NF uses a series of
invertible transformations to adjust particles from a simple
tractable distribution to ﬁt the posterior. However, the invertibility requirement restricts its ﬂexibility. PMD adopts the
mirror descent method to formulate an optimization problem
and uses a weighted kernel density estimator for the variational distribution, which is still a restricting assumption.
Another issue of Bayesian inference is the collaboration
with Riemann manifold. This consideration bears its importance in two ways: (i) the posterior of some models itself is a distribution on a given Riemann manifold, e.g. the
spherical admixture model (SAM) (Reisinger et al. 2010)
has its posterior on hyperspheres; (ii) latent variables in

Abstract
We develop Riemannian Stein Variational Gradient Descent
(RSVGD), a Bayesian inference method that generalizes
Stein Variational Gradient Descent (SVGD) to Riemann manifold. The beneﬁts are two-folds: (i) for inference tasks in Euclidean spaces, RSVGD has the advantage over SVGD of utilizing information geometry, and (ii) for inference tasks on
Riemann manifolds, RSVGD brings the unique advantages
of SVGD to the Riemannian world. To appropriately transfer to Riemann manifolds, we conceive novel and non-trivial
techniques for RSVGD, which are required by the intrinsically different characteristics of general Riemann manifolds
from Euclidean spaces. We also discover Riemannian Stein’s
Identity and Riemannian Kernelized Stein Discrepancy. Experimental results show the advantages over SVGD of exploring distribution geometry and the advantages of particleefﬁciency, iteration-effectiveness and approximation ﬂexibility over other inference methods on Riemann manifolds.

Introduction
Bayesian inference is the central task for learning a Bayesian
model to extract knowledge from data. The task is to estimate the posterior distribution of latent variables of the
model given observed data. It has been in the focus of
machine learning for decades, with quite a lot of methods
emerging. Variational inference methods (VIs) aim to approximate the posterior by a tractable variational distribution. Traditional VIs typically use a statistical model, usually
a parametric distribution family, as the variational distribution, and we call them model-based VIs (M-VIs). They cast
the inference problem as an optimization problem, which
can be efﬁciently solved by various techniques. However,
due to the restricted coverage of the chosen distribution family (e.g. the mean-ﬁeld form), there would be a gap blocking the approximation from getting any closer. Monte Carlo
methods (MCs) estimate the posterior by directly drawing
samples from it. Asymptotically accurate as they are, their
performance for ﬁnite samples is not guaranteed and usually
take effect slowly, especially for the widely applicable thus
commonly used Markov Chain MCs (MCMCs), due to the
positive autocorrelation of their samples.
∗

corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3627

