The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A SAT+CAS Method for
Enumerating Williamson Matrices of Even Order
Curtis Bright

Ilias Kotsireas

Vijay Ganesh

University of Waterloo

Wilfrid Laurier University

University of Waterloo

though generalizations of Williamson matrices have been
constructed in even orders (Wallis 1974). The algorithms
used for enumerating Williamson matrices prior to 2016
(e.g., (Baumert and Hall 1965; Sawade 1977; Koukouvinos
and Kounias 1988; Ðoković 1993; Holzmann, Kharaghani,
and Tayfeh-Rezaie 2008)) have all used properties only
available in odd orders. In light of this, it is interesting
to develop algorithms for enumerating Williamson matrices
which work in even orders.
Unfortunately, it would not be possible to resolve the
Hadamard conjecture by only studying Williamson matrices
of even order, since Hadamard matrices constructed using
Williamson matrices of even order have orders which are divisible by 8. However, it is still not even known if Hadamard
matrices exist for all orders divisible by 8, so nevertheless
studying Williamson matrices of even order has the potential to shed light on the Hadamard conjecture as well.
On the other hand, if it was possible to prove that
Williamson matrices exist for all odd orders this would resolve the Hadamard conjecture, leading to the related conjecture that Williamson matrices exist in all odd orders. As
the mathematician Richard Turyn wrote (Turyn 1972):
It has been conjectured that an Hadamard matrix of this
[Williamson] type might exist of every order 4t, at least
for t odd.
However, this conjecture was shown to be false by the mathematician Dragomir Ðoković who showed that such matrices do not exist in order t = 35 (Ðoković 1993). Later, a
complete enumeration of Williamson matrices for odd orders n < 60 was completed (Holzmann, Kharaghani, and
Tayfeh-Rezaie 2008). This showed that Williamson matrices also do not exist for orders 47, 53, and 59 but exist for all
other odd orders under 65 since Turyn’s construction (Turyn
1972; Lang and Schneider 2012) works in orders 61 and 63.
In this paper we provide for the ﬁrst time an enumeration
of Williamson matrices in orders which are not odd (preliminary results originally appeared in the PhD thesis of the ﬁrst
author (Bright 2017a)). In doing so, we uncover an interesting but so far unexplained phenomenon that there tend to be
more Williamson matrices in even orders than there are in
odd orders. In fact, Williamson matrices exist for every even
order in which we performed a search. In light of this, Turyn’s remark stating that the Williamson conjecture should
apply “at least for t odd” seems unnecessary. This leads us to

Abstract
We present for the ﬁrst time an exhaustive enumeration of
Williamson matrices of even order n < 65. The search
method relies on the novel SAT+CAS paradigm of coupling
SAT solvers with computer algebra systems so as to take advantage of the advances made in both the ﬁeld of satisﬁability checking and the ﬁeld of symbolic computation. Additionally, we use a programmatic SAT solver which allows
conﬂict clauses to be learned programmatically, through a
piece of code speciﬁcally tailored to the domain area. Prior
to our work, Williamson matrices had only been enumerated
for odd orders n < 60, so our work increases the bounds that
Williamson matrices have been enumerated up to and provides the ﬁrst enumeration of Williamson matrices of even
order. Our results show that Williamson matrices of even order tend to be much more abundant than those of odd orders.
In particular, Williamson matrices exist for every even order
n < 65 but do not exist in orders 35, 47, 53, and 59.

1

Introduction

In 1944 the mathematician John Williamson introduced
the matrices which now bear his name in the process of
studying the Hadamard conjecture from combinatorial design theory (Williamson 1944). This conjecture states that
Hadamard matrices—square n × n matrices H with ±1
entries where HH T is the identity matrix times n—exist
for all orders n divisible by 4. Williamson deﬁned a new
type of matrix which has been extensively used to construct
Hadamard matrices in many different orders n. Williamson
matrices have also found use in digital communication systems and this motivated mathematicians from NASA’s Jet
Propulsion Laboratory to construct Williamson matrices of
order 23 while developing codes allowing the transmission
of signals over a long range (Baumert, Golomb, and Hall
1962).
Although Williamson deﬁned his matrices for both even
and odd orders (see Section 2), almost all subsequent work
has focused on the odd case. Williamson matrices were recently constructed in all even orders up to 42 (Bright et
al. 2016; Zulkoski et al. 2017) but these works did not
contain a complete enumeration. We are not aware of any
other constructions of Williamson matrices in even orders,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6573

