The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

DLPaper2Code: Auto-Generation of Code
from Deep Learning Research Papers
Akshay Sethi∗

Anush Sankaran, Naveen Panwar,
Shreya Khare, Senthil Mani

IIIT Delhi

IBM Research AI

Another major challenge is the availability of various libraries in multiple programming languages to implement
DL algorithms such as Tensorﬂow (Abadi et al. 2016),
Theano (Bastien et al. 2012), Caffe (Jia et al. 2014),
Torch (et al 2011), MXNet (Chen 2015), DL4J (Gibson
2015), CNTK (Seide and Agarwal 2016) and wrappers such
as Keras (Chollet and others 2015), Lasagne (Dieleman
2015), and PyTorch (Chintala 2016). The public implementations of the DL research papers are available in various
libraries offering very little interoperability or communication across them. Consider a use-case for a researcher working in “image captioning”, where three of the highly referred
research papers for the problem of image captioning3 are:
1. Show and Tell (Vinyals et al. 2015): Original implementation available in Theano; https://github.com/kelvinxu/
arctic-captions
2. NeuralTalk2 (Karpathy and Fei-Fei 2015): Original
implementation available in Torch; https://github.com/
karpathy/neuraltalk2
3. LRCN (Donahue et al. 2015): Implementation available
in Caffe; http://jeffdonahue.com/lrcn/
As the implementations are available in different libraries,
a researcher cannot directly combine the models. Also, for
a practitioner having remaining of the code-base in Java
(DL4J) directly leveraging either of these public implementations would be daunting. Thus, we highlight two highly
overlooked challenges in DL:
1. Lack of public implementation available for existing research works and thus, the time incurred in reproducing
their results
2. Existing implementations are conﬁned to a single (or few)
libraries limiting portability into other popular libraries
for DL implementation.
We observed that most of the research papers explain the
DL model design either through a ﬁgure or a table. Thus,
in this research we propose a novel algorithm that automatically parses a research paper to extract the described DL
model design. The design is represented as an abstract computational graph which is independent of the implementation library or language. Finally, the source code is generated in multiple libraries from this abstract computational

Abstract
With an abundance of research papers in deep learning, reproducibility or adoption of the existing works becomes a
challenge. This is due to the lack of open source implementations provided by the authors. Even if the source code is
available, then re-implementing research papers in a different library is a daunting task. To address these challenges,
we propose a novel extensible approach, DLPaper2Code, to
extract and understand deep learning design ﬂow diagrams
and tables available in a research paper and convert them
to an abstract computational graph. The extracted computational graph is then converted into execution ready source
code in both Keras and Caffe, in real-time. An arXiv-like
website is created where the automatically generated designs
is made publicly available for 5, 000 research papers. The
generated designs could be rated and edited using an intuitive drag-and-drop UI framework in a crowd sourced manner. To evaluate our approach, we create a simulated dataset
with over 216, 000 valid deep learning design ﬂow diagrams
using a manually deﬁned grammar. Experiments on the simulated dataset show that the proposed framework provide more
than 93% accuracy in ﬂow diagram content extraction.

Introduction
The growth of deep learning (DL) in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence has been astounding in the last decade with about
63, 600 research papers being published since 20171 . Keeping up with the growing literature has been a real struggle
for researchers and practitioners. In one of the recent AI
conferences, NIPS 2016, the maximum number of papers
submitted (∼ 685/2500) were in the topic, “Deep Learning
or Neural Networks”. However, a majority of these research
papers are not accompanied by their corresponding implementations. In NIPS 2016, only 101/567 (∼ 18%) papers
made their source implementation available2 . Implementing
research papers takes at least a few days of effort for software engineers, assuming that they have limited knowledge
in DL (Sankaran et al. 2011).
∗

Akshay Sethi interened at IBM Research, India during this
work.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://scholar.google.co.in/scholar?as ylo=2017&q=deep+
learning&hl=en&as sdt=1,5
2
https://www.kaggle.com/benhamner/nips-papers

3

7339

https://competitions.codalab.org/competitions/3221#results

