The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Semantic Structure-Based Word Embedding by Incorporating
Concept Convergence and Word Divergence
Qian Liu,1,2 Heyan Huang,1,3∗ Guangquan Zhang,2 Yang Gao,1,4 Junyu Xuan,2 Jie Lu2
1. Department of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2. DeSI Lab, Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
3. Beijing Engineering Research Center of High Volume Language Information Processing
and Cloud Computing Applications, China
4. Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Imaging Technology, Captial Normal University, China
Abstract

tŽƌůĚ ƵƉ ĨŝŶĂů ŝƐ ƚŚĞ ŵŽƐƚ ǁĂƚĐŚĞĚ ŐĂŵĞ ŝŶ
ĨŽŽƚďĂůů͙

Representing the semantics of words is a fundamental task in
text processing. Several research studies have shown that text
and knowledge bases (KBs) are complementary sources for
word embedding learning. Most existing methods only consider relationships within word-pairs in the usage of KBs. We
argue that the structural information of well-organized words
within the KBs is able to convey more effective and stable
knowledge in capturing semantics of words. In this paper, we
propose a semantic structure-based word embedding method,
and introduce concept convergence and word divergence to
reveal semantic structures in the word embedding learning
process. To assess the effectiveness of our method, we use
WordNet for training and conduct extensive experiments on
word similarity, word analogy, text classiﬁcation and query
expansion. The experimental results show that our method
outperforms state-of-the-art methods, including the methods
trained solely on the corpus, and others trained on the corpus
and the KBs.

E ŝƐ ƚŚĞ ŵŽƐƚ ǁĂƚĐŚĞĚ ŐĂŵĞ ŝŶ ďĂƐŬĞƚďĂůů͙
dŚĞ ŶĂƚŝŽŶĂů ďĂƐŬĞƚďĂůů ĂƐƐŽĐŝĂƚŝŽŶ ŵŽƐƚ
ǀĂůƵĂďůĞ ƉůĂǇĞƌ ;DsWͿ ŝƐ ĂŶ ĂŶŶƵĂů͘͘
dŚĞ ůŝƚĞ &ŽŽƚďĂůů ĐĂĚĞŵǇ ƐƚĂĨĨ ŝƐ ŵƵĐŚ
ŵŽƌĞ ƚŚĂŶ ũƵƐƚ ĐŽĂĐŚĞƐ ĂŶĚ ƚƌĂŝŶĞƌƐ͘

&RQWH[W

ŐĂŵĞͺĞƋƵŝƉŵĞŶƚ
ďĂůů

͙

ůĞĂĚĞƌ
͙
ĐĂƉƚĂŝŶ

ƚƌĂŝŶĞƌ

ĂŶŝŵĂů
ƚƌĂŝŶĞƌ

ĐŽĂĐŚ

6HPDQWLF6WUXFWXUHV

Figure 1: We mark two types of words in the sentences with
blue color and red color, respectively. The underlined words
are their context in the corpus. The graphs in the right are
their semantic structures generated from WordNet.

counting-based methods (Pennington, Socher, and Manning
2014) which learn word representations through global matrix factorization based on a count of co-occurring words.
These corpus-based methods mainly consider a word’s cooccurrence information and, therefore, generally learn similar embeddings for words with similar contexts.
In the past few years, some efforts have focused on learning word representation beyond the corpus, and considered
external knowledge bases constructed by human experts,
such as semantic lexicons and concept graphs (Ponzetto
and Navigli 2010; Bollegala, Maehara, and Kawarabayashi
2015; Liu et al. 2015a; Bollegala et al. 2016; Goikoetxea,
Agirre, and Soroa 2016). Most previously proposed methods simply use relations within word-pairs, e.g., constraining words belonging to one semantic category (Yu and
Dredze 2014), or constructing a regularizer to model words
in particular semantic relations (Bollegala et al. 2016). As
such, this work did not fully explore the comprehensive
structures in the KBs.
In this paper, we argue that effective word embeddings
should contain the semantic structures within the knowledge
base. We illustrate how the semantic structures can be a
complementary source for word embeddings in Fig.1. As
shown in the sentences, football, basketball, trainer, coach
usually share similar context, and tend to have similar representations in the corpus-based methods. While the semantic
structures in the right side clearly deﬁne these words with
different semantic granularities and abstractions, i.e., these
four words are located in two different subgraphs, showing
that they belong to different concepts; football and basket-

Introduction
Understanding and representing the sense of text is a fundamental task in both information retrieval (IR) and natural
language processing (NLP). Previous research has expended
great effort on constructing distributed representations of
words (also known as word embedding) as the atomic components of text by embedding the semantic and syntactic
properties of the surface text into low-dimensional dense
vectors. Trained word embeddings have achieved overwhelming success in various real-world applications, e.g.,
document retrieval (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013;
Passalis and Tefas 2016; Roy et al. 2016), text classiﬁcation
(Lampos, Zou, and Cox 2017), question answering (Shen et
al. 2017), and sentiment classiﬁcation (Bollegala, Mu, and
Goulermas 2016).
Most of the research directs attention entirely towards
learning word representation methods from a large unlabeled corpus, such as prediction-based methods (Collobert et al. 2011; Mikolov et al. 2013b; 2013a; Cao
and Lu 2017) which learn word representation by predicting the co-occurrence of words in the given context, and
∗

Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5261

