The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Reliable Multi-View Clustering
Hong Tao,1 Chenping Hou,1 Xinwang Liu,2 Dongyun Yi,1 Jubo Zhu1
1

College of Science, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, 410073, Hunan, China.
School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, 410073, Hunan, China.
{taohong.nudt, hcpnudt}@hotmail.com, xinwangliu@nudt.edu.cn, dongyun.yi@gmail.com, ju bo zhu@aliyun.com
2

Nie, Cai, and Li 2017), weights are allocated to different
views automatically and promising results are obtained.
It is generally recognized that the performance of MVL
algorithms will be improved by utilizing more views. However, the experimental results of some researches (Bickel
and Scheffer 2004; Yang et al. 2013; Zhang et al. 2015)
show that, sometimes the use of multiple views may degenerate the performance. This problem is also reﬂected
in our experiments. As shown in Table 1, compared with
the best single-view normalized cut (Ncut) (Shi and Malik 2000) method, the previous proposed multi-view clustering approaches (Kumar, Rai, and Daume 2011; Kumar and
Daumé 2011; Cai et al. 2011; Cai, Nie, and Huang 2013;
Li et al. 2015) obtain lower clustering accuracy on at least
two data sets. Such phenomena are contrary to the original
intention of MVL and will hinder the practical use of MVL
in real applications, especially tasks requiring high dependability. Thus, it is vital to have reliable MVL approaches,
whose performance is never statistically signiﬁcantly worse
than that of merely using a single view.
Though there are already many studies on MVL, little
work has been done explicitly about its reliability. In this paper, we focus on clustering and propose the Reliable MultiView Clustering (RMVC) method. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst to directly study on the reliability
of MVL. More concretely, our goal is to utilizing multiple
views to obtain a clustering which is not worse than that
of using any single view. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁnal clustering is
produced by maximizing the performance gain in the worst
case based on several candidate multi-view clusterings. To
obtain the objective function, there are two key issues to
be solved. On one hand, the widely used clustering performance measures (e.g., clustering accuracy and normalized
mutual information (NMI)), are typically discontinuous and
hard to analyze. Using these measures directly causes trouble in optimization. Instead, the squared χ2 distance between partitions (Meilă 2012), which is quadratic and can
be analyzed conveniently, is employed for comparing clusterings. On the other hand, when there is no ground truth, it
is hard to ﬁnd out the best clustering in the original singleview outputs. Based on the candidate multi-view clusterings,
a equivalent clustering is deﬁned and can be solved with
a bound linear least squares optimization. The optimization of RMVC can be decomposed into two subproblems,

Abstract
With the advent of multi-view data, multi-view learning
(MVL) has become an important research direction in machine learning. It is usually expected that multi-view algorithms can obtain better performance than that of merely using a single view. However, previous researches have pointed
out that sometimes the utilization of multiple views may even
deteriorate the performance. This will be a stumbling block
for the practical use of MVL in real applications, especially
for tasks requiring high dependability. Thus, it is eager to
design reliable multi-view approaches, such that their performance is never degenerated by exploiting multiple views.
This issue is vital but rarely studied. In this paper, we focus
on clustering and propose the Reliable Multi-View Clustering (RMVC) method. Based on several candidate multi-view
clusterings, RMVC maximizes the worst-case performance
gain against the best single view clustering, which is equivalently expressed as no label information available. Speciﬁcally, employing the squared χ2 distance for clustering comparison makes the formulation of RMVC easy to solve, and
an efﬁcient strategy is proposed for optimization. Theoretically, it can be proved that the performance of RMVC will
never be signiﬁcantly decreased under some assumption. Experimental results on a number of data sets demonstrate that
the proposed method can effectively improve the reliability
of multi-view clustering.

Introduction
In many real-world applications, such as image retrieval
and cross language text classiﬁcation, the same object can
be represented by multiple different features (Xu, Tao, and
Xu 2013). For example, an image can be characterized by
different descriptors and news can be translated into various languages. This kind of data is known as multi-view
data, and each feature representation corresponds to a view
(Hou et al. 2010; Sun 2011). Multi-view learning (MVL),
which aims to improve the learning performance by exploiting the information from different views, has become
an important research direction. Unlike single-view algorithms that concatenate all views into a big one to meet
the setting, MVL designs advanced methods of combining multiple views to achieve the performance improvement
(Xu, Tao, and Xu 2013). For instance, in (Tao et al. 2017a;
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4123

