The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Lateral Inhibition-Inspired Convolutional Neural Network
for Visual Attention and Saliency Detection
Chunshui Cao,1,2 Yongzhen Huang,2,3,4 Zilei Wang,1 Liang Wang2,3,4
Ninglong Xu,3,4,5 Tieniu Tan2,3,4
1
University of Science and Technology of China
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology (CEBSIT)
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
5
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2

Abstract
Lateral inhibition in top-down feedback is widely existing in
visual neurobiology, but such an important mechanism has
not be well explored yet in computer vision. In our recent
research, we ﬁnd that modeling lateral inhibition in convolutional neural network (LICNN) is very useful for visual
attention and saliency detection. In this paper, we propose
to formulate lateral inhibition inspired by the related studies from neurobiology, and embed it into the top-down gradient computation of a general CNN for classiﬁcation, i.e.
only category-level information is used. After this operation
(only conducted once), the network has the ability to generate
accurate category-speciﬁc attention maps. Further, we apply
LICNN for weakly-supervised salient object detection. Extensive experimental studies on a set of databases, e.g., ECSSD, HKU-IS, PASCAL-S and DUT-OMRON, demonstrate
the great advantage of LICNN which achieves the state-ofthe-art performance. It is especially impressive that LICNN
with only category-level supervised information even outperforms some recent methods with segmentation-level supervised learning.

Figure 1: LICNN for visual attention. (a) Input images.
Here, three very challenging “dalmatian-on-snow” images
are particularly shown. (b) Modeling lateral inhibition in
each hidden layer of CNN. (c) Category-speciﬁc maps generated by LICNN. Best viewed in color.
and Duncan 1995), show that top-down feedback conveys
attentional signals to the sensory area of visual cortex and
supplies the criteria to select neurons that most relevant to a
speciﬁc task (Desimone and Duncan 1995), and lateral inhibition (Nielsen 2001) can further modulate the feedback signals by creating competition among neurons, which leads to
enhanced visual contrast and better perception of interested
objects (Wyatte, Herd, and Mingus 2012). This attention
mechanism is inspiring to model both stimulus-driven and
goal-oriented visual attention, and it is noted that no strong
supervised information, e.g., object segmentation mask, is
needed.
Motivated by the aforementioned ﬁndings, we propose a
method to formulate lateral inhibition in convolutional neural network (LICNN). As we all know that, various patterns can be expressed in a CNN classiﬁer. Given an input, they compete with each other during the feed-forward
phase and eventually contribute to one or more classes, leading to the distinct scores over different categories. And the
category-speciﬁc gradients can roughly estimate the importance of each pattern (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman
2013). Thus, we employ the category-speciﬁc gradients as
the feedback signals for attention in LICNN. And to bind

Introduction
Visual attention is an important mechanism of visual information processing in human brain. It has been extensively studied in neurobiology and preliminarily borrowed
in computer vision, including the top-down models for generating category-speciﬁc attention maps (Zhang et al. 2016;
Cao et al. 2015; Zhou et al. 2015; Simonyan, Vedaldi, and
Zisserman 2013) and bottom-up models for salient object
detection (Li and Yu 2016; Zhao et al. 2015; Wang et al.
2015b). In most of existing methods, however, the attention
maps usually suffer from heavy noise or fail to well preserve
a whole object. More importantly, the state-of-the-art models usually require strong supervision information for training, e.g., manually labeled segmentation masks of salient
objects, which is pretty time- and labor-consuming. However, human performance of visual attention is robust. In
neurobiology, classic theories like object binding (Wyatte,
Herd, and Mingus 2012) and selective attention (Desimone
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6690

