The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Mixtures of MLNs
Mohammad Maminur Islam

Somdeb Sarkhel

Deepak Venugopal

Department of Computer Science
The University of Memphis
mislam3@memphis.edu

Adobe Research
sarkhel@adobe.com

Department of Computer Science
The University of Memphis
dvngopal@memphis.edu

gradient-based methods for learning such as voted perceptron (Collins 2002) or contrastive divergence (Hinton 2002)
is often infeasible in MLNs designed for practical applications. To circumvent the non-scalability of learning algorithms, application designers typically use domain-speciﬁc
‘tricks’ to utilize MLNs for practical problems. For example, in their entity resolution application, Singla and Domingos (Singla and Domingos 2006) remove some evidence
from the training data that are likely to be false based
on heuristics. Similarly, Venugopal et al. (Venugopal et al.
2014) use SVM-learned weights for MLNs. However, such
domain-speciﬁc heuristics are problematic since they require a deep understanding of the domain, and are typically
not transferable across different MLN applications.
Over the last several years, lifted inference has become the
predominant method to scale up inference, and several algorithms have been developed using this strategy (Poole 2003;
Gogate and Domingos 2011; Van den Broeck et al. 2011).
The main idea in these algorithms is to use symmetries in the
MLN to scale up inference. More recently, lifted inference
algorithms have been used in generative weight learning algorithms (Haaren et al. 2016). Unfortunately, the same techniques do not work well for discriminative learning methods. Speciﬁcally, when learning discriminatively, we need to
perform inference on MLNs that are conditioned on certain
pre-speciﬁed query atoms (Domingos and Lowd 2009), and
most lifted inference methods, even the approximate ones,
fail to scale up when the MLN is conditioned on arbitrary
evidence that breaks symmetries (van den Broeck and Darwiche 2013). This is highly problematic because discriminative learning is quite often preferred since it converges faster
than generative learning (Singla and Domingos 2005), for
many applications. Therefore, we need advanced methods to
perform discriminative weight learning in MLNs. Recently
Sarkhel et al. (Sarkhel et al. 2016) proposed an approach that
scales up speciﬁc learning algorithms that use Gibbs sampling or MaxWalkSAT as a substep, by utilizing fast methods to solve a counting problem that repeatedly occurs with
Gibbs sampling and MaxWalkSAT. However, a generic approach for scalable discriminative learning is still elusive,
which is our main contribution in this paper.
Speciﬁcally, in this paper, we propose a discriminative
learning method which leverages recent advancements in
‘approximate’ lifted inference techniques. These techniques

Abstract
Weight learning is a challenging problem in Markov Logic
Networks (MLNs) due to the large size of the ground propositional probabilistic graphical model that underlies the ﬁrstorder representation of MLNs. Though more sophisticated
weight learning methods that use lifted inference have been
proposed, such methods can typically scale up only in the absence of evidence, namely in generative weight learning. In
discriminative learning, where the evidence typically destroys
symmetries, existing approaches are lacking in scalability. In
this paper, we propose a novel, intuitive approach for learning MLNs discriminatively by utilizing approximate symmetries. Speciﬁcally, we reduce the size of the training database
by clustering approximately symmetric atoms together and
selecting a representative atom from each cluster. However,
each choice made from the clusters induces a different distribution, increasing the uncertainty in our learned model. To
reduce this uncertainty, we learn a ﬁnite mixture model by
stacking the different distributions, where the parameters of
the model are learned using an EM approach. Our results on
several benchmarks show that our approach is much more
scalable and accurate as compared to existing state-of-the-art
MLN learning methods.

Introduction
Markov Logic Networks (MLNs) (Domingos and Lowd
2009) are templates that can represent large probabilistic
graphical models compactly using ﬁrst-order logic formulas. Speciﬁcally, MLNs represent uncertain knowledge as
weighted ﬁrst-order logic formulas, where the weight signiﬁes uncertainty associated with that formula. In a typical
use-case for MLNs, application designers encode domain
knowledge manually through ﬁrst-order logic formulas, and
then use automated tools such as Alchemy (Kok et al. 2006)
and Tuffy (Niu et al. 2011) to learn the weights of the formulas from data. Unfortunately, both weight learning and
inference (which is a sub-step in weight learning) in MLNs
are highly challenging problems. Typical learning and inference methods developed for probabilistic graphical models,
cannot be directly applied to MLNs. Speciﬁcally, MLNs represent extremely large probabilistic graphical models typically containing millions of variables and factors, and running even approximate inference methods or approximate
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6359

