The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Adversarial Learning of Portable Student Networks
1

Yunhe Wang,1,3 Chang Xu,2 Chao Xu,1,3 Dacheng Tao2
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University, China
2
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, SIT, FEIT, University of Sydney, Australia
3
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Peking University, China
wangyunhe@pku.edu.cn, c.xu@sydney.edu.au,
xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

ward to the applications of CNNs. However, launching sophisticated CNNs on these low-conﬁgure devices is almost
impossible since massive storage and a number of ﬂoating number multiplications would be consumed. For instance, over 232MB of memory and over 7.24 × 108 multiplications are demanded for processing one image using
AlexNet (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), which
cannot be tolerated by these devices. Therefore, portable
deep models with similar accuracies are urgently expected.
To this end, there are a variety of methods have been proposed for compressing convolutional neural networks such
as vector quantization (Gong et al. 2014), weight matrix
decomposition (Denton et al. 2014), encoding (Chen et al.
2015), and pruning (Wang et al. 2016; Han, Mao, and Dally
2016). Wherein, weight pruning has shown an extraordinary performance on most of the benchmark deep models.
In speciﬁc, (Han, Mao, and Dally 2016) showed that over
80% subtle weights can be removed without affecting performance of the original networks. (Wang et al. 2016) further pointed out that the redundancy can exist in both large
and small weights and explored an effective compression
method in the frequency domain.
Although, these sparsity based methods can achieve considerable compression and speed-up ratios by preserving
the accuracies, specialized hardwares are often required
for efﬁcient inference. Hence, another more straightforward strategy is very popular recently, i.e., directly learning a portable network (student network) with fewer parameters to inherit valuable properties of the original network (teacher network) (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015;
Romero et al. 2014), which has the similar purpose to transfer learning (Luo et al. 2014; 2017). Considering the consensus that the performance of the network usually improves with the increasing of network depth (Ba and Caruana 2014), the student network of the thinner and deeper architecture could also achieve similar accuracy. Various techniques have been exploited to measure and decrease the
discrepancy between student network and teacher network,
such as minimizing the Euclidean distance between features
extracted from hidden layers of the two networks (Ba and
Caruana 2014), inheriting the classiﬁcation results (Hinton,
Vinyals, and Dean 2015), and transferring feature information from intermediate layers (Romero et al. 2014). These
approaches have investigated the consistency between stu-

Abstract
Effective methods for learning deep neural networks with
fewer parameters are urgently required, since storage and
computations of heavy neural networks have largely prevented their widespread use on mobile devices. Compared
with algorithms which directly remove weights or ﬁlters
for obtaining considerable compression and speed-up ratios,
training thin deep networks exploiting the student-teacher
learning paradigm is more ﬂexible. However, it is very hard
to determine which formulation is optimal to measure the
information inherited from teacher networks. To overcome
this challenge, we utilize the generative adversarial network
(GAN) to learn the student network. In practice, the generator is exactly the student network with extremely less parameters and the discriminator is used as a teaching assistant
for distinguishing features extracted from student and teacher
networks. By simultaneously optimizing the generator and
the discriminator, the resulting student network can produce
features of input data with the similar distribution as that of
features of the teacher network. Extensive experimental results on benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed
method is capable of learning well-performed portable networks, which is superior to the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
As one of recent most effective tools for implementing machine intelligence tasks, deep neural networks, especially
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), have successfully
addressed a number of real world problems, e.g., image
classiﬁcation (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015; Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), visual detection and segmentation (Ren et al. 2015; Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015),
audio recognition and analysis (Liang, Jiang, and Hauptmann 2017), etc. Owing to the large amount of accessible
training data and computational power of GPUs, a series
of impressive CNNs have been developed to continuously
boost the performance of deep learning. For instance, the
ResNet-50 (He et al. 2015) obtained an about 3.8% top-5
error rate on the ILSVRC 2012 dataset (Russakovsky et al.
2015), which is slightly lower than that of human eyes.
Besides work stations and PC with GPU cards, mobile devices (e.g., telephone, micro robot) also look forc 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4260

