The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Conﬁdence-Aware Matrix Factorization for Recommender Systems

†

Chao Wang,† Qi Liu,† Runze Wu,† Enhong Chen,†∗
Chuanren Liu,‡ Xunpeng Huang,† Zhenya Huang†
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application, University of Science and Technology of China,
{wdyx2012, wrz179, hxpsola, huangzhy}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {qiliuql, cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn
‡
Decision Science and Management Information Systems Department, Drexel University, chuanren.liu@drexel.edu

High rating

Abstract

95% Confidence level

Collaborative ﬁltering (CF), particularly matrix factorization
(MF) based methods, have been widely used in recommender
systems. The literature has reported that matrix factorization
methods often produce superior accuracy of rating prediction in recommender systems. However, existing matrix factorization methods rarely consider conﬁdence of the rating
prediction and thus cannot support advanced recommendation tasks. In this paper, we propose a Conﬁdence-aware Matrix Factorization (CMF) framework to simultaneously optimize the accuracy of rating prediction and measure the prediction conﬁdence in the model. Speciﬁcally, we introduce
variance parameters for both users and items in the matrix
factorization process. Then, prediction interval can be computed to measure conﬁdence for each predicted rating. These
conﬁdence quantities can be used to enhance the quality of
recommendation results based on Conﬁdence-aware Ranking
(CR). We also develop two effective implementations of our
framework to compute the conﬁdence-aware matrix factorization for large-scale data. Finally, extensive experiments on
three real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our
framework from multiple perspectives.

1

˛
Low rating

a

b

c

d

Item

Figure 1: An example of predicted ratings with conﬁdence.

plenty of useful information in addition to predicted rating is
still largely underexploited in recommender systems. Particularly, conﬁdence of rating prediction, deﬁned as the recommender system’s trust in its prediction (Shani and Gunawardana 2011), bears important information that can be used
to improve the recommendations. In practice, a user often
has several alternatives in the recommendation results with
different conﬁdences. The conﬁdence weighs in the user’s
decision signiﬁcantly when the rating itself is not sufﬁcient
to make conclusive decisions.
One of the most common measuring methods of conﬁdence is prediction interval (Shani and Gunawardana 2011).
It is the interval around the predicted value where the
true value lies with a predeﬁned conﬁdence level, e.g.
95% (Hahn and Meeker 2011). A smaller prediction interval means a higher conﬁdence of the prediction. As shown
in Figure 1, we can observe the predicted ratings and the
related prediction intervals of a user on four movies. The
ratings of movie a and b are identical while the conﬁdence
of b’s rating is higher, which means the user prefers b to a
more possibly. However, traditional methods cannot decide
which of a and b is more preferred without consideration of
conﬁdence. Similarly, the conﬁdence of c’s rating is much
lower than that of b though c’s rating is slightly higher. The
user dose not necessarily choose c over b. Thus an ideal recommendation should be the item with both high rating and
high conﬁdence such as the movie d.
There are some pilot efforts on utilizing conﬁdence in recommender systems. McLaughlin and Herlocker (2004) proposed to artiﬁcially set probability distribution of different

Introduction

As one of the most successful data mining tasks, recommender systems have been prevailing for decades (Lu et
al. 2015; Zhao et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2011). Massive research efforts have been made into two general approaches:
content-based models and collaborative ﬁltering (CF) methods. Due to the superior performance for rating prediction
that can support the recommendation tasks, collaborative
ﬁltering(CF) methods, especially matrix factorization (MF)
based CF, have been widely applied in web-based services
like Google, Netﬂix and Amazon (Dror et al. 2012).
By projecting users and items into latent factor space,
most of MF methods pay more attention to the accuracy of
rating prediction (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009). However, these existing accuracy-oriented MF methods cannot always meet the expectation of end-users. For example, users do not necessarily prefer the items with higher
predicted ratings (Shani and Gunawardana 2011). Actually,
∗

Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

434

