The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

An Euclidean Distance Based on Tensor Product Graph Diffusion
Related Attribute Value Embedding for Nominal Data Clustering
1

Lei Gu,1 Ningning Zhou,1 Yang Zhao2
School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China
2
College of Humanities and Social Sciences, Nanjing Forestry University, Nanjing, China
leon gu@yeah.net, zhounn@njupt.edu.cn, zwx zy@njfu.edu.cn

(HAM for short)(Bock 2000). Additionally, with increasing efforts of researchers, more latest special distance metrics are proposed for nominal values in recent years, such
as the coupled nominal distance (CNS)(Wang et al. 2015;
2011), the Hong’s distance metric (HDM)(Jia, m. Cheung,
and Liu 2016) and the Ahmad’s distance metric (ADM)(Ahmad and Dey 2007). Nevertheless, these distance metrics
have some disadvantages. HAM is very simple, but it does
not notice the dependence between attributes; HDM focus
on the combination of two attributes, but it ignores the differences between multiple attributes; CNS and ADM all take
into consideration that there may be certain relations between two values from one attribute with respect to other
attributes, but they fail to give proper attention to the correlations between values from distinct attributes and are also
ineffective for nominal data with totally independent attributes. In addition, when implementing the clustering task,
we should incorporate the aforementioned distance metrics
into the models of some nominal clustering algorithms (e.g.,
the most popular K-modes(Huang 1998)), but the number of
nominal clustering algorithms is far less than that of numerical clustering algorithms.

Abstract
Not like numerical data clustering, nominal data clustering is
a very difﬁcult problem because there exists no natural relative ordering between nominal attribute values. This paper
mainly aims to make the Euclidean distance measure appropriate to nominal data clustering, and the core idea is the
attribute value embedding, namely, transforming each nominal attribute value into a numerical vector. This embedding
method consists of four steps. In the ﬁrst step, the weights,
which can quantify the amount of information in attribute
values, is calculated for each value in each nominal attribute
based on each object and its k nearest neighbors. In the second step, an intra-attribute value similarity matrix is created for each nominal attribute by using the attribute value’s
weights. In the third step, for each nominal attribute, we ﬁnd
another attribute with the maximal dependence on it, and
build an inter-attribute value similarity matrix on the basis
of the attribute value’s weights related to these two attributes.
In the last step, a diffusion matrix of each nominal attribute
is constructed by the tensor product graph diffusion process,
and this step can cause the acquired value embedding to contain simultaneously the intra- and inter-attribute value similarities information. To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed method, experiments are done on 10 data sets. Experimental results demonstrate that our method not only enables
the Euclidean distance to be used for nominal data clustering,
but also can acquire the better clustering performance than
several existing state-of-the-art approaches.

The embedding representation methods can convert nominal values into numerical vectors. Accordingly, after this
transformation, the numerical distance metrics (e.g., the simple Euclidean distance) can be inserted into a lot of effective numerical clustering algorithms (e.g., the most popular K-means) and be used to execute clustering on the
changed nominal data. The available and classical value embedding methods for nominal data clustering are few now.
Nevertheless, we can still roughly summarize three existing value embedding methods: the dummy variables related value embedding (DVE)(Suits 1957; Zdravevski et al.
2015), the term frequency–inverse document frequency related value embedding (TVE) and the coupled data embedding (CDE)(Songlei Jian 2017). Nonetheless, there are
also obvious drawbacks in these three approaches. First,
DVE only can transform each nominal attribute value into
a one dimensional vector, such as a number 0 or 1, and it
overlooks absolutely any relevance contained within nominal data. Second, the term frequency–inverse document
frequency(TF-IDF)(Berry 2003) is often applied to document analysis, but whether it is appropriate to general nominal data still requires the support of the theory foundation.

Introduction
Most of data mining techniques are only applicable to numerical data and can not operate well for nominal data consisting of several nominal attributes which have no numerical values, such as degree or profession, since nominal attributes have unordered scales and mathematical calculations, like addition or subtraction, are unable to be carried
out on them(Agresti 2007). To make nominal data clustering practicable, nowadays, there exist two primary kinds of
methods: designing the speciﬁc distance metrics to quantify the dissimilarities between nominal attribute values and
transforming nominal values into embedding vectors .
The most straightforward and generally used speciﬁc distance metric for nominal values is the Hamming distance
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3101

