The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Towards Affordable Semantic Searching:
Zero-Shot Retrieval via Dominant Attributes
1

Yang Long,1,3 Li Liu,†,2 Yuming Shen,4 Ling Shao1,2,4,∗

School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, P. R. China
2
JD Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research (JDAIR), Beijing, P. R. China
3
Open Lab, School of Computing, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
4
School of Computing Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK
Abstract
Instance-level retrieval has become an essential paradigm to
index and retrieves images from large-scale databases. Conventional instance search requires at least an example of
the query image to retrieve images that contain the same
object instance. Existing semantic retrieval can only search
semantically-related images, such as those sharing the same
category or a set of tags, not the exact instances. Meanwhile,
the unrealistic assumption is that all categories or tags are
known beforehand. Training models for these semantic concepts highly rely on instance-level attributes or human captions which are expensive to acquire. Given the above challenges, this paper studies the Zero-shot Retrieval problem that
aims for instance-level image search using only a few dominant attributes. The contributions are: 1) we utilise automatic
word embedding to infer class-level attributes to circumvent
expensive human labelling; 2) the inferred class-attributes can
be extended into discriminative instance attributes through
our proposed Latent Instance Attributes Discovery (LIAD)
algorithm; 3) our method is not restricted to complete attribute signatures, query of dominant attributes can also be
dealt with. On two benchmarks, CUB and SUN, extensive experiments demonstrate that our method can achieve promising performance for the problem. Moreover, our approach can
also beneﬁt conventional ZSL tasks.

Figure 1: In the zero-shot retrieval problem, there are two
situations: 1) querying image from the unseen gallery where
only several spare attributes of each instance are available; 2)
retrieving an unseen query in the gallery by given dominant
attributes.
2014), and book covers (Wang et al. 2011). However, developing generalised instance retrieval across different classes
remains an open problem.
There are mainly three practical issues that are worth considering. Firstly, it has been estimated that humans can distinguish at least 30,000 object classes (Biederman 1987).
For generalised instance retrieval, it is infeasible to collect
labelled data to train an retrieval model for each class separately (Tao, Smeulders, and Chang 2015). Secondly, an unknown query instance is not guaranteed to have a class name.
In other words, many class-speciﬁc models may not be applicable for generalised retrieval tasks. Thirdly, many recent
approaches are based on one-shot learning techniques, such
as person re-identiﬁcation (Liao et al. 2015), and face veriﬁcation (Taigman et al. 2014). However, in many realistic
applications, e.g. criminal identiﬁcation, even acquiring one
query image could be unattainable.
Inspired by the fact that humans can identify an unseen
instance given only some dominant attributes, this paper deﬁnes a more ﬂexible scenario named Zero-shot Retrieval

Introduction
Conventional recognition approaches usually focus on predicting the class label of an image. Recently, instance-level
retrieval has aroused increasing attention due to its unique
value for real-world applications, such as person identiﬁcation (Haque, Alahi, and Fei-Fei 2016), place localisation (Wu and Rehg 2008), and speciﬁc object search (Tao,
Smeulders, and Chang 2015). Instead of predicting the general class label, e.g. person or restaurant, we hope to ﬁnd
the exact object of the query image, i.e. ‘Who is the person?’ or ‘Which restaurant is shown?’ from a large number
of candidates. Previous work has achieved excellent results
on instance retrieval within a single category, such as buildings (Arandjelovic and Zisserman 2012), logos (Tao et al.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* The Corresponding Author is Ling Shao.
† This author contributes equally to the work.

7210

