The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Equilibrium Computation and Robust Optimization
in Zero Sum Games with Submodular Structure
Bryan Wilder
Department of Computer Science and Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Society
University of Southern California
bwilder@usc.edu

edges which are most likely to intersect the attacker’s chosen path. Computing this set is a submodular optimization
problem (Jain, Conitzer, and Tambe 2013). We give a general algorithm for computing approximate minimax equilibria in zero-sum games where the maximizing player’s best
response problem is a monotone submodular function. Our
algorithm obtains a (1 − 1e )2 −approximation (modulo an
additive loss of ) to the maximizing player’s minimax strategy. This algorithm runs in pseudopolynomial time even
when both action spaces are exponentially large given access to a weakened form of a best response oracle for the
adversary. Pseudopolynomial means that the runtime bound
depends polynomially on largest value of any single item
(which we expect to be a constant for most cases of interest). Our algorithm approximately solves a non-convex, nonsmooth continuous relaxation and then rounds the solution
to a pure strategy in a randomized fashion. To our knowledge, no subexponential algorithm was previously known
for this problem with exponentially large strategy spaces.
Our framework has a wide range of applications, corresponding to the ubiquitous presence of submodular functions in artiﬁcial intelligence and algorithm design.
One prominent application is robust submodular optimization. A decision maker is faced with a set of submodular
objectives f1 ...fm . They do not know which objective is the
true one, and so would like to ﬁnd a decision maximizing
mini fi . Robust submodular optimization has many applications because uncertainty is so often present in decisionmaking. We start by studying the randomized version of
this problem, where the decision maker may select a distribution over actions such that the worst case expected performance is maximized (Krause, Roper, and Golovin 2011;
Chen et al. 2017; Wilder et al. 2017). This is equivalent to
computing the minimax equilibrium for a game where one
player has a submodular best response. Our techniques for
solving such games also yield an algorithm for the deterministic robust optimization problem, where the decision maker
must commit to a single action. Speciﬁcally, we obtain bicriteria approximation guarantees analogous to previous work
(Krause et al. 2008) under signiﬁcantly more general conditions.
We make three contributions. First, we deﬁne the class of
submodular best response (SBR) games, which includes the
above examples. Second, we introduce the EQUATOR algo-

Abstract
We deﬁne a class of zero-sum games with combinatorial
structure, where the best response problem of one player is
to maximize a submodular function. For example, this class
includes security games played on networks, as well as the
problem of robustly optimizing a submodular function over
the worst case from a set of scenarios. The challenge in computing equilibria is that both players’ strategy spaces can be
exponentially large. Accordingly, previous algorithms have
worst-case exponential runtime and indeed fail to scale up on
practical instances. We provide a pseudopolynomial-time algorithm which obtains a guaranteed (1 − 1/e)2 -approximate
mixed strategy for the maximizing player. Our algorithm only
requires access to a weakened version of a best response oracle for the minimizing player which runs in polynomial time.
Experimental results for network security games and a robust
budget allocation problem conﬁrm that our algorithm delivers near-optimal solutions and scales to much larger instances
than was previously possible.

Introduction
Submodular functions are ubiquitous due to wide-spread applications ranging from machine learning, to viral marketing, to mechanism design. Intuitively, submodularity captures diminishing returns (formalized later). In this paper, we
use techniques rooted in submodular optimization to solve
previously intractable zero-sum games. We then show how
to instantiate our algorithm for two speciﬁc games, including the robust optimization of a submodular objective.
As an example, consider the network security game introduced by Tsai et al. (2010). A defender can place checkpoints on k edges of a graph. An attacker aims to travel
from a source node to any one of several targets without being intercepted. Each player has an exponential number of
strategies since the defender may choose any set of k edges
and the attacker may choose any path. Hence, previous approaches to computing the optimal defender strategy were
either heuristics with no approximation guarantee, or else
provided guarantees but ran in worst-case exponential time
(Jain et al. 2011; Iwashita et al. 2016).
However, this game has useful structure. The defender’s
best response to any attacker mixed strategy is to select the
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1274

