The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Information-Theoretic Domain
Adaptation under Severe Noise Conditions
Wei Wang,1 Hao Wang,2 Zhi-Yong Ran,3 Ran He4∗
1

Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China.
2
360 Search Lab, Qihoo 360, Beijing 100190, China.
3
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing 400065, China.
4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China.
wangwei2014@iscas.ac.cn, cashenry@126.com, ranzy@cqupt.edu.cn, rhe@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
the distributions (Si, Tao, and Geng 2010; Long et al. 2013).
Another line of work bridges the distribution gap by building a deep structure (Zhou et al. 2014). Within the feature
extraction family in domain adaptation, considerable efforts
have also been devoted to cross-domain data reconstruction (Shao, Kit, and Fu 2014; Ding, Shao, and Fu 2015;
Xu et al. 2016; Zhang, Zuo, and Zhang 2016). In this reconstruction based subcategory, the methods are more concerned on uncovering the intrinsic structures within two
domains and modeling the noise in target domain during
adaptation, showing robust potentials. Speciﬁcally, they ﬁrst
make some assumptions on noise, e.g., having a sparse representation. Then the corrupted target data are iteratively
recovered to avoid negative transfer. However, real-world
noise is often severe and unpredictable, which generally
degrades the performance of the above assumption based
methods. Even worse, existing works in cross-domain reconstruction are always optimized by the Augmented Lagrange Multiplier (ALM) technique (Lin, Chen, and Ma
2010), resulting in the absence of convergence guarantee.
Therefore, effectively learning a robust transformation for
domain adaptation is still challenging as the target data may
be contaminated by various kinds of complex noise in realworld applications (e.g., contiguous occlusions and shadows
exist simultaneously on images).
Recent studies derived from information-theoretic learning (Prı́ncipe, Xu, and Fisher 2000) have shown their superiority in robust learning (Chen et al. 2016; 2017b). In particular, based on Renyi’s quadratic entropy, correntropy is proposed and proven to have the theoretical foundation of handling unpredictable noise and outliers (Liu, Pokharel, and
Prı́ncipe 2007). In conventional supervised learning (e.g.,
dimensionality reduction (Yuan and Hu 2009) and classiﬁcation (He, Zheng, and Hu 2011)), the correntropy based
objectives provide strong robustness. However, these objectives fail to attain domain alignment and robustness simultaneously. Without knowledge transfer, the learning machines
trained from source domain are invalid for target domain.
In this paper, we make great efforts to address the challenges discussed above and propose a novel reconstruction
based method in an information-theoretic setting, named
Robust Information-Theoretic Domain Adaptation (RIDA).
To robustly uniform the geometrical properties of two domains, RIDA aims at transforming all data into a new space

Abstract
Cross-domain data reconstruction methods derive a shared
transformation across source and target domains. These
methods usually make a speciﬁc assumption on noise, which
exhibits limited ability when the target data are contaminated
by different kinds of complex noise in practice. To enhance
the robustness of domain adaptation under severe noise conditions, this paper proposes a novel reconstruction based algorithm in an information-theoretic setting. Speciﬁcally, beneﬁting from the theoretical property of correntropy, the proposed algorithm is distinguished with: detecting the contaminated target samples without making any speciﬁc assumption
on noise; greatly suppressing the negative inﬂuence of noise
on cross-domain transformation. Moreover, a relative entropy
based regularization of the transformation is incorporated to
avoid trivial solutions with the reaped theoretic advantages,
i.e., non-negativity and scale-invariance. For optimization, a
half-quadratic technique is developed to minimize the nonconvex information-theoretic objectives with explicitly guaranteed convergence. Experiments on two real-world domain
adaptation tasks demonstrate the superiority of our method.

Introduction
The task of domain adaptation refers to transferring knowledge from a well-learned source domain with sufﬁcient
labeled data to a target domain, where the two domains
follow different but related distributions (Pan and Yang
2010). It plays a substantial role to the success of supervised learning machines when there are no or insufﬁcient
labeled training data in the target domain due to the expensive hand-labeling. As one of the most important families
in domain adaptation, feature extraction (Pan et al. 2011;
Hoffman et al. 2014) has attracted great attention due to
their witnessed promising applications in multi-orientation
face recognition, heterogeneous object classiﬁcation, etc.
Generally, the key challenge in the feature extraction family of domain adaptation is to seek a shared feature space
across the domains where the discrepancy of two distributions is minimized while the desired data properties are preserved. For instance, a representative subcategory employs
a measurement to estimate and reduce the distance between
∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4203

