The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Dynamic Optimization of Neural Network
Structures Using Probabilistic Modeling
Shinichi Shirakawa

Yasushi Iwata

Youhei Akimoto

Yokohama National University
shirakawa-shinichi-bg@ynu.ac.jp

Yokohama National University
iwata-yasushi-ct@ynu.jp

Shinshu University
y akimoto@shinshu-u.ac.jp

of the DNNs and optimize them by a black-box optimization technique such as Bayesian optimization (Snoek,
Larochelle, and Adams 2012) or evolutionary algorithms
(Loshchilov and Hutter 2016). Given a network conﬁguration (hyper-parameter vector), the training is done for a certain period and the trained network is evaluated based on the
accuracy or the loss for validation dataset. A black-box optimizer treats the hyper-parameter vector and the resulting
accuracy/loss as the design variables and its objective/cost
function. Recently, the methods for automatic network design that can construct more ﬂexible network structures than
the conventional hyper-parameter optimization approaches
have been proposed. Zoph and Le deﬁned the recurrent neural networks (RNNs) that generate neural network architectures for a target problem and found the state-of-the-art architectures by optimizing the RNN using the policy gradient
method (Zoph and Le 2017). The works of (Real et al. 2017;
Suganuma, Shirakawa, and Nagao 2017) optimize the connections and types of layers by evolutionary algorithms
to construct a high-performance CNN architecture. These
methods succeeded in ﬁnding the state-of-the-art conﬁgurations of the DNNs. We view all these approaches as static
optimization of the network structures. The main disadvantage of static optimization is the efﬁciency, since it repeats
the training with different network conﬁgurations until it
ﬁnds a reasonable conﬁguration.

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are powerful machine learning models and have succeeded in various artiﬁcial intelligence tasks. Although various architectures and modules for
the DNNs have been proposed, selecting and designing the
appropriate network structure for a target problem is a challenging task. In this paper, we propose a method to simultaneously optimize the network structure and weight parameters during neural network training. We consider a probability
distribution that generates network structures, and optimize
the parameters of the distribution instead of directly optimizing the network structure. The proposed method can apply
to the various network structure optimization problems under the same framework. We apply the proposed method to
several structure optimization problems such as selection of
layers, selection of unit types, and selection of connections
using the MNIST, CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100 datasets. The
experimental results show that the proposed method can ﬁnd
the appropriate and competitive network structures.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have become a popular
machine-learning model and seen great success in various tasks such as image recognition and natural language
processing. To date, a variety of DNN models has been
proposed. Considering the convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) for visual object recognition as an example, a variety of deep and complex CNN models were developed,
such as the VGG model (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015),
the residual networks (ResNets) (He et al. 2016), which have
the skip connections, and the dense convolutional networks
(DenseNets) (Huang et al. 2017). It is not easy for users
to select an appropriate network structure including hyperparameters, such as the depth of a network, the type of each
unit, and the connection between layers, since the performance depends on tasks and data. However, the appropriate
conﬁguration of such structures is of importance for high
performance of the DNNs. Therefore, developing efﬁcient
methods to optimize the structure of the DNNs is an important topic.
A popular approach to such a network structure optimization is to treat the network structure as the hyper-parameters

A dynamic optimization of the network structures, on the
other side, learns the connection weights and the structure of
a network simultaneously. A typical example is to represent
the network structure parameters as the learnable parameters
and optimize them by a stochastic gradient descent when
carrying out the weight training (Srinivas and Babu 2016;
Ba and Frey 2013). Srinivas and Babu (Srinivas and Babu
2016) introduce the Tri-State ReLU activation having differentiable parameters to prune the units and layers using
back-propagation. Ba and Frey (Ba and Frey 2013) use a binary belief network overlaying a neural network to decide
the dropout rate and jointly train two networks. The sparse
and compact network structures can be dynamically learned
by using regularization techniques (Wen et al. 2016) as well.
These methods require the loss function to be differentiable
with respect to (w.r.t.) the structure parameters or they use
heuristic optimization techniques. The dynamic optimization approach is computationally efﬁcient since it optimizes

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4074

