The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Fast Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search
via k-Diverse Nearest Neighbor Graph
Yan Xiao, Jiafeng Guo, Yanyan Lan, Jun Xu, Xueqi Cheng
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
CAS Key Lab of Network Data Science and Technology,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
xiaoyanict@foxmail.com,{guojiafeng, lanyanyan, junxu, cxq}@ict.ac.cn
ance the precision and diversity of the neighborhood graph
to keep good exploitation and exploration abilities simultaneously. We take a novel view of the graph construction
process as search result diversiﬁcation in IR, which considers each point as the query and the neighbor candidates as
documents, and re-ranks the neighbors based on an adaption
of the maximal marginal relevance criterion. Experiments
show that our method can outperform both state-of-the-art
precise graph and diverse graph methods.

Abstract
Approximate nearest neighbor search is a fundamental problem and has been studied for a few decades. Recently graphbased indexing methods have demonstrated their great efﬁciency, whose main idea is to construct neighborhood graph
ofﬂine and perform a greedy search starting from some sampled points of the graph online. Most existing graph-based
methods focus on either the precise k-nearest neighbor (kNN) graph which has good exploitation ability, or the diverse graph which has good exploration ability. In this paper,
we propose the k-diverse nearest neighbor (k-DNN) graph,
which balances the precision and diversity of the graph, leading to good exploitation and exploration abilities simultaneously. We introduce an efﬁcient indexing algorithm for the
construction of the k-DNN graph inspired by a well-known
diverse ranking algorithm in information retrieval (IR). Experimental results show that our method can outperform both
state-of-the-art precise graph and diverse graph methods.

k-Diverse Nearest Neighbor Graph
We propose to build a k-DNN graph for fast approximate
nearest neighbor search, which takes into account both distance closeness and direction diversity simultaneously. This
is quite similar to diverse ranking in IR and there is a simple but effective approach namely maximal marginal relevance (MMR) (Carbonell and Goldstein 1998) algorithm,
which employs an iterative selection process and the document with the highest marginal relevance score is selected
at each iteration.
Inspired by the MMR algorithm, here we consider the
construction of the k-DNN graph as a two-step diverse ranking process for each data point. In the ﬁrst step, we compute the initial neighbor candidates of each point using the
state-of-the-art algorithm NN-Descent (Dong, Moses, and
Li 2011). In the second step, we apply a new MMR-type
algorithm to re-rank the candidates and obtain the k diverse
nearest neighbors for each data point.
Speciﬁcally, for a target point v, a set of selected (i.e.,
ranked) neighbor points S, and a candidate point q, we deﬁne the relevance score as the negative distance between the
target point and the candidate point, i.e., −distance(q, v).
Meanwhile, we deﬁne the margin score as the minimum angle between the candidate point and those selected neighbor
points with respect to the target point, which is computed
by the negative maximum cosine value −maxp∈S cos(q −
v , p −v ). To avoid the biases of different ranges, we re-scale
these scores so that they are in the same range as follows.

Introduction
Many efforts have been devoted to the approximate nearest neighbor search problem and graph-based methods have
achieved the state-of-the-art performance in recent literature. The main idea is to connect each point with its several neighbors in the ofﬂine stage. In the online stage, some
points are sampled as starting points and their neighbors are
iteratively explored to approach the query point.
Most existing graph-based methods focus on building either the precise k-NN graph (Hajebi et al. 2011) or the
direction-diverse graph (Harwood and Drummond 2016;
Li et al. 2016). The precise k-NN graph has good exploitation ability, i.e., neighbors are exactly those nearest points,
but the searching on the graph might be easily trapped in
local optimums due to the lack of the exploration ability.
On the contrary, the direction-diverse graph has good exploration ability, i.e., each point connects multidirectional
neighbors so that different directions can be explored when
traversing on the graph, but it might not be able to exploit the
neighbors very well by focusing on exploration too much.
In this paper, we propose the k-DNN graph, where each
point is connected to a set of neighbors that are close in distance while diverse in direction. In this way, we can bal-

Relevance Score(q, v) = −

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

distance(q, v)
distancemax − distancemin

M argin Score(q, v, S) = −

8175

maxp∈S cos(q − v , p − v )
1 − (−1)

