The Eighth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence 2018 (EAAI-18)

A Driving License for Intelligent Systems
Martin Kandlhofer

Gerald Steinbauer

Institute of Software Technology
Graz University of Technology
Inffeldgasse 16b/II,
8010 Graz, Austria
kandlhofer@ist.tugraz.at

Institute of Software Technology
Graz University of Technology
Inffeldgasse 16b/II,
8010 Graz, Austria
steinbauer@ist.tugraz.at

by the well-established International Computer Driving Licence (ICDL)2 which tests and certiﬁes people’s skills necessary to use common computer applications (e.g. word processing, spreadsheet, . . . ) (Csapo 2002). Further approaches
can be found in current literature. For instance, the Roberta
Initiative (raising girl’s interest in technical topics) conducted teacher training courses (including certiﬁcation) only
in robotics applying a train-the-trainer concept. (Bredenfeld
and Leimbach 2010). Several approaches focused on teaching AI concepts exclusively to undergraduate or graduate
students at certain universities or colleges (e.g. (Torrey et
al. 2016; Barik et al. 2013)) or on teaching the basics of
AI only to teacher trainees (e.g. (Dilger 2005)). Other approaches only dealt with selected topics of AI at school level
(e.g. (Heinze, Haase, and Higgins 2010)) or with very speciﬁc tools used to illustrate certain AI concepts (e.g. (Featherston et al. 2014)). To sum up, a project as presented in this
paper, aiming at training and certifying teachers/mentors as
well as students/young people in fundamental topics of AI
on a broad, international scale is quite unique.

Abstract
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) is becoming increasingly important. Thus, sound knowledge about the principles of AI will
be a crucial factor for future careers of young people as
well as for the development of novel, innovative products.
Addressing this challenge, we present an ambitious 3-year
project focusing on developing and implementing a professional, internationally accepted, standardized training and
certiﬁcation system for AI which will also be recognized
by the industry and educational institutions. The approach is
based on already implemented and evaluated pilot projects
in the area of AI education. The project’s main goal is to
train and certify teachers and mentors as well as students and
young people in basic and advanced AI topics, fostering AI
literacy among this target audience.

Introduction and Motivation
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) plays an increasingly important
role in our daily life. In the near future jobs will largely
be related to AI as it is the basis for upcoming disruptive
technologies. Sound knowledge about the principles of AI
and its application (e.g. in robotics) will be a crucial factor for careers in various occupational ﬁelds. In this context it is important to familiarize people with those topics
early in order to develop AI literacy. Therefore, in 2017
we launched a 3-year project (EDLRIS - European Driving License for Intelligent Systems1 ) funded by the European Union. The main goal of this project is to develop a
professional, international, standardized training and certiﬁcation system in the area of AI for trainers (e.g. teachers,
educators, mentors, . . . ) and trainees (young people aged between 13 and 18; e.g. secondary school students, undergraduate students, . . . ). It is important that the level and quality of the training is sufﬁciently advanced so that it will be
recognized and accepted by educational institutions and the
industry. The project is based on several pilot projects conducted and evaluated in previous years focusing on familiarizing different age groups with fundamental topics of AI
(Kandlhofer et al. 2016; Burgsteiner, Kandlhofer, and Steinbauer 2016). The idea of an ”AI driving license” is inspired

Methodology
The challenges and main goals of the presented project can
be summarized as follows: a) addressing state of the art
technological content in AI; b) developing AI training curricula on different levels (beginner, advanced); c) developing adequate, sound technological and pedagogical teaching material (on-line and handout material); d) developing a
certiﬁcation system that allows companies and educational
institutions to recognize skills and competencies acquired
through the training; e) conducting training courses for trainers/trainees; f) testing and certifying acquired technological
(AI) skills; g) gaining high acceptance and a broad, international deployment of the training and certiﬁcation system;
In order to address those challenges and to establish a sustainable and extendable programme we follow a three stage
approach:
1. Project base and preparation: Development of a
training and certiﬁcation system for trainers and trainees
(beginner, advanced) as well as adequate on-line and handout teaching materials. The curricula/teaching materials are
developed applying well-grounded didactic concepts based

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
www.interreg-athu.eu/edlris

2

7954

https://icdl.org/

