The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Euler Sparse Representation for Image Classiﬁcation
Yang Liu,1 Quanxue Gao,1∗ Jungong Han,2 Shujian Wang 1
1

State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
2
School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University, United Kingdom
xidianliuyang@gmail.com, qxgao@xidian.edu.cn, jungonghan77@gmail.com, wangsj079@163.com

the motivations of these methods are different, they employ squared 2 -norm as the distance metric in the objective function to measure the similarity between images. It is
commonly known that squared 2 -norm is not robust in the
sense that outlying measurements can arbitrarily skew the
solution from the desired solution (Ke and Kanade 2005;
Candès et al. 2011; Oh et al. 2016). To improve the robustness of subspace learning methods, some 1 -norm based
subspace learning methods have been developed, which can
be broadly divided into two categories: 1 -norm based PCA
technique and 1 -norm based LDA technique. As can be easily derived from the name, this sort of DR algorithms employs l1 normal as the distance metric in the objective function to measure the similarity between data, where the representatives include L1-PCA (Ke and Kanade 2005), PCAL1 (Kwak 2008), and LDA-L1 (Liu et al. 2016).
Another important area requiring further investigation is
the design of classiﬁer for image classiﬁcation. Nearest
neighbor (NN) classiﬁer has been widely used in classiﬁcation stage by using Euclidean distance measure. It is easy
to see that Euclidean distance is very sensitive to shape
variation. To handle this problem, Li and Lu (Li and Lu
1999) proposed the nearest feature line (NFL) classiﬁer. Motivated by the impressive results, Chien and Wu (Chien and
Wu 2002) proposed two robust classiﬁers: nearest feature
plane (NFP) and nearest feature space (NFS) to improve
face recognition system. Gao and Wang (Gao and Wang
2007) proposed center-based nearest neighbor classiﬁer to
deal with pattern classiﬁcation. Wang and Zhang (Wang and
Zhang 2004) proposed linear generalization subspace (LGS)
to achieve higher recognition rate using only limited training images. Zheng et al. (Zheng, Zhao, and Zou 2004) developed two classiﬁers (nearest neighbor line and nearest
neighbor plane) to improve the robustness of classiﬁcation.
Recently, sparse representation has shown its superior performance in image classiﬁcation and computer vision (Zhang et al. 2016; Wright et al. 2009; Gao, Tsang, and
Chia 2010). Wright et al. (Wright et al. 2009) proposed a
sparse representation based classiﬁcation (SRC) algorithm
for face recognition, and obtained impressive results in experiments. Inspired by SRC, sparse representation has been
widely used in image recognition and denoising. To improve
performance of SRC, kernel sparse representation has become an active topic in image recognition (Harandi et al.

Abstract
Sparse representation based classiﬁcation (SRC) has gained
great success in image recognition. Motivated by the fact that
kernel trick can capture the nonlinear similarity of features,
which may help improve the separability and margin between
nearby data points, we propose Euler SRC for image classiﬁcation, which is essentially the SRC with Euler sparse representation. To be speciﬁc, it ﬁrst maps the images into the complex space by Euler representation, which has a negligible
effect for outliers and illumination, and then performs complex SRC with Euler representation. The major advantage of
our method is that Euler representation is explicit with no increase of the image space dimensionality, thereby enabling
this technique to be easily deployed in real applications. To
solve Euler SRC, we present an efﬁcient algorithm, which is
fast and has good convergence. Extensive experimental results illustrate that Euler SRC outperforms traditional SRC
and achieves better performance for image classiﬁcation.

Introduction
Image classiﬁcation is one of the active topics in pattern recognition and machine learning. In many applications, each image is usually represented as a point in the
high-dimensional image space. However, many works have
demonstrated that the naturally generated images may reside on a lower dimensional manifold. Thus, it is beneﬁcial to ﬁrst perform a dimensionality reduction (DR) prior
to utilizing any technique for image classiﬁcation and retrieval. Principal component analysis (PCA) (Turk and Pentland 1991), linear discriminant analysis (LDA) (Belhumeur,
Hespanha, and Kriegman 1997), locality preserving projection (LPP) (Niyogi 2004) and neighborhood preserving embedding (NPE) (He et al. 2005) are four of the most prevalent techniques for DR. PCA is an unsupervised technique
and used to extract the most expressive features. LDA is considered to be capable of extracting the most discriminating
features. Different from PCA and LDA, which preserve the
global geometric structure, LPP and NPE characterize the
local geometric structure of images.
Motivated by these methods, many related approaches
have been developed for dimensionality reduction, although
∗

Corresponding author: Q. Gao.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3691

