The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Upping the Game of Taxi Driving in the Age of Uber
Shashi Shekhar Jha, Shih-Fen Cheng, Meghna Lowalekar, Nicholas Wong, Rishikeshan Rajendram
Trong Khiem Tran, Pradeep Varakantham, Nghia Truong Trong, Firmansyah Bin Abd Rahman
Fujitsu-SMU Urban Computing and Engineering (UNiCEN) Corp. Lab
Singapore Management University

for both the drivers and the passengers: compared to proprietary systems employed by most taxi ﬂeets, smartphonebased platforms are much easier to scale up and cheaper to
maintain, and can take advantage of the latest sensing technologies embedded in the smartphones, 2) Uber-like services focus predominately on pre-booked passengers: this
greatly reduces uncertainties resulted from having to serve
street pickups, 3) Uber-like services fully embrace data science: large-scale and real-time analytics are employed in all
aspects of service delivery, including but not limited to dynamic pricing (or surge pricing as it is commonly called),
route recommendation, and vehicle dispatch choices, and 4)
demand aggregation: taxi markets in most cities are fragmented, thus making it difﬁcult for a passenger to ﬁnd a
taxi even if the passenger intends to book a ride; Uber-like
platforms are designed from the beginning to play the role
of demand aggregator; although such strategy is expensive
to execute initially, the platform owner could enjoy nearmonopolistic power once it reaches critical masses in both
the drivers’ and the riders’ markets.

Abstract
In most cities, taxis play an important role in providing pointto-point transportation service. If the taxi service is reliable,
responsive, and cost-effective, past studies show that taxilike services can be a viable choice in replacing a signiﬁcant
amount of private cars. However, making taxi services efﬁcient is extremely challenging, mainly due to the fact that taxi
drivers are self-interested and they operate with only local
information. Although past research has demonstrated how
recommendation systems could potentially help taxi drivers
in improving their performance, most of these efforts are not
feasible in practice. This is mostly due to the lack of both the
comprehensive data coverage and an efﬁcient recommendation engine that can scale to tens of thousands of drivers.
In this paper, we propose a comprehensive working platform
called the Driver Guidance System (DGS). With real-time
citywide taxi data provided by our collaborator in Singapore,
we demonstrate how we can combine real-time data analytics
and large-scale optimization to create a guidance system that
can potentially beneﬁt tens of thousands of taxi drivers. Via a
realistic agent-based simulation, we demonstrate that drivers
following DGS can signiﬁcantly improve their performance
over ordinary drivers, regardless of the adoption ratios. We
have concluded our system designing and building and have
recently entered the ﬁeld trial phase.

Given all these technological advances, the taxi industry will have to upgrade itself by learning from Uber-like
services. Although the industry structure and government
regulations make it difﬁcult for the taxi industry to follow
many of Uber’s innovations (such as dynamic pricing or demand aggregation, just to name a few); however, the use of
real-time data in improving taxi ﬂeet’s efﬁciency is certainly
something the taxi industry is capable of doing. In this paper,
we design and implement a scalable framework to achieve
exactly this. Recognizing the now dominant position held
by Uber-like platforms in most major cities, we have carefully positioned our framework to highlight the market segment that only taxis can satisfy. In most cities, this market
segment is pickups on the streets or at the taxi stands. To
support this market positioning, we analyze all taxi trips occurred in Singapore from October and November of 2016
(in total there were 33.5 million taxi trips). Of all these trips,
78% are from street pickups or taxi stands, while 22% are
from various booking channels. Although this analysis does
not cover private vehicles from both the Uber and Grab networks (a Uber-like operator that is competitive in the South
East Asia), the huge number of rides coming from street
pickups (almost 400,000 per day) indicates that this is still
an important channel of demands. The key to keep potential

Introduction
In most cities, taxis play an important role in providing
point-to-point transportation service. If the taxi service is reliable, responsive, and cost-effective, past studies show that
taxi-like services (in the literature, such services are usually
termed as MoD, mobility-on-demand, or MaaS, mobilityas-a-service) can be a viable choice in replacing a signiﬁcant amount of private cars (Ma, Zheng, and Wolfson
2015). However, as pointed out by earlier studies (Ding et al.
2013), making taxi services efﬁcient is extremely challenging, mainly due to the fact that taxi drivers are self-interested
and they operate with only local information.
Such lack of coordination has plagued the taxi industry
for decades, until the emergence of the ride-hailing industry,
which is currently championed by Uber. Uber-like services
are more efﬁcient than traditional taxis due to the following reasons: 1) Uber-like services are built on smartphones
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7779

