The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Personalizing a Dialogue System with Transfer Reinforcement Learning
Kaixiang Mo,† Yu Zhang,† Shuangyin Li,† Jiajun Li,‡ Qiang Yang†
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
†
{kxmo, yuzhangcse, shuangyinli, qyang}@cse.ust.hk ‡ {jiajun.li}@alumni.ust.hk

dialogue systems (Thompson, Goker, and Langley 2004;
Kim et al. 2014; Bang et al. 2015) and learning-based dialogue systems (Casanueva et al. 2015; Genevay and Laroche
2016). In rule-based personalized dialogue systems, the dialogue state, system speech-act and user speech-act are predeﬁned by developers, hence it is difﬁcult to reuse this system
when the dialogue state and the speech-act are hard to deﬁne manually. Learning-based personalized dialogue systems
could learn states and actions from training data without
requiring explicit rules designed by developers.
However, it is difﬁcult to train a personalized task-oriented
dialogue system because the data collected from each individual is often insufﬁcient. A personalized dialogue system
trained on a small dataset is likely to fail on unseen but
common dialogues due to the overﬁtting. One solution is
to consider a collection of multiple users as a source domain and an individual user as a target domain, and transfer common dialogue structure and policy from the source
domain to the target domain, which is deﬁned as transfer
reinforcement learning. Unlike the traditional transfer learning which does not consider states, the transfer reinforcement learning aims to transfer knowledge between two reinforcement learning tasks. When transferring dialogue knowledge, the challenge lies in the difference between the source
and target domains. Some works (Casanueva et al. 2015;
Genevay and Laroche 2016) have been proposed to transfer
dialogue knowledge among similar users, but they did not
model the difference among users, which might harm the
performance in the target domain.
In this paper, we propose a PErsonalized Task-oriented diALogue (PETAL) system, which is a transfer reinforcement
learning framework based on the POMDP for learning a personalized dialogue system. The PETAL system ﬁrst learns
common dialogue knowledge from the source domain and
then adapts this knowledge to the target user. To achieve this
goal, the PETAL system models personalized policies with a
personalized Q-function deﬁned as the expected cumulative
general reward plus the expected cumulative personal reward.
The personalized Q-function can model differences between
the source and target users and thus can avoid the negative
transfer problem brought by the differences. Experimental
results on a real-world coffee-ordering dataset and simulation data show that the proposed PETAL system can choose
optimal actions for different users and thus can effectively

Abstract
It is difﬁcult to train a personalized task-oriented dialogue system because the data collected from each individual is often
insufﬁcient. Personalized dialogue systems trained on a small
dataset is likely to overﬁt and make it difﬁcult to adapt to different user needs. One way to solve this problem is to consider
a collection of multiple users as a source domain and an individual user as a target domain, and to perform transfer learning
from the source domain to the target domain. By following
this idea, we propose a PErsonalized Task-oriented diALogue
(PETAL) system, a transfer reinforcement learning framework
based on POMDP, to construct a personalized dialogue system.
The PETAL system ﬁrst learns common dialogue knowledge
from the source domain and then adapts this knowledge to
the target domain. The proposed PETAL system can avoid the
negative transfer problem by considering differences between
the source and target users in a personalized Q-function. Experimental results on a real-world coffee-shopping data and
simulation data show that the proposed PETAL system can
learn optimal policies for different users, and thus effectively
improve the dialogue quality under the personalized setting.

Introduction
Dialogue systems can be classiﬁed into two classes: open
domain dialogue systems (Ritter, Cherry, and Dolan 2011;
Galley et al. 2015; Serban et al. 2015; Li et al. 2016b; Mou
et al. 2016) and task-oriented dialogue systems (Levin, Pieraccini, and Eckert 1997; Young et al. 2013; Wen et al. 2015;
2016; Williams and Zweig 2016). Open domain dialogue
systems do not limit the dialogue topic to a speciﬁc domain,
and typically do not have a clear dialogue goal. Task-oriented
dialogue systems aim to solve a speciﬁc task via dialogues.
In this paper, we focus on the task-oriented dialogue systems
which aim to assist users to ﬁnish a task such as ordering a
cup of coffee.
Personalized task-oriented dialogue systems aim to help
a user complete a dialogue task better and faster than
non-personalized dialogue systems. Personalized dialogue
systems can learn about preferences and habits of a user during interactions with the user, and then utilize this personalized information to speed up the conversation process. Personalized dialogue systems could be categorized into rule-based
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5317

