The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Hybrid Attentive Answer Selection in
CQA with Deep Users Modelling
†

Jiahui Wen,† Jingwei Ma,† Yiliu Feng,‡ Mingyang Zhong†
School of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, The University of Queensland, Australia
‡
National University of Defence Technology, China
wenjh.nudt@gmail.com, fengyiliu11@nudt.edu.an, {jingwei.ma, m.zhong1}@uq.edu.au

Wang and Nyberg 2015) propose to model the latent representations of question and its answer independently and
defer their interactions later in the softmax or classiﬁcation
layer (Yang et al. 2016). The later interactions between QA
text pairs hinder the model to learn the distributed representations of words, hence the latent representations of QA text
pairs are not semantic enough to mitigate the lexical gap.
To overcome this limitation, some other methods (Yang et
al. 2016; Shen et al. 2017) calculate the matching matrix
that represents the interactions of sentence word pairs, and
employ neural networks on top of it to derive the semantic similarity between QA pairs. However, those methods do
not learn the representations of QA pairs, and the interaction
matrix is static through the learning process, so the performance of the models is limited by the way that the interaction matrix is calculated.
To deal with the shortcomings of the aforementioned solutions, in this paper, we propose a hybrid attention mechanism for semantic QA pairs matching. The basic idea underlying this method is that, useful parts in sentences for
sentence matching need to be locally important (e.g. keywords) and mutually important at the same time. We ﬁrst
calculate individual attentions for each question and answer
independently, and then for each word, we calculate its attentions over the words in the counterpart sentence. The former attention (individual attention) indicates local importance of a word while the entropy of the later (interactive
attention) implies the importance of a word with respect
to the counterpart sentence. By combining these two attention mechanisms together, we can align the most informative parts in each sentence for the matching task. The
interactive attentions are calculated based on the interactions between representations of QA pairs, and the interactions are expressed by the way how the words attend
to each other. This coupled interaction and attention provides a deep insight of soft-alignment between QA text
pairs. Although attentive neural networks have been applied
in answer selection in previous works (Zhang et al. 2017;
Yin et al. 2015), they simply compute attention weights
for each sentence separately. Speciﬁcally, they use attention mechanism to model local importance of each word and
summary a sentence based on the weighted word representations.
Furthermore, most of the existing works only model the

Abstract
In this paper, we propose solutions to advance answer selection in Community Question Answering (CQA). Unlike
previous works, we propose a hybrid attention mechanism
to model question-answer pairs. Speciﬁcally, for each word,
we calculate the intra-sentence attention indicating its local
importance and the inter-sentence attention implying its importance to the counterpart sentence. The inter-sentence attention is based on the interactions between question-answer
pairs, and the combination of these two attention mechanisms
enables us to align the most informative parts in questionanswer pairs for sentence matching. Additionally, we exploit
user information for answer selection due to the fact that users
are more likely to provide correct answers in their areas of expertise. We model users from their written answers to alleviate data sparsity problem, and then learn user representations
according to the informative parts in sentences that are useful
for question-answer matching task. This mean of modelling
users can bridge the semantic gap between different users, as
similar users may have the same way of wording their answers. The representations of users, questions and answers
are learnt in an end-to-end neural network in a mean that best
explains the interrelation between question-answer pairs. We
validate the proposed model on a public dataset, and demonstrate its advantages over the baselines with thorough experiments.

Introduction
One of the important task in CQA is automatically selecting the correct answer for a speciﬁc question, given the fact
that the CQA forums have accumulated a large quantity of
questions and the corresponding answers (Zhang et al. 2017;
van Dijk, Tsagkias, and de Rijke 2015). Selecting the correct
answer can also maximize user engagement with the site and
minimize the time for satisfying users seeking for correct answers to their questions (Elkahky, Song, and He 2015).
Many latest research leverage deep learning methods to
model the latent representations of question answering (QA)
text pairs for texts matching. The deep learning methods
can avoid feature engineering and bridge the lexical gap between text pairs. However, there are some shortcomings in
the those neural networks based methods. To begin with,
some solutions (Severyn and Moschitti 2015; Hu et al. 2014;
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2556

