The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Multi-Task Learning Approach for Improving
Product Title Compression with User Search Log Data
Jingang Wang,1∗ Junfeng Tian,2∗ Long Qiu,3 Sheng Li,1 Jun Lang,1 Luo Si,1 Man Lan2,4
2

1
iDST, Alibaba Group
School of Computer Science and Software Engineering, East China Normal University
3
Onehome (Beijing) Network Technology Co. Ltd.
4
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing, P.R.China
{jingang.wjg, lisheng.ls, langjun.lj, luo.si}@alibaba-inc.com,
qiulong@onehome.me, 51151201048@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, mlan@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

the merchants. For the sake of SEO, most of these titles are
rather redundant and lengthy. As shown in Figure 1b, the
product title consists of more than 30 Chinese words, seriously hurting users’ browsing experience. Usually, when
a customer browses a product on Apps, less than 10 Chinese words could be displayed due to the screen size limit,
as shown in Figure 1a. Amazon’s research also reveals that
product titles with less than 80 characters improve the shopping experience by making it easier for customers to ﬁnd,
review, and buy 2 .

Abstract
It is a challenging and practical research problem to obtain effective compression of lengthy product titles for Ecommerce. This is particularly important as more and more
users browse mobile E-commerce apps and more merchants
make the original product titles redundant and lengthy for
Search Engine Optimization. Traditional text summarization
approaches often require a large amount of preprocessing
costs and do not capture the important issue of conversion rate
in E-commerce. This paper proposes a novel multi-task learning approach for improving product title compression with
user search log data. In particular, a pointer network-based
sequence-to-sequence approach is utilized for title compression with an attentive mechanism as an extractive method and
an attentive encoder-decoder approach is utilized for generating user search queries. The encoding parameters (i.e., semantic embedding of original titles) are shared among the
two tasks and the attention distributions are jointly optimized.
An extensive set of experiments with both human annotated
data and online deployment demonstrate the advantage of the
proposed research for both compression qualities and online
business values.

Introduction
Mobile Internet are changing our lives profoundly. As depicted in the Statistical Report on China’s Internet development, daily active users of mobile phones in China have
overpassed 0.72 billion by June, 2017 1 . More online transactions are made on mobile phones instead of on PCs,
with the gap still widening. This trend demands mobile ECommerce platforms to improve user experience on their
Apps. The most prominent distinction between smart phones
and PCs lies in their screen sizes as a typical screen size of
smart phones varies from 4.5 to 5.5 inches only.
It is an important and practical research problem for producing succinct product titles in mobile E-commerce applications. On E-commerce platforms, especially customer to
customer (C2C) websites, product titles are often written by

(a) Search Result Page

(b) Product Detail Page

Figure 1: When a user issues a query “ﬂoral-dress longsleeve women”, the complete title cannot be displayed in
the Search Result Page, unless the user proceeds to the detail page further.
In comparison to conventional sentence summarization,
which only requires the generated summary preserves important information grammatically, product title compression often has more constraints. The words in long titles
are generally elaborated by experienced sellers and proved
helpful to transaction in PC era. Many sellers do not want to
include words not in their original titles. This is even more
serious if the new external words make the purchase conversion rate lower. For this practical reason, we address product

∗

Equal contributions.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://www.cnnic.cn/hlwfzyj/hlwxzbg/hlwtjbg/201708/
P020170807351923262153.pdf

2
https://sellercentral.amazon.com/forums/message.jspa?
messageID=2921001

451

