The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Label Space Driven Heterogeneous Transfer
Learning with Web Induced Alignment
Sanatan Sukhija
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Ropar, Punjab, India
sanatan@iitrpr.ac.in

Abstract

data in the common space. The shared information can be
present in the form of instance correspondences, overlapping
features, shared label space, common meta-features/latent
space or any task speciﬁc/independent information. Some
HTL approaches also leverage domain-speciﬁc knowledge
by utilizing external sources such as oracles/dictionary, social media or web to reduce the domain differences.
The proposed algorithm utilizes the inter-label space semantic similarities to improve the joint alignment of the
data from the source and target domains in the common
space. Our approach is motivated by the cross-domain activity recognition task where the label spaces are semantically related. Learning a robust activity recognition model
requires manually annotating large amounts of sensor observations, which is an expensive task. Cross-domain activity recognition leverages labeled data from existing smart
homes to a target smart home to circumvent the annotation
effort. The presence of different sensor modalities across the
different smart home layouts leads to heterogeneous feature
spaces. Differences in the daily routine of the residents in
different smart homes results in differences in the marginal
and conditional distribution of the data. However, the daily
activities of different smart home residents lead to semantically related label spaces. The proposed approach learns
a mapping between the heterogeneous sensors to enable
knowledge transfer. We conducted experiments to test the
transfer efﬁciency of our proposed approach on three singleresident smart homes from the CASAS datasets (Cook et al.
2013).

Heterogeneous Transfer Learning (HTL) algorithms leverage knowledge from a heterogeneous source domain to perform a task in a target domain. We present a novel HTL algorithm that works even where there are no shared features,
instance correspondences and further, the two domains do
not have identical labels. We utilize the label relationships
via web-distance to align the data of the domains in the projected space, while preserving the structure of the original
data.

Introduction
Traditional supervised algorithms require sufﬁcient labeled
data to learn a computational model for making reliable predictions. Often, obtaining labeled training data is expensive
and time consuming. Transfer learning algorithms overcome
this limitation for a target domain by leveraging labeled
knowledge from related domains (often termed as the source
domains) that can have different distributions, different feature spaces and even different label spaces (Sukhija, Krishnan, and Singh 2016). Knowledge transfer between domains
with heterogeneous feature spaces is widely known as Heterogeneous Transfer Learning (HTL). As the feature spaces
are heterogeneous, the ﬁrst task of any HTL approach is to
identify a common feature space for the source and target
domain that can be used for adaptation. Based on this common space, the HTL literature can be categorized into two
groups. The HTL methods belonging to the ﬁrst group (also
known as Feature Space Remapping (FSR) methods) learn
a single transformation that maps source features to target
features. With the help of this learned transformation, the
data from the source domain can be projected to the target
domain and vice-versa. The approaches associated with the
second group (also known as Latent Space Transformation
(LST) methods) learn a pair of mappings, one for each domain, to project the data onto a shared subspace for adaptation. The second task is to bridge the gap between the data
differences that arise when the data from both the domains is
projected onto the common space. For compensating these
differences, some shared information can be leveraged to
maximize the similarity of the source and target domain

Proposed approach
The primary limitation with state-of-the-art LST approaches
is that they rely on implicit feature relationships to ﬁnd a
lower dimensional optimal shared subspace that will be used
for adaptation. Learning the optimal shared subspace is an
expensive task as it involves a grid-search on the dimension
of the shared subspace. In order to circumvent this inherent
limitation of LST approaches, the proposed HTL algorithm
is conceived as a FSR minimization objective that bridges
the heterogeneous feature and output spaces of the source
and target domains without relying on instance or feature
correspondences. Our novel approach, Label Space Driven
Heterogeneous Transfer Learning with Web Induced Alignment (LSDHTL-WIA), aligns the data from the source and

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8165

