The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

An Unsupervised Model with Attention
Autoencoders for Question Retrieval
Minghua Zhang, Yunfang Wu∗
Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University, MOE, China
{zhangmh, wuyf}@pku.edu.cn

The challenge of question retrieval is that two natural language sentences often express similar meanings with different but semantically related words, which results in semantic gaps between them. In previous work, various approaches have been proposed to bridge the semantic gaps between two objects, most of which are supervised. Some researches leverage word-to-word (or phrase-to-phrase) translation probabilities to capture sematic matching terms (Xue,
Jeon, and Croft 2008; Zhou et al. 2011). In order to train
the translation model, one needs to collect a large amount
of monolingual parallel strings of similar questions pairs,
which are generally not available in practice. Alternatively,
question-answer pairs are also treated as parallel strings,
but the assumption that questions and answers are semantically equivalent is hardly true in reality. Furthermore, many
research (Romeo et al. 2016; Barrón-Cedeño et al. 2016;
Franco-Salvador et al. 2016; Charlet and Damnati 2017) apply a learning to rank architecture to handle question retrieval. These methods are supervised fusion of different features, including both supervised and unsupervised similarity
features. Among the features, many were based on overlap
count between components which include but are not limited
to, n-grams of words or characters, named entities, frame
representations and knowledge graphs (Franco-Salvador et
al. 2016). Recently, much attention is also paid for the use
of neural matching features (Goyal 2017), which can extract high level matching signals from distributed representations of the sentences and capture their similarity beyond
lexicons. Overall, the limitation of previous work is that,
building a large amount of training data with similar questions is expensive and careful feature engineering is timeconsuming.

Abstract
Question retrieval is a crucial subtask for community question answering. Previous research focus on supervised models which depend heavily on training data and manual feature engineering. In this paper, we propose a novel unsupervised framework, namely reduced attentive matching network (RAMN), to compute semantic matching between two
questions. Our RAMN integrates together the deep semantic
representations, the shallow lexical mismatching information
and the initial rank produced by an external search engine.
For the ﬁrst time, we propose attention autoencoders to generate semantic representations of questions. In addition, we
employ lexical mismatching to capture surface matching between two questions, which is derived from the importance of
each word in a question. We conduct experiments on the open
CQA datasets of SemEval-2016 and SemEval-2017. The experimental results show that our unsupervised model obtains
comparable performance with the state-of-the-art supervised
methods in SemEval-2016 Task 3, and outperforms the best
system in SemEval-2017 Task 3 by a wide margin.

Introduction
Community question answering (CQA) portals, like Yahoo!
Answers and Baidu Knows, are popular forums where users
ask and answer questions on diverse topics. As a consequence, the CQA has accumulated a large quantity of questions and answers, which have made CQA portals valuable
resources. In these CQA forums, questions may be repeated
or closely related to previously asked questions, and there
exists a large amount of answers with respect to a given
question. As a result, it will be difﬁcult and time-consuming
for users to search and distinguish the good answers. The
CQA system could help to automate the process of ﬁnding
good answers to new questions in a community-created discussion forum. The system ﬁrst retrieves similar questions
(i.e. question retrieval) in the forum and then identiﬁes the
posts (i.e. answer selection) in the answer threads of those
similar questions. In this paper, we focus on question retrieval for CQA, with the purpose of developing semantic
textual similarity measures for such noisy texts.

In this paper, we propose an unsupervised framework to
compute question-question similarity, relying only on the
large collection of unannotated data in CQA forums. We
focus on core textual semantic similarity, avoiding using
any metadata analysis (such as user proﬁle and question
categories). We propose a reduced attentive matching network (RAMN), which integrates three aspects of information in a robust and simple unsupervised framework, including the question representations generated by the deep network, the lexical mismatching information based on the surface matching and the initial rank produced by an external
search engine. We conduct experiments on the benchmark

∗

Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4978

