The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Maximizing Inﬂuence in an Unknown Social Network
1

Bryan Wilder,12 Nicole Immorlica,3 Eric Rice,24 Milind Tambe12

Department of Computer Science, 2 Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Society 4 School of Social Work
University of Southern California
{bwilder, ericr, tambe}@usc.edu
3
Microsoft Research, New England
nicimm@gmail.com

et al. 2012). For instance, a person may have hundreds of
Facebook friends whom they barely know. In principle, the
entire network could be reconstructed via surveys, and then
existing inﬂuence maximization algorithms applied. However, exhaustive surveys are very labor-intensive and often
considered impractical (Valente and Pumpuang 2007). For
inﬂuence maximization to be relevant to many real-world
problems, it must contend with limited information about
the network, not just limited computation.
The major informational restriction is the number of
nodes which may be surveyed to explore the network. Thus,
a key question is: how can we ﬁnd inﬂuential nodes with a
small number of queries? We formalize this problem as exploratory inﬂuence maximization and seek a principled algorithmic solution, i.e., an algorithm which makes a small
number of queries and returns a set of seed nodes which are
approximately as inﬂuential as the globally optimal seed set.
Existing ﬁeld work uses heuristics, such as sampling some
percentage of the nodes and asking them to nominate inﬂuencers (Valente and Pumpuang 2007). To our knowledge, no
previous work directly addresses this question from an algorithmic perspective (see Section 3).
We show that for general graphs, any algorithm for exploratory inﬂuence maximization may perform arbitrarily
badly unless it examines almost the entire network. However, real world networks often have strong community
structure, where nodes form tightly connected subgroups
which are only weakly connected to the rest of the network (Leskovec et al. 2009). Consequently, inﬂuence mostly
propagates locally. Community structure has been used to
develop computationally efﬁcient inﬂuence maximization
algorithms (Wang et al. 2010; Chen et al. 2014). Here, we
use it to design a highly information-efﬁcient algorithm.
We make four contributions. First, we introduce exploratory
inﬂuence maximization and show that it is intractable for
general graphs. Second, we present the ARISEN algorithm, which exploits community structure to ﬁnd inﬂuential nodes. Third, we show that ARISEN has strong empirical performance on an array of real world social networks.
Fourth, we formally analyze ARISEN on graphs drawn from
the Stochastic Block Model (SBM) (Fienberg and Wasserman 1981), a widely studied model of community structure.
We prove that it approximates the optimal inﬂuence if the
entire network were known by querying only a polylogarith-

Abstract
In many real world applications of inﬂuence maximization,
practitioners intervene in a population whose social structure
is initially unknown. This poses a multiagent systems challenge to act under uncertainty about how the agents are connected. We formalize this problem by introducing exploratory
inﬂuence maximization, in which an algorithm queries individual network nodes (agents) to learn their links. The goal
is to locate a seed set nearly as inﬂuential as the global optimum using very few queries. We show that this problem
is intractable for general graphs. However, real world networks typically have community structure, where nodes are
arranged in densely connected subgroups. We present the
ARISEN algorithm, which leverages community structure to
ﬁnd an inﬂuential seed set. Experiments on real world networks of homeless youth, village populations in India, and
others demonstrate ARISEN’s strong empirical performance.
To formally demonstrate how ARISEN exploits community
structure, we prove an approximation guarantee for ARISEN
on graphs drawn from the Stochastic Block Model.

1

Introduction

In contexts ranging from health to international development, practitioners have used the social network of their
target population to spread information and change behavior. Social interactions between population members form
a multiagent system; the challenge is identify the most inﬂuential agents. While previous work has delivered computationally efﬁcient algorithms for this inﬂuence maximization problem (Chen, Wang, and Wang 2010; Tang, Xiao, and
Shi 2014; Yadav et al. 2016), this work assumes that the social network is given explicitly as input. However, in many
real-world domains, the network is not initially known and
must be gathered via laborious ﬁeld observations. For example, collecting network data from vulnerable populations
such as homeless youth, while crucial for health interventions, requires signiﬁcant time spent gathering ﬁeld observations (Rice et al. 2012). Social media data is often unavailable when access to technology is limited, for instance in
developing countries or with vulnerable populations. Even
when such data is available, it often includes many weak
links which are not effective at spreading inﬂuence (Bond
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4743

