The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Two-Stage MaxSAT Reasoning Approach
for the Maximum Weight Clique Problem
1

Hua Jiang,1 Chu-Min Li,2∗ Yanli Liu,3 Felip Manyà4

College of Mathematics & Computer Science, Jianghan University, China
2
MIS, Université de Picardie Jules Verne, France
3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
4
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Institute (IIIA, CSIC), Spain
jianghua.hgd@gmail.com; chu-min.li@u-picardie.fr; yanlil2008@163.com; felip@iiia.csic.es
and Brunato 2011). See (Wu and Hao 2015a) for a review on
MC algorithms. Compared with the number of algorithms for
MC, there are relatively fewer algorithms available for MWC.
This is partially due to the fact that MWC is generally harder
to solve than MC because of the different weight values of
the vertices (Cai and Lin 2016; Jiang, Li, and Manyà 2017).
In this paper, we focus on algorithms for MWC. The most
efﬁcient heuristic algorithms for MWC are FastWClq (Cai
and Lin 2016), MN/TS (Wu, Hao, and Glover 2012),
LSCC+BMS (Wang, Cai, and Yin 2016), ReTS (Zhou, Hao,
and Goëffon 2017) and RRWL (Fan et al. 2017). The most
representative exact algorithms for MWC are Cliquer (Ostergard 2002), Kumlander’s algorithm (Kumlander 2008),
VCTable (Shimizu et al. 2012), OTClique (Shimizu et al.
2013), MWCLQ (Fang, Li, and Xu 2016) and WLMC (Jiang,
Li, and Manyà 2017). Among them, we identify MWCLQ
and WLMC as two of the most competitive algorithms. Both
implement the BnB scheme and apply MaxSAT reasoning to
improve the upper bound estimation. To our best knowledge,
MWCLQ is specially good in small/medium dense graphs
while WLMC exhibits the best performance in massive sparse
graphs.
MaxSAT reasoning has been proven to be effective to reduce the search space in BnB algorithms for MWC. The
current MaxSAT reasoning implemented in MWCLQ and
WLMC relies on an upper bound (UBIS ) derived from the
computation of an independent set (IS) partition of the vertices of the graph. However, as stated in (Jiang, Li, and Manyà
2017), UBIS is very conservative. Moreover, the MaxSAT
reasoning for improving UBIS implemented in both MWCLQ and WLMC is carried out in a brute-force manner: It
repeatedly and blindly applies unit IS propagation to detect
disjoint subsets of conﬂicting ISs.
To overcome the conservativeness of UBIS and improve
the efﬁciency of MaxSAT reasoning on BnB algorithms, we
propose a novel two-stage MaxSAT reasoning approach to
reducing the search space. In each stage, MaxSAT reasoning
is specialised and guided for different tasks. As a result, we
develop a new MWC algorithm called TSM-MWC.
The conducted experiments on an extensive set of instances show that the two-stage MaxSAT reasoning approach
is very effective on reducing the search space, and TSMMWC greatly outperforms relevant MWC algorithms in both
small/medium and massive real-world graphs. To our best

Abstract
MaxSAT reasoning is an effective technology used in modern branch-and-bound (BnB) algorithms for the Maximum
Weight Clique problem (MWC) to reduce the search space.
However, the current MaxSAT reasoning approach for MWC
is carried out in a blind manner and is not guided by any
relevant strategy. In this paper, we describe a new BnB algorithm for MWC that incorporates a novel two-stage MaxSAT
reasoning approach. In each stage, the MaxSAT reasoning
is specialised and guided for different tasks. Experiments on
an extensive set of graphs show that the new algorithm implementing this approach signiﬁcantly outperforms relevant
exact and heuristic MWC algorithms in both small/medium
and massive real-world graphs.

Introduction
In a vertex-weighted graph G = (V, E, w), where V is the
set of vertices and E is the set of edges, the weight function
w assigns a positive integer, called weight, to each vertex.
A clique C is a subset of V in which every two vertices
are adjacent in G. The size of a clique C is its cardinality.
The Maximum Clique Problem (MC) is to ﬁnd a clique of
maximum size in G. The weight of a clique C is deﬁned to
be the total weight of vertices in C. The Maximum Weight
Clique Problem (MWC), an important generalization of MC,
is to ﬁnd a clique of maximum weight in G, and its weight is
denoted by ωv (G).
MC and MWC are NP-hard problems (Garey and Johnson
1979) with applications in areas as diverse as coding theory (Zhian et al. 2013), protein structure prediction (Mascia
et al. 2010), combinatorial auctions (Wu and Hao 2015b),
computer vision (Zhang, Javed, and Shah 2014) and genomics (Butenko and Wilhelm 2006). Given their practical
importance, considerable efforts have been devoted to develop both exact and heuristic algorithms for them.
There exist a remarkable number of algorithms for MC.
We highlight the exact branch-and-bound (BnB) algorithms
described in (Tomita et al. 2010; Li and Quan 2010; San et
al. 2011; Jiang, Li, and Manyà 2016; Li, Jiang, and Manyà
2017), and the heuristic local search algorithms described
in (Wu and Hao 2013; Benlic and Hao 2013; Pullan, Mascia,
∗

Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1338

