The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Word Co-Occurrence Regularized Non-Negative
Matrix Tri-Factorization for Text Data Co-Clustering
Aghiles Salah
School of Information Systems
Singapore Management University,
Singapore
asalah@smu.edu.sg

Melissa Ailem

Mohamed Nadif

University of Southern California, USA
LIPADE
& INRIA, France
University of Paris Descartes, France
melissa.ailem@inria.fr
mohamed.nadif@parisdescartes.fr

a clustering along one dimension only (Salah, Rogovschi,
and Nadif 2016; Ailem, Role, and Nadif 2017b). In fact, coclustering exhibits several advantages, over one-sided clustering: it leverages the inherent duality between the rows and
columns of a data matrix, which makes it possible to improve clustering along both dimensions. It performs an implicit adaptive dimensionality reduction at each stage, which
lends itself to scalable and effective algorithms for sparse
data. It produces meaningful and interpretable results; in the
case of document-word matrices, for example, co-clustering
annotates sets of documents by clusters of words.
Among existing co-clustering approaches, Non-Negative
Matrix Tri-Factorization (NTMF) has proven to be useful
for this task (Long, Zhang, and Yu 2005; Ding et al. 2006).
NMTF turns the co-clustering problem into a matrix approximation problem. In the context of text data, this approach
seeks a decomposition of the document-word matrix X into
three non-negative latent factor matrices, i.e., X ≈ ZSW ,
where Z and W play the role of the document and column
cluster membership matrices, respectively, while S can be
viewed as a “summary” of X, due to co-clustering. Key advantages to consider NMTF for co-clustering are: high performance, efﬁciency, easy to implement inference and ﬂexibility: NMTF can be easily composed to build more complex
models and incorporate side information.
One important aspect when dealing with text data, is to
preserve the semantic relationships between words. However, previous co-clustering algorithms, including NMTF,
have overlooked this aspect. This is an important issue that
may induce a signiﬁcant loss of semantics, i.e., words with
similar meanings are not guaranteed to have similar latent
representations. Consequently, documents which are about
the same topic, using similar (but not identical) words,
are not guaranteed to be mapped to the same direction in
the latent space. Clearly, this may severely impede the coclustering performance of NMTF.
To address this issue, we propose to extend NMTF to account for the semantic relationships between words. The research question is how to capture and leverage such relationships. In this work, we rely on the distributional hypothesis (Harris 1954) stating that, words which co-occur frequently within the same “context” (e.g., a sentence, document, etc.) have similar meanings. Following this hypothesis, we propose to regularize the word factors in NMTF

Abstract
Text data co-clustering is the process of partitioning the documents and words simultaneously. This approach has proven
to be more useful than traditional one-sided clustering when
dealing with sparsity. Among the wide range of co-clustering
approaches, Non-Negative Matrix Tri-Factorization (NMTF)
is recognized for its high performance, ﬂexibility and theoretical foundations. One important aspect when dealing with
text data, is to capture the semantic relationships between
words since documents that are about the same topic may not
necessarily use exactly the same vocabulary. However, this
aspect has been overlooked by previous co-clustering models, including NMTF. To address this issue, we rely on the
distributional hypothesis stating that words which co-occur
frequently within the same context, e.g., a document or sentence, are likely to have similar meanings. We then propose a
new NMTF model that maps frequently co-occurring words
roughly to the same direction in the latent space to reﬂect the
relationships between them. To infer the factor matrices, we
derive a scalable alternating optimization algorithm, whose
convergence is guaranteed. Extensive experiments, on several
real-world datasets, provide strong evidence for the effectiveness of the proposed approach, in terms of co-clustering.

Introduction
Co-clustering is an important extension of traditional onesided clustering that aims to partition the rows and columns
of a data matrix simultaneously (Hartigan 1972; Banerjee et al. 2007; Govaert and Nadif 2013). This approach
has been shown to be useful in many application domains
such as text mining (Dhillon, Mallela, and Modha 2003;
Salah and Nadif 2017; Ailem, Role, and Nadif 2017a) to
group words and documents simultaneously, bioinformatics (Cheng and Church 2000; Madeira and Oliveira 2004;
Cho et al. 2004) to group genes and experimental conditions simultaneously or to identify heterogeneous groups of
two related entities (Pio et al. 2015), collaborative ﬁltering (Hofmann and Puzicha 1999; Shan and Banerjee 2008;
Deodhar and Ghosh 2010) to group users and items.
It turns out that, when dealing with high dimensional
sparse data, such as text, co-clustering is more useful than
traditional one-sided clustering even if we are interested in
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3992

