The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

SC2Net: Sparse LSTMs for Sparse Coding∗
Joey Tianyi Zhou,1 Kai Di,1 Jiawei Du,1 Xi Peng,2 Hao Yang,3 Sinno Jialin Pan,4
Ivor W. Tsang,5 Yong Liu 1 Zheng Qin, 1 Rick Siow Mong Goh 1
1

Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR, Singapore,
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, China, 3 Amazon, Seattle, USA,
4
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, 5 University of Technology Sydney, Australia,
1
{zhouty,dikai,dujw, liuyong, qinz,gohsm}@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg, 2 pengx.gm@gmail.com,
3
lancelot365@gmail.com, 4 sinnopan@ntu.edu.sg, 5 ivor.tsang@uts.edu.au
2

sparse coding is proportional to the size and the dimension
of the dictionary used, as well as the input dimension. These
makes most existing 1 -solvers less impractical in real-world
applications.
To address these issues, Gregor and LeCun (2010) recently proposed the Learned ISTA (LISTA) algorithm
which unfolds the iterative hard-thresholding (ISTA) algorithm (Blumensath and Davies 2008) – one of the most popular 1 -solvers, into a recurrent neural network (RNN). Beneﬁting from the new formulation, LISTA simultaneously optimizes the dictionary and sparse codes, which correspond
to the weights and outputs of the RNN, respectively. Unlike the traditional 1 -solvers, such as ISTA, LISTA is very
computationally efﬁcient in inference since it just passes the
input through a neural network instead of solving a convex
optimization problem. Although LISTA has received much
attention, it suffers from the following limitations as ISTA.

Abstract
The iterative hard-thresholding algorithm (ISTA) is one of the
most popular optimization solvers to achieve sparse codes.
However, ISTA suffers from following problems: 1) ISTA
employs non-adaptive updating strategy to learn the parameters on each dimension with a ﬁxed learning rate. Such a
strategy may lead to inferior performance due to the scarcity
of diversity; 2) ISTA does not incorporate the historical information into the updating rules, and the historical information has been proven helpful to speed up the convergence.
To address these challenging issues, we propose a novel formulation of ISTA (named as adaptive ISTA) by introducing
a novel adaptive momentum vector. To efﬁciently solve the
proposed adaptive ISTA, we recast it as a recurrent neural
network unit and show its connection with the well-known
long short term memory (LSTM) model. With a new proposed unit, we present a neural network (termed SC2Net) to
achieve sparse codes in an end-to-end manner. To the best
of our knowledge, this is one of the ﬁrst works to bridge the
1 -solver and LSTM, and may provide novel insights in understanding model-based optimization and LSTM. Extensive
experiments show the effectiveness of our method on both
unsupervised and supervised tasks.

1. LISTA (or ISTA) is a non-adaptive updating approach,
which updates the parameters on each dimension with a
ﬁxed learning rate. Such a strategy may not be optimal
in some cases, and lead to inferior performance. For example, sparse/big data usually requires the per-dimension
updating scheme for saving cost and memory.

Introduction

2. LISTA (or ISTA) does not consider the historical information to design the updating rules. A lot of studies in
the optimization community (Qian 1999; Zeiler 2012;
Duchi, Hazan, and Singer 2011) have proved that incorporating historical information is helpful to improve the
convergence performance of algorithms.

Sparse coding (SC) has demonstrated effectiveness in uncovering semantic information from noisy and high dimensional data (Peng et al. 2016), including image superresolution (Zhong, Lu, and Yang 2012), subspace learning (Peng et al. 2017), background modeling (Cevher et al.
2008), image classiﬁcation (Mairal et al. 2008), users likes
prediction (Guntuku et al. 2016), hashing (Zhou et al. 2016),
etc.
To achieve sparse codes, it generally requires to solve
an 1 -regularization optimization problem, which is usually computationally expensive. Although a number of 1 solvers have been proposed, they may suffer from several
limitations. First, these methods optimize one variable by
ﬁxing others and thus may obtain suboptimal solutions. Second, it is very computationally expensive to the inference of
sparse codes. For each data point, the time complexity for

To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel 1 solver, termed adaptive ISTA, by introducing adaptive momentum vectors to enable per-parameter updates and incorporate historical information. Accompanying with advantages of adaptive ISTA, the disadvantage is the difﬁculty
in optimization due to overmany parameters. To be speciﬁc, our adaptive ISTA needs automatically learning ds parameters, where ds is the dimension of sparse codes, while
ISTA only involves one parameter. To make optimization of
adaptive ISTA tractable, we recast our adaptive ISTA as a
novel RNN unit, named as sparse LSTM (SLSTM), which
could be regarded as a variant of long short term memory (LSTM) (Gers, Schraudolph, and Schmidhuber 2002;
Wang, Gao, and Yuan 2017). Speciﬁcally, we show that the

∗

Corresponding Author: Xi Peng.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4588

