The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

On the ERM Principle with Networked Data
Yuanhong Wang,1,2 Yuyi Wang,3 Xingwu Liu,4,5 Juhua Pu1,2∗
1

State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Research Institute of Beihang University in Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
3
Disco Group, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
4
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
5
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
trained with networked data (CLANET) whose goal is to
train a classiﬁer with examples in a data graph G. Every
vertex of G is an object and described by a feature vector
X ∈ X that is drawn independently and identically (i.i.d.)
from an unknown distribution, while every edge corresponds
to a training example whose input is a pair of feature vectors
(X, X  ) of the two ends of this edge and whose target value
Y is in {0, 1}.
A widely used principle to select a proper model from
a hypothesis set is Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM).
Papa, Bellet, and Clémençon (2016) establish risk bounds
for ERM on complete data graphs, and the bounds are independent of the distribution of the data. These bounds are of
the order O(log(n)/n), where n is the number of vertices in
the complete graph. However, in practice it is very likely that
one cannot collect examples for all pairs of vertices and then
G is usually incomplete, thus techniques based on complete
U -processes in (Papa, Bellet, and Clémençon 2016) cannot
be applied and the risk bounds of the order O(log(n)/n) are
no longer valid in this setting. By generalizing the moment
inequality for U -processes to the case of incomplete graphs,
we prove novel risk bounds for the incomplete graph.
Usually, every training example is equally weighted (or
unweighted) in ERM, which seems much less persuasive
when the examples are networked, in particular when the
graph is incomplete. But, most existing theoretical results
of learning from networked examples are based on the
unweighted ERM (Usunier, Amini, and Gallinari 2006,
Ralaivola, Szafranski,and Stempfel 2009), and their bounds
are of the order O( χ∗ (DG )/m) where DG is the line
graph of G and χ∗ is the fractional chromatic number of DG
(see Section A in the online appendix1 ) and m is the number
of training examples. In order to improve this bound, Wang,
Guo, and Ramon (2017) propose weighted ERM which adds
weights to training examples according to the data graph,
and show that
the risk bound for weighted ERM can be of the
order O(1/ ν ∗ (G)) where ν ∗ (G) is the fractional matching number of G, so using weighted ERM networked data
can be more effectively exploited than the equal weighting
∗
≥ m/χ∗ (DG ).
method, as basic graph theory tells us νG
However, Wang, Guo, and Ramon (2017) (in fact, Usunier,
Amini, and Gallinari (2006) and Ralaivola, Szafranski, and

Abstract
Networked data, in which every training example involves
two objects and may share some common objects with others, is used in many machine learning tasks such as learning
to rank and link prediction. A challenge of learning from networked examples is that target values are not known for some
pairs of objects. In this case, neither the classical i.i.d. assumption nor techniques based on complete U-statistics can
be used. Most existing theoretical results of this problem only
deal with the classical empirical risk minimization (ERM)
principle that always weights every example equally, but this
strategy leads to unsatisfactory bounds. We consider general
weighted ERM and show new universal risk bounds for this
problem. These new bounds naturally deﬁne an optimization
problem which leads to appropriate weights for networked
examples. Though this optimization problem is not convex in
general, we devise a new fully polynomial-time approximation scheme (FPTAS) to solve it.

1

Introduction

“No man is an island, entire of itself ...”, the beginning
of a well-known poem by the 17th century English poet
John Donne, might be able to explain why social networking websites are so popular. These social media not only
make communications convenient and enrich our lives but
also bring us data, of an unimaginable amount, that is intrinsically networked. Social network data nowadays is widely
used in research on social science, network dynamics, and as
an inevitable fate, data mining and machine learning (Scott
2017). Similar examples of networked data such as trafﬁc
networks (Min and Wynter 2011), chemical interaction networks (Szklarczyk et al. 2014), citation networks (Dawson
et al. 2014) also abound throughout the machine learning
world.
Admittedly, many efforts have been made to design practical algorithms for learning from networked data, e.g.,
(Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg 2007, Macskassy and Provost
2007, Li et al. 2016, Garcia-Duran et al. 2016). However,
not many theoretical guarantees of these methods have been
established, which is the main concern of this paper. More
speciﬁcally, this paper deals with risk bounds of classiﬁers
∗

Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

4244

https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.04297

