The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Training and Evaluating Improved
Dependency-Based Word Embeddings
†

‡

Chen Li,† Jianxin Li,† Yangqiu Song,‡ Ziwei Lin†

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
{lichen,lijx,linzw}@act.buaa.edu.cn, yqsong@cse.ust.hk
S1: Dogs are usually highly variable in height and weight.
S2: Usually, domestic cats are similar in size.
BOW
First-Order
Second-Order
Dogs
nmod-advmod−1 /height
are
advmod−1
nsubj-advmod−1 /Dogs
S1
highly
/variable
cop-advmod−1 /are
variable
advmod-advmod−1 /highly
nmod-advmod−1 /size
domestic advmod−1
S2
nsubj-advmod−1 /cats
cats
/similar
cop-advmod−1 /are

Abstract
Word embedding has been widely used in many natural language processing tasks. In this paper, we focus on learning word embeddings through selective higher-order relationships in sentences to improve the embeddings to be less
sensitive to local context and more accurate in capturing
semantic compositionality. We present a novel multi-order
dependency-based strategy to composite and represent the
context under several essential constraints. In order to realize selective learning from the word contexts, we automatically assign the strengths of different dependencies between
co-occurred words in the stochastic gradient descent process.
We evaluate and analyze our proposed approach using several
direct and indirect tasks for word embeddings. Experimental
results demonstrate that our embeddings are competitive to or
better than state-of-the-art methods and signiﬁcantly outperform other methods in terms of context stability. The output
weights and representations of dependencies obtained in our
embedding model conform to most of the linguistic characteristics and are valuable for many downstream tasks.

Table 1: First- and second-order dependency-based context
of two similar sentences (S1 and S2) for the same word
“usually.” First-order dependency-based context comes from
one-hop neighborhoods in the dependency parse tree where
second-order context comes from two-hop neighborhoods.
use target word to forecast its surrounding words, such as
Skip-Gram (SG) (Mikolov et al. 2013b) and its variants (Qiu
et al. 2014).
The above intuitions to train word embeddings have been
proven to be useful, however, some obvious issues have been
found in the composition and representation of local context.
First, though the large-scale corpus improves the learning effect of embeddings, with more diverse of a word’s context
may result in more difﬁculty to use one single embedding
vector to approximate the co-occurrences. Using multiple
embedding vectors of a word may be able to solve this problem (Huang et al. 2012), but how to decide the number of
vectors of a word is much more difﬁcult.
Second, in most of the existing models, context words
are treated equally or distinguished by distances between
the context words and the target central word. However, this
does not conform to the real linguistic rules and human cognition (Levy and Goldberg 2014; Komninos and Manandhar 2016). As illustrated in Table 1, the word “cats” is more
signiﬁcant than word “usually” for target word “domestic,”
because the dependency amod (between “cats” and “domestic”) is more important than other dependencies.
In this paper, we generalize word embedding approaches
to context combining context-dependent weights and multiorder dependencies. Our approach has two major contributions:
1) We propose a fast and efﬁcient strategy to generate the

Introduction
Distributed word representations, also known as word embeddings, have attracted more attention and been widely
applied to many Natural Language Processing (NLP)
tasks (Mikolov et al. 2013b; Collobert et al. 2011; Jeffrey, Richard, and Christopher 2014; Mikolov et al. 2013a;
Turian, Ratinov, and Bengio 2010; Levy, Goldberg, and Dagan 2015). Based on the distributed hypothesis, such models ﬁt the co-occurrence of words using vector representations. The output vectors can be use not only to explore relationships between words (Mikolov et al. 2013b; 2013a),
but also to achieve remarkable effects in many NLP tasks,
such as Part-Of-Speech (POS) tagging and Named Entity
Recognition (NER) (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013;
Baroni, Dinu, and Kruszewski 2014; Collobert et al. 2011).
Most of the embedding models iteratively learn the characteristics of co-occurrence, though the structures of models can be very different. For example, some models predict target word by considering its local context, such as
C&W (Collobert et al. 2011) and Continuous Bag-Of-Words
(CBOW) (Mikolov et al. 2013a), while the other methods
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5836

