The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Compatibility Family Learning for Item Recommendation and Generation
Yong-Siang Shih,1 Kai-Yueh Chang,1 Hsuan-Tien Lin,1,2 Min Sun3
1

Appier Inc., Taipei, Taiwan,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan,
3
National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
{yongsiang.shih,kychang}@appier.com, htlin@csie.ntu.edu.tw, sunmin@ee.nthu.edu.tw
2

Abstract
Compatibility between items, such as clothes and shoes,
is a major factor among customer’s purchasing decisions.
However, learning “compatibility” is challenging due to (1)
broader notions of compatibility than those of similarity, (2)
the asymmetric nature of compatibility, and (3) only a small
set of compatible and incompatible items are observed. We
propose an end-to-end trainable system to embed each item
into a latent vector and project a query item into K compatible prototypes in the same space. These prototypes reﬂect the broad notions of compatibility. We refer to both the
embedding and prototypes as “Compatibility Family”. In our
learned space, we introduce a novel Projected Compatibility Distance (PCD) function which is differentiable and ensures diversity by aiming for at least one prototype to be
close to a compatible item, whereas none of the prototypes are
close to an incompatible item. We evaluate our system on a
toy dataset, two Amazon product datasets, and Polyvore outﬁt dataset. Our method consistently achieves state-of-the-art
performance. Finally, we show that we can visualize the candidate compatible prototypes using a Metric-regularized Conditional Generative Adversarial Network (MrCGAN), where
the input is a projected prototype and the output is a generated image of a compatible item. We ask human evaluators
to judge the relative compatibility between our generated images and images generated by CGANs conditioned directly
on query items. Our generated images are signiﬁcantly preferred, with roughly twice the number of votes as others.

1

Figure 1: Notion of Compatibility (Left) vs. Similarity
(Right). Left: The upper outer garment in the center (red
circle) is the query item. The surrounding items are its compatible ones. The styles of both the compatible shoes and
lower body garments are various. Right: The style of a similar item (bottom) is constrained.

use standard techniques for a recommendation system, such
as collaborative ﬁltering, to identify compatible items. In
real world application, it is quite often encountered that there
are insufﬁcient records to make a decent compatible recommendation — it is then critical to fully exploit relevant contents associated with items, such as the images for dresses,
or the wineries for wines.
Even leveraging such relevant information, recommending or generating compatible items is challenging due to
three key reasons. First, the notion of compatibility typically goes across categories and is broader and more diverse than the notion of similarity, and it involves complex
many-to-many relationships. As shown in Figure 1, compatible items are not necessarily similar and vice versa. Second, the compatibility relationship is inherently asymmetric
for real world applications. For instance, students purchase
elementary textbooks before buying advanced ones, house
owners buy furniture only after their house purchases. Recommendation systems must take the asymmetry into consideration, as recommending car accessories to customers who
bought cars is rational; recommending cars to those who
bought car accessories would be improper. The two reasons
above make many existing methods (McAuley et al. 2015;
Veit et al. 2015; Lee, Seol, and Lee 2017) less ﬁt for compatibility learning, as they aim to learn a symmetric metric
so as to model the item-item relationship. Third, the currently available labeled data sets of compatible and incom-

Introduction

Identifying compatible items is an important aspect in building recommendation systems. For instance, recommending
matching shoes to a speciﬁc dress is important for fashion;
recommending a wine to go with different dishes is important for restaurants. In addition, it is valuable to visualize
what style is missing from the existing dataset so as to foresee potential matching items that could have been up-sold
to the users. We believe that the generated compatible items
could inspire fashion designers to create novel products and
help our business clients to fulﬁll the needs of customers.
For items with a sufﬁcient number of viewing or purchasing intents, it is possible to take the co-viewing (or copurchasing) records as signals of compatibility, and simply
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2403

