The Eighth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence 2018 (EAAI-18)

An E-Learning Recommender that
Helps Learners Find the Right Materials
Blessing Mbipo, Stewart Massie, Susan Craw
School of Computing Science & Digital Media
Robert Gordon University
Aberdeen, UK

most similar concepts to use for reﬁning the query. The semantic gap is addressed by leveraging the vocabulary associated with the domain concepts to support the reﬁnement of
queries. This allows us to reﬁne the learner’s query using the
vocabulary of the domain. The effect is to focus the search
on relevant documents and improve the recommendations.
We use background knowledge extracted automatically
from a structured collection of teaching materials, to inﬂuence query reﬁnement by providing a vocabulary for reﬁning
the queries. An e-Learning recommender system is built to
evaluate the effectiveness of our approach using a collection
of realistic learner queries and a dataset of Machine Learning and Data Mining resources. Evaluation results show our
method to outperform a standard Bag of Words approach.
The results demonstrate that using background knowledge
to reﬁne learners’ queries supports the learning process by
helping students to ﬁnd relevant documents.
There are two key contributions from this work. First, an
effective method for reﬁning a learner’s query to support the
retrieval of relevant documents. Second, an e-Learning recommender system that assists the learning process and helps
learners to ﬁnd relevant learning materials.

Abstract
Learning materials are increasingly available on the Web
making them an excellent source of information for building
e-Learning recommendation systems. However, learners often have difﬁculty ﬁnding the right materials to support their
learning goals because they lack sufﬁcient domain knowledge
to craft effective queries that convey what they wish to learn.
The unfamiliar vocabulary often used by domain experts creates a semantic gap between learners and experts, and also
makes it difﬁcult to map a learner’s query to relevant learning materials. We build an e-Learning recommender system
that uses background knowledge extracted from a collection
of teaching materials and encyclopedia sources to support the
reﬁnement of learners’ queries. Our approach allows us to
bridge the gap between learners and teaching experts. We
evaluate our method using a collection of realistic learner
queries and a dataset of Machine Learning and Data Mining documents. Evaluation results show our method to outperform benchmark approaches and demonstrates its effectiveness in assisting learners to ﬁnd the right materials.

Introduction
Learners often have difﬁculty asking an effective query of
a search engine for two reasons. First, they lack sufﬁcient
knowledge about the domain they are researching, so are unable to assemble effective keywords that identify what they
wish to learn (Liu, Kim, and Creel 2013). This problem results in an intent gap. Second, the vocabulary used by teaching experts is often different from that used by learners, as
learners often describe their problems in different terms to
how experts present the solutions (Millard et al. 2005). This
presents a semantic gap.
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) methods have been applied to
assist the teaching process in the design of an online course,
by using AI agents to provide feedback to learners (Goel and
Joyner 2016). AI techniques are also used in our method to
assist the learning process by creating an e-Learning recommender system that provides learners with relevant documents. The developed method allows us to bridge both the
intent and semantic gap between learners and domain experts. We address the intent gap by placing a learner’s query
within the space of learning concepts, and identifying the

Related Work
A large amount of e-Learning materials is available to learners on the Web. However, learners are often discouraged by
the time spent in ﬁnding and assembling relevant resources
to support their learning goals (Chen et al. 2014). Often,
learners are new to the topic they are researching, so they can
have difﬁculty asking effective queries in a search engine.
The unfamiliar vocabulary often used in teaching materials
poses a challenge to learners trying to ﬁnd relevant materials. One way of addressing these challenges is by reﬁning
queries to improve the recommendation made to learners.
One approach to query reﬁnement is by using internal knowledge from a document collection as a feedback
method (Wu and Fang 2013). This approach is similar to
pseudo relevance feedback. In this method, an initial set of
documents considered to be relevant are found, then terms
from these documents are used to reﬁne the query to improve retrieval performance. A drawback of this approach
is that search results may be directed towards a few documents, and this can be harmful if the documents are only
about speciﬁc topics. Further, the retrieval performance for

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7928

