The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Knowledge-Grounded Neural Conversation Model
Marjan Ghazvininejad,1∗ Chris Brockett,2 Ming-Wei Chang,2†
Bill Dolan,2 Jianfeng Gao,2 Wen-tau Yih,2‡ Michel Galley2
1

Information Sciences Institute, USC
2
Microsoft
ghazvini@isi.edu, mgalley@microsoft.com

Abstract
Neural network models are capable of generating extremely
natural sounding conversational interactions. However, these
models have been mostly applied to casual scenarios (e.g.,
as “chatbots”) and have yet to demonstrate they can serve in
more useful conversational applications. This paper presents
a novel, fully data-driven, and knowledge-grounded neural conversation model aimed at producing more contentful responses. We generalize the widely-used Sequence-toSequence (S EQ 2S EQ) approach by conditioning responses
on both conversation history and external “facts”, allowing
the model to be versatile and applicable in an open-domain
setting. Our approach yields signiﬁcant improvements over
a competitive S EQ 2S EQ baseline. Human judges found that
our outputs are signiﬁcantly more informative.

User input: Going to Kusakabe tonight.
Neural model: Have a great time!
Human: You’ll love it! Try omasake, the best in town.

Introduction

Figure 1: Responses of fully data-driven conversation models are often appropriate, but generally lack content characteristic of human responses.

Recent work has shown that conversational chatbot models can be trained in an end-to-end and completely datadriven fashion, without hand-coding (Ritter, Cherry, and
Dolan 2011; Sordoni et al. 2015; Shang, Lu, and Li 2015;
Vinyals and Le 2015; Serban et al. 2016, inter alia). However, fully data-driven systems still lack grounding in the
real world and do not have access to external knowledge
(textual or structured), which makes it challenging for such
systems to respond substantively. Fig. 1 illustrates the difﬁculty: while an ideal response would directly reﬂect on the
entities mentioned in the query (user input), neural models
produce responses that, while conversationally appropriate,
seldom include factual content. This contrasts with traditional dialog systems, which can readily inject entities and
facts into responses, but often at the cost of signiﬁcant handcoding. Slot-ﬁller dialog systems are hard put to come up
with a natural sounding utterance like the second response
in Fig. 1 in a manner that is generalizable and scalable.
The goal of this work is to beneﬁt from the versatility and
scalability of fully data-driven models, while simultaneously
seeking to produce models that are usefully grounded in external knowledge, permitting them to be deployed in, for ex-

ample, recommendation systems (e.g., for restaurants), and
to adapt quickly and easily to new domains. The objective
here is not task completion as in traditional dialog systems,
but the ability to engage a user in a relevant and informative
conversation. The tie to external data is critical, as the requisite knowledge is often not stored in conversational corpora.
Much of this information is not found in structured databases
either, but is textual, and can be mined from online resources
such as Wikipedia, book reviews on Goodreads, and restaurant reviews on Foursquare.
This paper presents a novel, fully data-driven, knowledgegrounded neural conversation model aimed at producing contentful responses. Our framework generalizes the
Sequence-to-Sequence (S EQ 2S EQ) approach (Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber 1997; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014)
of previous neural conversation models, as it naturally combines conversational and non-conversational data via techniques such as multi-task learning (Caruana 1997; Liu et
al. 2015). The key idea is that we can condition responses
not only based on conversation history (Sordoni et al. 2015),
but also on external “facts” that are relevant to the current
context (for example, Foursquare entries as in Fig. 1). Our
approach only requires a way to infuse external information

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* This work was conducted at Microsoft.
† Now at Google Research.
‡ Now at Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence.

5110

