The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Incorporating Discriminator in Sentence
Generation: A Gibbs Sampling Method
Jinyue Su, Jiacheng Xu, Xipeng Qiu,∗ Xuanjing Huang
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
825 Zhangheng Road, Shanghai, China
{jysu15,jcxu13,xpqiu,xjhuang}@fudan.edu.cn
On the contrary, we incorporate a discriminator in our
method. With the inspiration of revising sentence iteratively,
we propose a novel sentence generation framework based on
Gibbs Sampling (GS). Our method mainly contains two separate models: a pure Language Model, i.e. doesn’t aware of
the constraint information, and a Discriminator estimating
the probability of a given sentence satisfying the constraints.
Then by applying Gibbs Sampling, we can replace current
words with new ones iteratively, and the whole sentence is
becoming more and more natural. Since the discriminator
is guiding this process all the time, the sampled sentences
tend to satisfy all the constraints. There is also a Candidate
Generator proposing several most likely words at each iteration, thus leave fewer sentences for language model and
discriminator to inspect, which results in a speed-up.
Our method holds following advantages compared to conventional methods:

Abstract
Generating plausible and ﬂuent sentence with desired properties has long been a challenge. Most of the recent works
use recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and their variants to
predict following words given previous sequence and target
label. In this paper, we propose a novel framework to generate constrained sentences via Gibbs Sampling. The candidate
sentences are revised and updated iteratively, with sampled
new words replacing old ones. Our experiments show the effectiveness of the proposed method to generate plausible and
diverse sentences.

Introduction
Generating meaningful, coherent and plausible text is an increasingly important topic in NLP (Gatt and Krahmer 2017),
forming the closed loop of interaction between human and
machine. Recent progresses in language modeling, machine
translation (Cho et al. 2014), text summarization (Chopra,
Auli, and Rush 2016), dialogue systems (Li et al. 2016),
etc., have shown the effectiveness of deep learning methods
to understand and generate natural language. Among them,
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and their variants are
widely used.
However, generating natural language remains a challenging task. First, underlying semantic structures in language
are complicated and it’s hard for sequence models to construct text with rich structure during generation. Second, in
many cases, we expect the generated text could satisfy certain properties, such as the polarity of sentiment or the style
of writing. Third, annotated corpora for constrained text are
limited in terms of scale and diversity. In this paper, we
would like to address the challenge of generating short sentences with explicit constraints or desired properties, other
than speciﬁc tasks like translation or summarization.
Most of the previous works on this task rely on a conditional RNN-based language model as the ﬁnal step to generate words. The explicit constraint information is encoded
into a semantic vector, and a conditional language model decodes a sentence from the semantic vector one word per time
step.

• Our method directly accesses to the probability
p(c|w1...n ), i.e. how likely the sentence satisﬁes all
constraints. By checking this probability, our method ensures the signiﬁcance of every constraint, thus alleviates
the problem that some safe but meaningless sentences
may be generated. See our experiment results for more
details.
• Since the language model and the discriminator can be
trained separately, we can train the discriminator on labeled data, and train the language model both on labeled
and unlabeled data, which enables the framework to work
better in a semi-supervised fashion.
Also, as a side-product, from the nature of Gibbs Sampling,
our method is able to control the length of the generated sentence. And since the two major components are responsible
for ﬂuency and correctness respectively, we can easily ﬁgure
out which part is failing, and then improve it.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time Gibbs
Sampling is used in generating constrained sentence.

Background
In this section, we will introduce two folds of background
knowledge: gated recurrent neural networks and RNN language model.

∗

Corresponding Author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5496

