The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Dependence in Propositional Logic: Formula-Formula Dependence and
Formula Forgetting — Application to Belief Update and Conservative Extension
Liangda Fang,1 Hai Wan,2∗ Xianqiao Liu,2 Biqing Fang,2 Zhaorong Lai1

1

College of Information Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China
{fangld,laizhr}@jnu.edu.cn
2
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China
wanhai@mail.sysu.edu.cn, {liuxq35,fangbq3}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
a literal but no information about its complement, they
proposed a more ﬁne-grained notion, namely formulaliteral dependence (FL-dependence). For the second issue,
variable forgetting is highly related to FV-dependence. It
yields the strongest consequence independent of a variable.
The intuitive meaning of literal forgetting is similar.
As mentioned in (Darwiche 1997), dependence is not only
a philosophical notion but also a pragmatic notion. Over the
past years, this notion has been widely used in many ﬁelds
of AI, including automated reasoning (Levy, Fikes, and Sagiv 1997; Kautz, McAllester, and Selman 1997), knowledge compilation (Bryant 1992; Minato 1993; Darwiche
1997), reasoning about actions (Lin and Reiter 1997), and
especially belief change (Zhang and Zhou 2009; Oveisi et
al. 2017). Belief update, a type of belief change, studies
how an agent modiﬁes her belief base φ in the presence of
new information ψ in a dynamically changing environment.
Herzig, Lang, and Marquis (2013) suggested that belief update should be based on the notion of dependence, and proposed the dependence-based update scheme that consists of
ﬁrst removing any belief on which the negation of the new
information depends, and then adding the new information.
After investigating FL-dependence and literal forgetting,
a natural next step is to study two more general notions:
formula-formula dependence (FF-dependence) and formula
forgetting. This paper is intended to ﬁll this gap. The
main contributions are as follows. First of all, we give a
formal deﬁnition of FF-dependence, which is a dependence
relation between formulas. We also provide a model-based
characterization result and analyze some properties for
FF-dependence. In addition, based on FF-dependence, we
introduce formula forgetting as generalizations of literal
forgetting. We give various equivalent formulations of this
notion, including an axiomatic deﬁnition by four postulates,
a syntactic deﬁnition via conditioning, and a modeltheoretic deﬁnition. Finally, we apply these two notions in
two well-known issues of AI: belief update and conservative
extension. Following the dependence-based update scheme,
we deﬁne an update operator F by ﬁrst forgetting the negation of the new information in the initial belief base, and then
conjoining the resulting belief base with the new information. We characterize F by a set of postulates and assess it
against the well-known KM postulates. We compare it with
other operators from three perspectives including informa-

Abstract
Dependence is an important concept for many tasks in
artiﬁcial intelligence. A task can be executed more efﬁciently
by discarding something independent from the task. In this
paper, we propose two novel notions of dependence in propositional logic: formula-formula dependence and formula
forgetting. The ﬁrst is a relation between formulas capturing
whether a formula depends on another one, while the second
is an operation that returns the strongest consequence
independent of a formula. We also apply these two notions
in two well-known issues: belief update and conservative
extension. Firstly, we deﬁne a new update operator based
on formula-formula dependence. Furthermore, we reduce
conservative extension to formula forgetting.

Introduction
Dependence1 is an important concept in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). Before performing an intelligent task (e.g.,
reasoning and planning), it is intuitive to ﬁrst determine
what are irrelevant, and discard them for better efﬁciency.
For example, when a student takes an examination on
literature, she does not need to keep the knowledge of
mathematics in mind. This process of discarding irrelevant
information involves two issues:
1. What is the irrelevant information in the background
knowledge base (KB) for the task?
2. How to discard it in the KB?
In the context of propositional logic, various authors
(Boutilier 1994; Lakemeyer 1997) studied the ﬁrst issue by
systematically analyzing a dependence relation between a
formula and a variable, namely formula-variable dependence (FV-dependence). Loosely speaking, a formula φ
depends on a variable v if v always occur in every formula
equivalent to φ. Further, Lang, Liberatore, and Marquis
(2003) pointed out that, in some applications, we are concerned about not only which variable the formula depends
on but also the polarity of the variable. To distinguish the
case where a formula conveys some information about
∗

Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In this paper, we do not differentiate between “dependence”
and “relevance”, and use these terms interchangeably.

1835

