The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

WiFi-Based Human Identiﬁcation via
Convex Tensor Shapelet Learning
Han Zou,∗ Yuxun Zhou,∗ Jianfei Yang,† Weixi Gu,‡ Lihua Xie,† Costas J. Spanos∗

∗

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, USA
†
School of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
‡
Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University, China
Email: {hanzou, yxzhou, spanos}@berkeley.edu, {yang0478, elhxie}@ntu.edu.sg, guweixigavin@gmail.com
require the deployment of dedicated infrastructure or
the active cooperation of users to carry additional devices, which are expensive, inconvenient and privacy
intrusive for pervasive implementation (Ngo et al. 2014;
Yang et al. 2017). For instance, using biometric signatures
(e.g. ﬁngerprint, face recognition and iris) are able to provide high identiﬁcation accuracy (Gafurov 2007). However,
a speciﬁc and expensive hardware has to be deployed and
users’ physical interaction with the equipment is required.
To alleviate the issue of high cost and user involvement,
Ngo et al. (2014) proposes to use accelerometers embedded in wearable devices to collect gait information for
identiﬁcation purposes. But requiring users to carry these
devices may introduce considerable inconvenience for the
person. The most common device-free human identiﬁcation
system is based on video monitoring from cameras (Chen
et al. 2017). Nonetheless, the performance of these vision
based approaches rely on appropriate lighting conditions,
and more critically, they also raise privacy concerns. Thus,
a non-intrusive, privacy-preserving, cost-effective and
accurate human identiﬁcation scheme is desired urgently.

Abstract
We propose AutoID, a human identiﬁcation system that leverages the measurements from existing WiFi-enabled Internet
of Things (IoT) devices and produces the identity estimation
via a novel sparse representation learning technique. The key
idea is to use the unique ﬁne-grained gait patterns of each
person revealed from the WiFi Channel State Information
(CSI) measurements, technically referred to as shapelet signatures, as the ”ﬁngerprint” for human identiﬁcation. For this
purpose, a novel OpenWrt-based IoT platform is designed
to collect CSI data from commercial IoT devices. More
importantly, we propose a new optimization-based shapelet
learning framework for tensors, namely Convex Clustered
Concurrent Shapelet Learning (C3 SL), which formulates the
learning problem as a convex optimization. The global solution of C3 SL can be obtained efﬁciently with a generalized
gradient-based algorithm, and the three concurrent regularization terms reveal the inter-dependence and the clustering
effect of the CSI tensor data. Extensive experiments are conducted in multiple real-world indoor environments, showing
that AutoID achieves an average human identiﬁcation accuracy of 91% from a group of 20 people. As a combination
of novel sensing and learning platform, AutoID attains substantial progress towards a more accurate, cost-effective and
sustainable human identiﬁcation system for pervasive implementations.

Recently, the ubiquity of WiFi infrastructure and WiFi
enabled mobile devices (MDs) have enabled a myriad of
applications in context-aware services and location-based
services (Zou et al. 2016; 2017a). Furthermore, with the
booming development of Internet of Things (IoT), billions
of WiFi enabled IoT devices, such as thermostats, sound
bar, and smart TV, are en route to being widely deployed
in indoor environments. Because the body movements of
a human introduce variations in WiFi Received Signal
Strength (RSS) measurements, device-free occupancy sensing becomes feasible by analyzing the signals (Ghourchian,
Allegue-Martinez, and Precup 2017). Being a coarse measurement, nevertheless, RSS usually fails to capture the multipath effects caused by complicated human motions. Alternatively, at the physical layer, Channel State Information
(CSI) describes how WiFi signal propagates from a transmitter (TX) to a receiver (RX) through multiple paths at the
granularity of Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM)
subcarriers, which is more sensitive to the presence and
movements of an object and is more robust to background
noise. Recent literature has witnessed many successful employments of CSI measurements for various applications,
such as crowd counting (Zou et al. 2017b) and human ac-

Introduction
Human identiﬁcation, which aims to automatically associate
a person with his/her identity, is a critical underpinning not
only for secure authentication but also for tailoring services
to each individual. In particular, it has become an important, if not indispensable, tool for many emerging applications in human-in-the-loop cyber-physical systems. In addition to automatic access authorization that vastly improves
user experience, an integrated human identiﬁcation system
can also help achieving preventive actions to protect children and elderly people, and realizing tailor-made services
in smart home, such as playing customized music, sports or
TV shows, based on the identity information made available
by the system.
Conventional human identiﬁcation systems (e.g.,
biometric-based and vision-based approaches) either
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1711

