The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Trafﬁc Optimization for a Mixture of Self-Interested and Compliant Agents
Guni Sharon,1∗ Michael Albert,2∗ Tarun Rambha,3∗ Stephen Boyles,4 Peter Stone1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA
3
Civil and Environmental Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
4
Civil, Architectural and Environmental Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA
gunisharon@gmail.com, malbert@cs.duke.edu, tr244@cornell.edu, sboyles@mail.utexas.edu, pstone@cs.utexas.edu
number of self-interested agents that a system can tolerate at
optimal ﬂow, 2) determining whether a given subset of centrally controlled agents are sufﬁcient to achieve system optimum (SO), and 3) computing the actions the leader should
prescribe to a sufﬁcient set of compliant agents in order to
achieve SO.
A known fact in routing games is that agents seeking to
minimize their private latency need not minimize the total system’s latency (Pigou 1920; Roughgarden and Tardos
2002). That is, self-interested agents may reach a user equilibrium (UE) that is not optimal from a system perspective.
However, if all agents are assigned paths with minimum system marginal cost then the system will achieve optimal performance (Pigou 1920; Beckmann, McGuire, and Winsten
1956; Dietrich 1969).
Therefore, from a system manager perspective, it is desirable that all agents traversing a network would strictly
utilize minimal marginal cost paths, even if such paths are
not of minimum latency for an individual agent. However,
in many important scenarios, it will not be possible to enforce path assignment on all agents, but it may be possible to affect the behavior of a subset (the compliant agents).
As a motivating example, consider an opt-in tolling system
where drivers are given positive incentives to enroll but,
in exchange, they will be subject to tolls that affect their
route choice (Sharon et al. 2017a; 2017b). Another relevant example is virtual private network (VPN) path allocation. While each packet within the VPN might be selfinterested, a pro-social network manager might allocate virtual paths that are different from those preferred by the
self-interested packets (Fingerhut, Suri, and Turner 1997;
Dufﬁeld et al. 1999).
We show that, in the general case, computing the optimal
assignment of compliant agents is NP-hard. Therefore, we
focus on the speciﬁc scenario where the portion of compliant agents is sufﬁciently large to achieve SO. We present a
novel linear program (LP ) representation for computing the
maximal portion of self-interested agents that allow the system to achieve SO and to determine whether a given set of
compliant agents is sufﬁcient to achieve SO. Furthermore,
we provide a method to tractably compute the ﬂow assignment for the compliant agents such that SO performance is
guaranteed.
Experimental results, performed using a standard trafﬁc

Abstract
This paper focuses on two commonly used path assignment policies for agents traversing a congested network: selfinterested routing, and system-optimum routing. In the selfinterested routing policy each agent selects a path that optimizes its own utility, while the system-optimum routing
agents are assigned paths with the goal of maximizing system
performance. This paper considers a scenario where a centralized network manager wishes to optimize utilities over all
agents, i.e., implement a system-optimum routing policy. In
many real-life scenarios, however, the system manager is unable to inﬂuence the route assignment of all agents due to limited inﬂuence on route choice decisions. Motivated by such
scenarios, a computationally tractable method is presented
that computes the minimal amount of agents that the system manager needs to inﬂuence (compliant agents) in order to
achieve system optimal performance. Moreover, this methodology can also determine whether a given set of compliant
agents is sufﬁcient to achieve system optimum and compute
the optimal route assignment for the compliant agents to do
so. Experimental results are presented showing that in several large-scale, realistic trafﬁc networks optimal ﬂow can be
achieved with as low as 13% of the agent being compliant
and up to 54%.

Introduction
In multiagent systems, there are generally two paradigms of
interaction. Centralized control paradigms assume that a single decision making entity is able to dictate the actions of all
the agents, thus leading them to a coordinated social optimum. Decentralized control paradigms, on the other hand,
assume that each agent selects its own actions, and while it
is in principle possible for them to act altruistically, they are
generally assumed to be self-interested.
In this paper, we consider a routing scenario in which a
subset of agents are controlled centrally (compliant agents),
while the remaining are self-interested agents. We model the
system as a Stackelberg routing game (Yang, Zhang, and
Meng 2007) in which the decision maker for the centrally
controlled agents is the leader, and the self-interested agents
are the followers. In this paper, we provide a computationally tractable methodology for 1) determining the maximum
∗

These authors contributed equally.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1202

