The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Zero-Resource Neural Machine Translation with
Multi-Agent Communication Game
Yun Chen,† Yang Liu,‡ Victor O.K. Li†

†

Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The University of Hong Kong
‡
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
yun.chencreek@gmail.com; liuyang2011@tsinghua.edu.cn; vli@eee.hku.hk
other hand, large amounts of monolingual text documents
with rich multimodal content are available on the web, e.g.,
text with photos or videos posted to social networking sites
and blogs. How to utilize the monolingual multimodal content to build zero-resource NMT systems remains an open
question.
Multimodal content, especially image, has been widely
explored in the context of NMT recently. Most of the work
focus on using image in addition to text query to reinforce the translation performance (Caglayan et al. 2016;
Hitschler, Schamoni, and Riezler 2016; Calixto, Liu, and
Campbell 2017). This task is called multimodal neural machine translation and has become a subtask in WMT16 1 and
WMT17 2 . In contrast, there exists limited work on bridging languages using multimodal content only. Gella et al.
(2017) propose to learn multimodal multilingual representations of ﬁxed length for matching images and sentences in
different languages in the same space with image as a pivot.
Nakayama and Nishida (2017) suggest putting a decoder
on top of the ﬁxed-length modality-agnostic representation
to generate a translation in the target language. Although
the approach enables zero-resource translation, the use of
a ﬁxed-length vector is a bottleneck in improving translation
performance (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015).
In this work, we introduce a multi-agent communication
game within a multimodal environment (Lazaridou, Pham,
and Baroni 2016; Havrylov and Titov 2017) to achieve direct modeling of zero-resource source-to-target NMT. We
have two agents in the game: a captioner which describes an
image in the source language and a translator which translates a source-language sentence to a target-language sentence. Apparently, the translator is our training target. The
two agents collaborate with each other to accomplish the
task of describing an image in the target language with message in the source language exchanged between the agents.
Both agents get reward from the communication game and
collectively learn to maximize the expected reward. Experiments on German-to-English and English-to-German translation tasks over the IAPR-TC12 and Multi30K datasets
demonstrate that the proposed approach yields substantial
gains over the baseline methods.

Abstract
While end-to-end neural machine translation (NMT) has
achieved notable success in the past years in translating a
handful of resource-rich language pairs, it still suffers from
the data scarcity problem for low-resource language pairs
and domains. To tackle this problem, we propose an interactive multimodal framework for zero-resource neural machine translation. Instead of being passively exposed to large
amounts of parallel corpora, our learners (implemented as
encoder-decoder architecture) engage in cooperative image
description games, and thus develop their own image captioning or neural machine translation model from the need to
communicate in order to succeed at the game. Experimental
results on the IAPR-TC12 and Multi30K datasets show that
the proposed learning mechanism signiﬁcantly improves over
the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Neural machine translation (NMT) (Kalchbrenner and Blunsom 2013; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho,
and Bengio 2015), which directly models the translation
process in an end-to-end way, has achieved state-of-theart translation performance on resource-rich language pairs
such as English-French and German-English (Johnson et al.
2016; Gehring et al. 2017; Vaswani et al. 2017). The success is mainly attributed to the quality and scale of available
parallel corpora to train NMT systems. However, preparing
such parallel corpora has remained a big problem in some
speciﬁc domains or between resource-scarce language pairs.
Zoph et al. (2016) indicate that NMT trends to obtain much
worse translation quality than statistical machine translation
(SMT) under small-data conditions.
As a result, developing methods to achieve neural machine translation without direct source-target parallel corpora has attracted increasing attention in the community recently. These methods utilize a third language (Firat et al.
2016; Johnson et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2017; Zheng, Cheng,
and Liu 2017; Cheng et al. 2017) or modality (Nakayama
and Nishida 2017) as a pivot to enable zero-resource sourceto-target translation. Although promising results have been
obtained, pivoting with a third language still demands large
scale parallel source-pivot and pivot-target corpora. On the

1

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

5086

http://www.statmt.org/wmt16/
http://www.statmt.org/wmt17/

