The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Order-Free RNN with Visual Attention for Multi-Label Classiﬁcation
Shang-Fu Chen,1∗ Yi-Chen Chen,2∗ Chih-Kuan Yeh,3 Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1,2
1

2

Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
Graduate Institute of Communication Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
3
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
Email: {b02901030, r06942069, ycwang}@ntu.edu.tw, cjyeh@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

While a number of research works (Zhang and Zhou
2006; Nam et al. 2014; Gong et al. 2013; Wei et al. 2014;
Wang et al. 2016) start to advance the CNN architecture for multi-label classiﬁcation, CNN-RNN (Wang et al.
2016) embeds image and semantic structures by projecting both features into a joint embedding space. By further utilizing the component of Long Short Term Memory
(LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), a recurrent
neural network (RNN) structure is introduced to memorize
long-term label dependency. As a result, CNN-RNN exhibits
promising multi-label classiﬁcation performance with crosslabel correlation implicitly preserved.
Unfortunately, the above frameworks suffer from the following three different problems. First, due to the use of
LSTM, a pre-deﬁned label order is required during training. Take (Wang et al. 2016) for example, its label order is
determined by the frequencies of labels observed from the
training data. In practice, such pre-deﬁned orders of label
prediction might not reﬂect proper label dependency. For example, based on the number of label occurrences, one might
obtain the label sequence as {sea, sun, ﬁsh}. However, it
is obvious that ﬁsh is less semantically relevant to sun than
sea. For better learning and prediction of such labels, the order of {sea, ﬁsh, sun} should be considered. On the other
hand, (Jin and Nakayama 2016) consider four experimental settings with different label orders: alphabetical order,
random order, frequency-ﬁrst order and rare-ﬁrst order (note
that rare-ﬁrst is exactly the reverse of frequency-ﬁrst). It is
concluded in (Jin and Nakayama 2016) that the rare-ﬁrst order results in the best performance. Later we will conduct
thorough experiments for veriﬁcation, and show that orders
automatically learned by our model would be desirable.
The second concern of the above methods is that, labels of
objects which are in smaller scales/sizes in images would often be more difﬁcult to be recovered. As a possible solution,
attention map (Xu et al. 2015) has been widely considered
in image captioning (Xu et al. 2015), image question answering (Yang et al. 2016b), and segmentation (Hong et al.
2016). Extracted by different kernels from a certain convolutional layer in CNN, the corresponding feature maps contain
rich information of different patterns from the input image.
By further attending on such feature maps, the resulting attention map is able to identify important components or objects in an image. By exploiting the label co-occurrence be-

We propose a recurrent neural network (RNN) based model
for image multi-label classiﬁcation. Our model uniquely integrates and learning of visual attention and Long Short
Term Memory (LSTM) layers, which jointly learns the labels of interest and their co-occurrences, while the associated image regions are visually attended. Different from existing approaches utilize either model in their network architectures, training of our model does not require pre-deﬁned
label orders. Moreover, a robust inference process is introduced so that prediction errors would not propagate and thus
affect the performance. Our experiments on NUS-WISE and
MS-COCO datasets conﬁrm the design of our network and
its effectiveness in solving multi-label classiﬁcation problems.

Introduction
Multi-label classiﬁcation has been an important and practical research topic, since it needs to assign more than
one label to each observed instance. From machine learning, data mining, and computer vision, a variety of applications beneﬁt from the development and success of
multi-label classiﬁcation algorithms (Zhang and Zhou 2014;
Boutell et al. 2004; Schapire and Singer 2000; Godbole and
Sarawagi 2004; Lin et al. 2014; Kang et al. 2016b; 2016a;
Boutell et al. 2004; Shao et al. 2016). A fundamental and
challenging issue for multi-label classiﬁcation is to identify
and recover the co-occurrence of multiple labels, so that satisfactory prediction accuracy can be expected.
Recently, development of deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
Szegedy et al. 2015; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; He et
al. 2016) have made a remarkable progress in several research ﬁelds. Due to its ability of representation learning
with prediction guarantees, CNNs contribute to the recent
success in image classiﬁcation tasks and beyond (Deng et
al. 2009; Fei-Fei, Fergus, and Perona 2007; Grifﬁn, Holub,
and Perona 2007). Despite its effectiveness, how to extend
CNNs for solving multi-label classiﬁcation problems is still
a research direction to explore.
∗

- indicates equal contribution.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6714

