The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Substructure Assembling Network for Graph Classiﬁcation
Xiaohan Zhao

Bo Zong

Ziyu Guan

Snap Inc.
homeisland03@gmail.com

NEC Laboratories, America
bzong@nec-labs.com

Northwest University of China
ziyuguan@nwu.edu.cn

Kai Zhang

Wei Zhao∗

Temple University
zhang.kai@temple.edu

Xidian University
ywzhao@mail.xidian.edu.cn
challenging to estimate the mapping between instances and
their learning targets. As connectivity and size of graphs
could vary signiﬁcantly across instances, how to capture the
key structural information from graph-based objects remains
an open problem in the machine learning community.
Various approaches have been proposed to build predictive models on graph datasets. For example, one interesting
idea is to explicitly extract local graph patterns as features,
such that each graph can be represented as a bag of features
that naturally ﬁt in traditional predictive models (e.g., support vector machines) (Yan and Han 2002). Though convenient, the number of potential graph patterns can grow exponentially with graph size and node/edge attributes. Another
popular approach is to design graph kernels to measure the
similarity between graphs (Neumann et al. 2016), followed
by a kernel-based classiﬁer. A graph kernel implicitly decomposes a graph into local structures, such as random walk
paths or subtrees, and computes their similarity score.
One critical problem in pattern mining and graph kernel methods is that their feature extraction (either explicit
or implicit) is independent from the followup classiﬁcation
or model learning tasks. In the context of graphs where the
number of features extracted can be quite huge or even approach inﬁnity (e.g., graph kernels), such unguided feature
extraction step can be particularly cumbersome in identifying discriminative graph patterns that are relevant to learning
tasks. This, in turn, could severely hamper the generalization
performance no matter which classiﬁer is adopted.
Recently, there has been a surge of interest in exploiting the power of neural networks to map graph objects to
continuous feature spaces (Niepert, Ahmed, and Kutzkov
2016; Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Duvenaud et al. 2015; Bruna et al. 2014; Scarselli et al. 2009;
Li et al. 2016). Although these methods have gained great
success in a number of benchmark graph classiﬁcation tasks,
open challenges still exist due to the overwhelming structural complexity of graphs. One limitation of the existing
methods is that it can be hard for them to tune graph features at a ﬁne granularity. (1) For spectral methods (Bruna
et al. 2014; Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016),
a small adjustment in spectral space results in a global impact to graph feature selection. (2) For the methods in graph
space (Simonovsky and Komodakis 2017; Li et al. 2016;
Duvenaud et al. 2015), they usually assume that feature se-

Abstract
Graphs are natural data structures adopted to represent realworld data of complex relationships. In recent years, a surge
of interest has been received to build predictive models over
graphs, with prominent examples in chemistry, computational
biology, and social networks. The overwhelming complexity
of graph space often makes it challenging to extract interpretable and discriminative structural features for classiﬁcation tasks. In this work, we propose a novel neural network
structure called Substructure Assembling Network (SAN) to
extract graph features and improve the generalization performance of graph classiﬁcation. The key innovation of our work
is a uniﬁed substructure assembling unit, which is a variant of
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) designed to hierarchically
assemble useful pieces of graph components so as to fabricate discriminative substructures. SAN adopts a sequential,
probabilistic decision process, and therefore it can tune substructure features in a ﬁner granularity. Meanwhile, the parameterized soft decisions can be continuously improved with
supervised learning through back-propagation, leading to optimizable search trajectories. Overall, SAN embraces both the
ﬂexibility of combinatorial pattern search and the strong optimizability of deep learning, and delivers promising results as
well as interpretable structural features in graph classiﬁcation
against state-of-the-art techniques.

Introduction
Many real-world data have complex structures in which
instances are naturally represented as graphs, such as
molecules in chemical compounds or proteins, dependence
graphs in computer programs, social interactions in online
social networks. There is an increasing demand for building
predictive models over these graph datasets. For example,
inference on the characteristics of a new compound could
help in clinical trials (Cumming et al. 2013); Identiﬁcation
over critical subgraphs in program ﬂow graphs could help locate bugs in complex programs (Cheng et al. 2009); Prediction on the biochemical properties of compounds library can
greatly facilitate discovery of pharmacological targets (Burbidge, Trotter, and Holden 2000).
Compared with vectorial data, the discrete and semistructured representation of graphs makes it much more
∗

Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4514

