The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Towards a Neural Conversation Model
with Diversity Net Using Determinantal Point Processes
Yiping Song,1 Rui Yan,2,3∗ Yansong Feng,2 Yaoyuan Zhang,2 Dongyan Zhao,2,3 Ming Zhang1∗
1

Institute of Network Computing and Information Systems, School of EECS, Peking University, China
2
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, China
3
Beijing Institute of Big Data Research, China
{songyiping,ruiyan,fengyansong,zhang yaoyuan,zhaody,mzhang cs}@pku.edu.cn
Query

Abstract

Nice weather
today, isn’t it?

Typically, neural conversation systems generate replies based
on the sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) model. seq2seq
tends to produce safe and universal replies, which suffers
from the lack of diversity and information. Determinantal
Point Processes (DPPs) is a probabilistic model deﬁned on
item sets, which can select the items with good diversity and
quality. In this paper, we investigate the diversity issue in two
different aspects, namely query-level and system-level diversity. We propose a novel framework which organically combines seq2seq model with Determinantal Point Processes
(DPPs). The new framework achieves high quality in generated reply and signiﬁcantly improves the diversity among
them. Experiments show that our model achieves the best performance among various baselines in terms of both quality
and diversity.

I know the new movie
will be showed soon.
You know what,
Bob is coming!
How to get to
the Great Wall?

Human Reply
Yeah, can’t be better!
Great weather for outdoor activities!
But it is going to rain tomorrow.

System Reply
The weather is good!
The weather is great!
Good weather!

I heard it would be next month.

I don’t know.

Let’s get together for a little party?

I don’t know.

Sorry, this is my ﬁrst time here.

Sorry, I don’t know.

Table 1: An example of how humans respond versus how
traditional generative systems respond. A human can offer
different proper replies to the same query. On the contrary,
the traditional systems could only generate similar replies,
and they prefer to use universal replies for different queries.
be completely different but all appropriate. Although a traditional seq2seq model can produce multiple reply candidates during beam search, the most top-ranked replies from
the beam search have minor differences with each other (Li
et al. 2016a). As showed in Table 1, compared with the
replies in various expressions from human-beings, providing
multiple similar replies to a given query all the time would
make users feel boring.
Moreover, due to the origin of the seq2seq model, the
model “translates” the inputs with the maximum likelihood
as the outputs. Universal replies, such as “I don’t know,”
“I’m OK”, seem to be plausible for most queries and have
a dominant coverage in natural conversation datasets.1 For
a traditional seq2seq model, it is safe to “translate” most
queries into such universal replies with the maximum likelihood. Some cases are in Table 1, providing a universal reply
(which is actually meaningless) to many queries, the conversation system becomes boring.
As discussed, we point out two aspects of diversity in neural conversation systems: (1) query-level diversity and (2)
system-level diversity. The former means the inner-query diversity. For a particular query, we aim to generate different replies with different semantics to respond the query appropriately. The latter means the outer-query diversity. For
a conversation system, we manage to solve the problem to
generate universal replies for various user queries.
Different from some previous works, which incorporate

Introduction
Automatic conversation systems, facilitating a smooth interaction in natural languages between humans and computers,
are of growing importance in both academia and industry.
Recently, with massive publicly accessible free-chatting resources on the Web and the fast development of data-driven
deep learning techniques, it becomes more and more promising for us to build a non-task-oriented conversation system.
Deep learning has greatly advanced neural conversation
systems. Given a human utterance, called a query, a neural conversation system generates a reply tailored for the
query. Most neural conversation systems are based on the
sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) model (Sordoni et al.
2015; Shang, Lu, and Li 2015; Serban et al. 2016b), which is
derived from neural machine translation. seq2seq model
encodes a query into a vector (also known as encoder), and
decodes the vector into a reply to the query (also known as
decoder). This framework has been widely used in neural
conversation systems due to its strong capability of capturing the semantic relevance between queries and replies.
However, seq2seq model aims at ﬁnding the most relevant “translation” sentence during the decoding process,
which is not applicable to the conversation scenario. Given
a query, there are multiple choices to respond it: replies can
∗

Corresponding authors
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
According to Li et al. (2016a), 0.45% sentences contain the
sequence “I don’t know.”

5932

