The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Link Prediction with Personalized Social Inﬂuence
Zepeng Huo,1 Xiao Huang,1 Xia Hu1,2
1

2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University
Center for Remote Health Technologies and Systems, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
{guangzhou92,xhuang,xiahu}@tamu.edu

Manco 2014) and community recommendation (Backstrom
et al. 2006). Traditional methods for link prediction can be
roughly categorized into two groups. First, some methods
use neighbor-based metrics to infer the missing links (LibenNowell and Kleinberg 2007), where the similarity functions
can be the counts of common neighbors, Jaccard Coefﬁcient
of common neighbors, or other variations. Second, some
methods employ path-based metrics for link prediction, in
which random walk is designed to traverse the paths between two users to calculate the proximity, with one hop or
multiple hops (Backstrom and Leskovec 2011). While these
existing methods usually focus on the pure topological network structure, users in social media are actually associated
with a rich set of social activities, which could be potentially
useful in link prediction.
The various kinds of social activities carry abundant information of social media users, where one user’s activities are complicatedly intertwined with other user’s activities, through social inﬂuence (Wasserman and Faust 1994).
Social inﬂuence in social networks is deﬁned as the phenomenon where we can observe “alteration of an attitude
or behavior by one network actor in response to another”
(Marsden and Friedkin 1993). Therefore, we could infer the
existence of social inﬂuence by observing the changing pattern of social activities, which in turn means social inﬂuence
is not equivalent to social activities, but some kind of quantiﬁcation of social activities. In social media, the links and
dependencies among users could be considered as the results
of the social inﬂuence taking place. In previous work, social
inﬂuence has also been demonstrated useful in many applications such as information diffusion study (Bakshy, Karrer,
and Adamic 2009) and emotion contagion study (Yang et
al. 2016). Thus, we are motivated to collectively model the
social inﬂuence and network structure to advance link prediction in social media.
However, it is non-trivial to jointly learn and incorporate
the heterogeneous social inﬂuence and topological structure (Huang, Li, and Hu 2017). Although link prediction
on the pure topological network structure has been intensively studied, integrating different types of social activities
to infer social inﬂuence for link prediction remains an open
problem. There are three major challenges as follows. (1)
The social activities are heterogeneous. In a social network
like Twitter, users can tweet, retweet, reply, and mention oth-

Abstract
Link prediction in social networks is to infer the new links
likely to be formed next or to reconstruct the links that are
currently missing. Other than the pure topological network
structures, social networks are often associated with rich
information of social activities of users, such as tweeting,
retweeting, and replying. Social theories such as social inﬂuence indicate that social activities could have potential impacts on the neighbors, and links in social media could be the
results of the social inﬂuence among users. It motivates us to
learn and model social inﬂuence among users to tackle the
link prediction problem. However, this is a non-trivial task
since it is challenging to model heterogeneous social activities. Traditional methods often deﬁne universal metrics of
social inﬂuence for all users, but even for the same activity
of a user, the inﬂuence towards different neighbors might not
be the same. It motivates a personalized learning schema. In
information theory, if a time-series signal inﬂuences another,
then the uncertainty in the latter one will be reduced, given the
distribution of the former one. Thus, we are motivated to learn
social inﬂuence based on the timestamps of social activities.
Given the timestamps of each user, we use entropy to measure
the reduction of uncertainty of his/her neighbors. The learned
social inﬂuence is then incorporated into a graph based link
prediction model to perform joint learning. Through comprehensive experiments, we demonstrate that the proposed
framework can perform better than the state-of-the-art methods on different real-world networks.

Introduction
As social networks becoming increasingly popular, predicting and reproducing the social network structure draw lots
of attentions in recent years (Lichtenwalter, Lussier, and
Chawla 2010). Among different problems, link prediction
especially directed link prediction is of great interests (Song,
Meyer, and Tao 2015). This problem aims to either infer the
links that are likely to occur in the near future or reconstruct
the existing links that are missing in the current snapshot of
the social network. In this paper, we target at the latter one,
i.e., link reconstruction problem.
Due to its practical value, link prediction has become an
effective computational tool for many real-world applications, such as friend recommendation (Barbieri, Bonchi, and
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2289

