The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Co-Saliency Detection within a Single Image
Hongkai Yu,2 Kang Zheng,2 Jianwu Fang,3, 4 Hao Guo,2 Wei Feng,1 Song Wang1, 2,∗
1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC
3
Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
4
School of Electronic and Control Engineering, Chang’an University, Xi’an, China

Abstract
Recently, saliency detection in a single image and co-saliency
detection in multiple images have drawn extensive research
interest in the vision community. In this paper, we investigate
a new problem of co-saliency detection within a single image, i.e., detecting within-image co-saliency. By identifying
common saliency within an image, e.g., highlighting multiple
occurrences of an object class with similar appearance, this
work can beneﬁt many important applications, such as the detection of objects of interest, more robust object recognition,
reduction of information redundancy, and animation synthesis. We propose a new bottom-up method to address this problem. Speciﬁcally, a large number of object proposals are ﬁrst
detected from the image. Then we develop an optimization
algorithm to derive a set of proposal groups, each of which
contains multiple proposals showing good common saliency
in the original image. For each proposal group, we calculate
a co-saliency map and then use a low-rank based algorithm to
fuse the maps calculated from all the proposal groups for the
ﬁnal co-saliency map in the image. In the experiment, we collect a new dataset of 364 color images with within-image cosaliency. Experiment results show that the proposed method
can better detect the within-image co-saliency than existing
algorithms.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Illustrations of different saliency detection problems. (a) Within-image saliency detection. (b) Cross-image
co-saliency detection, where co-saliency is detected across
three images. (c) The proposed within-image co-saliency
detection. First row: images. Second row: ground-truth
saliency/co-saliency maps.
detect the common saliency, e.g., red-clothed soccer players, that are present in all three images. In this paper, we
investigate a new problem of detecting co-saliency within a
single image, i.e., within-image co-saliency detection, which
aims to highlight the common saliency within an image. An
example is shown in Fig. 1(c), where the two red-clothed
players show good within-image co-saliency, but the whiteclothed player does not because only one white-clothed
player is present in the image.
Within-image co-saliency detection can beneﬁt many important applications in computer vision. For example, it
can be used to help detect multiple instances of an object class in an image and help estimate the number of
instances of the same object class (He and Gould 2014;
Lin et al. 2014). By combining the features of the identiﬁed co-salient objects, we may obtain more accurate and
more reliable object recognition and detection in the image.
Within-image co-saliency detection can also help identify
and reduce information redundancy within an image. For
example, recent mobile plant-recognition systems (Kumar
et al. 2012) usually require the user to take an plant image
using his/her smart phone camera and then send the plant
image to a remote server for large-scale plant-species classiﬁcation. The proposed within-image co-saliency detection
can identify multiple instances of the same plant part, e.g.,
leaf, and then crop out only one of them before sending it

Introduction
Research on image-based saliency detection has drawn extensive interest in the vision community in the past decade.
It started with saliency detection in a single image, i.e.,
within-image saliency detection, which aims at highlighting the visually standing-out regions/objects/structures from
the surrounding background (Cheng et al. 2015; Mahadevan and Vasconcelos 2009; Zhao, Ouyang, and Wang 2013;
Huang, Feng, and Sun 2015), as illustrated in Fig. 1(a).
More recently, co-saliency detection in multiple images,
e.g., cross-image co-saliency detection (Fu, Cao, and Tu
2013; Zhang et al. 2015a; Huang, Feng, and Sun 2017),
has been attracting much attention with many successful
applications (Meng et al. 2012; Yu, Xian, and Qi 2014;
Joulin, Tang, and Fei-Fei 2014; Tang et al. 2014). As illustrated in Fig. 1(b), cross-image co-saliency detection aims to
∗

Corresponding author: songwang@cec.sc.edu
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7509

