The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Planning and Learning for Decentralized
MDPs with Event Driven Rewards
Tarun Gupta,1 Akshat Kumar,2† Praveen Paruchuri1†
1

Machine Learning Lab, Kohli Center on Intelligent Systems, IIIT Hyderabad
2
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University
tarun.gupta@research.iiit.ac.in, akshatkumar@smu.edu.sg, praveen.p@iiit.ac.in

Nguyen, Kumar, and Lau 2017a; 2017b). Our focus is on
agent interactions with complex event-based rewards which
depend on entire state-action histories of multiple agents.
We use the transition independent Dec-MDP model (TIDecMDP) (Becker et al. 2004) where agents have their independent local MDPs. Agents are coupled through event-based
global rewards dependent on their execution histories. Intuitively, events capture if agents accomplished some highlevel task. Becker et al. show such event-driven rewards are
highly expressive being able to model temporal relations
among agents (e.g., agent A’s activity facilitates or hinders
agent B’s activity rewards). Joint-rewards are given when at
least x or at most x or exactly x out of k events occur. Such
expressiveness is useful to model several practical problems such as multiagent coverage (Yehoshua and Agmon
2016). Several approaches have been developed to solve
TIDec-MDPs and related models. (Dibangoye et al. 2013)
use occupancy measures over the joint state-space of agents
to compute agent policies. Their focus is on standard reward setting, and do not address event-based rewards. Bilinear programming based approach of (Petrik and Zilberstein
2011) is limited to two agents. (Scharpff et al. 2016) solve
transition independent multiagent MDPs where an agent’s
policy can depend on the global state while the global state
is unobservable in TIDec-MDPs. Thus, our work addresses
this gap by developing scalable approaches for large multiagent settings ( 2 agents) and event-based rewards.

Abstract
Decentralized (PO)MDPs provide a rigorous framework for
sequential multiagent decision making under uncertainty.
However, their high computational complexity limits the
practical impact. To address scalability and real-world impact, we focus on settings where a large number of agents
primarily interact through complex joint-rewards that depend
on their entire histories of states and actions. Such historybased rewards encapsulate the notion of events or tasks such
that the team reward is given only when the joint-task is
completed. Algorithmically, we contribute — 1) A nonlinear
programming (NLP) formulation for such event-based planning model; 2) A probabilistic inference based approach that
scales much better than NLP solvers for a large number of
agents; 3) A policy gradient based multiagent reinforcement
learning approach that scales well even for exponential statespaces. Our inference and RL-based advances enable us to
solve a large real-world multiagent coverage problem modeling schedule coordination of agents in a real urban subway
network where other approaches fail to scale.

1

Introduction

Decentralized MDPs and POMDPs (Dec-(PO)MDPs) provide a rigorous framework for collaborative multiagent sequential decision making under uncertainty and partial observability (Bernstein et al. 2002). They model settings
where agents act based on different partial observations
about the environment and about each other to maximize a
global objective. Applications of Dec-POMDPs include coordinating planetary rovers (Becker et al. 2004), multi-robot
coordination (Amato et al. 2015) and throughput optimization in a wireless network (Pajarinen, Hottinen, and Peltonen
2014). Solving Dec-POMDPs is computationally challenging with NEXP-Hard complexity (Bernstein et al. 2002).
For scalability and practical application, several variants
of Dec-POMDPs have been developed including state transition and observation independence (Becker et al. 2004; Nair
et al. 2005; Kumar, Zilberstein, and Toussaint 2011; Dibangoye et al. 2013), weak coupling among agents (Witwicki
and Durfee 2010) and collective interactions (Sonu, Chen,
and Doshi 2015; Robbel, Oliehoek, and Kochenderfer 2016;

Our contributions are: 1) we present a nonlinear programming (NLP) formulation for TIDec-MDPs with event-based
rewards. The NLP formulation is more scalable than the approach for 2-agent TIDec-MDPs in (Becker et al. 2004).
Becker et al.’s approach models some types of joint-rewards,
e.g., at least or at most x events, by adding additional bits to
states leading to exponential state-space increase. Our NLP
formulation does not require any modiﬁcations to the statespace and is highly compact; 2) we present an inferencebased approach that translates the NLP to that of inference in a graphical model by extending the planning-asinference strategy (Toussaint, Harmeling, and Storkey 2006;
Kumar, Zilberstein, and Toussaint 2015). A key difference
is that we directly solve the underlying nonconvex, nonlinear program without requiring expensive forward-backward
message-passing. Unlike the NLP, our inference approach
always involves solving one small convex program per agent

†

Equal advising.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6186

