The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Reversible Architectures for
Arbitrarily Deep Residual Neural Networks
1

Bo Chang,∗1,2 Lili Meng,∗1,2 Eldad Haber,1,2
Lars Ruthotto,2,3 David Begert,2 Elliot Holtham2
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. (bchang@stat.ubc.ca, menglili@cs.ubc.ca, haber@math.ubc.ca)
2
Xtract Technologies Inc., Vancouver, Canada. (david@xtract.ai, elliot@xtract.ai)
3
Emory University, Atlanta, USA. (lruthotto@emory.edu). This author is supported in part by NSF DMS 1522599.
∗
Authors contributed equally.
success (Coddington and Levinson 1955; Simmons 2016;
Arnold 2012). The connection between nonlinear ODEs and
deep ResNets has been established in the recent works of
(E 2017; Haber and Ruthotto 2017; Haber, Ruthotto, and
Holtham 2017; Lu et al. 2017; Long et al. 2017; Chang et
al. 2017). The continuous interpretation of ResNets as dynamical systems allows the adaption of existing theory and
numerical techniques for ODEs to deep learning. For example, the paper (Haber and Ruthotto 2017) introduces the
concept of stable networks that can be arbitrarily long. However, only deep networks with simple single-layer convolution building blocks are proposed, and the architectures are
not reversible (and thus the length of the network is limited by the amount of available memory), and only simple
numerical examples are provided. Our work aims at overcoming these drawbacks and further investigates the efﬁcacy
and practicability of stable architectures derived from the
dynamical systems perspective.

Abstract
Recently, deep residual networks have been successfully applied in many computer vision and natural language processing tasks, pushing the state-of-the-art performance with
deeper and wider architectures. In this work, we interpret
deep residual networks as ordinary differential equations
(ODEs), which have long been studied in mathematics and
physics with rich theoretical and empirical success. From this
interpretation, we develop a theoretical framework on stability and reversibility of deep neural networks, and derive three
reversible neural network architectures that can go arbitrarily
deep in theory. The reversibility property allows a memoryefﬁcient implementation, which does not need to store the activations for most hidden layers. Together with the stability of
our architectures, this enables training deeper networks using
only modest computational resources. We provide both theoretical analyses and empirical results. Experimental results
demonstrate the efﬁcacy of our architectures against several
strong baselines on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and STL-10 with
superior or on-par state-of-the-art performance. Furthermore,
we show our architectures yield superior results when trained
using fewer training data.

1

In this work, we connect deep ResNets and ODEs more
closely and propose three stable and reversible architectures.
We show that the three architectures are governed by stable
and well-posed ODEs. In particular, our approach allows to
train arbitrarily long networks using only minimal memory
storage. We illustrate the intrinsic reversibility of these architectures with both theoretical analysis and empirical results. The reversibility property easily leads to a memoryefﬁcient implementation, which does not need to store the
activations at most hidden layers. Together with the stability,
this allows one to train almost arbitrarily deep architectures
using modest computational resources.

Introduction

Deep learning powers many research areas and impacts various aspects of society (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015)
from computer vision (He et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2017),
natural language processing (Cho et al. 2014) to biology (Esteva et al. 2017) and e-commerce. Recent progress in designing architectures for deep networks has further accelerated
this trend (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015; He et al. 2016;
Huang et al. 2017). Among the most successful architectures are deep residual network (ResNet) and its variants,
which are widely used in many computer vision applications (He et al. 2016; Pohlen et al. 2017) and natural language processing tasks (Oord et al. 2016; Xiong et al. 2017;
Wu et al. 2016). However, there still are few theoretical analyses and guidelines for designing and training ResNet.
In contrast to the recent interest in deep residual networks,
system of Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs), special kinds of dynamical systems, have long been studied in
mathematics and physics with rich theoretical and empirical

The remainder of our paper is organized as follows. We
discuss related work in Sec. 2. In Sec. 3 we review the notion
of reversibility and stability in ResNets, present three new
architectures, and a regularization functional. In Sec. 4 we
show the efﬁcacy of our networks using three common classiﬁcation benchmarks (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, STL-10).
Our new architectures achieve comparable or even superior
accuracy and, in particular, generalize better when a limited
number of labeled training data is used. In Sec. 5 we conclude the paper.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2811

