The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Asymmetric Action Abstractions for Multi-Unit
Control in Adversarial Real-Time Games
Rubens O. Moraes, Levi H. S. Lelis
Departamento de Informática, Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Brazil
{rubens.moraes, levi.lelis}@ufv.br

A set of scripts P induces an action abstraction by restricting the set of legal moves of all units to moves returned by
the scripts in P. We call an action abstraction created with
Churchill and Buro’s scheme a uniform abstraction.
In theory, players searching in un-abstracted spaces are
guaranteed to derive optimal strategies that are no worse
than the optimal strategies derived from action-abstracted
spaces. This is because the former has access to actions that
are not available in action-abstracted spaces. Despite its theoretical disadvantage, uniform abstractions are successful in
large-scale combats (Churchill and Buro 2013). This happens because the state space of RTS combats can be very
large, and the problem’s real-time constraints often allow
search algorithms to explore only a small fraction of all legal
actions before deciding on which action to perform next—
uniform abstractions allow algorithms to focus their search
on actions deemed as promising by the set of scripts P.
In this paper we introduce search algorithms that use what
we call asymmetric action abstractions (asymmetric abstractions for short) for multi-unit adversarial games. In contrast
with uniform abstractions that restrict the number of moves
of all units, asymmetric abstractions restrict the number of
moves of only a subset of units. We show that asymmetric abstractions retain the un-abstracted spaces’ theoretical
advantage over uniformly abstracted ones while still allowing algorithms to derive effective strategies in practice, even
in large-scale games. Another advantage of asymmetric abstractions is that they allow the search effort to be distributed
unevenly amongst the units. This is important because some
units might beneﬁt more from ﬁner strategies (i.e., strategies
computed while accounting for a larger set of moves) than
others (e.g., in RTS games it is advantageous to provide ﬁner
control to units with low hit points so they survive longer).
The algorithms we introduce for searching in asymmetrically abstracted spaces are based on Portfolio Greedy Search
(PGS) (Churchill and Buro 2013) and Stratiﬁed Strategy Selection (SSS) (Lelis 2017), two state-of-the-art approaches.
Empirical results on RTS combats show that our algorithms
are able to substantially outperform PGS and SSS.

Abstract
Action abstractions restrict the number of legal actions available during search in multi-unit real-time adversarial games,
thus allowing algorithms to focus their search on a set
of promising actions. Optimal strategies derived from unabstracted spaces are guaranteed to be no worse than optimal
strategies derived from action-abstracted spaces. In practice,
however, due to real-time constraints and the state space size,
one is only able to derive good strategies in un-abstracted
spaces in small-scale games. In this paper we introduce
search algorithms that use an action abstraction scheme we
call asymmetric abstraction. Asymmetric abstractions retain
the un-abstracted spaces’ theoretical advantage over regularly
abstracted spaces while still allowing the search algorithms to
derive effective strategies, even in large-scale games. Empirical results on combat scenarios that arise in a real-time strategy game show that our search algorithms are able to substantially outperform state-of-the-art approaches.

Introduction
In real-time strategy (RTS) games the player controls dozens
of units to collect resources, build structures, and battle the
opponent. RTS games are excellent testbeds for Artiﬁcial
Intelligence methods because they offer fast-paced environments, where players act simultaneously, and the number of
legal actions grows exponentially with the number of units
the player controls. Also, the time allowed for planning is on
the order of milliseconds. In this paper we focus on the combat scenarios that arise in RTS games. A simpliﬁed version
of RTS combats in which the units cannot move was shown
to be PSPACE-hard in general (Furtak and Buro 2010).
A successful family of algorithms for controlling combat units uses what we call action abstractions to reduce
the number of legal actions available during the game. In
RTS games, player actions are represented as a vector of unit
moves, where each entry in the vector represents a move for
a unit controlled by the player. Action abstractions reduce
the number of legal actions a player can perform by reducing the number of legal moves each unit can perform.
Churchill and Buro (2013) introduced a method for building action abstractions through scripts. A script σ̄ is a function mapping a game state s and a unit u to a move m for u.

Related Work
Justesen et al. (2014) proposed two variations of UCT (Kocsis and Szepesvári 2006) for searching in uniformly abstracted spaces: script-based and cluster-based UCT. Wang

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

876

