The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Dynamic Detection of Communities and Their
Evolutions in Temporal Social Networks
Yaowei Huang,∗ Jinghuan Shang,∗ Bill Y. Lin,∗ Luoyi Fu, Xinbing Wang
{14330222150355,elicassion,yuchenlin,yiluofu,xwang8}@sjtu.edu.cn
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai, China 200240

Abstract
:{(t1 , t1c ), (t2 , t c2 ),..., (te , t ce )}

官家宨宵尋家季容室宵宼宬宱宪季宦宲宰宰宸宱宬宷宼季
室宩宩宬宯宬室宷宬宲宱季家宷宵宨宱宪宷宫季宲容宨宵季宷宬宰宨

communities

affiliation

In this paper, we propose a novel community detection model,
which explores the dynamic community evolutions in temporal social networks by modeling temporal afﬁliation strength
between users and communities. Instead of transforming dynamic networks into static networks, our model utilizes normal distribution to estimate the change of afﬁliation strength
more concisely and comprehensively. Extensive quantitative
and qualitative evaluation on large social network datasets
show that our model achieves improvements in terms of prediction accuracy and reveals distinctive insight about evolutions of temporal social networks.

users

time

(a) Input

(b) Output

Figure 1: (a) is the input temporal social network. (b) is the
output distributions.

Problem Formulation

Introduction

Temporal Interaction Network A temporal interaction
network is deﬁned as a directed unweighted graph G =
(V, E). Each edge e ∈ E is associated with two time stamps
t1 , t2 . The time stamps represents the posting time (t1 ) and
mentioning time (t2 ). A directed edge (u, t1 , v, t2 ) indicates
the communication of users at different moments. 1
Afﬁliation Strength A nonnegative parameter Fuc represents the afﬁliation strength of a user u in a community
c. Fuc = 0 means node u is not afﬁliated to community c.
Thus, we use Puc (t) to represent the weights of Fuc at time
t. Finally, we have πuc (t) = Puc (t)Fuc as the temporal
strength between a user u in a community c at time t.
Probability of User Interaction We denote pu,v,t1 ,t2 as
the probability of the existence of an edge (u, t1 , v, t2 ) in
a Temporal Interaction Network. We assume the connection between users are through all internal communities
with different contributions. The probability of an interaction between two users through a particular community c is
πuc (t1 )πvc (t2 ). p(u, t1 , v, t2 ) is calculated in the following
equations, where C is the set of all communities.

πuc (t1 )πvc (t2 ),
H=
(1)
c∈C
p(u, v, t1 , t2 ) = 1 − exp(−H),

A community in social networks is a cluster of nodes with
more intense interactions amongst its members than others. Detecting communities in temporal social networks and
studying their evolutions are very beneﬁcial but challenging.
In this paper, we study community detection and the evolution of communities in temporal social networks, by modeling temporal strength between users and communities.
Figure 1 shows the overview of our model. The input
is an interaction network among users, where the directed
edges have two time-stamps for two interacting users. The
output is temporal distribution of the afﬁliation strength of
different communities for each user. Our main contributions
in this paper are as follows:
1. Novel Perspective: To the best of our knowledge, we
are among the ﬁrst to study community detection and
evolution by modeling temporal strength between users
and communities and observe ﬂows of the membership
strength of users among multiple communities as community evolution.
2. Novel Model: We model the continuous relationship between users and communities with normal distribution.
3. Better Performance: Extensive experiments show our
model outperforms strong baseline methods by substantial margins. We also present real-world applications.

The problem we aim to solve is how to better model the such
probability of edges in temporal social networks.

∗

The ﬁrst three authors contributed equally.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
This can be derived from the various types of interactions such
as citing papers, re-tweeting and commenting on social media.

8089

