The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Transfer Adversarial Hashing
for Hamming Space Retrieval
Zhangjie Cao, Mingsheng Long,∗ Chao Huang, Jianmin Wang
KLiss, MOE; NEL-BDS; TNList; School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
{caozhangjie14,huangcthu}@gmail.com {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

There are two related search problems in hashing (Norouzi, Punjani, and Fleet 2014), K-NN search and
Point Location in Equal Balls (PLEB) (Indyk and Motwani
1998). Given a database of hash codes, K-NN search aims
to ﬁnd K codes in database that are closest in Hamming distance to a given query. With the Deﬁnition that a binary code
is an r-neighbor of a query code q if it differs from q in r
bits or less, PLEB for r Equal Ball ﬁnds all r-neighbors of a
query in the database. This paper will focus on PLEB search
which we call Hamming Space Retrieval.
For binary codes of b bits, thenumber
 of distinct hash
r
buckets to examine is N (b, r) = k=0 bk . N (b, r) grows
rapidly with r and when r ≤ 2, it only requires O(1) time
for each query to ﬁnd all r-neighbors. Therefore, the search
efﬁciency and quality within Hamming Radius 2 is an important technical backbone of hashing.
Previous image hashing methods (Kulis and Darrell 2009;
Gong and Lazebnik 2011; Norouzi and Blei 2011; Fleet,
Punjani, and Norouzi 2012; Liu et al. 2012; Wang, Kumar,
and Chang 2012; Liu et al. 2013; Gong et al. 2013; Yu et
al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2014; Liu et al. 2014; Xia et al. 2014;
Lai et al. 2015; Shen et al. 2015; Erin Liong et al. 2015;
Zhu et al. 2016; Cao et al. 2016b; Li, Wang, and Kang 2016;
Liu et al. 2016; Cao et al. 2017b) have achieved promising
image retrieval performance. However, they all require that
the source domain and the target domain are the same, under
which they can directly apply the model trained on train images to database images. Many real-world applications actually violate this assumption where source and target domain
are different. For example, one person want to build a search
engine on real-world images, but unfortunately, he/she only
has images rendered from 3D model with known similarity and real-world images without any supervised similarity.
Thus, a method for the transfer setting is needed.
The transfer retrieval setting can raise two problems. The
ﬁrst is that the similar points of a query within its Hamming
Radius 2 Ball will deviate more from the query. As shown in
Figure 1(a), the red points similar to black query in the orange Hamming Ball (Hamming Radius 2 Ball) of the source
domain scatter more sparsely in a blue larger Hamming Ball
of the target domain in Figure 1(b), indicating that the number of similar points within Hamming Radius 2 decreases
because of the domain gap. This can be validated in Table 1 by the decreasing of average number of similar points

Abstract
Hashing is widely applied to large-scale image retrieval
due to the storage and retrieval efﬁciency. Existing work
on deep hashing assumes that the database in the target domain is identically distributed with the training
set in the source domain. This paper relaxes this assumption to a transfer retrieval setting, which allows the
database and the training set to come from different but
relevant domains. However, the transfer retrieval setting
will introduce two technical difﬁculties: ﬁrst, the hash
model trained on the source domain cannot work well
on the target domain due to the large distribution gap;
second, the domain gap makes it difﬁcult to concentrate
the database points to be within a small Hamming ball.
As a consequence, transfer retrieval performance within
Hamming Radius 2 degrades signiﬁcantly in existing
hashing methods. This paper presents Transfer Adversarial Hashing (TAH), a new hybrid deep architecture
that incorporates a pairwise t-distribution cross-entropy
loss to learn concentrated hash codes and an adversarial network to align the data distributions between the
source and target domains. TAH can generate compact
transfer hash codes for efﬁcient image retrieval on both
source and target domains. Comprehensive experiments
validate that TAH yields state of the art Hamming space
retrieval performance on standard datasets.

Introduction
With increasing large-scale and high-dimensional image
data emerging in search engines and social networks, image retrieval has attracted increasing attention in computer
vision community. Approximate nearest neighbors (ANN)
search is an important method for image retrieval. Parallel to the traditional indexing methods (Lew et al. 2006),
another advantageous solution is hashing methods (Wang
et al. 2014), which transform high-dimensional image data
into compact binary codes and generate similar binary codes
for similar data items. In this paper, we will focus on datadependent hash encoding schemes for efﬁcient image retrieval, which have shown better performance than dataindependent hashing methods, e.g. Locality-Sensitive Hashing (LSH) (Gionis et al. 1999).
∗

Corresponding author: Mingsheng Long
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6698

