The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Probabilistic Hierarchical Model for
Multi-View and Multi-Feature Classiﬁcation
Jinxing Li,† Hongwei Yong,† Bob Zhang,‡ Mu Li,† Lei Zhang,† David Zhang†
†

(email: {csjxli, cshyong, csmuli, cslzhang, csdzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk)
Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Hong Kong, China
‡
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau, Macau, China
(email: bobzhang@umac.mo)
Abstract

Multi-view
Face

Certain
Relationship

Tongue

Geometric
Texture
Color

Certain
Relationship

Sublingual

Some recent works in classiﬁcation show that the data obtained from various views with different sensors for an object contributes to achieving a remarkable performance. Actually, in many real-world applications, each view often contains multiple features, which means that this type of data has
a hierarchical structure, while most of existing works do not
take these features with multi-layer structure into consideration simultaneously. In this paper, a probabilistic hierarchical
model is proposed to address this issue and applied for classiﬁcation. In our model, a latent variable is ﬁrst learned to fuse
the multiple features obtained from a same view, sensor or
modality. Particularly, mapping matrices corresponding to a
certain view are estimated to project the latent variable from a
shared space to the multiple observations. Since this method
is designed for the supervised purpose, we assume that the
latent variables associated with different views are inﬂuenced
by their ground-truth label. In order to effectively solve the
proposed method, the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm is applied to estimate the parameters and latent variables. Experimental results on the extensive synthetic and two
real-world datasets substantiate the effectiveness and superiority of our approach as compared with state-of-the-art.

Multi-feature

Texture
Color

Geometric
Color

Certain
Relationship

Figure 1: An example of the multi-view and multi-feature
object. A person can be diagnosed through his or her tongue,
face and sublingual vessel. Also, these modalities can be
represented with different features.
Although many methods are proposed for multi-view data
to integrate different views to get an outstanding performance, there are still some difﬁculties for us to tackle. One
key problem is that apart from obtained multiple views, each
view is also represented with various features that are fully
valuable for classiﬁcation. For instance, a person is veriﬁed by the combination of iris, ﬁngerprint, face and palm
print. Furthermore, an iris image is described with wavelet
and gabor. So do other modalities. Similarly, Li et al. (Li
et al. 2016) (Li, Zhang, and Zhang 2017a) also illustrated
that the fatty liver and diabetes mellitus disease can be detected through a patient’s tongue, face and sublingual vessel,
and these three types of modalities are also represented with
color, texture, and geometric features, as shown in Fig.1. To
the best of our knowledge, many existing methods only established models for multiple modalities, which is limited
for the data including multiple views and their corresponding multiple features. For this situation, a naive way is to
only concatenate different features acquired from a same
view as a large one, and the existing multi-view approach is
then applied, as done in (Li et al. 2016) and (Li, Zhang, and
Zhang 2017a). However, this kind of strategy ignores the
correlation among multiple features, and the larger vector
would result in over-ﬁtting if the dimensionality of each feature is relatively large, encountering the performance degradation subsequently.
In order to address this problem, we propose a probabilis-

Introduction
In many practical applications, the raw data is obtained from
various domains or extracted from diverse modalities. For
instance, a person can be veriﬁed by the ﬁngerprint, palm
print, or iris; a face image can be captured from different
angles. These multiple types of data are called multi-view
or multi-modal data, which have attracted much attention
in recent years. Due to the comprehensive information provided by multiple views, multi-view methods have achieved
better performances in many ﬁelds such as object recognition (Eleftheriadis, Rudovic, and Pantic 2015), (Li, Zhang,
and Zhang 2017b), (Yang et al. 2012) (Jing et al. 2014),
disease detection (Li et al. 2016) (Li, Zhang, and Zhang
2017a), cross modal learning (Song et al. 2015), and semisupervised learning (Zhang and Zhang 2016) (Ceci et al.
2015) (Tao et al. 2017), regression (Zheng et al. 2015) etc.,
compared with those methods only using the information
from single view.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3498

