The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning with Options
that Terminate Off-Policy
Anna Harutyunyan

Peter Vrancx

Pierre-Luc Bacon

Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Brussels, Belgium

PROWLER.io
Cambridge, England

McGill University
Montreal, Canada

Doina Precup

Ann Nowé

McGill University
Montreal, Canada

Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Brussels, Belgium
if the options are not perfect, which of course is likely. Indeed, when a set of options is given, we can show that the
more they terminate, the more optimal the resulting policy is
at the primitive action level. This poses a challenge: on the
one hand, we wish for the options to be long to yield fast
convergence and meaningful exploration, but on the other, if
these options are not ideal, the more we commit to them, the
poorer the quality of our solution. Interrupting suboptimal
options is one way of addressing this (Sutton, Precup, and
Singh 1999), but like “cutting” traces in off-policy learning,
it may prevent us from following a coherent policy for more
than a couple of steps.
To this end, we propose to terminate options off-policy,
that is: decouple the behavior termination condition that the
options execute with, from the target termination condition
that is to be factored into the solution. The behavior terminations then solely become a means of inﬂuencing convergence speed. We describe a new algorithm, Q(β), that
achieves this by leveraging connections to several old and
new multi-step off-policy temporal difference algorithms.
The paper is organized as follows. After introducing relevant background, we will derive the ﬁxed point of the classical call-and-return option operator. Using its shape for intuition, we will then incrementally build up to our proposed
off-policy termination option operator, starting from the classical intra-option equations. We will analyze the convergence properties of this operator for both policy evaluation
and control, and state the corresponding online algorithm
Q(β). Finally, we will validate Q(β) empirically, and show
that it can (1) learn to evaluate a task w.r.t. options terminating off-policy, and (2) learn an optimal solution from suboptimal options quicker than the alternatives.

Abstract
A temporally abstract action, or an option, is speciﬁed by
a policy and a termination condition: the policy guides the
option behavior, and the termination condition roughly determines its length. Generally, learning with longer options
(like learning with multi-step returns) is known to be more
efﬁcient. However, if the option set for the task is not ideal,
and cannot express the primitive optimal policy well, shorter
options offer more ﬂexibility and can yield a better solution. Thus, the termination condition puts learning efﬁciency
at odds with solution quality. We propose to resolve this
dilemma by decoupling the behavior and target terminations,
just like it is done with policies in off-policy learning. To this
end, we give a new algorithm, Q(β), that learns the solution
with respect to any termination condition, regardless of how
the options actually terminate. We derive Q(β) by casting
learning with options into a common framework with wellstudied multi-step off-policy learning. We validate our algorithm empirically, and show that it holds up to its motivating
claims.

1

Introduction

Abstraction is essential for scaling up learning, and there
has been a renewed interest in methods that extract, or
leverage it (Vezhnevets et al. 2016; Kulkarni et al. 2016;
Tessler et al. 2017). The options framework (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999) is the standard for modeling temporal
abstraction in reinforcement learning. The temporal aspect
of an option is determined by its termination condition β,
which roughly determines its length. Learning and planning
with longer options is known to be more efﬁcient (Mann,
Mannor, and Precup 2015). This is partly due to an option having similar properties to the familiar multi-step λreturns,1 which are known to yield faster convergence (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis 1996). The key qualitative difference between β and λ, however, is that β directly affects the solution
rather than, like λ, just the rate of convergence. If β is not
trivial, this couples the quality of the solution with the quality of the options at hand. This can be restrictive especially

2

Framework and notation

We assume the standard reinforcement learning setting (Sutton and Barto 2017) of an MDP M = (S,A,p,r,γ), where
S is the set of states, A the set of discrete actions; p :
S × A × S → [0,1] the transition that speciﬁes the environment dynamics, with p(s |s,a) (or pass in short), denoting the probability of transitioning to state s upon taking action a in s; r : S × A → [−rmax ,rmax ] is the
reward function, and γ the scalar discount factor. A pol-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The similarity is particularly relevant since a full βmodel (Sutton 1995) is at the basis of both paradigms.

3173

