The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Hierarchical Attention Flow for
Multiple-Choice Reading Comprehension
Haichao Zhu,∗ Furu Wei,§ Bing Qin,† Ting Liu


SCIR, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
§
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
{hczhu, qinb, tliu}@ir.hit.edu.cn, fuwei@microsoft.com

Abstract

Passage: ... In 1993, New York State ordered stores to
charge money on beverage containers. Within a year,
consumers had returned millions of aluminum cans and
glass and plastic bottles. Plenty of companies were eager to accept the aluminum and glass as raw material for new products, but because few could ﬁgure out
what to do with the plastic, much of it wound end up ...
Question: What regulation was issued by New York
State concerning beverage containers?
A. A fee should be charged on used containers for
recycling.
B. Throwaways should be collected by the state for
recycling.
C. Consumers had to pay for beverage containers
and could get their money back on returning them.
D. Beverage companies should be responsible for
collecting and reusing discarded plastic soda bottles.
Answer: C

In this paper, we focus on multiple-choice reading comprehension which aims to answer a question given a passage and
multiple candidate options. We present the hierarchical attention ﬂow to adequately leverage candidate options to model
the interactions among passages, questions and candidate options. We observe that leveraging candidate options to boost
evidence gathering from the passages play a vital role in this
task, which is ignored in previous works. In addition, we explicitly model the option correlations with attention mechanism to obtain better option representations, which are further
fed into a bilinear layer to obtain the ranking score for each
option. On a large-scale multiple-choice reading comprehension dataset (i.e. the RACE dataset), the proposed model
outperforms two previous neural network baselines on both
RACE-M and RACE-H subsets and yields the state-of-the-art
overall results.

Introduction
In this paper, we study the task of multiple-choice reading comprehension, in which every question is accompanied
with four candidate options and only one is correct. Figure 1 shows an example. Comparing to questions from previous reading comprehension tasks (Hermann et al. 2015;
Hill et al. 2016; Onishi et al. 2016; Rajpurkar et al. 2016),
multiple-choice questions put no constraints on the answers
to be exact match spans of the reference passage. Instead
the candidate options are human generated sentences, which
may not appear in the passage.
RACE (Lai et al. 2017) and MCTest (Richardson, Burges,
and Renshaw 2013) are two representative benchmark
datasets generated by human for multiple-choice reading
comprehension. Yin, Ebert, and Schütze (2016) use convolutional neural network to build the representation at different hierarchical levels with attention mechanism. Trischler
et al. (2016) propose to conduct the match in multiple parallel perspectives with the hierarchical structure, and a training technique for the proposed neural model to converge on
MCTest. Lai et al. (2017) adapt two strong neural models
GA Reader (Dhingra et al. 2017) and Stanford AR (Chen,

Figure 1: An example multiple-choice reading comprehension question.
Bolton, and Manning 2016) as neural network baselines
for the large-scale RACE dataset. Speciﬁcally, the models
gather and summarize the passage evidence only with the
question, then conduct the match between the evidence and
candidate options.
Inspired by Yin, Ebert, and Schütze (2016) and Trischler
et al. (2016), we present the neural network based hierarchical attention ﬂow, depicted in Figure 2, to adequately
leverage candidate options to model the word level and sentence level interactions among passages, questions and candidate options. The attention ﬂow is organized in the following hierarchical order. We use a bi-directional recurrent
neural network (BiRNN) to encode passage sentences, question and candidate options separately. Then, the word-level
attention layer builds the question-aware passage sentence
and the candidate option representation. Next, the sentence
context encoder models temporal context between passage
sentences with a BiRNN. Afterwards, the sentence-level attention layer gathers evidence from the passage with candidate options in addition to the question, and models option
correlations for better option representation. Finally, the bi-

∗

Contribution during internship at Microsoft STC Asia.
Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

6077

