The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Dynamic Deep Neural Networks: Optimizing
Accuracy-Efﬁciency Trade-Offs by Selective Execution
Lanlan Liu, Jia Deng
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
2260 Hayward Street
Ann Arbor, Michigan, 48109

tion of images, where some images can be rapidly classiﬁed
as negative after only a small amount of computation.
D2 NNs are motivated by the need for computational efﬁciency, in particular, by the need to deploy deep networks
on mobile devices and data centers. Mobile devices are constrained by energy and power, limiting the amount of computation that can be executed. Data centers need energy efﬁciency to scale to higher throughput and to save operating
cost. D2 NNs provide a way to improve computational efﬁciency by selective execution, pruning unnecessary computation depending on input. D2 NNs also make it possible to
use a bigger network under a computation budget by executing only a subset of the neurons each time.
A D2 NN is trained end to end. That is, regular modules
and control modules are jointly trained to optimize both accuracy and efﬁciency. We achieve such training by integrating backpropagation with reinforcement learning, necessitated by the non-differentiability of control modules.
Compared to prior work that optimizes computational efﬁciency in computer vision and machine learning, our work
is distinctive in four aspects: (1) the decisions on selective
execution are part of the network inference and are learned
end to end together with the rest of the network, as opposed to hand-designed or separately learned (Li et al. 2015;
Sun, Wang, and Tang 2013; Almahairi et al. 2016); (2)
D2 NNs allow more ﬂexible network architectures and execution sequences including parallel paths, as opposed to architectures with less variance (Denoyer and Gallinari 2014;
Shazeer et al. 2017); (3) our D2 NNs directly optimize arbitrary efﬁciency metric that is deﬁned by the user, while previous work has no such ﬂexibility because they improve efﬁciency indirectly through sparsity constraints(Bengio et al.
2015; Bengio, Léonard, and Courville 2013; Shazeer et al.
2017). (4) our method optimizes metrics such as the F-score
that does not decompose over individual examples. This is
an issue not addressed in prior work. We will elaborate on
these differences in the Related Work section of this paper.
We perform extensive experiments to validate our D2 NNs
algorithms. We evaluate various D2 NN architectures on several tasks. They demonstrate that D2 NNs are general, ﬂexible, and can effectively improve computational efﬁciency.
Our main contribution is the D2 NN framework that allows
a user to augment a static feed-forward network with control
modules to achieve dynamic selective execution. We show

Abstract
2

We introduce Dynamic Deep Neural Networks (D NN), a
new type of feed-forward deep neural network that allows
selective execution. Given an input, only a subset of D2 NN
neurons are executed, and the particular subset is determined
by the D2 NN itself. By pruning unnecessary computation depending on input, D2 NNs provide a way to improve computational efﬁciency. To achieve dynamic selective execution, a D2 NN augments a feed-forward deep neural network
(directed acyclic graph of differentiable modules) with controller modules. Each controller module is a sub-network
whose output is a decision that controls whether other modules can execute. A D2 NN is trained end to end. Both regular and controller modules in a D2 NN are learnable and are
jointly trained to optimize both accuracy and efﬁciency. Such
training is achieved by integrating backpropagation with reinforcement learning. With extensive experiments of various
D2 NN architectures on image classiﬁcation tasks, we demonstrate that D2 NNs are general and ﬂexible, and can effectively
optimize accuracy-efﬁciency trade-offs.

Introduction
This paper introduces Dynamic Deep Neural Networks
(D2 NN), a new type of feed-forward deep neural network
(DNN) that allows selective execution. That is, given an input, only a subset of neurons are executed, and the particular
subset is determined by the network itself based on the particular input. In other words, the amount of computation and
computation sequence are dynamic based on input. This is
different from standard feed-forward networks that always
execute the same computation sequence regardless of input.
A D2 NN is a feed-forward deep neural network (directed
acyclic graph of differentiable modules) augmented with
one or more control modules. A control module is a subnetwork whose output is a decision that controls whether
other modules can execute. Fig. 1 (left) illustrates a simple
D2 NN with one control module (Q) and two regular modules (N1, N2), where the controller Q outputs a binary decision on whether module N2 executes. For certain inputs, the
controller may decide that N2 is unnecessary and instead execute a dummy node D to save on computation. As an example application, this D2 NN can be used for binary classiﬁcac 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3675

