The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Memory Management with Explicit Time
in Resource-Bounded Agents
Valentina Pitoni
University of L’Aquila
Via Vetoio, 67100 L’Aquila AQ
+393200977664
valentina.pitoni@graduate.univaq.it
and/or certain inferences can legally be enforced;

The primary objective of my research project is the formal
treatment (in Computational Logic) of memory issues in Intelligent Software Agents. Memory is a basic component of
every reasoning process, and vice versa interaction between
the agent and the environment can play an important role in
creating memory and can affect future behavior. Most methods to design agent memorization mechanisms have been inspired by models of human memory (cf. e.g., (Pearson and
Logie 2003)) developed in cognitive science. Atkinson and
Shiffrin in (Atkinson and Shiffrin 1968) proposed a model
of human memory which consists of two distinct memory
stores, the short term memory (or working memory), where
explicit beliefs are stored, and the long term memory which
stores the background knowledge.
In reference to memory management, the most important cognitive architecture which has a model of memory
is SOAR, which was deﬁned by Laird, Newell and Rosenbloom in (Laird, Newell, and Rosenbloom 1987). In recent work (Balbiani, Duque, and Lorini 2016), Balbiani,
Fernández-Duque and Lorini proposed a (partial) formalization of SOAR architecture in modal logic, reasoning on
a particular type of agents: resource-bounded agents. They
proposed a new logic called DLEK (Dynamic Logic of Explicit Beliefs and Knowledge) which helps in clarifying how
a non-omniscient resource-bounded agent can form new beliefs either through perception or through inference from existing knowledge and beliefs. In this logic there are mental operations either of perceptive type or of inferential
type, having effects on the epistemic states of the resourcebounded agent. In fact, DLEK is a logic that consists of a
static component and of a dynamic one.
However DLEK does not explicitly consider temporal aspects, as rules and beliefs are seen as time-independent. The
starting point of my research project is the extension of (Balbiani, Duque, and Lorini 2016) introducing timed beliefs
and timed background rules by means of Metric Temporal
Logic. Speciﬁcally:

• the formalization of the possibility that a memory update, speciﬁed by rules in the long-term memory, might
remove/restructure previous beliefs. This is different from
simple “forgetting”, which consists in removing single beliefs either arbitrarily, or after a certain time; the objective
it to make beliefs defeasible, which is useful to many purposes among which for representing the effects of actions.
Perceptions (future beliefs) are in fact in our view inherently timed, and so are the conclusions that can be drawn
from them. For instance, if one buys today a ticket for a trip
then (s)he knows that (s)he can go to that trip on the date and
time indicated on the ticket; if one gets a bill to pay, then one
usually has to pay within a certain date; if the present temperature is low then a heavy jacket is needed in order to go
out now, etc. Also, similar perceptions can be repeated: e.g.,
to choose a jacket one should refer to the last measurement
of temperature, ignoring previous ones.
I introduce TDLEK starting from DLEK and its nondynamic version LEK. In this setting, a time interval I ⊆
(0, ∞) is an interval of natural numbers with the upper extreme in N, as [t1 , t2 ], (t1 , t2 ), or mixed (t1 , t2 ], [t1 , t2 )
where however in the open cases the upper bound could be
∞ (in any case, we have t1 ≤ t2 ). The extension to the LEK
language (LLEK ) presented in (Balbiani, Duque, and Lorini
2016) to the TLEK language (LT LEK ) by adding timed formulas, indicated by ΦI where I, I1 , I2 are intervals, is deﬁned as follows (t being a natural number):
ΦI

:= p | pt | pI | ¬ΦI1 | ΦI1 ∨ ΦI2 |
ΦI 1 ∧ ΦI 2 |  I Φ I 1 | B i ΦI | Ki  I ΦI 1

where the other boolean constructions , ⊥, →, ↔ are deﬁned from ¬ and ∧ in the standard way. Assuming a countable set of atomic propositions Atm = {p, q, . . .}, pt is atom
p annotated with “time-stamp” t, where t is a time instant in
the underlying linear model of time. By pI with I = [tm , tn ],
0 ≤ m ≤ n we mean ptm ∧ ptm+1 ∧ . . . ∧ ptn . Plain
atom p can be seen as equivalent to pIˆ with Iˆ = [0, ∞).
A formula Φt is entirely composed of atoms of this form.
Operator Bi is intended to denote belief and operator Ki
to denote knowledge, both referred to agent i. I1 ΦI2 applies the MTL Interval “always” operator to a timed formula,
where it is required I2 ⊆ I1 . Both I1 and I2 can be [0, ∞).

• the formalization of short-term memory by associating to
each perception the temporal instant of arrival;
• the introduction in the general rules of long-term memory of the time intervals within which the rules are valid
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8133

