The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Submodular Function Maximization over Graphs via
Zero-Suppressed Binary Decision Diagrams
Shinsaku Sakaue, Masaaki Nishino, Norihito Yasuda
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation
{sakaue.shinsaku, masaaki.nishino, yasuda.n}@lab.ntt.co.jp

SFM with complex constraints also arises in the context of
wireless sensor network (WSN) design. One such example
is the problem considered in (Krause et al. 2006). Given a
graph that represents the connectability of sensor nodes, we
seek a connected tree to maximize a submodular function that
measures the informativeness of the obtained tree. Each edge
in the graph has a cost, which represents the energy consumed
when the two sensors placed on its ends communicate with
each other, and the total cost of the obtained tree must be
less than or equal to a given budget, B. In realistic WSN
design problems, however, more complex constraints often
appear. Below we list two such examples, which we call the
submodular Steiner tree problem (SSTP) and the submodular
vertex-connected network problem (SVCNP):

Abstract
Submodular function maximization (SFM) has attracted much
attention thanks to its applicability to various practical problems. Although most studies have considered SFM with size or
budget constraints, more complex constraints often appear in
practice. In this paper, we consider a very general class of SFM
with such complex constraints (e.g., an s-t path constraint on
a given graph). We propose a novel algorithm that takes advantage of zero-suppressed binary decision diagrams, which store
all feasible solutions efﬁciently thus enabling us to circumvent the difﬁculty of determining feasibility. Theoretically, our
algorithm is guaranteed to achieve (1 − c)-approximations,
where c is the curvature of a submodular function. Experiments show that our algorithm runs much faster than exact
algorithms and ﬁnds better solutions than those obtained by an
existing approximation algorithm in many instances. Notably,
our algorithm achieves better than a 90%-approximation in all
instances for which optimal values are available.

1

SSTP: As in (Ke, Liu, and Tsai 2011), many sensor placement problems have some critical areas that we are particularly interested in; a vertex that corresponds to a critical
area is called a terminal. In SSTP, we seek a Steiner tree that
covers all terminals under the budget constraint to maximize
an objective function.

Introduction

Submodular function maximization (SFM) can model a large
number of real-world problems (e.g., sensor placement, feature selection, and document summarization), and so continues to be a dominant subject of study. Given ﬁnite set
V , set function f : 2V → R is said to be submodular if
f (S) + f (T ) ≥ f (S ∪ T ) + f (S ∩ T ) for all S, T ∈ 2V , and
monotone if f (T ) ≥ f (S) for any S ⊆ T . Although SFM is
NP-hard in general, greedy-based algorithms are known to offer strong approximation guarantees; some of them consider
a size constraint, a budget constraint, or a matroid constraint.
However, it has remained hard to design efﬁcient approximation algorithms for SFM with more complex constraints. A
typical such problem is the submodular orienteering problem
(SOP) (Chekuri and Pal 2005):
SOP: Given budget B > 0 and a graph with edge costs
and two speciﬁed vertices s, t, we seek to ﬁnd an s-t path
whose cost is at most B to maximize a submodular objective
function of the set of vertices visited by the s-t path. SOP
is important since it models various practical problems such
as path-planning problems with robotic sensors (Singh et al.
2009), travel planning (Zeng et al. 2015), and door-to-door
marketing (Zhang and Vorobeychik 2016).

SVCNP: We aim to obtain a robust WSN that has no cut vertex, which is a vertex whose removal breaks the connectivity
of the network; we call a network with no cut vertex vertexconnected (VC) network. Since the failure of a sensor placed
on a cut vertex blocks data transmission, how to design a
VC network has been extensively studied (Liu et al. 2006;
Xiong and Li 2010). In SVCNP, we seek a VC network under
the budget constraint to maximize an objective function.
The difﬁculty of the above problems is that the constraints
are rigid. Given a subset of vertices, determining the feasibility of the subset in SOP and SSTP reduces to NP-complete
problems: the Hamilton path problem and Steiner tree problem, respectively. The feasibility determination in SVCNP is
known to be as hard as the Hamilton cycle problem if the edge
costs are uniform, and it becomes more difﬁcult if the costs
are not uniform, for which no existing algorithm has been developed; SVCNP is empirically more challenging than SOP
and SSTP due to the difﬁcult feasibility determination. If we
apply a naive iterative algorithm (e.g., the greedy algorithm)
to such problems, we need to solve an NP-complete problem
every time a solution is updated.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1422

