The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Generative Adversarial Network Based Heterogeneous Bibliographic
Network Representation for Personalized Citation Recommendation
Xiaoyan Cai, Junwei Han,* Libin Yang
School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
{xiaoyanc, jhan, libiny}@nwpu.edu.cn

ence papers that are relevant to the researchers’ information need, is an essential technology to overcome this
problem. A variety of citation recommendation approaches
have been proposed in the literature (He et al. 2010; He et
al. 2011; Ren et al. 2014; Huang et al. 2014). These approaches are either global or local. Global recommendation
(He et al. 2011; Meng et al. 2013; Ren et al. 2014;) recommends a list of references for a given manuscript. Local
recommendation (He et al. 2010), on the other hand, aims
to recommend citations for specific context of each place
where a citation should be made. We focus on global citation recommendation in this work.
Existing global citation recommendation approaches fall
into three categories: collaborative filtering (CF) (Hernando et al. 2016), content-based filtering (CBF) (Nascimento
et al. 2011) and graph-based approaches (Meng et al. 2013).
CF makes citation recommendation by finding correlations
among other researchers with similar research interests.
CBF recommends a reference paper based on words and/or
topic features of a manuscript and the identity of a researcher. Graph-based approaches often consider citation
recommendation as a link prediction problem and solve the
problem using properties of random walks.
Recently, network representation has been exploited for
graph-based citation recommendation (Gupta and Varma
2017). Most network representation methods are based on
network structure. Inspired by deep learning techniques in
natural language processing (Mikolov et al. 2013), Perozzi
et al. (2014) proposed DeepWalk approach, which learns
feature vectors for vertices from a corpus of random walks
generated from networks by employing neural network
models. Grover and Leskovec (2016) proposed Node2Vec
approach, which maximizes the likelihood of preserving
network neighborhoods of vertices to learn feature representation. However, they only consider network structure,
ignoring content information associated with each vertex.
Pan et al. (2016) proposed TriDNR approach, which uses
information from three parties, i.e. vertex structure, vertex

Abstract
Network representation has been recently exploited for
many applications, such as citation recommendation, multilabel classification and link prediction. It learns lowdimensional vector representation for each vertex in networks. Existing network representation methods only focus
on incomplete aspects of vertex information (i.e., vertex
content, network structure or partial integration), moreover
they are commonly designed for homogeneous information
networks where all the vertices of a network are of the same
type. In this paper, we propose a deep network representation model that integrates network structure and the vertex
content information into a unified framework by exploiting
generative adversarial network, and represents different
types of vertices in the heterogeneous network in a continuous and common vector space. Based on the proposed model, we can obtain heterogeneous bibliographic network representation for efficient citation recommendation. The proposed model also makes personalized citation recommendation possible, which is a new issue that a few papers addressed in the past. When evaluated on the AAN and DBLP
datasets, the performance of the proposed heterogeneous
bibliographic network based citation recommendation approach is comparable with that of the other network representation based citation recommendation approaches. The
results also demonstrate that the personalized citation recommendation approach is more effective than the nonpersonalized citation recommendation approach.

Introduction
With the rapid growth in the number of scientific papers,
researchers might find it hard to find appropriate and necessary work to cite. Researchers usually retrieve papers
from web search engines based on certain keywords, manually review them and decide which paper should be cited.
However, it is labor-intensive as well as time-consuming,
and especially difficult for the beginning researchers. Citation recommendation which can recommend a list of refer*Corresponding author
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5747

