The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Disjunctive Program Synthesis:
A Robust Approach to Programming by Example
Mohammad Raza

Sumit Gulwani

Microsoft Corporation
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, Washington, USA
moraza@microsoft.com

Microsoft Corporation
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, Washington, USA
sumitg@microsoft.com
be extremely beneﬁcial in helping end users to automate the
generation of such scripts. A PBE system allows the user
to specify their intent by giving a few input-output examples of the desired task, from which the system attempts to
automatically generate a program in an underlying domainspeciﬁc language (DSL) that satisﬁes the given examples.
Instead of opaquely automating one-off tasks, PBE produces
lightweight scripts in common programming languages that
can saved and reused by users in different environments, independently of the learning techniques used to infer those
scripts.
PBE approaches have seen signiﬁcant interest and
progress in recent years (Lau et al. 2003; Gulwani, Harris, and Singh 2012; Devlin et al. 2017; Balog et al. 2017;
Manshadi, Gildea, and Allen 2013; Singh 2016; Raza and
Gulwani 2017), as well as notable commercial successes
such as the Flash Fill feature in Microsoft Excel (Gulwani
2011). However, a key challenge faced by current systems
is that the programs inferred from a few examples generally lack robustness and easily fail on new inputs. This
is because the state space of possible programs (deﬁned
by the DSL) is large, since we need to support expressive
programs covering different tasks, and hence there can be
many possible programs satisfying a given set of examples provided by the user. This expressivity vs. correctness
trade-off is a central challenge in the design of PBE systems, which is why there has been a strong effort in the
synthesis community to improve the ranking used in PBE
systems to choose the most likely program the user may
want out of the large set of candidates that logically satisfy
the given examples (Singh and Gulwani 2015; Singh 2016;
Ellis and Gulwani 2017).
However, no matter how good the ranking technique is,
this approach by deﬁnition restricts the system to choose a
single option from a set of many likely possibilities (and this
is true for synthesis at every sub-program level, not just fowr
ﬁnal programs). In this work we explore a philosophically
different approach to this issue of robustness based on the
idea that we need not prematurely commit to a single choice
of program at synthesis time. Instead, it would be beneﬁcial to delay this ranking decision to the execution of the
program when we have more information: the actual input
on which the program is to be executed. We illustrate this
idea with scenarios from two practical application domains

Abstract
Programming by example (PBE) systems allow end users to
easily create programs by providing a few input-output examples to specify their intended task. The system attempts
to generate a program in a domain speciﬁc language (DSL)
that satisﬁes the given examples. However, a key challenge
faced by existing PBE techniques is to ensure the robustness
of the programs that are synthesized from a small number of
examples, as these programs often fail when applied to new
inputs. This is because there can be many possible programs
satisfying a small number of examples, and the PBE system
has to somehow rank between these candidates and choose
the correct one without any further information from the user.
In this work we present a different approach to PBE in which
the system avoids making a ranking decision at the synthesis stage, by instead synthesizing a disjunctive program that
includes the many possible top-ranked programs as possible
alternatives and selects between these different choices upon
execution on a new input. This delayed choice brings the important beneﬁt of comparing the possible outputs produced
by the different disjuncts on a given input at execution time.
We present a generic framework for synthesizing such disjunctive programs in arbitrary DSLs, and describe two concrete implementations of disjunctive synthesis in the practical
domains of data extraction from plain text and HTML documents. We present an evaluation showing the signiﬁcant increase in robustness achieved with our disjunctive approach,
as illustrated by an increase from 59% to 93% of tasks for
which correct programs can be learnt from a single example.

Introduction
The vast majority of computer users and knowledge workers today are not computer programmers, and yet commonly
face challenges for which programming skills are required.
Many examples of such tasks can be seen in the domain of
data manipulation, such as extracting substrings of text from
a column in a spreadsheet, or extracting important data ﬁelds
from a collection of richly formatted emails or web pages.
Such tasks may be performed by professional programmers
by writing custom extraction scripts using regular expressions, Excel macros or CSS expressions, but are out of the
reach of the common computer user. This is where Programming by example (PBE) approaches (Lieberman 2001) can
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1403

