The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Supervised Deep Hashing for Hierarchical Labeled Data
Dan Wang,1 Heyan Huang,1∗ Chi Lu,1 Bo-Si Feng,1
Guihua Wen,2 Liqiang Nie,3 Xian-Ling Mao1
1

Beijing Institute of Technology, China
South China University of Technology, China
3
Shandong University, China
{wangdan12856, hhy63, luchi, maoxl}@bit.edu.cn, fengbosi1994@163.com
crghwen@scut.edu.cn, nieliqiang@gmail.com
2

Indyk, and Motwani 1999; Raginsky and Lazebnik 2009)
which do not use any data for training, data-dependent
hashing methods, can achieve better accuracy with shorter
codes by learning hash functions from training data (Gong
and Lazebnik 2011; Zhang et al. 2014). Existing datadependent methods can be further divided into three categories: unsupervised methods (He, Wen, and Sun 2013;
Gong and Lazebnik 2011; Shen et al. 2015; Zhu et al. 2017),
supervised methods (Liu et al. 2012; Zhang et al. 2014;
Yuan et al. 2017), and semi-supervised methods (Wang,
Kumar, and Chang 2010; Zhang, Peng, and Zhang 2016;
Zhang and Zheng 2017). Unsupervised hashing works by
preserving the Euclidean similarity between the attributes of
training points, while supervised and semi-supervised hashing try to preserve the semantic similarity constructed from
the semantic labels of the training points (Zhang et al. 2014;
Kang, Li, and Zhou 2016). Although there are also some
works to exploit other types of supervised information like
the ranking information for hashing (Li et al. 2013), the semantic information is usually given in the form of pairwise
labels indicating whether two data points are known to be
similar or dissimilar. As far as we know, these supervised
and semi-supervised methods can mainly be used to deal
with the data with non-hierarchical labels.

Abstract
Recently, hashing methods have been widely used in largescale image retrieval. However, most existing supervised
hashing methods do not consider the hierarchical relation of
labels, which means that they ignored the rich semantic information stored in the hierarchy. Moreover, most of previous works treat each bit in a hash code equally, which does
not meet the scenario of hierarchical labeled data. To tackle
the aforementioned problems, in this paper, we propose a
novel deep hashing method, called supervised hierarchical
deep hashing (SHDH), to perform hash code learning for hierarchical labeled data. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne a novel similarity formula for hierarchical labeled data by weighting each
level, and design a deep neural network to obtain a hash code
for each data point. Extensive experiments on two real-world
public datasets show that the proposed method outperforms
the state-of-the-art baselines in the image retrieval task.

Introduction
Nearest neighbour (NN) search plays a pivotal role in multimedia and related areas, such as image retrieval, pattern
recognition, and computer vision (Zheng et al. 2015). In big
data applications, it is, however, time-consuming to return
the exact nearest neighbours to the given queries. Hence, approximate nearest neighbour (ANN) search algorithms with
improved speed and memory saving have drawn more and
more attention from researchers in this big data era (Andoni
and Indyk 2008).
Due to its fast retrieval speed and low storage cost,
similarity-preserving hashing has been widely used for ANN
search (Zhu et al. 2016). The central idea of hashing is to
map the data points from the original feature space into binary codes in the Hamming space and preserve the pairwise similarities in the original space. With the binarycode representation, hashing enables constant or sub-linear
time complexity for ANN search (Gong and Lazebnik 2011;
Zhang et al. 2014). Moreover, hashing can reduce the storage cost dramatically.
Compared with traditional data-independent hashing
methods like Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH) (Gionis,

However, there are indeed lots of hierarchical labeled
data, such as Imagenet (Deng et al. 2009), IAPRTC-12(Escalante et al. 2010) and CIFAR-100(Krizhevsky 2009). Intuitively, we can simply take hierarchical labeled data as
non-hierarchical labeled data, and then take advantage of
the existing algorithms. Obviously, it cannot achieve optimal
performance, because most of the existing methods are essentially designed to deal with non-hierarchical labeled data
which do not consider special characteristics of hierarchical
labeled data. For example, in Figure 1, if taking the hierarchical ones as non-hierarchical labeled data, images Ia and
Ib have the same label “Rose”, the label of the image Ic is
“Sunﬂower”, and the labels for Id and Ie are respectively
“Ock” and “Tiger”. Given a query Iq with the ground truth
label “Rose”, the retrieved results may be “Ia , Ib , Ie , Id , and
Ic ” in descending order without considering the hierarchy. It
does not make sense that the ranking positions of images Ie
and Id are higher than that of Ic , because the image Ic is also

∗

Corresponding Author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7388

