The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

State of the Art: Reproducibility
in Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Odd Erik Gundersen, Sigbjørn Kjensmo
Department of Computer Science
Norwegian University of Science and Technology

Guidelines, best-practices and solutions to aid reproducibility point towards open data and open source code as requirements for reproducible research (Sandve et al. 2013;
Stodden and Miguez 2014). The increased focus on reproducibility has resulted in an increased adoption of data and
code sharing policies for journals (Stodden, Guo, and Ma
2013). Still, proposed solutions for facilitating reproducibility see little adoption due to low ease-of-use and the time
required to retroactively ﬁt an experiment to these solutions
(Gent and Kotthoff 2014). (Braun and Ong 2014) argues
that automation should be possible to a higher degree for
machine learning, as everything needed is available on a
computer. Despite of this, the percentage of research that
is reproducible is not higher for machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) research (Hunold and Träff 2013;
Fokkens et al. 2013; Hunold 2015).
The scientiﬁc method is based on reproducibility; ”if
other researchers can’t repeat an experiment and get the
same result as the original researchers, then they refute the
hypothesis” (Oates 2006, p. 285). Hence, the inability to
reproduce results affects the trustworthiness of science. To
ensure high trustworthiness of AI and machine learning research measures must be taken to increase its reproducibility. However, before measures can be taken, the state of reproducibility in AI research must be documented. The state
of reproducibility can only be documented if a proper framework is built.
Our objective is to quantify the state of reproducibility
of empirical AI research, and our main hypothesis is that
the documentation of AI research is not good enough to reproduce the reported results. We also investigate a second
hypothesis, which is that documentation practices have improved during recent years. Two predictions were made, one
for each hypothesis. The ﬁrst prediction is that the current
documentation practices at top AI conferences render most
of the reported research results irreproducible, and the second prediction is that a larger portion of the reported research results are reproducible when comparing the latest
installments of conferences to earlier installments. We surveyed research papers from the two top AI conference series, International Joint Conference on AI (IJCAI) and the
Association for the Advancement of AI (AAAI) to test the
hypotheses. Our contributions are twofold: i) an investigation of what reproducibility means for AI research and ii) a

Abstract
Background: Research results in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
are criticized for not being reproducible. Objective: To quantify the state of reproducibility of empirical AI research using six reproducibility metrics measuring three different degrees of reproducibility. Hypotheses: 1) AI research is not
documented well enough to reproduce the reported results. 2)
Documentation practices have improved over time. Method:
The literature is reviewed and a set of variables that should be
documented to enable reproducibility are grouped into three
factors: Experiment, Data and Method. The metrics describe
how well the factors have been documented for a paper. A total of 400 research papers from the conference series IJCAI
and AAAI have been surveyed using the metrics. Findings:
None of the papers document all of the variables. The metrics
show that between 20% and 30% of the variables for each factor are documented. One of the metrics show statistically signiﬁcant increase over time while the others show no change.
Interpretation: The reproducibility scores decrease with increased documentation requirements. Improvement over time
is found. Conclusion: Both hypotheses are supported.

Introduction
Although reproducibility is a cornerstone of science, a large
amount of published research results cannot be reproduced.
This is even the case for results published in the most prestigious journals; even the original researchers cannot reproduce their own results (Aarts et al. 2016; Begley and Ellis 2012; Begley and Ioannidis 2014; Prinz, Schlange, and
Asadullah 2011). (Goodman, Fanelli, and Ioannidis 2016)
presents data from Scopus that shows that the problem with
reproducibility spans several scientiﬁc ﬁelds. According to
(Donoho et al. 2009) ”it is impossible to verify most of the
computational results presented at conferences and in papers today”. This was conﬁrmed by (Collberg and Proebsting 2016). Out of 402 experimental papers they were
able to repeat 32.3% without communicating with the author, rising to 48.3% with communication. Papers by authors with industry afﬁliation showed a lower rate of reproducibility. They also found that some researchers are
not willing to share code and data, while those that actually share, provide too little to repeat the experiment.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1644

