The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Stochastic Non-Convex Ordinal Embedding with
Stabilized Barzilai-Borwein Step Size
Ke Ma,1,2 Jinshan Zeng,3,4 Jiechao Xiong,5 Qianqian Xu,1
Xiaochun Cao,1* Wei Liu,5 Yuan Yao4∗
1

State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Computer Information Engineering, Jiangxi Normal University
4
Department of Mathematics, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 5 Tencent AI Lab
{make, xuqianqian, caoxiaochun}@iie.ac.cn, jsh.zeng@gmail.com
jcxiong@tencent.com, wliu@ee.columbia.edu, yuany@ust.hk
The ordinal embedding problem was ﬁrstly studied by
(Shepard 1962a; 1962b; Kruskal 1964a; 1964b) in the psychometric society. In recent years, it has drawn a lot of attention in machine learning (Jamieson and Nowak 2011b;
Kleindessner and Luxburg 2014; Arias-Castro 2017; Jain,
Jamieson, and Nowak 2016), statistic ranking (McFee and
Lanckriet 2011; Jamieson and Nowak 2011a), artiﬁcial intelligence (Heikinheimo and Ukkonen 2013; Wilber, Kwak,
and Belongie 2014), information retrieval (Song et al. 2015),
and computer vision (Wah et al. 2014; Wilber et al. 2015),
etc.

Abstract
Learning representation from relative similarity comparisons,
often called ordinal embedding, gains rising attention in recent years. Most of the existing methods are batch methods
designed mainly based on the convex optimization, say, the
projected gradient descent method. However, they are generally time-consuming due to that the singular value decomposition (SVD) is commonly adopted during the update, especially when the data size is very large. To overcome this challenge, we propose a stochastic algorithm called SVRG-SBB,
which has the following features: (a) SVD-free via dropping
convexity, with good scalability by the use of stochastic algorithm, i.e., stochastic variance reduced gradient (SVRG),
and (b) adaptive step size choice via introducing a new stabilized Barzilai-Borwein (SBB) method as the original version
for convex problems might fail for the considered stochastic
non-convex optimization problem. Moreover, we show that
the proposed algorithm converges to a stationary point at a
rate O( T1 ) in our setting, where T is the number of total iterations. Numerous simulations and real-world data experiments
are conducted to show the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm via comparing with the state-of-the-art methods, particularly, much lower computational cost with good prediction
performance.

One of the typical methods for ordinal embedding problem is the well-known Generalized Non-Metric Multidimensional Scaling (GNMDS) (Agarwal et al. 2007), which
aims at ﬁnding a low-rank Gram (or kernel) matrix G in
Euclidean space such that the pairwise distances between
the embedding of objects in Reproducing Kernel Hilbert
Space (RKHS) satisfy the relative similarity comparisons.
As GNMDS uses hinge loss to model the relative similarity between the objects, it neglects the information provided by satisﬁed constraints in ﬁnding the underlying structure in the low-dimensional space. To alleviate this issue, the Crowd Kernel Learning (CKL) was proposed by
(Tamuz et al. 2011) via employing a scale-invariant loss
function. However, the objective function used in CKL only
considers the constraints which are strongly violated. Latter, (van der Maaten and Weinberger 2012) proposed the
Stochastic Triplet Embedding (STE) that jointly penalizes
the violated constraints and rewards the satisﬁed constraints,
via using the logistic loss function. Note that the aforementioned three typical methods are based on the convex
formulations, and also employ the projected gradient descent method and singular value decomposition (SVD) to
obtain the embedding. However, a huge amount of comparisons and the computational complexity of SVD significantly inhibit their usage to large scale and on-line applications. Structure Preserving Embedding (SPE) (Shaw and
Jebara 2009) and Local Ordinal Embedding (LOE) (Terada and Luxburg 2014) embed unweighted nearest neighbor graphs to Euclidean spaces with convex and non-convex
objective functions. The nearest neighbor adjacency matrix

Introduction
Ordinal embedding aims to learn representation of data objects as points in a low-dimensional space. The distances
among these points agree with a set of relative similarity
comparisons as well as possible. Relative comparisons are
often collected by workers who are asked to answer the following question:
“Is the similarity between object i and j larger than the
similarity between l and k?”
The feedback of individuals provide us a set of quadruplets, i.e., {(i, j, l, k)}, which can be treated as the supervision for ordinal embedding. Without prior knowledge, the
relative similarity comparisons always involve all objects
and the number of potential quadruplet could be O(n4 ).
∗

The corresponding authors.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3738

