The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Predicting Depression Severity by Multi-Modal Feature Engineering and Fusion
Aven Samareh,∗1 Yan Jin,∗1 Zhangyang Wang, 2 Xiangyu Chang, 3 Shuai Huang 1
1

Industrial & Systems Engineering Department, University of Washington
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University
3
Department of Information, Xi’an Jiaotong University
{asamareh, yanjin, shuaih}@uw.edu, atlaswang@tamu.edu, xiangyuchang@gmail.com
2

The original audio datasets were pre-extracted features
using the COVAREP toolbox. We further extracted descriptors: fundamental frequency (F0), voicing (VUV), normalized amplitude quotient (NAQ), quasi open quotient
(QOQ), the ﬁrst two harmonics of the differentiated glottal source spectrum (H1, H2), parabolic spectral parameter (PSP), maxima dispersion quotient (MDQ), spectral
tilt/slope of wavelet responses (peak/slope), shape parameter of the Liljencrants-Fant model of the glottal pulse dynamic (Rd), Rd conf, Mel cepstral coefﬁcient (MCEP 0-24),
harmonic model and phase distortion mean (HMPDM 0-24)
and deviations (HMPDD 0-12), and the ﬁrst 3 formants. The
top 10 largest discrete cosine transformation (DCT) coefﬁcients were computed for each descriptor to balance between information loss and efﬁciency. Delta and Delta-Delta
features known as differential and acceleration coefﬁcients
were calculated as additional features to capture the spectral
domain dynamic information. In addition, a series of statistical descriptors such as mean, median, std, peak-magnitude
to rms ratio, were calculated. Overall, a total of 1425 audio
features were extracted.

Abstract
We present our preliminary work to determine if patient’s
vocal acoustic, linguistic, and facial patterns could predict clinical ratings of depression severity, namely Patient
Health Questionnaire depression scale (PHQ-8). We proposed a multi-modal fusion model that combines three different modalities: audio, video, and text features. By training over the AVEC2017 dataset, our proposed model outperforms each single-modality prediction model, and surpasses
the dataset baseline with a nice margin.

Introduction
Depression is a signiﬁcant health concern worldwide, and its
early-stage symptom monitoring, detection, and prediction
are becoming crucial for us to mitigate this disease. With
considerable attentions devoted to this ﬁeld, traditional diagnosis and monitoring procedures usually rely on subjective
measurements. It is desirable to develop more biomarkers
that can be automatically extracted from objective measurements. Depression will leave recognizable markers in patient’s vocal acoustic, linguistic, and facial patterns, all of
which have demonstrated increasing promise on evaluating
and predicting patient’s mental condition in an unobtrusive
way (Kächele et al. 2014). In this work, we aim to extend
the existing body of related work and investigate the performances of each of the biomarker modalities (audio, linguistic, and facial) for the task of depression severity evaluation,
and further boost our results by using a conﬁdence based
fusion mechanism to combine all three modalities. Experiments on the recently released AVEC 2017 (Ringeval et al.
2017) depression dataset have veriﬁed the promising performance of the proposed model.

2D coordinates of 68 points on the face, estimated from
raw video data were provided. To develop visual features
from this data-limited setting, we chose stable regions between eyes and mouth due to minimal involvement in facial expression. We calculated the mean shape of 46 stable
points not confounding with gender. The pairwise Euclidean
distance between coordinates of the landmarks were calculated as well as the angles (in radians) between the points,
resulting in 92 features. Finally, we split the facial landmarks into three groups of different regions: the left eye
and left eyebrow, the right eye and right eyebrow, and the
mouth. We calculated the difference between the coordinates
of the landmarks and ﬁnally calculated the Euclidean distances (2 -norm) between the points for each group, resulting in 41 features. Overall, we obtained 133 features.

Feature Engineering
The AVEC 2017 dataset includes audio and video recordings, as well as extensive questionnaire responses in text
formats, collected from (nearly) real-world settings. We will
next introduce how we developed feature engineering techniques based on given data and features in each modality.

The transcript ﬁle includes translated communication
content between each participant and the animated virtual
interviewer Ellie. Basic statistics of words or sentences from
the transcription ﬁle including number of sentences over the
duration, number of the words, ratio of number of the laughters over the number of words were calculated. The depression related words were identiﬁed from a dictionary of more

∗

Equal contributor
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8147

