The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Graph Scan Statistics With Uncertainty
Jose Cadena, Arinjoy Basak, Anil Vullikanti
Department of Computer Science and Biocomplexity Institute,
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061
{jcadena,arinjoyb,vsakumar}@vt.edu

Xinwei Deng
Department of Statistics, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061
xdeng@vt.edu
anomaly score is formalized in terms of the log likelihood
of occurrence of observed data. One of the very few results
on the impact of uncertainty in scan statistics is by (Malizia
2013), who observes that uncertainty exists and that it can
affect the quality of the clusters discovered by scan statistics,
but this study does not propose any methods for taking uncertainty into account. To the best of our knowledge, the only
scan-statistics-based method that incorporates uncertainty is
the Bayesian scan statistic proposed in (Neill et al. 2009)
and later extended to the multivariate case (Neill and Cooper
2010)—though the authors do not explicitly motivate their
work as a solution to uncertainty. Both papers assume simple
conjugate priors and thus are able to derive closed-form expressions. However, in general, more complex distributional
assumptions for uncertainty would lead to expressions that
do not have a closed form and can only be approximately
optimized via sampling. In this paper, we use methods from
the theory of stochastic optimization to formally characterize scan statistic maximization with uncertainty and develop
novel algorithms and heuristics for this problem. Our contributions are summarized below.

Abstract
Scan statistics is one of the most popular approaches for
anomaly detection in spatial and network data. In practice,
there are numerous sources of uncertainty in the observed data.
However, most prior works have overlooked such uncertainty,
which can affect the accuracy and inferences of such methods. In this paper, we develop the ﬁrst systematic approach
to incorporating uncertainty in scan statistics. We study two
formulations for robust scan statistics, one based on the sample average approximation and the other using a max-min
objective. We show that uncertainty signiﬁcantly increases
the computational complexity of these problems. Rigorous
algorithms and efﬁcient heuristics for both formulations are
developed with justiﬁcation of theoretical bounds. We evaluate
our proposed methods on synthetic and real datasets, and we
observe that our methods give signiﬁcant improvement in the
detection power as well as optimization objective, relative to a
baseline.

1

Introduction

Identifying anomalous “hotspots” or outliers is an important problem in the analysis of spatio-temporal and network
data, with a large number of applications in areas such as
disease surveillance, security, systems biology and social
network analysis. One of the popular methods for anomaly
detection is the scan statistics approach e.g., (Kulldorff 1997;
Neill 2012). Informally, this involves formalizing a notion
of “anomalousness” by a form of hypothesis testing, based
on either an underlying model of the expected data (referred
to as parametric methods), or based on historical values of
the data (i.e., non-parametric methods). One of the earliest
uses of scan statistics was for ﬁnding unusual disease clusters
(Kulldorff 1997). See (Akoglu, Tong, and Koutra 2014) for a
survey and Section 7 for more details.
Most existing work in anomaly detection for network data
typically assumes that the datasets are taken “as is”, which
is often not a realistic assumption. The observed counts in
data have uncertainty and do not exactly match the real world
due to reporting errors, geocoding errors, missing entries, etc.
All these sources of uncertainty would affect the problem
formulations and algorithms for anomaly detection, but they
are especially relevant when using scan statistics because the

• Scan Statistics with Uncertainty. We propose two approaches for taking uncertainty into account: a sample average approximation (SAA) and a max-min formulation (Shapiro, Dentcheva, and Ruszczyński 2009;
Bertsekas 1995; Prékopa 2013), and show that these are
well motivated for scan statistics by analyzing instances
with stochastic perturbations. When we account for uncertainty, the anomaly detection task becomes much more
challenging. We show that, even without any connectivity
constraints, ﬁnding clusters based on scan statistics that optimize the max-min objective function is NP-hard, whereas
it can be done in linear time if there is no uncertainty.
• Rigorous Algorithms and Theoretical Bounds. We develop rigorous algorithms and heuristics for optimizing
the scan statistics in both these formulations. For the SAA
formulation, our algorithm AGGREGATE SAA gives rigorous bounds on the approximation guarantee for ﬁnding
solutions of a given “effective” size k, with or without
connectivity constraints, and is a ﬁxed parameter tractable
algorithm. For the max-min formulation, we present two
algorithms: (1) M AX M IN L P ROUND for the case of no
connectivity constraints, using linear programming rounding, which yields rigorous approximation bounds, and

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2771

