The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Scale Up Event Extraction Learning
via Automatic Training Data Generation
1

Ying Zeng,1 Yansong Feng,1,∗ Rong Ma,1 Zheng Wang 2
Rui Yan 1 and Chongde Shi 3 and Dongyan Zhao 1

Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, P.R. China,
2
School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University, UK,
3
Institute of Scientiﬁc and Technical Information of China
{ying.zeng, fengyansong, marongcs, ruiyan, zhaody}@pku.edu.cn z.wang@lancaster.ac.uk shcd@istic.ac.cn
arguments from each individual training instance. This process requires the involvement of linguists to design annotation templates and rules for a set of predeﬁned event types,
and the employment of annotators to manually label if an
individual instance belongs to a predeﬁned event type.
To determine an event type, existing approaches all require explicitly identifying event triggers from text and assign them with predeﬁned types, thus relies on human
to annotate training data. This makes the quality and the
number of the generated instances dependent on the skill
and available time of the annotators (Aguilar et al. 2014;
Song et al. 2015). To scale up event extractor training, we
therefore must take human annotators out from the loop of
data labeling.
This work develops a novel approach to automatically label training instances for event extraction. Our key insight
was that while event triggers are useful, they do not always
need to be explicitly captured. Structured knowledge bases
(KBs) such as Freebase already provide rich information of
event arguments, organizing as structured tables, to enable
us to automatically infer the event type. For example, sentence “In 2002, WorldCom made its ﬁling for Chapter 11 in
New York.” describes a bankruptcy event; but this event does
not have to be identiﬁed through a bankrupt trigger (and in
fact such a trigger is missing in this sentence) – in this case,
several key arguments together also imply such an event.
If we can ﬁnd ways to exploit structured tables or lists, a
single entry can then be used to label many instances without
human annotations. Such an approach is known as distant
supervision (DS). Recent studies (Mintz et al. 2009; Zeng
et al. 2015) have demonstrated its effectiveness in various
NLP tasks. The central idea of DS is to use the knowledge
extracted from a known KB to distantly supervise the process
of training data generation.
We observe that the structured tables of Freebase and
Wikipedia can be useful for inferring event types. We then
design heuristics to identify what are the most important
properties, or key arguments, of a table entry in determining the occurrence of an event. We show that it is possible
to completely forgo explicit trigger information and entirely
rely on key arguments to determine event types. Using key
arguments, we can now develop an automatic approach to
generate training data for event extraction. Under this new
DS paradigm, we further propose a novel event extractor ar-

Abstract
The task of event extraction has long been investigated in a
supervised learning paradigm, which is bound by the number and the quality of the training instances. Existing training
data must be manually generated through a combination of
expert domain knowledge and extensive human involvement.
However, due to drastic efforts required in annotating text, the
resultant datasets are usually small, which severally affects
the quality of the learned model, making it hard to generalize. Our work develops an automatic approach for generating
training data for event extraction. Our approach allows us to
scale up event extraction training instances from thousands
to hundreds of thousands, and it does this at a much lower
cost than a manual approach. We achieve this by employing distant supervision to automatically create event annotations from unlabelled text using existing structured knowledge bases or tables. We then develop a neural network model
with post inference to transfer the knowledge extracted from
structured knowledge bases to automatically annotate typed
events with corresponding arguments in text. We evaluate our
approach by using the knowledge extracted from Freebase
to label texts from Wikipedia articles. Experimental results
show that our approach can generate a large number of highquality training instances. We show that this large volume of
training data not only leads to a better event extractor, but also
allows us to detect multiple typed events.

Introduction
Event extraction is a key enabling technique for many natural language processing (NLP) tasks. The goal of event extraction is to detect, from the text, the occurrence of events
with speciﬁc types, and to extract arguments (i.e. typed participants or attributes) that are associated with an event. Current event extractor systems are typically built through applying supervised learning to learn over labelled datasets.
This means that the performance of the learned model is
bound by the quality and coverage of the training datasets.
To generate training data for event extraction, existing approaches all require manually identifying – if an event occurs and of what type – by examining the event trigger1 and
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
A trigger is the word or phrase that clearly expresses the occurrence of an event. E.g., ex in ex-husband triggers a divorce event.

6045

