The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Domain Generalization via
Conditional Invariant Representations
†

Ya Li,† Mingming Gong, Xinmei Tian,† Tongliang Liu,‡ Dacheng Tao‡
CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in Geo-Spatial Information Processing and Application Systems,
University of Science and Technology of China, China
‡
UBTECH Sydney Artiﬁcial Intelligence Institute, SIT, FEIT, The University of Sydney, Australia

Department of philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University

Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Pittsburgh
muziyiye@mail.ustc.edu.cn, gongmingnju@gmail.com, xinmei@ustc.edu.cn,
tliang.liu@gmail.com, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Muandet, Balduzzi, and Schölkopf 2013). These problems
are known as domain generalization, in which the training
set consists of data from heterogeneous source domains, say
patients, and the test data distribution is different from that
of the training data.

Abstract
Domain generalization aims to apply knowledge gained from
multiple labeled source domains to unseen target domains.
The main difﬁculty comes from the dataset bias: training data
and test data have different distributions, and the training set
contains heterogeneous samples from different distributions.
Let X denote the features, and Y be the class labels. Existing domain generalization methods address the dataset bias
problem by learning a domain-invariant representation h(X)
that has the same marginal distribution P(h(X)) across multiple source domains. The functional relationship encoded
in P(Y |X) is usually assumed to be stable across domains
such that P(Y |h(X)) is also invariant. However, it is unclear
whether this assumption holds in practical problems. In this
paper, we consider the general situation where both P(X)
and P(Y |X) can change across all domains. We propose
to learn a feature representation which has domain-invariant
class conditional distributions P(h(X)|Y ). With the conditional invariant representation, the invariance of the joint distribution P(h(X), Y ) can be guaranteed if the class prior
P(Y ) does not change across training and test domains. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real data demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

To handle the distribution changes, many existing domain
generalization methods aim to learn domain-invariant representations that have stable distributions across all source domains (Muandet, Balduzzi, and Schölkopf 2013; Erfani et al.
2016; Ghifary et al. 2017). The learned invariant representations are expected to generalize well to any unseen test set
under the assumption that the changes of distribution across
source and test domains are caused by some common factors whose effects are removed in the invariant representations. In computer vision, such factors could be illumination,
camera viewpoints, and backgrounds. These methods have
achieved good performance in computer vision (Ghifary et
al. 2015; 2017) and medical diagnosis (Muandet, Balduzzi,
and Schölkopf 2013).
However, existing methods that learn domain-invariant
representations assume that only P(X) changes across domains while the conditional distribution P(Y |X) is rather
stable. Thus, the conditional distribution P(Y |h(X)) is also
invariant, and the learning problem reduces to ensuring that
the marginal distribution P(h(X)) is invariant across domains. This assumption greatly simpliﬁes the problem, but
it is unclear whether this assumption holds in practical situations. According to some recent results in causal learning (Schölkopf et al. 2012; Janzing and Scholkopf 2010),
P(Y |X) can be stable when P(X) changes in the situation where X is the cause for Y , i.e., the causal structure
is X → Y . This is because the mechanism that generates
the cause, i.e., P(X), is not coupled with the mechanism
that generates the effect from the cause, i.e., P(Y |X), and
not vice versa. That is to say, if Y is the cause and X is
the effect, P(X) often changes together with P(Y |X). In
this situation, if P(X) changes, it is very likely that P(Y |X)
also changes across domains, which violates the stability of
P(Y |X) assumption. In practice, we have plenty of problems where the causal structure is Y → X. For example,

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a great success of supervised
learning in various pattern recognition problems, such as image classiﬁcation, object detection, and speech recognition.
Standard supervised learning relies heavily on the i.i.d. data
assumption; however, dataset-bias is unavoidable in many
situations due to selection bias or mechanism changes. For
example, this problem has been well recognized in the computer vision community (Torralba and Efros 2011; Khosla
et al. 2012): the widely adopted vision datasets have their
special properties and are not representative of the visual
world. In medical diagnosis, the distribution of cell types
varies from patient to patient, and we need to train a classiﬁer on the data collected from previous patients that generalizes well to unseen patients (Blanchard, Lee, and Scott 2011;
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3579

