The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multi-Task Medical Concept Normalization
Using Multi-View Convolutional Neural Network
1

Yi Luo,1 Guojie Song,2∗ Pengyu Li,2 Zhongang Qi3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, San Diego, USA
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Ministry of Education, Peking University, China
3
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University, USA
yil901@eng.ucsd.edu, gjsong@pku.edu.cn, lipengyu@pku.edu.cn, qiz@oregonstate.edu
Procedure mentions

Abstract





(Resetting of humerus
fracture)

Medical concept normalization is a critical problem in
biomedical research and clinical applications. In this paper,
we focus on normalizing diagnostic and procedure names in
Chinese discharge summaries to standard entities, which is
formulated as a semantic matching problem. However, nonstandard Chinese expressions, short-text normalization and
heterogeneity of tasks pose critical challenges in our problem.
This paper presents a general framework which introduces a
tensor generator and a novel multi-view convolutional neural
network (CNN) with multi-task shared structure to tackle the
two tasks simultaneously. We propose that the key to address
non-standard expressions and short-text problem is to incorporate a matching tensor with multiple granularities. Then
multi-view CNN is adopted to extract semantic matching patterns and learn to synthesize them from different views. Finally, multi-task shared structure allows the model to exploit
medical correlations between disease and procedure names
to better perform disambiguation tasks. Comprehensive experimental analysis indicates our model outperforms existing
baselines which demonstrates the effectiveness of our model.

1

Case 1


(Repair on shoulder joint)
Case 2
1. Strong correlation
2. Weak correlation

Disease entities

Disease mentions



2

 
(Sequelae of sprain in leg)

(Fracture of near end of
humerus)
 
(Fracture of left humerus
upper-end)

3


(Sequelae of injury
of lower limb)

3



4

(Fracture of upper
end of humerus)

3.
4.

Semantic match
Reverse word order

Figure 1: Illustration of three challenges

paper comes from the discharge summaries, an overview of
hospitalization for patients, from 153 triple-A hospitals in 31
provinces and regions in China. Each record in the dataset
includes a primary diagnosis of disease and a corresponding procedure both in ambiguous short texts. For clarity, we
denote the short-text statement written by doctors as mention and the medical concept from standard library as entity. This paper focuses on normalizing disease mentions and
procedure mentions to standard entities, respectively, which
is formulated as a semantic matching task.
In general, there exist three major challenges in the two
tasks: 1) Short text normalization. Unstructured medical
texts such as electronic medical records (EMRs) can provide critical context information in entity linking. However,
for our problem, Chinese diagnostic statements and procedure names are mention-level short texts whose information is limited. By statistic analysis, there are only 7.8 and
15 characters in average for disease and procedure mentions, respectively. Figure 1 shows some examples. To alleviate this issue, it’s necessary to concentrate on how to expand the content of short texts and how to utilize the subtle
distinctions between semantic matching patterns. 2) Nonstandard expressions. Different from English medical text
which has been widely researched (Friedman et al. 2004;
Aronson et al. 2007), non-standard expressions in Chinese
have its own linguistic features which needs to be considered in our task. In Figure 1, two different disease mentions in the second column match to the same disease entity,
where reversing word orders occurs such as ‘C1a’1 (Fracture
of left humerus upper-end) and ‘C1b’ (Fracture of upper-

Named Entity Disambiguation (NED), which links mentions in text to entities in knowledge bases, is an important research topic in natural language processing (Bunescu
and Pasca 2006; Alhelbawy and Gaizauskas 2014). Chinese
medical concept normalization is a typical problem of NED
in biomedical domain, which aims to normalize ambiguous
medical mentions into concepts in a controlled vocabulary
such as International Classiﬁcation of Disease 10th revision
(ICD-10). This problem has wide-ranging applications in
clinical research (Leaman, Khare, and Lu 2015), statistical
analysis for hospitals, epidemiological research (Pakhomov,
Buntrock, and Chute 2006), and diagnosis-related group
(DRG) (Hoelzer, Schweiger, and Dudeck 2003), and consequently, the solutions to it beneﬁt a wide range of people
and generate great societal and technical impacts.
The major issue of Chinese medical concept normalization is the variety of the data sources, which brings multiple
different expressions of the same entity due to diverse writing habits, experiences of physicians, requirements of medical institutions, etc. For example, the dataset used in this
∗

Corresponding author. Email: gjsong@cis.pku.edu.cn
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

5868

See Chinese statements in Table 1.

