The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

MaxSAT Resolution with the Dual Rail Encoding∗
Maria Luisa Bonet,1 Sam Buss,2 Alexey Ignatiev,3,4 Joao Marques-Silva,3 Antonio Morgado3
1

Computer Science Department, Universidad Politécnica de Cataluña, Barcelona, Spain
2
Department of Mathematics, University of California, San Diego, USA
3
LASIGE, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal
4
ISDCT SB RAS, Irkutsk, Russia

the well-known dual rail encoding (Bryant et al. 1987;
Palopoli, Pirri, and Pizzuti 1999) and then refuted with
a MaxSAT solver, e.g. MaxSAT resolution (Larrosa and
Heras 2005; Bonet, Levy, and Manyà 2007) or core-guided
MaxSAT (Morgado et al. 2013). The re-encoded formulas are polynomial size (in fact linear). Somewhat surprisingly, the propositional encoding of the pigeonhole principle (PHP), if reencoded with the modiﬁed dual rail encoding, can be refuted in polynomial time, both with MaxSAT
resolution and with core-guided MaxSAT (Ignatiev, Morgado, and Marques-Silva 2017)1 . In contrast, the ordinary
(non-dual-rail encoded) PHP formulas have exponential
lower bounds for RES and CDCL (Haken 1985; Beame,
Kautz, and Sabharwal 2004), but also for MaxSAT resolution (Bonet, Levy, and Manyà 2007).
This paper begins the process of charting the relative
efﬁciency of the dual rail MaxSAT (DRMaxSAT) proof
system. The ﬁrst result is that DRMaxSAT p-simulates
general resolution, and thus since DRMaxSAT has short
proofs of the PHP, it is a strictly stronger proof system
than either CDCL or RES. The paper also shows that
DRMaxSAT cannot p-simulate either of AC0 -Frege+PHP
or cutting planes. Finally, the paper investigates a variant
of the pigeonhole principle (Biere 2013a). In practice, this
variant is much harder than plain PHP formula. Experimental results on formulas encoding this variant of PHP
conﬁrm that the practical implementation of DRMaxSAT
outperforms modern CDCL SAT solvers.

Abstract
Conﬂict-driven clause learning (CDCL) is at the core of the
success of modern SAT solvers. In terms of propositional
proof complexity, CDCL has been shown as strong as general
resolution. Improvements to SAT solvers can be realized either by improving existing algorithms, or by exploiting proof
systems stronger than CDCL. Recent work proposed an approach for solving SAT by reduction to Horn MaxSAT. The
proposed reduction coupled with MaxSAT resolution represents a new proof system, DRMaxSAT, which was shown
to enable polynomial time refutations of pigeonhole formulas, in contrast with either CDCL or general resolution. This
paper investigates the DRMaxSAT proof system, and shows
that DRMaxSAT p-simulates general resolution, that AC0 Frege+PHP p-simulates DRMaxSAT, and that DRMaxSAT
can not p-simulate AC0 -Frege+PHP or the cutting planes
proof system.

Introduction
The practical success of Conﬂict-Driven Clause Learning
(CDCL) SAT solvers hinges on what can be construed as
a relatively weak proof system, at least when compared with
several others (Beame and Pitassi 2001; Buss 2012; Nordström 2015). This proof system (CDCL) is as powerful as
general resolution (RES). One approach to improving SAT
solvers is to exploit proof systems stronger than CDCL/RES;
however, it is open whether a proof system stronger than
CDCL/RES can yield more efﬁcient SAT solvers, as attempts at exploiting extended resolution (Huang 2010; Audemard, Katsirelos, and Simon 2010) or cutting planes in
SAT solvers (Nordström 2015) have been so far largely unsuccessful. Furthermore, a key issue from a practical perspective is whether stronger proof systems are automatizable (Bonet, Pitassi, and Raz 2000), and unfortunately,
most results regarding automatizability are negative (Bonet,
Pitassi, and Raz 2000).
Recent work (Ignatiev, Morgado, and Marques-Silva
2017) proposed a different take on SAT solving. Propositional formulas can be re-encoded, using a variant of

Preliminaries
MaxSAT and Weighted MaxSAT. MaxSAT is the problem of ﬁnding an assignment that minimizes the number
of falsiﬁed clauses of a CNF formula. MaxSAT has several
generalizations. To deﬁne them, we need to give weights to
clauses, with the weight indicating the “cost” of falsifying
the clause. A weighted clause is written (A, w) where A is a
clause and w ∈ {1, 2, 3, . . .} ∪ {}. The value  is viewed

∗
This work was ﬁnancially supported in part by TIN201676573-C2-2-P and by FCT funding of post-doctoral grants
SFRH/BPD/103609/2014,
SFRH/BPD/120315/2016,
and
LASIGE Research Unit, ref. UID/CEC/00408/2013.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

Earlier work (Sabharwal 2005) showed that problem-speciﬁc
symmetry-breaking can serve to reduce refutations of PHP from
exponential to polynomial. In contrast, the results in (Ignatiev,
Morgado, and Marques-Silva 2017) exploit a general reduction to
Horn MaxSAT.

6565

