The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Fact Checking in Community Forums
Tsvetomila Mihaylova,1 Preslav Nakov,2 Lluı́s Màrquez,2 Alberto Barrón-Cedeño,2
Mitra Mohtarami,3 Georgi Karadzhov,1 James Glass 3
1

Soﬁa University “St. Kliment Ohridski”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria
Qatar Computing Research Institute, Hamad bin Khalifa University, Doha, Qatar
3
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
tsvetomila.mihaylova@gmail.com, {pnakov, lmarquez, albarron}@hbku.edu.qa,
mitra@csail.mit.edu, georgi.m.karadjov@gmail.com, glass@mit.edu

2

q: I have heard its not possible to extend visit visa more than 6
months? Can U please answer me.. Thankzzz...

Abstract
Community Question Answering (cQA) forums are very popular nowadays, as they represent effective means for communities around particular topics to share information. Unfortunately, this information is not always factual. Thus, here we
explore a new dimension in the context of cQA, which has
been ignored so far: checking the veracity of answers to particular questions in cQA forums. As this is a new problem, we
create a specialized dataset for it. We further propose a novel
multi-faceted model, which captures information from the answer content (what is said and how), from the author proﬁle
(who says it), from the rest of the community forum (where it
is said), and from external authoritative sources of information (external support). Evaluation results show a MAP value
of 86.54, which is 21 points absolute above the baseline.

a1 : Maximum period is 9 Months....
a2 : 6 months maximum
a3 : This has been anwered in QL so many times. Please do search
for information regarding this. BTW answer is 6 months.

Figure 1: Example from the Qatar Living forum.

Figure 1 presents an excerpt of an example from the Qatar
Living forum, with one question and three answers selected from a longer thread. According to SemEval-2017
Task 3 (Nakov et al. 2017a), all three answers are good since
they address the question q. Nevertheless, a1 contains false
information, while a2 and a3 are true,1 as can be checked on
an ofﬁcial governmental website.2
Determining the veracity of a claim is a very difﬁcult
problem, and solving it in full would require language understanding and inference, integration of several sources of information, and world knowledge, among other things. Here,
we approach it as a supervised classiﬁcation task, and we
propose a novel model based on multi-faceted modeling of
the facts, which integrates knowledge from several complementary sources, such as the answer content (what is said
and how), the author proﬁle (who says it), the rest of the
community forum (where it is said), and external authoritative sources of information (external support).
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
(i) ﬁrst, we are the ﬁrst to study factuality in cQA, and we
create a new high-quality dataset —CQA-QL-2016-fact—,
which we release to the research community;3 to the best
of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst publicly-available dataset

Introduction
Community Question Answering (cQA) forums such as
StackOverﬂow, Yahoo! Answers, and Quora are very popular nowadays, as they represent effective means for communities around particular topics to share information and
to collectively satisfy their information needs. However, the
information being shared is not always factual. There are
multiple factors explaining the presence of incorrect answers
in cQA forums, e.g., misunderstanding, ignorance, or maliciousness of the responder. This is exacerbated by the fact
that most cQA forums are barely moderated and lack systematic quality control. Moreover, in our dynamic world of
today, truth is often time-sensitive: what was true yesterday
may become false today.
We explore a new dimension in the context of cQA:
checking the veracity of answers to a given question. This
aspect has been ignored so far, e.g., in recent cQA tasks
at NTCIR and SemEval (Ishikawa, Sakai, and Kando 2010;
Nakov et al. 2015; 2016; 2017a), where an answer is considered as G OOD if it tries to address the question, irrespective
of its veracity. Yet, veracity is an important aspect, as highquality automatic fact checking can offer better user experience for cQA systems. For instance, the user could be presented with veracity scores, where low scores would warn
him/her not to completely trust the answer or to doublecheck it.

One could also guess that a2 and a3 are more likely to be true
from the fact that the 6 months answer appears many times in the
thread, as well as in other threads. While these observations serve
the basis for useful features for classiﬁcation, the real veriﬁcation
for a gold standard annotation requires ﬁnding support from a credible external source.
2
https://www.moi.gov.qa/site/english/departments/
PassportDept/news/2011/01/03/23385.html
3
The dataset and the source code are available online at https:
//github.com/qcri/QLFactChecking
1

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5309

