The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Aida: Intelligent Image Analysis to Automatically Detect
Poems in Digital Archives of Historic Newspapers
Leen
- Kiat Soh, Elizabeth Lorang, Yi Liu
University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE
lksoh@cse.unl.edu, liz.lorang@unl.edu, yil@cse.unl.edu

challenge of locating materials of relevance is compounded
when the collections are highly heterogeneous, both across
items within a digital library and especially when individual items themselves are highly heterogeneous (e.g., scrapbooks, newspapers, magazines).
Artificial intelligence (AI) has already had important
and lasting impacts on the development of digital libraries
of historic materials with the advent and continued improvement of optical character recognition (OCR) processes. Applications of computer vision techniques are helping
researchers to identify derivative works, such as reprintings, as well as visually similar works, and to recognize
and identify faces in digital collections, among other applications (Bergel et al. 2013; Chung 2014; Oliveira, et al.
2017; Seguin et al. 2017; Smiths 2017). The information
generated in these processes can then be used for deeper
levels of information in large collections, aiding researchers in locating materials of relevance.
Other researchers are using machine learning to leverage information out of the electronic texts of materials in
digital libraries. Information gleaned from these processes
then can be added to the descriptive information about materials in digital collections or be made separately available
as datasets. Underwood (2014, "Understanding Genre")
describes using machine learning to identify genre at the
page-level of each volume in a large digital library. And
others have employed topic modeling as an avenue to explore the text of digital collections of cultural materials,
both historic and current. The resulting word groupings
and subsequent human labeling of topics can become another pathway into digital collections (Cain 2016; Hagedorn et al. 2011; Tze-I Yang et al. 2011).
For the most part, researchers have pursued image-based
approaches to digital collections that are understood to be
"visual" and have pursued text-based approaches to digital
collections that are understood principally to be "textual."
Yet, virtually all digital collections of historic materials include digital images of the objects they represent. A common use of these digital images is as input for OCR-

Abstract
We describe an intelligent image analysis approach to
automatically detect poems in digitally archived historic
newspapers. Our application, Image Analysis for Archival
Discovery, or Aida, integrates computer vision to capture
visual cues based on visual structures of poetic works—
instead of the meaning or content—and machine learning to
train an artificial neural network to determine whether an
image has poetic text. We have tested our application on
almost 17,000 image snippets and obtained promising accuracies, precision, and recall. The application is currently being deployed at two institutions for digital library and literary research.

Introduction
Creating and making available digital libraries of historic
materials continues to be a significant area of development
for libraries, archives, and similar institutions. As storage
has become cheaper, Internet and web access more ubiquitous, and users more likely to expect electronic access to
information, the number, variety, and size of digital collections and digital libraries of historic materials has grown
apace. It is now relatively inexpensive to create digital image copies of historic material, store those images, and
make the images available. Yet, the work of describing and
characterizing the materials to increase their findability and
usability for researchers remains an expensive part of creating digital libraries, because of the human labor—and
expertise—required to do the work effectively and well. As
a result, the users of voluminous digital libraries often face
significant difficulty finding materials of relevance for
their research, because the types and nature of information
they can query are limited, as are the ways that researchers
can engage with the materials within digital libraries
(Lorang et al. 2015; Green & Courtney 2015; DeRidder &
Matheny 2014; Underwood 2014, "How to Find"). The
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7837

