The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Mining Heavy Temporal Subgraphs:
Fast Algorithms and Applications
Jose Cadena, Anil Vullikanti
Department of Computer Science and Biocomplexity Institute, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061
{jcadena,vsakumar}@vt.edu

edge scores is maximized (see Section 2 for a formal deﬁnition). When the time interval is ﬁxed (i.e., the graph is static),
we refer to this as the Heaviest Subgraph (HS) problem. The
HDS has been shown to be able to identify interesting events
in social media and trafﬁc data networks. The heaviest subgraph problem for a static graph is the complement of the
well-known Prize Collecting Steiner Tree (PCST) problem—
this is equivalent to the PCST problem with the Net-Worth
objective, which is known to be very challenging in general
(Bateni, Hajiaghayi, and Liaghat 2013). Despite a lot of work,
no rigorous algorithms are known for the NetWorth objective, but usually the Goemans-Williamson (Goemans and
Williamson 1997) algorithm for PCST is used as a heuristic.

Abstract
Anomaly detection is a fundamental problem in dynamic networks. In this paper, we study an approach for identifying
anomalous subgraphs based on the Heaviest Dynamic Subgraph (HDS) problem. The HDS in a time-evolving edgeweighted graph consists of a pair containing a subgraph and
sub-interval whose sum of edge weights is maximized. The
HDS problem in a static graph is equivalent to the Prize
Collecting Steiner Tree (PCST) problem with the Net-Worth
objective—this is a very challenging problem, in general, and
numerous heuristics have been proposed. Prior methods for
the HDS problem use the PCST solution as a heuristic, and
run in time quadratic in the size of the graph. As a result, they
do not scale well to large instances. In this paper, we develop
a new approach for the HDS problem, which combines rigorous algorithmic and practical techniques and has much better
scalability. Our algorithm is able to extend to other variations
of the HDS problem, such as the problem of ﬁnding multiple
anomalous regions. We evaluate our algorithms in a diverse
set of real and synthetic networks, and we ﬁnd solutions with
higher score and better detection power for anomalous events
compared to earlier heuristics.

1

In this paper, we develop a new approach for the HDS
problem and its extensions that combines rigorous algorithmic and practical techniques. Our contributions are:
(1) We design a new temporal ﬁltering method that selects
a sub-quadratic set of time intervals and provably preserves
the maximum HDS solution, within a factor of 2. Together,
with a faster algorithm for the PCST problem (by adapting
the technique of (Cole et al. 2001)), we obtain a near-linear
time algorithm, both in terms of the number of time intervals
and the size of the network.
(2) Our algorithms can be applied to various extensions of the
HDS problem, such as ﬁnding multiple anomalous regions,
ﬁnding anomalous regions rooted at a subset of interest, and
ﬁnding regions up to a size constraint.
(3) We evaluate our algorithms in real and synthetic networks.
Our proposed algorithm for the HDS problem is several orders of magnitude (up to four) faster than existing methods.
For the generalization of HDS to multiple anomalous regions,
we discover more regions while either matching or improving
on the objective value of the existing state-of-the-art method.
Further, we show that the subgraphs identiﬁed by our algorithms are relevant in their respective domains.

Introduction

Networks in most applications are dynamic and evolve over
time. An important problem in temporal data is to detect
“anomalous” events, e.g., an unusual rate of incidence of a disease in a region. As discussed in the survey of (Akoglu, Tong,
and Koutra 2014), the different directions on dynamic network anomaly detection are formalized in terms of changes
in properties of nodes and edges (Kang et al. 2011), spectral
properties (Sun et al. 2008) or communities (Peel and Clauset
2014), or window-based (Bogdanov, Mongiovı̀, and Singh
2011; Mongiovı̀ et al. 2013).
We focus on the window-based approach in a weighted
temporal graph. In this setting, we are given a ﬁxed graph
G = (V, E) with a weight f t (e) for an edge e = (u, v) ∈ E
for timestamps t = 1, . . . , T , which may reﬂect the signiﬁcance of the interaction at some time. The objective of
the Heaviest Dynamic Subgraph (HDS) problem (Bogdanov,
Mongiovı̀, and Singh 2011) is then to ﬁnd a connected subgraph G = (V  , E  ) and a time interval [i, j] whose sum of

Since the Steiner tree and PCST are commonly used
heuristics in a number of problems (Rozenshtein et al. 2014;
Sadeghi and Frohlich 2013; Mongiovı̀ et al. 2013; Wu et al.
2016), we expect our techniques for speeding up PCST will
be useful more generally. Many details are omitted because
of the space limitation, and are available in the full version at
(Cadena and Vullikanti 2017).

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2779

