The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Optimal Pricing for
Distance-Based Transit Fares
Richard Hoshino, Jeneva Beairsto
Quest University Canada
Squamish, British Columbia, Canada

Metro Vancouver’s SkyTrain network is divided into three
zones, where passengers pay either f1 = $2.20, f2 = $3.25,
or f3 = $4.30, depending on the number of zones they
pass through. While the zone-based system is simple to understand, it punishes passengers travelling short distances
over an arbitrary zone boundary and beneﬁts passengers who
travel long distances within a single zone. This is clear from
the given SkyTrain map, where various one-station trips cost
f2 while one 17-station trip costs only f1 .
TransLink, the transit authority of Metro Vancouver, implemented the three-zone fare structure back in 1984, when
the region’s public transit was based entirely on buses. In
2016, TransLink decided to launch its ﬁrst-ever transit fare
review, to explore other possibilities for pricing transit given
the major changes in travel patterns due to the growth of the
SkyTrain rapid transit network over the past three decades.
In Phase 1 of the review, TransLink surveyed over 28,000
people, ﬁnding that 64% disagreed that “the current zonebased fare structure works well”, compared to only 19% who
agreed with the statement. Among all priorities identiﬁed
by the respondents, the most important was to “make fares
lower for shorter-distance trips” (TransLink 2016).
In Phase 2, TransLink surveyed nearly 13,000 residents,
ﬁnding that the majority preferred distance-based fares for
the SkyTrain (TransLink 2017). In a distance-based model,
there are n different “tiers”, with a fare of Xi for travelling
a distance of i units. Note that the units can be measured in
kilometres, miles, or even the number of passed stations.
Distance-based fares have long been advocated by urban
planners and transit scholars, as this paradigm charges passengers for the actual costs they impose on the transit system
(Cervero 1981), and beneﬁt low-income and elderly populations (Farber et al. 2014). Furthermore, distance-based fares
eliminate the inherent unfairness of zone boundaries, and incentivize people to take short trips with a cheap public transit
option, rather than by car or taxi.
As a result, public transit authorities in several large cities,
including Edmonton and Toronto, are currently considering
a switch to distance-based transit fares. The challenge is
determining how to do this, to optimally convert m different zone fares (note that ﬂat fares are just zone fares with
m = 1) to n distance-based tiers, to maximize forecasted
ridership and revenue. We answer this question by formulating it as an AI problem and ﬁnding an exact solution.

Abstract
Numerous urban planners advocate for differentiated transit
pricing to improve both ridership and service equity. Several
metropolitan cities are considering switching to a more “fair
fare system”, where passengers pay according to the distance
travelled, rather than a ﬂat fare or zone boundary scheme that
discriminates against various marginalized groups.
In this paper, we present a two-part optimal pricing formula
for switching to distance-based transit fares: the ﬁrst formula
maximizes forecasted revenue given a target ridership, and
the second formula maximizes forecasted ridership given a
target revenue. Both formulas hold for all price elasticities.
Our theory has been successfully tested on the SkyTrain
mass transit network in Metro Vancouver, British Columbia,
with over 400,000 daily passengers. This research has served
Metro Vancouver’s transportation authority as they consider
changing their fare structure for the ﬁrst time in over 30 years.

Introduction
Nearly every metropolitan city in the world has a mass transit system, to reduce car congestion and improve environmental sustainability. In the United States, over ten billion
trips are made each year on buses and trains, a 37% increase
in public transit ridership over the past two decades, nearly
double the population growth rate during this same period
(American Public Transportation Association 2017).
There are several ways to charge passengers for public
transit. The two simplest systems are a ﬂat fare that charges
a ﬁxed amount regardless of distance travelled, and a zonebased fare scheme that is common to many cities, including
the Canadian metropolitan region of Vancouver.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7765

