The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

An Interpretable Joint Graphical Model
for Fact-Checking from Crowds
An T. Nguyen,1 Aditya Kharosekar,1 Matthew Lease,1 Byron C. Wallace2
1

University of Texas at Austin
2
Northeastern University
atn@cs.utexas.edu, aditya.kharosekar@gmail.com, ml@utexas.edu, byron@ccs.neu.edu

claims, sources and annotators. Moreover, while such models may realize reasonable prediction accuracy, it is not clear
how explainable these models are, which we argue is critical
for this domain in order for people to be able to trust a model
or integrate its predictions with their own knowledge.
We adopt a probabilistic graphical model (PGM) framework for our approach. PGMs afford important beneﬁts over
alternative approaches when humans are assumed to be in
‘in-the-loop’: (i) transparency, (ii) incorporation of users’
knowledge; and (iii) uncertainty quantiﬁcation. Concerning
(i), fact-checking is intended to assuage skeptics of claims,
who would likely also be skeptical about any automated
fact-checking tool. Consequently, the model should be transparent in how it arrived at its prediction. The second consideration — incorporating users’ knowledge (ii) — may,
ﬁrst, improve predictive performance. Second, and perhaps
more importantly, this allows model predictions to be seen
as relative statements with respect to prior knowledge, rather
than deﬁnitive judgments regarding claims; this is natural
for the fact-checking task. Finally, uncertainty quantiﬁcation (iii) is important for characterizing our conﬁdence (or,
from a Bayesian perspective, our beliefs) regarding predictions while accounting for potential sources of errors. PGMs
realize all of these desiderata and allow joint reasoning over
claim, source and annotator reliabilities. Crucially, PGMs
afford clear interpretation, facilitating in-depth inspection
and criticism of the system by individuals.
Our approach is further distinguished by its crowd component. Beyond using crowd labels to train our model, we
can call upon the crowd at run-time, integrating human intelligence with machine learning to further boost accuracy.
Key contributions: (1) a novel, interpretable PGM for
fact-checking, providing a uniﬁed framework for modeling source credibility and stance with respect to individual
claims, crowd worker reliability, and claim veracity; and (2)
an efﬁcient variational inference method for model estimation; (3) a small user study suggesting that model explanations improve user satisfaction and trust in the model.

Abstract
Assessing the veracity of claims made on the Internet is
an important, challenging, and timely problem. While automated fact-checking models have potential to help people
better assess what they read, we argue such models must be
explainable, accurate, and fast to be useful in practice; while
prediction accuracy is clearly important, model transparency
is critical in order for users to trust the system and integrate
their own knowledge with model predictions. To achieve this,
we propose a novel probabilistic graphical model (PGM)
which combines machine learning with crowd annotations.
Nodes in our model correspond to claim veracity, article
stance regarding claims, reputation of news sources, and annotator reliabilities. We introduce a fast variational method
for parameter estimation. Evaluation across two real-world
datasets and three scenarios shows that: (1) joint modeling
of sources, claims and crowd annotators in a PGM improves
the predictive performance and interpretability for predicting claim veracity; and (2) our variational inference method
achieves scalably fast parameter estimation, with only modest degradation in performance compared to Gibbs sampling.
Regarding model transparency, we designed and deployed
a prototype fact-checker Web tool, including a visual interface for explaining model predictions. Results of a small user
study indicate that model explanations improve user satisfaction and trust in model predictions. We share our web demo,
model source code, and the 13K crowd labels we collected.1

Introduction
Fact-checking, the task of determining the veracity (or correctness) of claims, has attracted signiﬁcant attention. Websites such as Snopes, Politifact and Emergent, which rely on
professional fact-checkers to carefully analyze claims and
sources in order to assess veracity, have emerged as valuable
resources for assessing potential misinformation. Unfortunately, the scalability of this manual approach is challenged
by the pace and volume of modern online media, which continually generate and report new claims.
Recent research has pursued development of automated
fact-checking systems (Popat et al. 2017; Nakashole and
Mitchell 2014; Samadi et al. 2016), but these systems do not
explicitly model joint interactions between key variables:

Methods
Model

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
github.com/thanhan/fc-aaai18

We assume that there are n claims, m sources, and a set
of news articles in which each article from a source j ∈

1511

