The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Relational Marginal Problems: Theory and Estimation
Ondřej Kuželka

Yuyi Wang

Cardiff University, UK
KuzelkaO@cardiff.ac.uk

ETH Zurich, Switzerland
yuwang@ethz.ch

Jesse Davis

Steven Schockaert

KU Leuven, Belgium
jesse.davis@cs.kuleuven.be

Cardiff University, UK
SchockaertS1@cardiff.ac.uk
tional marginal problem. In the propositional case (Wainwright and Jordan 2008), marginal problems entail ﬁnding a maximum-entropy distribution which has the given
marginal probabilities. A well-known property of such problems is that they are dual to the maximum-likelihood estimation of the parameters of an undirected graphical model
(where “dual” is in the sense of convex optimization). In
relational marginal problems, we are similarly looking for
a maximum-entropy distribution which satisﬁes some given
statistics – relational marginals. However, we also need to
deﬁne what these relational marginals are. Thus, ﬁrst, we
describe two different types of relational marginals, which
differ in the kinds of statistics that are provided.1 The ﬁrst
type is based on relational marginal distributions (Kuželka,
Davis, and Schockaert 2017) and the second is based on
Halpern-style random substitution semantics (Bacchus et
al. 1992). Second, for both types of statistics, we establish
a relational counterpart of the duality between maximumlikelihood estimation and max-entropy marginal problems.
Interestingly, for the latter model, the corresponding dual is
MLNs.
Third, the relational marginal perspective allows us to
learn parameters for domains that have different sizes (i.e.,
number of constants) than the training data. The basic idea
to achieve this is simple. We assume that the training data
is a sample of the data that we want to model. For example,
imagine trying to model all of Facebook based on a sampled subset of Facebook users along with all relations among
them. Assuming the sample is a large enough and was obtained in a suitable way (which is not always the case in
practice – we discuss this issue later), the parameters of the
marginals estimated from the sample should be close to the
respective parameters for the whole network. Then, instead
of using a model learned by optimizing the likelihood on the
training data, we use a model obtained as a solution of the
corresponding relational marginal problem with a domain of
the required size. We may end up with estimated parameters
for which the relational marginal problem has no solution.
Therefore, we propose a method for adjusting the estimated
parameters that enables a solution and characterize its effect on the estimates. Then we also introduce the relational

Abstract
In the propositional setting, the marginal problem is to
ﬁnd a (maximum-entropy) distribution that has some given
marginals. We study this problem in a relational setting and
make the following contributions. First, we compare two different notions of relational marginals. Second, we show a duality between the resulting relational marginal problems and
the maximum likelihood estimation of the parameters of relational models, which generalizes a well-known duality from
the propositional setting. Third, by exploiting the relational
marginal formulation, we present a statistically sound method
to learn the parameters of relational models that will be applied in settings where the number of constants differs between the training and test data. Furthermore, based on a relational generalization of marginal polytopes, we characterize
cases where the standard estimators based on feature’s number of true groundings needs to be adjusted and we quantitatively characterize the consequences of these adjustments.
Fourth, we prove bounds on expected errors of the estimated
parameters, which allows us to lower-bound, among other
things, the effective sample size of relational training data.

Introduction
Statistical Relational Learning (SRL, Getoor and Taskar,
eds., 2007) is concerned with learning probabilistic models
from relational data. Many popular SRL frameworks, such
as Markov Logic Networks (MLNs, Richardson and Domingos 2006), use weighted logical formulas to encode statistical regularities that hold for the considered problem. Typically, the maximum (pseudo-)likelihood weights of the formulas are estimated from training data, which is usually a
single large example (e.g. a social network). This is problematic for two reasons. First, the weights that are learned
from this single training example are in general not optimal for examples of different sizes (Jain, Kirchlechner, and
Beetz 2007). This turns out to be a fundamental problem,
which cannot simply be solved by rescaling the weights
(Shalizi and Rinaldo 2013). Second, without making further
assumptions, it is difﬁcult to provide any statistical guarantees about the learned weights.
In this paper, we approach parameter estimation in SRL
from a novel direction, by introducing the notion of a relac 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
All statistics in this paper are based on universally quantiﬁed
formulas; we do not consider formulas with existential quantiﬁers.

6384

