The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Anytime Anyspace AND/OR Best-First Search for Bounding Marginal MAP
Qi Lou

Rina Dechter

Alexander Ihler

University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697, USA
qlou@ics.uci.edu

University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697, USA
dechter@ics.uci.edu

University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697, USA
ihler@ics.uci.edu

Some early works (Park and Darwiche 2003; Yuan and
Hansen 2009) solve MMAP exactly based on depth-ﬁrst
branch and bound. Marinescu, Dechter, and Ihler (2014) outperforms the predecessors by using AND/OR search spaces
and high-quality variational heuristics. Later, a best-ﬁrst
search variant of Marinescu, Dechter, and Ihler (2014) was
proposed and shown empirically superior to the depth-ﬁrst
one given enough memory (Marinescu, Dechter, and Ihler
2015). Because best-ﬁrst search is memory-intensive, a recursive best-ﬁrst search algorithm (Marinescu, Dechter, and Ihler
2015) that operates within limited memory was proposed.
However, because of the inherent difﬁculty of MMAP,
searching for exact solutions is generally unpromising. Recent works on MMAP often focus on approximate schemes.
Among the approximate schemes, those with deterministic or probabilistic guarantees are of particular interest because they quantify the bounds on the approximation errors. Also, we often favor those approaches with anytime
behavior because they allow users to trade computational
resources with solution quality. Approximate elimination
methods (Liu and Ihler 2011; Dechter and Rish 2003) and
closely related variational bounds (Liu and Ihler 2013;
Wainwright and Jordan 2008) provide deterministic guarantees. However, these bounds are not anytime; their quality often depends on the memory available, and does not
improve without additional amount of memory. Although
recent work (Ping, Liu, and Ihler 2015) in the same class
has anytime behavior, it is not guaranteed to ﬁnd optimal solutions unless given enough memory. Some Monte Carlo
methods such as one based on random hashing (Xue et
al. 2016) provide probabilistic bounds only, while some
may not even have this property, e.g., those based on
Markov chain Monte Carlo (Yuan, Lu, and Druzdzel 2004;
Doucet, Godsill, and Robert 2002). Another algorithm that
provides anytime deterministic bounds for MMAP is based
on factor set elimination (Mauá and de Campos 2012), but the
factor sets it maintains tend to grow very large and thus limit
its practical use to problems with relatively small induced
widths (Marinescu et al. 2017).
Recent search-based algorithms improve upon their exact predecessors (Marinescu, Dechter, and Ihler 2015; 2014;
Otten and Dechter 2012) by introducing weighted heuristics
in best-ﬁrst search (Lee et al. 2016) or by combining bestﬁrst search with depth-ﬁrst search (Marinescu et al. 2017)

Abstract
Marginal MAP is a key task in Bayesian inference and
decision-making. It is known to be very difﬁcult in general,
particularly because the evaluation of each MAP assignment
requires solving an internal summation problem. In this paper,
we propose a best-ﬁrst search algorithm that provides anytime
upper bounds for marginal MAP in graphical models. It folds
the computation of external maximization and internal summation into an AND/OR tree search framework, and solves them
simultaneously using a uniﬁed best-ﬁrst search algorithm. The
algorithm avoids some unnecessary computation of summation sub-problems associated with MAP assignments, and thus
yields signiﬁcant time savings. Furthermore, our algorithm
is able to operate within limited memory. Empirical evaluation on three challenging benchmarks demonstrates that our
uniﬁed best-ﬁrst search algorithm using pre-compiled variational heuristics often provides tighter anytime upper bounds
compared to those state-of-the-art baselines.

Introduction
Probabilistic graphical models, including Bayesian networks
and Markov random ﬁelds, provide a framework for representing and reasoning with probabilistic and deterministic
information (Dechter 2013; Dechter, Geffner, and Halpern
2010; Darwiche 2009). Typical inference queries in graphical
models include maximum a posteriori (MAP) that aims to
ﬁnd an assignment of MAP variables (a.k.a., MAX variables)
with the highest value, the partition function that is the normalizing constant ensuring a proper probability measure over
all variables, and marginal MAP (MMAP) that generalizes
the aforementioned two tasks by maximizing over a subset
of variables with the remaining variables marginalized.
MMAP arises in many scenarios such as latent variable
models (Ping, Liu, and Ihler 2014) and decision-making
tasks (Kiselev and Poupart 2014). MMAP has complexity
NPPP (Park 2002), commonly believed to be harder than either max inference (NP-complete (Darwiche 2009)) or sum
inference (#P-hard (Valiant 1979)), and is even intractable
for tree-structured models (Park 2002). The hardness of
MMAP is partly due to the fact that max and sum operators do not commute.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6392

