The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Randomized Kernel Selection with
Spectra of Multilevel Circulant Matrices
Lizhong Ding,1 Shizhong Liao,2 Yong Liu,3 Peng Yang,1 Xin Gao1,∗
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Computational Bioscience Research Center (CBRC),
Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Sciences and Engineering (CEMSE) Division, Thuwal, 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China
3
Institute of Information Engineering, CAS, Beijing, China
lizhong.ding@kaust.edu.sa, szliao@tju.edu.cn, liuyong@iie.ac.cn, {peng.yang.2, xin.gao}@kaust.edu.sa
Kernel selection is usually to select a good kernel by
minimizing or maximizing some kernel selection criteria
(Bartlett, Boucheron, and Lugosi 2002; Anguita et al. 2012;
Liu et al. 2017). The existing kernel selection criteria can
be classiﬁed into three categories based on different inductive biases. The ﬁrst category is to minimize the theoretical
upper bounds of the generalization error. The upper bounds
are composed of the error on data and the complexity of the
hypothesis space (Bartlett, Boucheron, and Lugosi 2002).
Different measures of the complexity constitute different
kernel selection criteria, such as Rademacher complexity
(Bartlett and Mendelson 2002), local Rademacher complexity (Cortes, Kloft, and Mohri 2013), radius-margin bound
(Chapelle et al. 2002), maximum mean discrepancy (MMD)
(Sriperumbudur et al. 2009; Gretton et al. 2012a; 2012b;
Song et al. 2012), effective dimensionality (Zhang 2005;
Bach 2013), eigenvalues ratio (Liu and Liao 2015), and the
covering number (Ding and Liao 2014b). The second category is to maximize the similarity between the kernel matrix and the label matrix. The criteria in this category are
two-stage kernel selection criteria (Cortes, Mohri, and Rostamizadeh 2010), which do not require the training of the
learning algorithms in the kernel selection step. The representative criterion is the kernel target alignment (KTA)
(Cristianini et al. 2002). Feature space-based measure (FSM)
(Nguyen and Ho 2007) and centered KTA (CKTA) (Cortes,
Mohri, and Rostamizadeh 2010) were proposed to improve
the performance of KTA. The third category is to minimize
the statistical experimental errors, including hold-out method,
cross validation (CV), leave-one-out (LOO) and Bootstrap.
The CV error is probably the most commonly used criterion in the machine learning community and the LOO error
gives an almost unbiased estimate of the generalization error
(Luntz and Brailovsky 1969). However, CV and LOO require
training the learning algorithm for every candidate parameter many times, unavoidably bringing high computational
burdens. For the sake of efﬁciency, some approximate CV
approaches were proposed, such as generalized cross validation (GCV) (Golub, Heath, and Wahba 1979), efﬁcient LOO
(Cawley and Talbot 2010), and Bouligand inﬂuence function
CV (BIFCV) (Liu, Jiang, and Liao 2014).

Abstract
Kernel selection aims at choosing an appropriate kernel function for kernel-based learning algorithms to avoid either underﬁtting or overﬁtting of the resulting hypothesis. One of
the main problems faced by kernel selection is the evaluation
of the goodness of a kernel, which is typically difﬁcult and
computationally expensive. In this paper, we propose a randomized kernel selection approach to evaluate and select the
kernel with the spectra of the speciﬁcally designed multilevel
circulant matrices (MCMs), which is statistically sound and
computationally efﬁcient. Instead of constructing the kernel
matrix, we construct the randomized MCM to encode the
kernel function and all data points together with labels. We
build a one-to-one correspondence between all candidate kernel functions and the spectra of the randomized MCMs by
Fourier transform. We prove the statistical properties of the
randomized MCMs and the randomized kernel selection criteria, which theoretically qualify the utility of the randomized
criteria in kernel selection. With the spectra of the randomized
MCMs, we derive a series of randomized criteria to conduct
kernel selection, which can be computed in log-linear time
and linear space complexity by fast Fourier transform (FFT).
Experimental results demonstrate that our randomized kernel
selection criteria are signiﬁcantly more efﬁcient than the existing classic and widely-used criteria while preserving similar
predictive performance.

Introduction
Model selection of learning is the problem of choosing an
appropriate hypothesis space, in which the learning algorithm
searches the optimal hypothesis with the available training
data, so as to avoid either underﬁtting or overﬁtting of the
resulting hypothesis. For kernel-based learning algorithms,
the candidate hypothesis spaces are the constrained reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHSs) (Cucker and Smale 2002),
which are determined by the kernel functions and the regularization parameters. In this case, model selection is reduced
to the selection of the kernel function and the regularization
parameter. This paper focuses on the evaluation and selection
of the kernel function, which is a fundamental and critical
problem in kernel-based learning.

The computational complexities of the existing kernel selection criteria are at least quadratic in the number of examples l, i.e., O(l2 ), and usually O(l3 ). This kind of scalability

∗

All correspondence should be addressed to Xin Gao.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2910

