The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

CoLink: An Unsupervised
Framework for User Identity Linkage
Zexuan Zhong,†∗ Yong Cao,‡ Mu Guo,‡ Zaiqing Nie§
‡

Microsoft Research, China
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
§
Alibaba AI Labs, China
zexuan2@illinois.edu, {yongc, muguo}@microsoft.com, zaiqing.nzq@alibaba-inc.com
†

ing enterprise effectiveness, as it connects the public knowledge to the enterprise knowledge, which are usually complementary. For example, the relationships and life-related
proﬁles in one’s public social networks are usually missing from his/her enterprise proﬁle. Such information may
greatly help different enterprise scenarios including internal
collaboration, talent hiring, and cross-enterprise businesses.
Although machine learning algorithms have been widely
used in the UIL problem, the effort of training data annotation is not trivial. Firstly, ﬁnding linked user pairs is extremely time-consuming since it requires one to search over
the entire networks and carefully evaluate a large amount of
candidate pairs. It also requires the human labellers to have
a wide range of domain knowledge, for example, one has
to know that “SDE” is the acronym for “Software Development Engineer” before he/she starts to work on the users
who have software development backgrounds. Secondly, not
all the social network proﬁle data can be exposed to human
labellers for privacy protection reasons, especially when the
proﬁle comes from internal enterprise networks.
Researchers have proposed unsupervised approaches for
the UIL problem which requires no labelled data. Such solutions are either heuristic approaches or machine learning based approaches with auto-generated training data.
Lacoste-Julien et al. (2013) propose a greedy approach
which updates the relationship similarity iteratively. The attributes are aligned with heuristic string similarity functions.
However, the selected string similarity functions are very
much sensitive to the proﬁle data, which makes them hard
to generalize. Liu et al. (2013) try to automatically collect
a training data set based on the rareness of the user names
from the forum data, and then employ Supported Vector Machine (SVM) to classify whether two users are linked or not.
The performance very much depends on the quantity and
quality of the auto-generated training data which is sensitive
to the targeted UIL tasks. There is lack of general unsupervised solutions in the literature.
Linking users between two social networks requires to
carefully compare the user attributes in both networks, such
as name, job title, location etc. As a result, aligning the
attribute values is essential to the UIL problem. The attribute alignment is usually handled with string similarity
comparison. For example, Kong, Zhang, and Yu (2013) convert the attribute value text into bag-of-words vectors with

Abstract
Nowadays, it is very common for one person to be in different
social networks. Linking identical users across different social networks, also known as the User Identity Linkage (UIL)
problem, is fundamental for many applications. There are two
major challenges in the UIL problem. First, it’s extremely
expensive to collect manually linked user pairs as training
data. Second, the user attributes in different networks are usually deﬁned and formatted very differently which makes attribute alignment very hard. In this paper we propose CoLink, a general unsupervised framework for the UIL problem. CoLink employs a co-training algorithm, which manipulates two independent models, the attribute-based model and
the relationship-based model, and makes them reinforce each
other iteratively in an unsupervised way. We also propose the
sequence-to-sequence learning as a very effective implementation of the attribute-based model, which can well handle the
challenge of the attribute alignment by treating it as a machine
translation problem. We apply CoLink to a UIL task of mapping the employees in an enterprise network to their LinkedIn
proﬁles. The experiment results show that CoLink generally
outperforms the state-of-the-art unsupervised approaches by
an F1 increase over 20%.

Introduction
Social network services (SNS) play a very important role in
people’s everyday life. It’s very common that one real-world
person appears in different SNS, including public social networks on the web, such as LinkedIn and Facebook, and private social networks such as employee networks inside an
enterprise. Linking the user identities among different social
networks, a.k.a the UIL problem, is generally required to get
better and deeper understanding of individual users which
usually results in better business intelligence. For example,
linking different social network users that refer to the same
person can help create an integrated person proﬁle (Zhang et
al. 2015); understand user migration patterns in social media
(Kumar, Zafarani, and Liu 2011); and help social network
websites recommend potential friends more precisely.
Speciﬁcally, linking the enterprise users to their public social network proﬁles brings huge opportunities for improv∗
This work was done when the ﬁrst author was on an internship
with Microsoft Research.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5714

