The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Goal-Driven Query Answering for Existential Rules with Equality
Michael Benedikt, Boris Motik

Efthymia Tsamoura

University of Oxford

Alan Turing Institute & University of Oxford

Abstract

Computing a universal model in full when only a speciﬁc
query is to be answered may be inefﬁcient. We experimentally show that query answers often depend only on a small
subset of the universal model, particularly for queries containing constants, so the chase may perform a lot of unnecessary work. Moreover, universal models sometimes cannot
be computed due to their size. In such cases, goal-driven
query answering techniques, which take the query into account, hold the key to efﬁcient query answering.
One possibility, implemented in systems such as Ontop
(Calvanese et al. 2017) and Graal (Baget et al. 2015b), is
to rewrite the relevant rules into a new query that can be
evaluated directly on the base instance. Rewriting into ﬁrstorder queries is possible for DL-lite (Calvanese et al. 2007),
linear TGDs (Calı̀, Gottlob, and Lukasiewicz 2012), and
sticky TGDs (Gottlob, Orsi, and Pieris 2014; Calı̀, Gottlob,
and Pieris 2010), among others. Frontier-guarded (Baget et
al. 2011a), weakly-guarded (Gottlob, Rudolph, and Simkus
2014), and Horn-SHIQ (Eiter et al. 2012) rules can be
rewritten into Datalog. Rewriting approaches, however, cannot handle common properties that can be handled via the
chase, such as transitivity, and they typically support only
“innocuous” equalities that do not affect query answers.
In Datalog and logic programming, the magic sets algorithm (Bancilhon et al. 1986; Beeri and Ramakrishnan
1991) annotates the rules with magic atoms, which ensure
that bottom-up evaluation of the magic program simulates
top-down query evaluation. This inﬂuential idea has been
adapted to disjunctive (Alviano et al. 2012a) and ﬁnitely recursive (Calimeri et al. 2009) programs, programs with aggregates (Alviano, Greco, and Leone 2011), and Shy existential rules (Alviano et al. 2012b). These approaches, however,
do not handle existential rules with equality.
In this paper we present what we believe to be the ﬁrst
goal-driven query answering technique for terminating existential rules with equality. Given a set of rules Σ and a query
Q, we compute a logic program P such that, for each base
instance B, the answers to Q on Σ ∪ B and P ∪ B coincide,
but processing the latter is typically much more efﬁcient.
Our approach combines existing techniques such as singularization (Marnette 2009) with two new ingredients: a new
relevance analysis algorithm that identiﬁes irrelevant rules,
and a new magic sets variant that handles existential rules
with equality. These two techniques are complementary: the

Inspired by the magic sets for Datalog, we present a novel
goal-driven approach for answering queries over terminating
existential rules with equality (aka TGDs and EGDs). Our
technique improves the performance of query answering by
pruning the consequences that are not relevant for the query.
This is challenging in our setting because equalities can potentially affect all predicates in a dataset. We address this
problem by combining the existing singularization technique
with two new ingredients: an algorithm for identifying the
rules relevant to a query and a new magic sets algorithm. We
show empirically that our technique can signiﬁcantly improve
the performance of query answering, and that it can mean the
difference between answering a query in a few seconds or not
being able to process the query at all.

1

Introduction

Existential rules with equality, also known as tuple- and
equality generating dependencies (TGDs and EGDs) or
Datalog± rules, extend Datalog by allowing rule heads to
contain existential quantiﬁers and the equality predicate ≈.
Answering a conjunctive query Q over a set of existential
rules Σ and a base instance B is key to dealing with incomplete information in information systems (Fagin et al.
2005). The problem is undecidable in general, but many decidable cases are known (Baget et al. 2011b; König et al.
2015; Baget et al. 2015a; Gottlob, Manna, and Pieris 2015;
Leone et al. 2012). Systems such as Llunatic (Geerts et
al. 2014), RDFox (Motik et al. 2014), DLV∃ (Leone et al.
2012), ChaseFUN (Bonifati, Ileana, and Linardi 2017), Ontop (Calvanese et al. 2017), and Graal (Baget et al. 2015b)
implement various query answering techniques. One solution to this problem is to evaluate the query in a universal model of Σ ∪ B, and a common and practically relevant case is when a ﬁnite universal model can be computed using a chase procedure. Many chase variants have
been proposed. Although checking chase termination is undecidable for all variants (Deutsch, Nash, and Remmel 2008;
Marnette 2009), numerous sufﬁcient acyclicity conditions
(Marnette 2009; Krötzsch and Rudolph 2011; Grau et al.
2013) guarantee termination of at least the oblivious Skolem
chase; we call such Σ ∪ B terminating.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1761

