The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Residual Encoder Decoder Network
and Adaptive Prior for Face Parsing
Tianchu Guo,1 Youngsung Kim,2 Hui Zhang,1 Deheng Qian,1 ByungIn Yoo2
Jingtao Xu,1 Dongqing Zou,1 Jae-Joon Han,2 Changkyu Choi2
1

2

Beijing Samsung Telecommunication, SAIT China Lab
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology, S/W Solution Lab

Abstract
Face parsing assigns every pixel in a facial image with a semantic label, which could be applied in various applications
including face expression recognition, facial beautiﬁcation,
affective computing and animation. While lots of progress
have been made in this ﬁeld, current state-of-the-art methods still fail to extract real effective feature and restore accurate score map, especially for those facial parts which have
large variations of deformation and fairly similar appearance, e.g. mouth, eyes and thin eyebrows. In this paper, we
propose a novel pixel-wise face parsing method called Residual Encoder Decoder Network (RED-Net), which combines a
feature-rich encoder-decoder framework with adaptive prior
mechanism. Our encoder-decoder framework extracts feature with ResNet and decodes the feature by elaborately fusing the residual architectures into deconvolution. This framework learns more effective feature comparing to that learnt
by decoding with interpolation or classic deconvolution operations. To overcome the appearance ambiguity between facial parts, an adaptive prior mechanism is proposed in term
of the decoder prediction conﬁdence, allowing reﬁning the ﬁnal result. The experimental results on two public databases
demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-of-thearts signiﬁcantly, achieving improvements of F-measure from
0.854 to 0.905 on the Helen dataset, and pixel accuracy from
95.12% to 97.59% on the LFW dataset. In particular, convincing qualitative examples show that our method parses eye,
eyebrow and lip regions more accurately.

Figure 1: Challenging cases for face parsing. Existing methods fail to parse the facial parts with large variations of deformation and fairly similar appearance, e.g. mouth and light
eyebrows. The ﬁrst column is the original image, the red
dashed frame indicates the challenging parts. The next three
columns are zoom-in versions of parsing results of the red
dashed frame. The second column shows the results of existing method, i.e. VGG-Deconv Net(Noh, Hong, and Han
2015) reproduced by us. The third column shows the results
of our RED-Net. The last column shows the ground truth.

2015; Luo, Wang, and Tang 2012; Smith et al. 2013;
Tsogkas et al. 2015; Warrell and Prince 2009; Yamashita et
al. 2015; Zhou, Hu, and Zhang 2015)(or semantic segmentation) often have difﬁculty with extremely similar appearance and parts having large variation of deformation. On the
one hand, the similar appearance of parts results in that the
distinguish ability of features that learned or hand-crafted
is limited. So the absolute boundary of facial parts with extremely similar appearance cannot be recognized clearly. For
example, as shown in Fig. 1, segmenting child’s eyebrows
from its skin is tough due to the light color of eyebrows.
On the other hand, large deformation of parts will cause that
the features for different states of the same part, e.g., mouth
open or close, are very different. Consequently, the features
of such parts vary so large that the robustness of existing
methods is low. It is very difﬁcult to achieve accurate parsing results while maintaining robustness for various cases.

Introduction
Face parsing is both fundamental and important to a variety
of computer vision and animation areas ranging from classic
tasks such as facial beautiﬁcation, affective computing and
face animation, to modern applications like face Augmented
Reality (AR) and expression transfer (Ou et al. 2016; Zhang
et al. 2017). The problem of the face parsing is to assign
every pixel with a semantic label, thus the face parsing is
much more valuable and challenging comparing with face
landmark detection.
Though tremendous strides have been made in face parsing, current state-of-the-art algorithms of face parsing (Kae
et al. 2013; Khan, Mauro, and Leonardi 2015; Liu et al.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6861

