The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Adaptive Hidden Layers
for Mobile Gesture Recognition
Ting-Kuei Hu, Yen-Yu Lin, Pi-Cheng Hsiu
Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
Email: {tkhu, yylin, pchsiu}@citi.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract
This paper addresses two obstacles hindering advances in
accurate gesture recognition on mobile devices. First, gesture recognition performance is highly dependant on feature
selection, but optimal features typically vary from gesture
to gesture. Second, diverse user behaviors and mobile environments result in extremely large intra-class variations. We
tackle these issues by introducing a new network layer, called
an adaptive hidden layer (AHL), to generalize a hidden layer
in deep neural networks and dynamically generate an activation map conditioned on the input. To this end, an AHL
is composed of multiple neuron groups and an extra selector. The former compiles multi-modal features captured by
mobile sensors, while the latter adaptively picks a plausible
group for each input sample. The AHL is end-to-end trainable and can generalize an arbitrary subset of hidden layers.
Through a series of AHLs, the great expressive power from
exponentially many forward paths allows us to choose proper
multi-modal features in a sample-speciﬁc fashion and resolve
the problems caused by the unfavorable variations in mobile
gesture recognition. The proposed approach is evaluated on
a benchmark for gesture recognition and a newly collected
dataset. Superior performance demonstrates its effectiveness.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Gestures of categories (a) ﬁst, (b) fetch, and (c)
palm-up. Visual modalities are effective to separate gestures
of category ﬁst from the rest owing to their distinctive hand
shapes. In contrast, motion-based modalities are discriminative for gestures of category palm-up due to the consistent
moving trajectories. Meanwhile, gestures of class fetch are
better predicted by using both types of modalities jointly.
racy by leveraging complementary multi-modal information. However, two major issues hinder the development of
these approaches for mobile gesture recognition. First, these
approaches seek an immutable combination of multi-modal
information, but the optimal modality typically varies from
gesture to gesture, as an example shown in Figure 1. Second,
mobile contexts suffer from large modality-speciﬁc environment variations. For example, visual features from cameras
are sensitive to lighting conditions or viewing angles. By
contrast, motion features from accelerometers are easily affected by the plane on which the gesture is performed.
In this work, we propose an approach based on deep neural networks (DNNs), which are characterized by the effectiveness in joint feature extraction and nonlinear classiﬁer
learning. Speciﬁcally, we introduce a new network layer,
called an adaptive hidden layer (AHL), which generalizes
a hidden layer in DNNs and can dynamically generate an
appropriate activation map for a given input. Unlike a conventional hidden layer equipped with a single group of neurons, an AHL is composed of multiple neuron groups and
an extra selector. The neuron groups in AHL extract diverse
features and are optimized so that each training data can be
well processed by at least one group, while the selector that

Introduction
Gesture recognition aims to identify categories of handed
gestures, which are sequences of distinct hand shapes. It
provides an intuitive and convenient means for humanmachine interaction in various mobile applications. Conventional vision-based approaches have delivered promising results in controlled settings. However, in the context of mobile and wearable devices, accurate gesture recognition becomes quite challenging due to frequently large and unfavorable variations caused by diverse user behaviors and ubiquitous environments.
Such challenges could potentially be resolved through
using extra information from sensing modalities (Jong et
al. 2016), such as IR proximity sensors (Butler, Izadi, and
Hodges 2008), magnetic ﬁeld sensors (Hwang, Ahn, and
Wohn 2013), and accelerometers (Zaen et al. 2014) on mobile devices. Approaches based on multi-modal learning,
e.g. (Ngiam et al. 2011), can enhance recognition accuc 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6934

