The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Regression Approach for Modeling Games with Many Symmetric Players
Bryce Wiedenbeck

Fengjun Yang

Michael P. Wellman

Swarthmore College
bwieden1@swarthmore.edu

Swarthmore College
fyang1@swarthmore.edu

University of Michigan
wellman@umich.edu

of the game can be straightforwardly generated by simulation. Using simulated data from a small subset of the game’s
states, learning techniques have succeeded in extracting general principles that apply to never-before-seen parts of the
game. Agents employing such learning have achieved highlevel play (Silver et al. 2016; Moravčı́k et al. 2017) and identiﬁed approximate equilibria (Heinrich, Lanctot, and Silver
2015).
In normal-form games, the representational complexity
derives principally from the number of players. A standard
payoff matrix representation of a game with |P | players and
|S| strategies per player records a vector of payoff values
|P |
cells. In many AI applications, symmein each of |S|
tries among agents permit some economy of representation,
but
even a fully symmetric game must record payoffs for
|P |+|S|−1
distinct outcomes (Cheng et al. 2004). As a re|P |
sult, analysts are often restricted to studying games with
small numbers of players and strategies, or with specialpurpose compact representations.
In the present work, we use data about a small subset of a game’s outcomes as input to learning methods
that seek to extract general principles of the game’s utility function. Data of this form is common in the ﬁeld of
empirical game-theoretic analysis (Wellman 2006). EGTA
is used to study multi-agent interactions where a closedform game model is unavailable or intractable. In such settings, an agent-based model can often capture key features
of the interaction and provide data about agent incentives.
Generally, a single run of an agent-based simulation generates a noisy sample of each payoff value in one cell
of the payoff matrix. Settings where EGTA has been employed include identifying bidding strategies in continuous
double auctions (Phelps, Marcinkiewicz, and Parsons 2006;
Vytelingum, Cliff, and Jennings 2008), designing network
routing protocols (Wellman, Kim, and Duong 2013), understanding credit provision in the absence of a central currency
(Dandekar et al. 2015), and ﬁnding ways to mitigate the effects of high-frequency trading (Wah and Wellman 2017).
Because of the combinatorial growth of the payoff matrix, ﬁlling every cell by simulation quickly becomes intractable as the number of players and strategies grows.
Early EGTA studies were often restricted to small numbers
of players and strategies (Phelps, Marcinkiewicz, and Par-

Abstract
We exploit player symmetry to formulate the representation of large normal-form games as a regression task. This
formulation allows arbitrary regression methods to be employed in in estimating utility functions from a small subset of
the game’s outcomes. We demonstrate the applicability both
neural networks and Gaussian process regression, but focus
on the latter. Once utility functions are learned, computing
Nash equilibria requires estimating expected payoffs of purestrategy deviations from mixed-strategy proﬁles. Computing
these expectations exactly requires an infeasible sum over the
full payoff matrix, so we propose and test several approximation methods. Three of these are simple and generic, applicable to any regression method and games with any number
of player roles. However, the best performance is achieved
by a continuous integral that approximates the summation,
which we formulate for the speciﬁc case of fully-symmetric
games learned by Gaussian process regression with a radial
basis function kernel. We demonstrate experimentally that the
combination of learned utility functions and expected payoff
estimation allows us to efﬁciently identify approximate equilibria of large games using sparse payoff data.

The study of intelligent agents naturally gives rise to questions of how multiple agents will interact. Game-theoretic
models offer powerful methods for reasoning about such interactions and have therefore become a key component of
the AI toolkit. Like many core AI methods, game-theoretic
analysis has beneﬁted from recent advances in machine
learning algorithms and from the availability of ever-larger
data sets. Most notably, automated playing and solving of
extremely large extensive-form games has advanced considerably with the aid of learning algorithms that generalize across game states. In this paper, we consider extremely
large normal-form games, and show that learning algorithms
generalizing across symmetric players can help to compactly
represent and efﬁciently solve such games.
In both normal and extensive form games, the chief obstacle to computing equilibria is the enormous size of the
standard input representation (Papadimitriou and Roughgarden 2005; Bowling et al. 2015). In games like poker and
go, the extensive form representation is far too big to be
constructed explicitly, but observations of particular states
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1266

