The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Glass-Box Program Synthesis: A Machine Learning Approach
Konstantina Christakopoulou

Adam Tauman Kalai

University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
christa@cs.umn.edu

Microsoft Research, New England
Adam.Kalai@microsoft.com

Input x
BUBQJ
ZMFXI
NEJOL
RVOII

Abstract
Recently proposed models which learn to write computer programs from data use either input/output examples or rich execution traces. Instead, we argue that a novel alternative is
to use a glass-box scoring function, given as a program itself
that can be directly inspected. Glass-box optimization covers
a wide range of problems, from computing the greatest common divisor of two integers, to learning-to-learn problems.
In this paper, we present an intelligent search system which
learns, given the partial program and the glass-box problem, the probabilities over the space of programs. We empirically demonstrate that our informed search procedure leads
to signiﬁcant improvements compared to brute-force program
search, both in terms of accuracy and time. For our experiments we use rich context free grammars inspired by number
theory, text processing, and algebra. Our results show that (i)
running our framework iteratively can considerably increase
the number of problems solved, (ii) our framework can improve itself even in domain agnostic scenarios, and (iii) it can
solve problems that would be otherwise too slow to solve with
brute-force search.

Output y
B
Z
N
I

def score(x: string, y: char):
return x.count(y)
sum([score(x, f(x)) for x in tests()])

Figure 1: Two representations of the problem of ﬁnding the
most frequent character in a string. Top: example inputoutput (x, y) pairs. Bottom: glass-box representation, summing scores on test strings. The score is the number of occurrences of y in x, and tests() randomly generates strings.

we illustrate the potential of the glass-box program synthesis approach by designing a system that learns to synthesize
programs that maximize the corresponding utilities of various glass-box objectives.

Introduction
For computers to program computers, we must ﬁrst address
how programming problems will be represented and how
performance will be evaluated. In the ﬁeld of program synthesis, the two main approaches for specifying problems are:
(a) by examples (Gulwani, Harris, and Singh 2012), in which
a number of example input-output pairs (xi , yi ) are provided as input and the goal is to output a function f satisfying f (xi ) = yi ∀i while possibly minimizing other criteria (e.g., being short); and (b) by speciﬁcation (Manna and
Waldinger 1980), in which a formal speciﬁcation in some
particular language is given. More generally, there is a utility (usefulness score) for any synthesized program. Assuming this utility function can be written as a program-scoring
program, we propose the approach of giving the synthesis
direct access to the scoring-program’s source code: (c) program synthesis as optimizing the glass-box1 program scoring objective that will be used to evaluate it. In this paper,

Glass-box program synthesis. To better understand the
glass-box representation, consider a program synthesis contest. In programming contests among humans, problems are
often described in English and scored by automated scoring
programs based on their output on certain inputs (and other
factors such as runtime and time of submission). Certainly, it
is difﬁcult for computers to understand English descriptions,
so instead, we propose describing the problem to the synthesis system through the source code of the scoring program.
In this “glass-box” model, there is no need for a separate
problem description or examples – just the scoring program.
As illustrated in Figure 1, if the problem was to ﬁnd the most
frequent character in a string, the score of a program outputting a character y on a string x would be the number of
occurrences of y in x and the total score would be the sum of
its scores over some randomly generated strings. Note that
to specify the problem by input-output examples (Figure 1
top), one needs to solve the problem on several examples,
and there may be ambiguities in that there may be multiple
different functions f mapping x to y.
In casting the problem of programming as optimizing a

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Ironically, the term white box is commonly used to indicate
transparency even though white boxes are not necessarily transparent. Hence, we use glass box.

646

