The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Show, Reward and Tell: Automatic Generation of Narrative
Paragraph from Photo Stream by Adversarial Training
1

Jing Wang,1∗ Jianlong Fu,2 Jinhui Tang,1† Zechao Li,1 Tao Mei2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
{jwang,jinhuitang,zechao.li}@njust.edu.cn,{jianf,tmei}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Impressive image captioning results (i.e., an objective description for an image) are achieved with plenty of training
pairs. In this paper, we take one step further to investigate the
creation of narrative paragraph for a photo stream. This task
is even more challenging due to the difﬁculty in modeling
an ordered photo sequence and in generating a relevant paragraph with expressive language style for storytelling. The difﬁculty can even be exacerbated by the limited training data, so
that existing approaches almost focus on search-based solutions. To deal with these challenges, we propose a sequenceto-sequence modeling approach with reinforcement learning
and adversarial training. First, to model the ordered photo
stream, we propose a hierarchical recurrent neural network as
story generator, which is optimized by reinforcement learning with rewards. Second, to generate relevant and story-style
paragraphs, we design the rewards with two critic networks,
including a multi-modal and a language-style discriminator.
Third, we further consider the story generator and reward critics as adversaries. The generator aims to create indistinguishable paragraphs to human-level stories, whereas the critics
aim at distinguishing them and further improving the generator by policy gradient. Experiments on three widely-used
datasets show the effectiveness, against state-of-the-art methods with relative increase of 20.2% by METEOR. We also
show the subjective preference for the proposed approach
over the baselines through a user study with 30 human subjects.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Captions
(1) The woman is standing in the middle of the room.
(2) Man standing near lion monument while posing for the camera.
(3) Two women are talking together in a beer garden.
(4) Sunlight shining through a group of trees onto a small cemetery.
(5) A city on the horizon at night taken from high up.
Stories
Annotator 1: We had so much fun being tourists while looking at colleges.
The statues were awe inspiring. We stopped for lunch at a great restaurant
with a beautiful patio. We visited some old cemeteries to see the history.
The view from our hotel room at the end of the night was amazing.
Annotator 2: The dance party at church had just finished. We were
standing in front of a nice statue. The kids were sad that they didn't get to
play patty cake. The trail was very bright and lovely. At night ,The scenery
was nice and it would be great if I can visit here again in the future.

Figure 1: Examples of image captioning and storytelling.
Both the captions and stories are provided by human annotators. The blue emotional words and the red clauses from
story paragraphs are more expressive than captions. [Best
viewed in color]
Existing researches have focused more on visual captioning (Vinyals et al. 2015; Xu et al. 2015; Venugopalan et
al. 2015) and paragraphing (Krause et al. 2017) for a single image or a short video clip. These works often adopt
the paradigm for integrating Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). Although signiﬁcant results have been achieved by training
with plenty of image-caption pairs, these works can only
generate objective descriptions for a single image or a video
clip, which are far from narrative creations.
In this paper, we take one step further to investigate the
creation of narrative paragraph for a photo stream. Existing
works on this task mainly focus on search-based solutions
by cross-modality embedding and ranking, because of the
limited training data (Park and Kim 2015; Liu et al. 2017).
However, these works cannot generate appropriate and emotional stories for new photo streams from personal media
collections (e.g., Flickr.com or albums on the phone), which
makes storytelling still largely unexplored.
In particular, the challenges of visual storytelling can be

Introduction
Creating a narrative paragraph from an ordered photo stream
poses a fundamental challenge to the research on both computer vision and natural language processing. In this paper, we refer to this task as “visual storytelling”, which can
speciﬁcally generate one natural language sentence for each
photo. This is challenging because of the difﬁculty in fully
understanding the visual clues and the relation from photo
streams, and the difﬁculty in generating the paragraph with
expressive language style for storytelling.
∗
This work was performed when Jing Wang was visiting Microsoft Research Asia as a research intern.
†
Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7396

