The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Nonlinear Dynamics in Efﬁcient, Balanced
Spiking Networks Using Local Plasticity Rules
Aireza Alemi∗

Christian K. Machens

École Normale Supérieure
& UC Davis

Champalimaud Centre

Sophie Denève†

Jean-Jacques Slotine†

École Normale Supérieure

MIT
used non-local, biologically implausible learning rules such
as temporal backpropagation (Werbos 1990) or FORCE
learning (Sussillo and Abbott 2009).
Second, information in the nervous system is communicated with spikes. In order to obey the constraints imposed by the brain that is extremely costly to our metabolism
(Laughlin, de Ruyter van Steveninck, and Anderson 1998),
spiking neural networks should work with reasonably small
number of spikes per dimension of the internal state dynamics. Such efﬁciency requires that there is no redundancy in
the representation, so that spike trains of different neurons
are uncorrelated.
Third, learning has to be able to resist various perturbations, such as varying levels of noise or the loss of neurons.
Such robustness requires some level of degeneracy in neural
populations, so that a given network has more neurons than
strictly needed to learn a task.
These constraints are also important for implementation
of dynamical computation in robotic systems with neuromorphic hardware. The goal in these systems is to design
and implement micro-electronic systems that emulate the
structure and function of the brain (Schuman et al. 2017).
Spiking networks make the transmission of information
among units less costly and more robust to noise than ﬁring rate transmission. They can also trade off accuracy for
speed or latency. Spiking efﬁciency make sure the consumption of energy due to emitting spikes is minimal. Robustness
makes the system resilient to damage and noise, and locality of learning rules makes the physical implementation of
plasticity rules easier in neuromorphic hardware.
No previous approach has been able to meet all three
constraints at the same time. A few recent approaches
based on adaptive control theory (Slotine and Coetsee 1986;
Slotine and Li 1991) have been able to provide online learning rules for spiking networks. In (DeWolf et al. 2016), a
spiking network controller was trained to be adaptive to
unknown changes in kinematics and dynamics. In (Gilra
and Gerstner 2017), a spiking network was trained to predict nonlinear dynamics using a local learning rule. However, none of the works enforce spiking efﬁciency i.e., they
do not require smallest possible number of spikes. Spiking efﬁciency and robustness were introduced in efﬁcient

Abstract
The brain uses spikes in neural circuits to perform many dynamical computations. The computations are performed with
properties such as spiking efﬁciency, i.e. minimal number of
spikes, and robustness to noise. A major obstacle for learning computations in artiﬁcial spiking neural networks with
such desired biological properties is due to lack of our understanding of how biological spiking neural networks learn
computations.
Here, we consider the credit assignment problem, i.e. determining the local contribution of each synapse to the network’s
global output error, for learning nonlinear dynamical computations in a spiking network with the desired properties
of biological networks. We approach this problem by fusing
the theory of efﬁcient, balanced neural networks (EBN) with
nonlinear adaptive control theory to propose a local learning
rule. Locality of learning rules are ensured by feeding back
into the network its own error, resulting in a learning rule depending solely on presynaptic inputs and error feedbacks. The
spiking efﬁciency and robustness of the network are guaranteed by maintaining a tight excitatory/inhibitory balance,
ensuring that each spike represents a local projection of the
global output error and minimizes a loss function. The resulting networks can learn to implement complex dynamics with
very small numbers of neurons and spikes, exhibit the same
spike train variability as observed experimentally, and are extremely robust to noise and neuronal loss.

Recurrent networks in the nervous system perform a variety of tasks that could be formalized as dynamical systems.
In many cases, these dynamical systems are learned based
on examples (“desired” trajectories), a form of supervised
learning. For example, to learn to control an arm, sensorymotor circuits can learn to predict both the arm state trajectories and the sensory feedbacks, that are caused by speciﬁc
motor commands.
Such learning occurs under several constraints. First,
synapses have only access to local information. Because any
local change in a synapse could have unpredictable effects
on the rest of the network, previous approaches have often
∗

Email: alemi AT ucdavis.edu
Co-PI, alphabetic order
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

588

