The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Online Learning for Structured Loss Spaces
Siddharth Barman, Aditya Gopalan, Aadirupa Saha
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore 560012
{barman, aditya, aadirupa}@iisc.ac.in

to exploit and improve her performance. A notable example is when the loss vectors for the prediction with experts
problem come from a low-dimensional subspace (Hazan et
al. 2016). This is often the case in recommender systems
based on latent factor models (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky
2009), where users and items are represented in terms of
their features or attribute vectors, typically of small dimension. Under a bilinear model for the utility of a user-item
pair, each user’s utility across all items becomes a vector
from a subspace of dimension at most the size of the feature vectors. (Hazan et al. 2016) show
√ that in this setup the
learner can limit her regret to O(d T ) when each loss vector comes from a d-dimensional
subspace of RN . If d  N

√
(in fact, d = o
ln N ), then this is potentially advantageous over a more general best-experts algorithm like Exponential Weights.
This example is interesting not only because it shows
that geometric/structural properties known in advance can
help the learner achieve order-wise better regret, but also
because it opens up the possibility of studying whether
other, arguably more realistic, forms of structure can be exploited, such as sparsity in the input (or more generally small
norm) and, more importantly, “additive” combinations of
such structures, e.g., low-rank losses added with losses of
small 2 -norm, which expresses losses that are noisy perturbations of a low-dimensional subspace. In this paper, we
take a step in this direction and develop a framework for online learning problems with structured losses.

Abstract
We consider prediction with expert advice when the loss vectors are assumed to lie in a set described by the sum of atomic
norm balls. We derive a regret bound for a general version
of the online mirror descent (OMD) algorithm that uses a
combination of regularizers, each adapted to the constituent
atomic norms. The general result recovers standard OMD regret bounds, and yields regret bounds for new structured settings where the loss vectors are (i) noisy versions of vectors from a low-dimensional subspace, (ii) sparse vectors corrupted with noise, and (iii) sparse perturbations of low-rank
vectors. For the problem of online learning with structured
losses, we also show lower bounds on regret in terms of rank
and sparsity of the loss vectors, which implies lower bounds
for the above additive loss settings as well.

1

Introduction

Online learning problems, such as prediction with expert advice (Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi 2006) and online convex optimization (Zinkevich 2003), involve a learner who sequentially makes decisions from a decision set. The learner seeks
to minimize her total loss over a sequence of loss functions,
unknown at the beginning, but which is revealed causally.
Speciﬁcally, she attempts to achieve low regret, for each sequence in a class of loss sequences, with respect to the best
single decision point in hindsight.
The theory of online learning, by now, has yielded ﬂexible
and elegant algorithmic techniques that enjoy provably sublinear regret in the time horizon of plays. Regret bounds for
online learning algorithms typically hold across inputs (loss
function sequences) that have little or no structure. For instance, for the prediction with experts problem, the exponentially weighted forecaster (Cesa-Bianchi and√Lugosi 2006)
is known to achieve an expected regret of O( T ln N ) over
any sequence of N -dimensional loss vectors with coordinates bounded in [0, 1]; here T is the number of rounds of
play.
There is often, however, more structure in the inputs of
online learning problems beyond elementary ∞ -type constraints, which a learner with a priori knowledge can hope

Our Results and Techniques: We consider the prediction
with experts problem with loss sequences in which each element (loss vector) belongs to a set that respects structural
constraints. Speciﬁcally, we assume that the loss vectors belong to a sum of atomic norm balls1 (Chandrasekaran et al.
2012), say A + B, where the sum of sets, A and B, is in
the Minkowski sense.2 For this setup—which we call online learning with additive loss spaces—we show a general
regret guarantee for an online mirror descent (OMD) algorithm that uses a combination of regularizer functions, each

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
A full version of this paper is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/
1706.04125

1
centrally symmetric, convex, compact sets with their centroids
at the origin.
2
A + B = {a + b : a ∈ A, b ∈ B}.

2696

