The Twenty-Third AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium

Identifying Private Content for Online Image Sharing
Ashwini Tonge
Department of Computer Science
Kansas State University
atonge@ksu.edu

Abstract I present the outline of my dissertation work,
Identifying Private Content for Online Image Sharing. In my
dissertation, I explore learning models to predict appropriate binary privacy settings (i.e., private, public) for images,
before they are shared online. Speciﬁcally, I investigate textual features (user-annotated tags and automatically derived
tags), and visual semantic features that are transferred from
various layers of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). Experimental results show that the learning models based on
the proposed features outperform strong baseline models for
this task on the Flickr dataset of thousands of images.

such as SIFT (Scale Invariant Feature Transform) and RGB
(Red Green Blue) (Zerr et al. 2012; Squicciarini, Caragea,
and Balakavi 2014). These studies found that users tags
are informative and perform better than image content features such as SIFT. More recently, due to the success of
object recognition from images using CNN (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), researchers started to investigate learning models of image privacy based on CNN (Tran
et al. 2016). Tran et al. proposed privacy framework that
combines features obtained from the last fully-connected
layers (of 24 neurons) of two CNNs: one that extracts convolutional features, and another that derives object features
corresponding to the features extracted from 48 neurons.
However, unlike prior works, I show that the features controlling the distinct attributes of the objects obtained through
the higher number of neurons and using the strengths of
very deep CNNs, can improve the privacy prediction performance. Intuitively, the objects present in images signiﬁcantly impact images’ privacy. I also show that uncovering
the scene context from the image content, in addition to object features, further improves the performance. Moreover, I
evaluate the models on a large set of images sampled from
the PicAlert dataset (Zerr et al. 2012) and show that the models trained on the proposed features can infer accurate privacy settings for a diverse set of image subjects.

Introduction
Online image sharing through social networking sites such
as Facebook, Flickr, Foursquare, and Instagram is on the
rise, and so is the sharing of sensitive images, which can
lead to potential threats to users’ privacy. Many users share
private images about themselves, their family and friends,
but they rarely change the default privacy settings, which
could jeopardize their privacy (Zerr et al. 2012). For example, it is common to take photos at cocktail parties and
upload them on social networking sites without much hesitation. These pictures can potentially reveal users’ personal
and social habits and may be used in the detriment of the
photos’ owner. Even though current social networking sites
allow users to set their privacy preferences, it is often a cumbersome task for the vast majority of users on the Web, who
face difﬁculties in assigning and managing privacy settings.
Given the enormous and growing amounts of images
shared online, the development of automatic approaches that
can accurately predict binary privacy settings (i.e., private,
public) for these images are required to avoid a possible loss
of the user’s privacy. An online user’s privacy is recognized
as a concern for social networking sites by researchers as
well. For example, the Director of AI Research at Facebook,
Yann LeCun 1 urged the development of a digital assistant
to warn people before uploading sensitive content (or embarrassing photos), helping them avoid regrets later.
Several studies explored binary prediction models of image privacy based on user tags and image content features

Contributions
In my dissertation, I formulate the problem of identifying
private content for online image sharing as follows:
Problem Formulation: Given an image to be uploaded
online, classify it into one of two classes: private or public,
i.e., consisting of private or public content, respectively.
This research is motivated by the fact that, increasingly,
online users’ privacy is routinely compromised by using social and content sharing applications. Identifying sensitive
content is inherently difﬁcult because it requires the tool to
have an in-depth understanding of the visual content of the
image. Moreover, the problem is very subjective, and users
are generally reluctant to give full access to their private
images (but only access to the images’ tags) for the image
content analysis, which can hinder the personalized privacy
prediction using visual features. Hence, I aim to carefully
identify features derived from the multi-modal information
of the image that can adequately understand the image con-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.wired.com/2014/12/fb/all/1

8040

