The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Task-Aware Compressed Sensing
with Generative Adversarial Networks
Maya Kabkab,∗ Pouya Samangouei,∗ Rama Chellappa
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Maryland Institute for Advanced Computer Studies
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742
{mayak, pouya, rama}@umiacs.umd.edu
Tsybakov, 2009]. These conditions include the Restricted
Isometry Property (RIP) or the Restricted Eigenvalue Condition (REC) [Candes, Romberg, and Tao, 2006a, Pati, Rezaiifar, and Krishnaprasad, 1993].
Even though the sparsity assumption on x is the most
common choice, it is not the only possible one. Indeed,
other approaches, such as combining sparsity with additional model-based constraints [Baraniuk et al., 2010] or
graph structures [Hegde, Indyk, and Schmidt, 2015], have
been developed. Recently, in [Bora et al., 2017], a generative model was used and the unknown signal x was assumed
to be the output of this model. Generative models have been
successfully used to model data distributions, and include
the variational auto-encoder (VAE) [Kingma and Welling,
2013], generative adversarial networks (GANs) [Goodfellow et al., 2014], and variations thereof [Radford, Metz,
and Chintala, 2016, Chen et al., 2016, Lamb, Dumoulin, and
Courville, 2016]. In the GAN framework, two models are
trained simultaneously in an adversarial setting: a generative
model that emulates the data distribution, and a discriminative model that predicts whether a certain input came from
real data or was artiﬁcially created. The generative model
learns a mapping G from a low-dimensional vector z ∈ Rk
to the high dimensional space Rn .
The authors in [Bora et al., 2017] use a pre-trained generative model G, and recover an estimate of x from the compressed measurements y, assuming it is in the range of G.
To this end, the following optimization problem is solved:

Abstract
In recent years, neural network approaches have been widely
adopted for machine learning tasks, with applications in computer vision. More recently, unsupervised generative models
based on neural networks have been successfully applied to
model data distributions via low-dimensional latent spaces. In
this paper, we use Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
to impose structure in compressed sensing problems, replacing the usual sparsity constraint. We propose to train the
GANs in a task-aware fashion, speciﬁcally for reconstruction
tasks. We also show that it is possible to train our model without using any (or much) non-compressed data. Finally, we
show that the latent space of the GAN carries discriminative
information and can further be regularized to generate input
features for general inference tasks. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on a variety of reconstruction and
classiﬁcation problems.

Introduction
The broad scope and generality of the ﬁeld of compressed
sensing has led to many impressive applications, such as
rapid magnetic resonance imaging [Lustig, Donoho, and
Pauly, 2007], single-pixel camera [Duarte et al., 2008] and
UAV systems. The core problem of compressed sensing is
that of efﬁciently reconstructing a signal x ∈ Rn from
an under-determined linear system of noisy measurements
given by
y = Ax + ζ

(1)

where A ∈ Rm×n is the measurement sensing matrix,
m < n, and ζ ∈ Rm is the measurement noise [Donoho,
2006]. Since this is an under-determined system of equations, a unique solution does not exist, even in the absence
of noise, unless some assumptions are made on the structure
of the unknown vector x. Depending on applications, the
structural assumptions may vary, the most common one being that x is sparse [Donoho, 2006, Candes, Romberg, and
Tao, 2006b, Candes and Wakin, 2008]. Under this speciﬁc
assumption, the problem of recovering x has been widely
studied, and different conditions on the matrix A have been
established to guarantee reliable recovery [Bickel, Ritov, and

min

||Ax̂ − y||22

s. t.

x̂ = G(z)

x̂,z

(2)

In the setting of [Bora et al., 2017], the pre-trained
G is unaware of the compressed sensing framework.
Furthermore, it is assumed that an abundance of real
(non-compressed) images is available to train G, which,
depending on the application, may not be a realistic assumption [Lustig et al., 2008]. After all, the aim of compressed
sensing is to recover signals through the use of compressed measurements. In this paper, we propose to train G
speciﬁcally for the task of recovering compressed measurements. This makes our GAN task-aware, and improves the
compressed sensing performance. Our approach will also
address the case where no or very little non-compressed

∗

The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2297

