The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Topic Modeling on Health Journals
with Regularized Variational Inference
Robert Giaquinto, Arindam Banerjee
Dept of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
{smit7982@umn.edu, banerjee@cs.umn.edu}

State-of-the-art topic models can identify topics (Blei, Ng,
and Jordan 2003), track how topics change over time (Blei
and Lafferty 2006; Wang and McCallum 2006; Wei, Sun,
and Wang 2007; Wang, Blei, and Heckerman 2008), or associate authors with certain topics (Rosen-Zvi et al. 2004;
Steyvers et al. 2004; McCallum, Corrada-Emmanuel, and
Wang 2005; Mimno and McCallum 2007). These models
cannot, however, describe common narratives and the authors sharing them. We present the Dynamic Author-Persona
topic model (DAP), a novel approach that represents authors by latent personas. Personas act as a soft-clustering
on authors based their propensity to write about similar topics over time. Our approach is unique in multiple respects.
First, unlike other temporal topic models, the words making
up a topic don’t evolve over time — rather, DAP’s personas
reﬂect the ﬂow of conversation from one topic to next. Second, we introduce a regularized variational inference (RVI)
algorithm, an approach we use to encourage personas to be
distinct from one another.
Our results show that the DAP model outperforms competing topic models, producing better likelihoods on heldout data. Finally, we demonstrate that using RVI further improves the DAP model’s performance, and results in personas that are rich and compelling descriptions of the health
journeys experienced by CB authors.
The rest of the paper is as follows: Section 2 is a brief
background on temporal topic models. Section 3 presents the
DAP model. Section 4 details the model’s RVI algorithm.
Section 5 introduces the evaluation dataset and procedure.
Section 6 shares the results of the experiments. Finally, in
Section 7 we summarize the contributions of this paper.

Abstract
Topic modeling enables exploration and compact representation of a corpus. The CaringBridge (CB) dataset is a massive
collection of journals written by patients and caregivers during a health crisis. Topic modeling on the CB dataset, however, is challenging due to the asynchronous nature of multiple authors writing about their health journeys. To overcome
this challenge we introduce the Dynamic Author-Persona
topic model (DAP), a probabilistic graphical model designed
for temporal corpora with multiple authors. The novelty of
the DAP model lies in its representation of authors by a persona — where personas capture the propensity to write about
certain topics over time. Further, we present a regularized
variational inference (RVI) algorithm, which we use to encourage the DAP model’s personas to be distinct. Our results
show signiﬁcant improvements over competing topic models — particularly after regularization, and highlight the DAP
model’s unique ability to capture common journeys shared by
different authors.

1

Introduction

Topic models can compactly represent large collections of
documents by the themes running through them. We introduce a topic model designed for the unique challenges presented by the CaringBridge (CB) dataset. The CB dataset
includes journals written by patients and caregivers during
a health crisis. CB journals function like a blog, and are
shared to a private community of friends and family. The
full dataset includes 13.1 million journals written by approximately half a million authors between 2006 and 2016. From
the CB dataset we’re interested in capturing health journeys,
that is, authors writing about the same topics over time.
The challenges in topic modeling on the CB dataset stem
from the asynchronous nature of author’s posts. Speciﬁcally,
authors start and stop journaling at different times — both
in terms of calendar dates and how far along they are in
their health journey. Additionally, authors post at irregular
frequencies. While about 15% of CB authors post nearly everyday, the majority of authors typically post less frequently,
often corresponding to a major update, event, or anniversary
of an event. What’s more, the length of these posts can range
from just a few words to thousands of words.

2

Background

Much of the research on topic modeling builds on the latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) model (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003). The LDA model doesn’t account for metainformation like authorship or time. Nevertheless, interest in
LDA has endured, in part, due its ability to richly describe
topics as distributions over words and documents as mixtures of topics. In the years since LDA’s introduction, others
have extended the idea to compliment corpora with a variety
of structures and metadata.
Author information is common in many corpora. A few
topic models have been designed to identify authors’ pref-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3021

