The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Human-in-the-Loop SLAM
Samer B. Nashed, Joydeep Biswas
College of Information and Computer Sciences
140 Governors Drive
Amherst MA, USA 01003

Abstract
Building large-scale, globally consistent maps is a challenging problem, made more difﬁcult in environments with limited access, sparse features, or when using data collected by
novice users. For such scenarios, where state-of-the-art mapping algorithms produce globally inconsistent maps, we introduce a systematic approach to incorporating sparse human corrections, which we term Human-in-the-Loop Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (HitL-SLAM). Given an
initial factor graph for pose graph SLAM, HitL-SLAM accepts approximate, potentially erroneous, and rank-deﬁcient
human input, infers the intended correction via expectation
maximization (EM), back-propagates the extracted corrections over the pose graph, and ﬁnally jointly optimizes the
factor graph including the human inputs as human correction
factor terms, to yield globally consistent large-scale maps. We
thus contribute an EM formulation for inferring potentially
rank-deﬁcient human corrections to mapping, and human correction factor extensions to the factor graphs for pose graph
SLAM that result in a principled approach to joint optimization of the pose graph while simultaneously accounting for
multiple forms of human correction. We present empirical results showing the effectiveness of HitL-SLAM at generating
globally accurate and consistent maps even when given poor
initial estimates of the map.

Figure 1: HitL SLAM example, showing a) the input initial
map with global consistency errors, and b) the resulting ﬁnal map produced by HitL-SLAM by incorporating human
corrections (blue lines) along with the input.

SLAM), a principled approach to incorporate approximate
human corrections in the process of solving for metric
maps1 . Fig. 1 presents an example of HitL-SLAM in practice. HitL-SLAM operates on a pose graph estimate of a
map along with the corresponding observations from each
pose, either from an existing state-of-the-art SLAM solver,
or aligned only by odometry. In an interactive, iterative process, HitL-SLAM accepts human corrections, re-solves the
pose graph problem, and presents the updated map estimate.
This iterative procedure is repeated until the user is satisﬁed
by the mapping result, and provides no further corrections.
We thus present three primary contributions: 1) an EMbased algorithm (Dempster, Laird, and Rubin 1977) to interpret several types of approximate human correction for
mapping (§4), 2) a human factor formulation to incorporate
a variety of types of human corrections in a factor graph
for SLAM (§5), and 3) a two-stage solver for the resultant,
hybrid factor graph composed of human and robot factors,
which minimally distorts trajectories in the presence of rank
deﬁcient human corrections (§5). We show how HitL-SLAM
introduces numerical stability in the mapping problem by
using human corrections to introduce off-diagonal blocks in
the information matrix. Finally, we present several examples
of HitL-SLAM operating on maps that intrinsically included
erroneous observations and poor initial map estimates, and

Introduction
Building large-scale globally consistent metric maps requires accurate relative location information between poses
with large spatial separation. However, due to sensor noise
and range limitations, such correlations across distant poses
are difﬁcult to extract from real robot sensors. Even when
such observations are made, extracting such correlations autonomously is a computationally intensive problem. Furthermore, the order of exploration, and the speed of the
robot during the exploration affect the numerical stability,
and consequently the global consistency of large-scale maps.
Due to these factors, even state of the art mapping algorithms
often yield inaccurate or inconsistent large-scale maps, especially when processing data collected by novice users in
challenging environments.
To address these challenges and limitations of large-scale
mapping, we propose Human-in-the-Loop SLAM (HitLc 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Code and sample data is available at:
https://github.com/umass-amrl/hitl-slam

1503

