The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

r-BTN: Cross-Domain Face Composite
and Synthesis from Limited Facial Patches
Yang Song, Zhifei Zhang, Hairong Qi
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA
{ysong18, zzhang61, hqi@utk.edu}

Abstract
Recent face composite and synthesis related works have
shown promising results in generating realistic face images
from deep convolutional networks. However, these works either do not generate consistent results when the constituent
patches contain large domain variations (i.e., from face and
sketch domains) or cannot generate high-resolution images
with limited facial patches (e.g., the inpainting approach
tends to blur the generated region when the missing area is
more than 50%). Motivated by the mental imagery and simulation in human cognition, we exploit the potential of deep
learning networks in ﬁlling large missing region (e.g., as high
as 95% missing) and generating realistic faces with highﬁdelity in cross domains. We propose the recursive generation
by bidirectional transformation networks (r-BTN) that recursively generates a whole face/sketch from a small sketch/face
patch. The large missing area and domain variations make it
difﬁcult to generate satisfactory results using a unidirectional
cross-domain learning structure. We explore that the bidirectional transformation network can lead to the consistent result
by minimizing the forward and backward errors in the crossdomain scenario. On the other hand, a forward and backward
bidirectional learning between the face and sketch domains
would enable recursive estimation of the missing region in
an incremental manner to yield appealing results. r-BTN also
adopts an adversarial constraint to encourage the generation
of realistic faces/sketches. Extensive experiments have been
conducted to demonstrate the superior performance from rBTN as compared to existing potential solutions.

Face composite Face synthesis
from limited patch

Figure 1: Illustration of face composite based on crossdomain patches and face synthesis from limited facial patch.
large missing area could lead to blurry generated images.
In addition, some existing methods (e.g., Photoﬁt (Photoﬁt
)) synthesize faces by stitching patches from cross domains
which deteriorates the consistency and photo-reality. It is
still unclear how to preserve the color/domain consistency
between patches with large domain variations.
In this paper, we study the above-mentioned problems
which would play a key role in many applications, such as
face image stitching, face blending, face editing, etc. To the
best of our knowledge, this work represents the ﬁrst attempt
to cross-ﬁlling large missing area in both face and sketch
domains. Existing works that may potentially address this
problem are mainly in the perspectives of face/sketch synthesis/transformation and image inpainting.
The face/sketch synthesis works (Wang and Tang 2009;
Tang and Wang 2003; Zhou, Kuang, and Wong 2012;
Song et al. 2014) synthesize target faces from the source domain through patch-wise searching of similar patches in the
training set. Without the generative capability, these methods fail to render reasonable pixels for large missing areas. The rapid development of generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) has shown impressive performance in face generation (Radford, Metz, and
Chintala 2015; Zhang, Song, and Qi 2017a), domain transformation (Zhu et al. 2016; Isola et al. 2016), and inpainting (Yeh et al. 2016; Pathak et al. 2016). However, generating faces from small patches in either single or cross domains has not been explored. Intuitively, combining domain
transformation and inpainting works could be a potential solution. However, with large missing area, the generated results tend to be blurred and may look unrealistic.
In this paper, we investigate the problem of cross-domain
face/sketch generation conditioned on a given small patch of
sketch/face. We assume that faces and sketches lie on high-

Introduction
We start by asking an interesting yet challenging question,
“If provided with limited facial patches from sketch/face
domains where human beings may be able to generate a
real face image in brain (Kosslyn, Thompson, and Ganis
2006) as shown in Fig. 1, can advanced computer vision
techniques generate the whole face image?” Recently, several face synthesis methods built on neural networks have
emerged (Zhang, Song, and Qi 2017a; Sangkloy et al. 2016).
These methods can generate face/sketch images based on
whole face information from one domain. However, how
to generate realistic faces/sketches that are consistent to the
given sketch/face patches is still a challenging task because
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2427

