The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Combinatorial-Bandit Algorithm for the Online Joint
Bid / Budget Optimization of Pay-per-Click Advertising Campaigns
Alessandro Nuara, Francesco Trovò, Nicola Gatti, Marcello Restelli
Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria
Politecnico di Milano, Milano, Italy
{alessandro.nuara, francesco1.trovo, nicola.gatti, marcello.restelli}@polimi.it

is not truthful—i.e., the best bid for an advertiser may be
different from the actual value per click—, and learning algorithms are commonly used to learn the optimal bids. The
Vicrey-Clarke-Groves mechanism (VCG) is instead used for
contextual and social advertising (Varian and Harris 2014;
Gatti et al. 2015). This auction is truthful only in the unrealistic case in which the daily budget is unlimited.1 Thus, each
advertiser needs to ﬁnd the best bid and budget values in an
online fashion, and this problem is currently open in the literature. In the present paper, we provide a novel algorithm,
based on combinatorial bandit techniques (Chen, Wang, and
Yuan 2013), capable of automating this task.
Related works. Only a few works in the algorithmic economic literature tackle the campaign advertising problem
by combining learning and optimization techniques. More
speciﬁcally, Zhang et al. (2012) study a scenario similar to
the one we analyze in this paper. The authors take into account the problem of the joint bid/budget optimization of
subcampaigns in an ofﬂine fashion. However, this algorithm
suffers from some drawbacks. More precisely, the model
of each subcampaign requires a huge number of parameters s.t. even achieving rough estimates requires a considerable amount of data, usually available only after the system has been running for several months. Furthermore, some
parameters (e.g., the position of the ad for each impression
and click) cannot be observed by an advertiser, not allowing the employment of the model in practice. Finally, the
optimization problem formulated therein is nonlinear and
ﬁnding a good-quality approximate solution requires long
computational time. Thomaidou, Liakopoulos, and Vazirgiannis (2014) separate the optimization of the bid from that
one of the budget, using a genetic algorithm to optimize the
budget and subsequently applying some bidding strategies.
Markakis and Telelis (2010) study the convergence of some
bidding strategies in a single-subcampaign scenario.
Online learning results are known only for the restricted
cases with a single subcampaign and a budget constraint
over all the length of the campaign without temporal deadlines.2 Ding et al. (2013) and Xia et al. (2015) work on a

Abstract
Pay-per-click advertising includes various formats (e.g.,
search, contextual, and social) with a total investment of more
than 140 billion USD per year. An advertising campaign
is composed of some subcampaigns—each with a different
ad—and a cumulative daily budget. The allocation of the ads
is ruled exploiting auction mechanisms. In this paper, we propose, for the ﬁrst time to the best of our knowledge, an algorithm for the online joint bid/budget optimization of payper-click multi-channel advertising campaigns. We formulate
the optimization problem as a combinatorial bandit problem, in which we use Gaussian Processes to estimate stochastic functions, Bayesian bandit techniques to address the exploration/exploitation problem, and a dynamic programming
technique to solve a variation of the Multiple-Choice Knapsack problem. We experimentally evaluate our algorithm both
in simulation—using a synthetic setting generated a Yahoo!
dataset—and in a real-world application for two months.

Introduction
Online advertising has been given wide attention from the
scientiﬁc world as well as from industry. in 2016 more than
72 billion USD has been spent in search advertising (IAB
2016), which represents about 50% of the total market. The
development of automatic techniques is crucial both for the
publishers and the advertisers, and artiﬁcial intelligence can
play a prominent role in this context. In this paper, we focus
on pay-per-click advertising—including different formats,
e.g., search, contextual, and social—in which an advertiser
pays only once a user has clicked her ad.
An advertising campaign is characterized by a set
of subcampaigns—each with a potentially different pair
ad/targeting—and by a cumulative daily budget. Remarkably, a campaign may include subcampaigns on different
channels, e.g., Google, Bing, Facebook. In pay-per-click advertising, to get an ad impressed, the advertisers take part
in an auction, specifying a bid and a daily budget for each
subcampaign (Qin, Chen, and Liu 2015). The advertisers’
goal is to select these variables to maximize the expected
revenue they get from the advertising campaign. The Generalized Second Price auction (GSP) is used for search advertising (King, Atkins, and Schwarz 2007). This auction

1

Notably, the value per click is unknown at the setup of the
campaign, not allowing an advertiser to bid truthfully.
2
This last assumption rarely holds in real-world applications
where, instead, results are expected by a given deadline.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2379

