The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Progressive Cognitive Human Parsing
1

Bingke Zhu,1,2 Yingying Chen,1,2 Ming Tang,1,2 Jinqiao Wang1,2
National Lab of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{bingke.zhu, yingying.chen, tangm, jqwang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Human parsing is an important task for human-centric understanding. Generally, two mainstreams are used to deal with
this challenging and fundamental problem. The ﬁrst one is
employing extra human pose information to generate hierarchical parse graph to deal with human parsing task. Another one is training an end-to-end network with the semantic information in image level. In this paper, we develop an
end-to-end progressive cognitive network to segment human
parts. In order to establish a hierarchical relationship, a novel
component-aware region convolution structure is proposed.
With this structure, latter layers inherit prior component information from former layers and pay its attention to a ﬁner
component. In this way, we deal with human parsing as a progressive recognition task, that is, we ﬁrst locate the whole human and then segment the hierarchical components gradually.
The experiments indicate that our method has a better location capacity for the small objects and a better classiﬁcation
capacity for the large objects. Moreover, our framework can
be embedded into any fully convolutional network to enhance
the performance signiﬁcantly.

(a) Image

(b) Level 1

(c) Level 2

(d) Level 3

(e) Level 4

(f) Level 5

background
human
upper-body
lower-body
head
mid-body
upper-leg
lower-leg
torso
arm
upper-arm
lower-arm

Figure 1: A sketch of progressive cognitive human parsing. (a) Input image. (b) Level 1 segmentation mask for human level. (c) Level 2 segmentation mask for {upper-body,
lower-body} level. (d) Level 3 segmentation mask for {head,
mid-body, upper-leg, lower-leg} level. (e) Level 4 segmentation mask for {head, torso, arm, upper-leg, lower-leg} level.
(f) Level 5 segmentation mask for {head, torso, upper-arm,
lower-arm, upper-leg, lower-leg} level. Note that the level
division can be altered for different dataset.

Introduction

by poses, locations and shapes of human. As a result, these
methods can use the relation of human parts for better human parsing. However, these methods often need extra human pose information and cannot be trained in an end-to-end
way.
In contrast, another mainstream methods build their models with the end-to-end networks based on the semantic information (Xia et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2017),
which beneﬁt from the powerful performance of fully convolutional networks in semantic segmentation task. Although
such approaches demonstrate the good performance on the
semantic segmentation, it is still hard to segment all the ﬁnegrained parts of the human with a single classiﬁer because
of the complex relationships among human parts and the unbalanced classes among different human parts and the background.
In this paper, we develop an end-to-end progressive cognitive network to recognize different human parts from the
whole image gradually. This recognition manner is similar to
human vision habits. In fact, the human vision system recognizes an object and its constituent parts in a quite different
way. The visual cortex extracts features of an object in the

The goal of human parsing is to segment a human image
into different ﬁne-grained semantic parts such as head, torso,
arms and legs. Human parsing can provide more detailed
understanding of image contents and the human parts. It
has many high-level computer vision applications such as
image/video retrieval (Yamaguchi et al. 2012), person reidentiﬁcation (Zhao, Ouyang, and Wang 2013), virtual ﬁtting (Liu et al. 2012), ﬁne-grained recognition (Fu, Zheng,
and Tao 2017), action recognition (Wang, Wang, and Yuille
2013) as well as video surveillance (Lu et al. 2014). However, human parsing is still a challenging computer vision
problem due to the complicated and various human appearance, size, shape, clothes, occlusion, illumination and semantic ambiguity.
Generally, there are two mainstreams to deal with the human parsing task. The ﬁrst one is employing the graph models based on the hierarchical prior information (Xia et al.
2016b; Park, Nie, and Zhu 2017). These methods segment
human parts with the parse graph models which are built
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7607

