The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

DepthLGP: Learning Embeddings of
Out-of-Sample Nodes in Dynamic Networks
Jianxin Ma, Peng Cui, Wenwu Zhu
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, China
majx13fromthu@gmail.com, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn, wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Network embedding algorithms to date are primarily designed for static networks, where all nodes are known before
learning. How to infer embeddings for out-of-sample nodes,
i.e. nodes that arrive after learning, remains an open problem. The problem poses great challenges to existing methods, since the inferred embeddings should preserve intricate network properties such as high-order proximity, share
similar characteristics (i.e. be of a homogeneous space)
with in-sample node embeddings, and be of low computational cost. To overcome these challenges, we propose a
Deeply Transformed High-order Laplacian Gaussian Process
(DepthLGP) method to infer embeddings for out-of-sample
nodes. DepthLGP combines the strength of nonparametric
probabilistic modeling and deep learning. In particular, we
design a high-order Laplacian Gaussian process (hLGP) to
encode network properties, which permits fast and scalable
inference. In order to further ensure homogeneity, we then
employ a deep neural network to learn a nonlinear transformation from latent states of the hLGP to node embeddings.
DepthLGP is general, in that it is applicable to embeddings
learned by any network embedding algorithms. We theoretically prove the expressive power of DepthLGP, and conduct
extensive experiments on real-world networks. Empirical results demonstrate that our approach can achieve signiﬁcant
performance gain over existing approaches.

Figure 1: Here v6 , v7 , and v8 are out-of-sample nodes. And
h(·) is a latent function. The values of the shaded nodes
are learned during training. To predict f (v7 ), DepthLGP ﬁrst
predicts h(v7 ) via probabilistic inference, then passes h(v7 )
through a neural network to obtain the ﬁnal result.

Several graph-based methods in literature can be adjusted
to infer out-of-sample embeddings given in-sample ones.
Many of them deduce outcomes (embeddings) of new nodes
by performing information propagation (Zhu and Ghahramani 2002), or optimizing a loss that encourages smooth
changes between linked nodes (Zhu, Ghahramani, and Lafferty 2003; Delalleau, Bengio, and Roux 2005). There are
also methods that aim to learn a mapping from node features
to outcomes (embeddings), by imposing a manifold regularizer derived from the graph (Belkin, Niyogi, and Sindhwani
2006). The node features can be text attributes, or rows of the
adjacency matrix when attributes are unavailable. With the
learned mapping, the embeddings of out-of-sample nodes
can then be predicted.
However, the recent progress of network embedding imposes new challenges to the existing methods. Firstly, the
inferred embeddings of out-of-sample nodes should preserve intricate network properties with embeddings of insample nodes. For example, high-order proximity, among
many other properties, is deemed particularly essential to
be preserved by network embedding (Tang et al. 2015;
Cao, Lu, and Xu 2015; Ou et al. 2016), and thus must be

Introduction
Network embedding (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014)
automates the process of extracting low-dimensional feature
vectors, termed embeddings, for nodes in a network. Despite
the remarkable success they are achieving in tasks such as
classiﬁcation and recommendation, most network embedding algorithms in the literature to date are primarily designed for static networks, where all nodes are known before
learning. However, for large-scale networks, it is infeasible
to rerun network embedding whenever new nodes arrive, especially considering the fact that rerunning network embedding also results in the need of retraining all downstream
classiﬁers. How to efﬁciently infer proper embeddings for
out-of-sample nodes, i.e. nodes that arrive after the embedding process, remains largely unanswered.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

370

