The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Unsupervised Learning of Geometry from Videos
with Edge-Aware Depth-Normal Consistency
Zhenheng Yang,1 Peng Wang,2 Wei Xu,2 Liang Zhao,2 Ramakant Nevatia1
zhenheny@usc.edu {wangpeng54,wei.xu,zhaoliang07}@baidu.com nevatia@usc.edu
1
University of Southern California 2 Baidu Research

Abstract

1

(b)

(a)

Learning to reconstruct depths from a single image by watching unlabeled videos via deep convolutional network (DCN)
is attracting signiﬁcant attention in recent years, e.g.(Zhou
et al. 2017). In this paper, we propose to use surface normal representation for unsupervised depth estimation framework. Our estimated depths are constrained to be compatible
with predicted normals, yielding more robust geometry results.
Speciﬁcally, we formulate an edge-aware depth-normal consistency term, and solve it by constructing a depth-to-normal
layer and a normal-to-depth layer inside of the DCN. The
depth-to-normal layer takes estimated depths as input, and
computes normal directions using cross production based on
neighboring pixels. Then given the estimated normals, the
normal-to-depth layer outputs a regularized depth map through
local planar smoothness. Both layers are computed with awareness of edges inside the image to help address the issue of
depth/normal discontinuity and preserve sharp edges. Finally,
to train the network, we apply the photometric error and gradient smoothness to supervise both depth and normal predictions.
We conducted experiments on both outdoor (KITTI) and indoor (NYUv2) datasets, and showed that our algorithm vastly
outperforms state-of-the-art, which demonstrates the beneﬁts
of our approach.

close

far

Depth
Normal x -x y z

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Comparison between (Zhou et al. 2017) and our
results with depth-normal consistency. Top to bottom: (b)
Ground truth depths (left) and normals (right). (c) Results
from (Zhou et al. 2017). (d) Our results. In the circled region,
(Zhou et al. 2017) fails to predict scene structure as shown by
estimated normals, while ours correctly predict both depths
and normals with such consistency.

(Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015), supervised learning
of depth, e.g.(Eigen, Puhrsch, and Fergus 2014), achieved
impressive results over public datasets like KITTI (Geiger,
Lenz, and Urtasun 2012), NYUv2 (Silberman et al. 2012)
and SUN3D (Xiao, Owens, and Torralba 2013). Nevertheless, collecting ground truth depth is almost impossible for
random videos. It is hard for the supervisedly learned models
to generalize on videos of different scenes.
We can, instead, try to solve this problem in an unsupervised way by imposing 3D scene geometric consistency
between video frames. There have been some works in this
line, (Zhou et al. 2017) propose a single image depth FCN
learning from videos. In their training, rather than using
ground truth depth, they warp the target image to other consecutive video frames based on the predicted depths and
relative motions, and match the photometry between the
warped frames and observed frames (detailed in Sec. 3).
Then, the matching errors are used as the supervision of
the depth prediction. Similar idea is applied in depth prediction when stereo pairs are available (Garg, G, and Reid 2016;
Godard, Mac Aodha, and Brostow 2017).
Altough those methods are able to do single image depth
estimation, the results do not well represent the scene structure, especially when visulized with computed normals, as
shown in Fig. 1(c). This is mostly due to that photometric matching is ambiguous, i.e.a pixel in source frames can

Introduction

1

Human beings are highly competent in recovering the 3D
geometry of observed natural scenes at a very detailed level
in real-time, even from a single image. Being able to do
reconstruction for monocular images can be widely applied
to large amount of real applications such as augmented reality
and robotics.
One group of approaches solve this problem by feature matching and estimating camera and scene geometries,
e.g.structure from motion (SFM) (Wu 2011) etc., or color
matching, e.g.DTAM (Newcombe, Lovegrove, and Davison
2011). But these techniques are sensitive to correct matching
and are ineffective in homogeneous areas. Another way to
do 3D reconstruction is a learning based method, where the
reconstruction cues can be incrementally discovered by learning from videos. Currently, with the development of pixelwise prediction such as fully convolutional network (FCN)
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
This work is done while Zhengheng Yang is interning at Baidu

7493

