The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Faithful to the Original: Fact-Aware
Neural Abstractive Summarization
1

Ziqiang Cao,1,2∗ Furu Wei,3 Wenjie Li,1,2 Sujian Li4
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
2
Hong Kong Polytechnic University Shenzhen Research Institute, China
3
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
4
Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University, China
{cszqcao, cswjli}@comp.polyu.edu.hk
furu@microsoft.com lisujian@pku.edu.cn

Recently, the application of the attentional sequence-tosequence (s2s) framework has attracted growing attention
in this area (Rush, Chopra, and Weston 2015a; Chopra et al.
2016; Nallapati et al. 2016).
As we know, sentence summarization inevitably needs
to fuse different parts in the source sentence and is abstractive. Consequently, the generated summaries often mismatch with the original relations and yield fake facts. Our
preliminary study reveals that nearly 30% of the outputs
from a state-of-the-art s2s system suffer from this problem. Previous researches are usually devoted to increasing
summary informativeness. However, one of the most essential prerequisites for a practical abstractive summarization system is that the generated summaries must accord
with the facts expressed in the source. We refer to this aspect as summary faithfulness in this paper. A fake summary may greatly misguide the comprehension of the original text. Look at an illustrative example of the generation result using the state-of-the-art s2s model (Nallapati et
al. 2016) in Table 1. The actual subject of the verb “postponed” is “repatriation”. Nevertheless, probably because the
entity “bosnian moslems” is closer to “postponed” in the
source sentence, the summarization system wrongly regards
“bosnian moslems” as the subject and counterfeits a fact
“bosnian moslems postponed”. Meanwhile, the s2s system
generates another fake fact: “unhcr pulled out of bosnia”
and puts it into the summary. Consequently, although the
informativeness (ROUGE-1 F1=0.57) and readability of this
summary are high, its meaning departs far from the original.
This sort of summaries is nearly useless in practice.
Since the fact fabrication is a serious problem, intuitively, encoding existing facts into the summarization system should be an ideal solution to avoid fake generation. To
achieve this goal, the ﬁrst step is to extract the facts from
the source sentence. In the relatively mature task of Open
Information Extraction (OpenIE) (Banko et al. 2007), a fact
is usually represented by a relation triple consisting of (subject; predicate; object). For example, given the source sentence in Table 1, the popular OpenIE tool (Angeli, Premkumar, and Manning 2015) generates two relation triples in-

Abstract
Unlike extractive summarization, abstractive summarization
has to fuse different parts of the source text, which inclines to
create fake facts. Our preliminary study reveals nearly 30%
of the outputs from a state-of-the-art neural summarization
system suffer from this problem. While previous abstractive
summarization approaches usually focus on the improvement
of informativeness, we argue that faithfulness is also a vital prerequisite for a practical abstractive summarization system. To avoid generating fake facts in a summary, we leverage open information extraction and dependency parse technologies to extract actual fact descriptions from the source
text. The dual-attention sequence-to-sequence framework is
then proposed to force the generation conditioned on both
the source text and the extracted fact descriptions. Experiments on the Gigaword benchmark dataset demonstrate that
our model can greatly reduce fake summaries by 80%. Notably, the fact descriptions also bring signiﬁcant improvement
on informativeness since they often condense the meaning of
the source text.

Introduction
The exponentially growing online information has necessitated the development of effective automatic summarization
systems. In this paper, we focus on an increasingly intriguing task, i.e., abstractive sentence summarization (Rush,
Chopra, and Weston 2015a) which generates a shorter version of a given sentence while attempting to preserve its
original meaning. This task is different from documentlevel summarization since it is hard to apply the common extractive techniques (Over and Yen 2004). Selecting existing sentences to form the sentence summary is
impossible. Early studies on sentence summarization involve handcrafted rules (Zajic et al. 2007), syntactic tree
pruning (Knight and Marcu 2002) and statistical machine
translation techniques (Banko, Mittal, and Witbrock 2000).
∗

Contribution during internship at Microsoft Research
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4784

