The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning to Attack: Adversarial
Transformation Networks
Shumeet Baluja, Ian Fischer
Google Research
Google, Inc.

proposed in (Szegedy et al. 2013) and (Carlini and Wagner
2016). (2) By approximation with single-step gradient-based
techniques like fast gradient sign (Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy 2014) or fast least likely class (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016). (3) By approximation with iterative variants of gradient-based techniques (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. 2016;
Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, and Frossard 2016). These approaches use multiple forward and backward passes through
the target network to more carefully move an input towards an adversarial classiﬁcation. Other approaches assume a black-box model and only having access to the target model’s output (Papernot et al. 2016; Baluja, Covell, and
Sukthankar 2015; Tramèr et al. 2016). See (Papernot et al.
2015) for a discussion of threat models.
Each of the above approaches solved an optimization
problem such that a single set of inputs was perturbed
enough to force the target network to make a mistake.
We take a fundamentally different approach: given a welltrained target network, can we create a separate, attacknetwork that, with high probability, minimally transforms
all inputs into ones that will be misclassiﬁed? No per-sample
optimization problems should be solved. The attack-network
should take as input a clean image and output a minimally
modiﬁed image that will cause a misclassiﬁcation in the target network. Further, can we do this while imposing strict
constraints on the types and amount of perturbations allowed? We introduce a class of networks, called Adversarial
Transformation Networks, to efﬁciently address this task.

Abstract
With the rapidly increasing popularity of deep neural networks for image recognition tasks, a parallel interest in generating adversarial examples to attack the trained models has
arisen. To date, these approaches have involved either directly
computing gradients with respect to the image pixels or directly solving an optimization on the image pixels. We generalize this pursuit in a novel direction: can a separate network be trained to efﬁciently attack another fully trained network? We demonstrate that it is possible, and that the generated attacks yield startling insights into the weaknesses of
the target network. We call such a network an Adversarial
Transformation Network (ATN). ATNs transform any input
into an adversarial attack on the target network, while being
minimally perturbing to the original inputs and the target network’s outputs. Further, we show that ATNs are capable of
not only causing the target network to make an error, but can
be constructed to explicitly control the type of misclassiﬁcation made. We demonstrate ATNs on both simple MNISTdigit classiﬁers and state-of-the-art ImageNet classiﬁers deployed by Google, Inc.: Inception ResNet-v2.

With the resurgence of deep neural networks for many
real-world classiﬁcation tasks, there is an increased interest
in methods to assess the weaknesses in the trained models.
Adversarial examples are small perturbations of the inputs
that are carefully crafted to fool the network into producing
incorrect outputs. Seminal work by (Szegedy et al. 2013)
and (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014), as well as
much recent work, has shown that adversarial examples are
abundant, and that there are many ways to discover them.
Given a classiﬁer f (x) : x ∈ X → y ∈ Y and
original inputs x ∈ X , the problem of generating untargeted adversarial examples can be expressed as the optimization: argminx∗ L(x, x∗ ) s.t. f (x∗ ) = f (x), where
L(·) is a distance metric between examples from the input space (e.g., the L2 norm). Similarly, generating a targeted adversarial attack on a classiﬁer can be expressed as
argminx∗ L(x, x∗ ) s.t. f (x∗ ) = yt , where yt ∈ Y is some
target label chosen by the attacker.
Until now, these optimization problems have been solved
using three broad approaches: (1) By directly using optimizers like L-BFGS or Adam (Kingma and Ba 2015), as

Adversarial Transformation Networks
In this work, we propose Adversarial Transformation Networks (ATNs). An ATN is a neural network that transforms
an input into an adversarial example against a target network
or set of networks. ATNs may be untargeted or targeted, and
trained in a black-box or white-box manner. In this work, we
will focus on targeted, white-box ATNs.
Formally, an ATN can be deﬁned as a neural network:
gf,θ (x) : x ∈ X → x

(1)

where θ is the parameter vector of g, f is the target network
which outputs a probability distribution across class labels,
and x ∼ x, but argmax f (x) = argmax f (x ).

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2687

