The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Temporal-Difference Learning with
Sampling Baseline for Image Captioning∗
Hui Chen,† Guiguang Ding,† Sicheng Zhao,† Jungong Han‡
†

‡

School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University, Lancaster, LA1 4YW, UK
{jichenhui2012,schzhao,jungonghan77}@gmail.com, dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn

Inspired by the machine translation domain, recent works
focus on the deep network based and end-to-end methods
mainly under the encoder-decoder framework. In general,
the recurrent neural networks (RNN), especially long short
term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997),
are employed as the decoder to generate captions (Vinyals
et al. 2015; Jin et al. 2015; Xu et al. 2015; You et al. 2016;
Zhao et al. 2017) on the basis of the visual features of image extracted by the CNN. These models are usually trained
to maximize the likelihood of next ground-truth word given
the previous ground-truth words. However, this method will
lead to a problem called exposure bias (Ranzato et al. 2015),
since at test time, the model uses the word sampled from
the model predictions as the next LSTM input, instead of
the ground-truth words. The second problem is about the
inconsistency between the optimizing function at training
time and the evaluation metrics at test time. The training
procedure attempts to lower the cross entropy loss, while
the metrics used to evaluate a generated sentence are some
discrete and non-differentiable NLP metrics such as BLEU,
ROUGE, CIDEr, and METEOR. These two problems limit
the ability of the model to understand the image and describe
it with descriptive sentences.

Abstract
The existing methods for image captioning usually train the
language model under the cross entropy loss, which results
in the exposure bias and inconsistency of evaluation metric.
Recent research has shown these two issues can be well addressed by policy gradient method in reinforcement learning
domain attributable to its unique capability of directly optimizing the discrete and non-differentiable evaluation metric.
In this paper, we utilize reinforcement learning method to
train the image captioning model. Speciﬁcally, we train our
image captioning model to maximize the overall reward of
the sentences by adopting the temporal-difference (TD) learning method, which takes the correlation between temporally
successive actions into account. In this way, we assign different values to different words in one sampled sentence by
a discounted coefﬁcient when back-propagating the gradient
with the REINFORCE algorithm, enabling the correlation between actions to be learned. Besides, instead of estimating a
“baseline” to normalize the rewards with another network,
we utilize the reward of another Monte-Carlo sample as the
“baseline” to avoid high variance. We show that our proposed
method can improve the quality of generated captions and
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on the benchmark
dataset MS COCO in terms of seven evaluation metrics.

It has been shown that the reinforcement learning (RL)
can provide a solution to these two identiﬁed issues above.
There are some works exploring the idea of incorporating
the reinforcement learning into image captioning. (Ranzato
et al. 2015) proposed a novel training procedure at the sequence level using the policy gradient method. (Rennie et
al. 2017) adopted the same loss function as (Ranzato et al.
2015) but the baseline modelling method is slightly different, where they proposed a self-critical training method with
the caption generated by the inference algorithm at test time.
(Liu et al. 2016) employed the same method to produce the
baseline as (Ranzato et al. 2015), and their main contribution
lies in using Monte Carlo rollouts to approximate the value
function. Despite their better performance, especially compared to the non-RL approaches, there are still some shortcomings in these works. For example, (Rennie et al. 2017)
and (Ranzato et al. 2015) both implicitly assumed that every word in one sampled sequence makes the same contribution to the reward, which is clearly not reasonable in general. (Liu et al. 2016) estimated a baseline reward by simply
adopting a MLP to learn the baseline reward from the state

Introduction
Scene understanding is one of the ultimate goals of computer
vision. Image captioning aims at generating reasonable captions automatically for images which is of great importance
to scene understanding. It is a challenging task not only because the captioning models must be capable of recognizing
what objects are in the image, but also must be powerful
enough to understand the semantic relationships among the
objects and describe them properly in natural language. It
is also of great signiﬁcance to enable machine mimicking
the human ability to express the rich visual information with
descriptive language, and thus attracts much attention from
academic researchers and industry companies.
∗

This research was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 61571269, 61701273), the Royal
Society Newton Mobility Grant (IE150997) and the Project Funded
by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 2017M610897).
Corresponding authors: Guiguang Ding and Jungong Han.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6706

