The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Adversarial Dropout for Supervised
and Semi-Supervised Learning
Sungrae Park, JunKeon Park, Su-Jin Shin, Il-Chul Moon
Department of Industrial and System Engineering
KAIST
Deajeon, South Korea
{sungraepark, alex3012, sujin.shin, icmoon}@kaist.ac.kr
loss of models perturbed by dropout. They also pointed
out that the output of dropout is the geometric mean of
the outputs from the model ensemble with the shared parameters. Extending the weight sharing perspective, several studies (Baldi and Sadowski 2013; Chen et al. 2014;
Jain et al. 2015) analyzed the ensemble effects from the
dropout.
The recent work by Laine & Aila (2016) enhanced the ensemble effect of dropout by adding self-ensembling terms.
The self-ensembling term is constructed by a divergence between two sampled neural networks from the dropout. By
minimizing the divergence, the sampled networks learn from
each other, and this practice is similar to the working mechanism of the ladder network (Rasmus et al. 2015), which
builds a connection between an unsupervised and a supervised neural network. Our method also follows the principles of self-ensembling, but we apply the adversarial training concept to the sampling of neural network structures
through dropout.
At the same time that the community has developed the
dropout, adversarial training has become another focus of
the community. Szegedy et al. (2013) showed that a certain neural network is vulnerable to a very small perturbation in the training data set if the noise direction is sensitive to the models’ label assignment y given x, even when
the perturbation is so small that human eyes cannot discern the difference. They empirically proved that robustly
training models against adversarial perturbation is effective
in reducing test errors. However, their method of identifying adversarial perturbations contains a computationally
expensive inner loop. To compensate it, Goodfellow et al.
(2014) suggested an approximation method, through the linearization of the loss function, that is free from the loop.
Adversarial training can be conducted on supervised learning because the adversarial direction can be deﬁned when
true y labels are known. Miyato et al. (2015) proposed a
virtual adversarial direction to apply the adversarial training in the semi-supervised learning that may not assume
the true y value. Until now, the adversarial perturbation can
be deﬁned as a unit vector of additive noise imposed on
the input or the embedding spaces (Szegedy et al. 2013;
Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Miyato et al. 2015).
Our proposed method, adversarial dropout, can be
viewed from the dropout and from the adversarial train-

Abstract
Recently, training with adversarial examples, which are generated by adding a small but worst-case perturbation on input examples, has improved the generalization performance
of neural networks. In contrast to the biased individual inputs
to enhance the generality, this paper introduces adversarial
dropout, which is a minimal set of dropouts that maximize
the divergence between 1) the training supervision and 2) the
outputs from the network with the dropouts. The identiﬁed
adversarial dropouts are used to automatically reconﬁgure the
neural network in the training process, and we demonstrated
that the simultaneous training on the original and the reconﬁgured network improves the generalization performance of
supervised and semi-supervised learning tasks on MNIST,
SVHN, and CIFAR-10. We analyzed the trained model to ﬁnd
the performance improvement reasons. We found that adversarial dropout increases the sparsity of neural networks more
than the standard dropout. Finally, we also proved that adversarial dropout is a regularization term with a rank-valued
hyper parameter that is different from a continuous-valued
parameter to specify the strength of the regularization.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated the signiﬁcant improvement on benchmark performances in a
wide range of applications. As neural networks become
deeper, the model complexity also increases quickly, and
this complexity leads DNNs to potentially overﬁt a training data set. Several techniques (Hinton et al. 2012; Poole,
Sohl-Dickstein, and Ganguli 2014; Bishop 1995b; Lasserre,
Bishop, and Minka 2006) have emerged over the past years
to address this challenge, and dropout has become one of
dominant methods due to its simplicity and effectiveness
(Hinton et al. 2012; Srivastava et al. 2014).
Dropout randomly disconnects neural units during training as a method to prevent the feature co-adaptation (Baldi
and Sadowski 2013; Wager, Wang, and Liang 2013; Wang
and Manning 2013; Li, Gong, and Yang 2016). The earlier work by Hinton et al. (2012) and Srivastava et al.
(2014) interpreted dropout as an extreme form of model
combinations, a.k.a. a model ensemble, by sharing extensive parameters on neural networks. They proposed learning the model combination through minimizing an expected
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3917

