The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Batch Learning Framework
for Scalable Personalized Ranking
Kuan Liu, Prem Natarajan
Information Sciences Institute & Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California

learning task into many binary classiﬁcation problems and
optimize the average classiﬁcation accuracy. For example, BPR (Rendle et al. 2009) maximizes the probability
of correct prediction of each pairwise item comparison.
MMMF (Srebro, Rennie, and Jaakkola 2005) minimizes a
margin loss for each pair in a matrix factorization setting.
Listwise algorithms such as those recently explored by (Hidasi et al. 2015; Covington, Adams, and Sargin 2016) treat
the problem as a multi-class classiﬁcation and use crossentropy as the loss function.
Despite the simplicity and wide application, these rankindependent methods are not satisfactory because the quality of results from a ranking system is highly positiondependent. A high accuracy at the top of a list is more important than that at a low position on the list. However, the
average accuracy targeted by the pairwise algorithms discussed above places equal weights at all the positions. This
mismatch therefore leads to under-exploitation in the prediction accuracy at the top part. Listwise algorithms, on the
other hand, do make an attempt to push items to the top using
a classiﬁcation scheme. However, its classiﬁcation criterion
also does not match well with ranking.
Position-dependent approaches are explored to address
the above limitations. One critical question is how to approximate item ranks to perform rank-dependent training.
TFMAP (Shi et al. 2012a) and ClifMF (Shi et al. 2012b) approximate an item rank purely based on the model score of
this item, i.e., a pointwise estimate. Particularly, it models
the reciprocal rank of an item with a sigmoid transformed
from the score returned by the model. TFMAP then optimizes a smoothed modiﬁcation of MAP, while ClifMF optimizes MRR. This pointwise estimation is simple, but it is
only loosely connected to the true ranks. The estimation becomes even more unreliable as the itemset size increases.
An arguably more direct approach is to optimize the ranks
of relevant items returned by the model to encourage top
accuracy. It requires the computation or estimation of item
ranks and modiﬁcation of the updating strategy. This idea
is explored in traditional learning to rank methods LambdaNet (Burges et al. 2005), LambdaRank (Burges, Ragno,
and Le 2007), etc., where the learning rate is adjusted based
on item ranks. In personalized ranking, WARP (Weston,
Bengio, and Usunier 2010) propose to use a sampling procedure to estimate item ranks. It repeatedly samples negative

Abstract
In designing personalized ranking algorithms, it is desirable
to encourage a high precision at the top of the ranked list. Existing methods either seek a smooth convex surrogate for a
non-smooth ranking metric or directly modify updating procedures to encourage top accuracy. In this work we point out
that these methods do not scale well in a large-scale setting,
and this is partly due to the inaccurate pointwise or pairwise
rank estimation. We propose a new framework for personalized ranking. It uses batch-based rank estimators and smooth
rank-sensitive loss functions. This new batch learning framework leads to more stable and accurate rank approximations
compared to previous work. Moreover, it enables explicit use
of parallel computation to speed up training. We conduct
empirical evaluations on three item recommendation tasks,
and our method shows a consistent accuracy improvement
over current state-of-the-art methods. Additionally, we observe time efﬁciency advantages when data scale increases.

Introduction
The task of personalized ranking is to provide each user
with a ranked list of items that he might prefer. It has received considerable attention in academic research (Hu, Koren, and Volinsky 2008; Rendle et al. 2009; He et al. 2016),
and algorithms developed are applied in various applications
in e-commerce (Linden, Smith, and York 2003), social networks (Chen et al. 2009), location (Liu et al. 2014), etc.
However, personalized ranking remains a very challenging
task: 1) The learning objectives of ranking models are hard
to directly optimize. For example, the quality of the model
output is commonly evaluated by ranking measures such as
NDCG, MAP, and MRR, which are position-dependent (or
rank-dependent) and non-smooth. It makes gradient-based
optimization infeasible and also computationally expensive.
2) The size of an item set that a ranking task uses can be very
large. It is not uncommon to see an online recommender system with millions of items. As a consequence, it increases
the difﬁculty of capturing user preferences over the entire
set of items. It also makes it harder to compute or estimate
the rank of a particular item.
Traditional approaches model user preferences with rankindependent algorithms. Pairwise algorithms convert the
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3667

