The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Skyline Computation for Low-Latency Image-Activated Cell Identiﬁcation
Kenichi Koizumi, Kei Hiraki, Mary Inaba
The University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan +81-3-5841-4110
{koiken, hiraki, mary}@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Real-Time Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research
Because of breakthroughs in the ﬁeld of deep learning, the
accuracy of image classiﬁcation and multimedia recognition in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) research has improved
rapidly. In this study, the objective is the classiﬁcation of
high-dimensional data, and, in particular, the screening of
very rare entries from a large population. In general, the initial set of vectors is divided into several groups by using a
clustering method, and an outlier detection method identiﬁes
distinct entries such as noise. Our focus is on a new cognitive research problem in which the aim is to detect boundary
entries, namely entries that are geometrically located near
the outer edges of a population in multidimensional space.
Serendipiter (Guo et al. 2017) is a fast cell sorter that discovers very rare cells with atypical ability from an enormous
number of cells. A block diagram of Serendipiter is shown in
Figure 1. The cells are identiﬁed from the cell-measurement
information obtained by multiple sensor technologies, such
as optical imaging and spectroscopy. The measurement and
identiﬁcation latencies must be below ten milliseconds. The
discovery of very rare cells (constituting one per a trillion
cells) within a realistic time is anticipated for efﬁcient biofuel production by Euglena spp. and high-precision blood
testing. Serendipiter accurately analyzes single cells and
classiﬁes 10,000 cells per second. We approached this challenge by using the skyline computation method and considering the set of boundary entries as a set of skyline points.

Figure 2: Examples of skylines in multidimensional spaces
(left: two dimensions and right: three dimensions); the yellow and blue points denote the skyline and non-skyline
points, respectively.
from a database containing entries with multiple attributes.
Points that are not dominated by the other points are called
skyline or pareto-optimal points. The left and right panels
of Figure 2 show examples of skylines in two- and threedimensional space, respectively.
The task of computing the skyline of a dynamic set
of points is known as the continuous skyline computation
(Morse, Patel, and Grosky 2007). Real databases are updated
frequently in streaming or other suitable environments. The
injection and ejection times of an entry into and from the
database are called the activation and deactivation times of
the entry, respectively. In a continuous skyline computation,
a set of skyline points is updated due to point activation and
deactivaton.

The JR-tree
The continuous skyline computation presents a difﬁcult
problem because the activation or deactivation of just one
point can demote many existing skyline points from the skyline, or promote many existing points to the skyline, both of
which will change a substantial part of the skyline. Previous
methods utilize spatial indexing trees, such as B-trees, Rtrees, or quadtrees (Morse, Patel, and Grosky 2007). The JRtree (Koizumi, Inaba, and Hiraki 2015) is the state-of-the-art
algorithm for continuous skyline computation. A complete
dominance graph is a directed acyclic graph, whose vertex
represents each point and whose arc represents each dominance relation. A JR-tree is a rooted spanning subtree of the
complete dominance graph. The JR-tree algorithm is faster
than other algorithms because (1) it uses a more appropriate
hierarchical structure, and (2) it is dimension-independent.

Figure 1: Block diagram of Serendipiter

Skyline Computation
The skyline computation algorithm (Börzsönyi, Kossmann,
and Stocker 2001) is used to extract extraordinary entries
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8101

