The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Scalable Relaxations of Sparse Packing Constraints:
Optimal Biocontrol in Predator-Prey Networks
Johan Bjorck

Yiwei Bai

Xiaojian Wu

Dept. of Computer Science
Cornell University
njb225@cornell.edu

Dept. of Computer Science
Shanghai Jiao Tong University ∗
yb263@cornell.edu

Dept. of Computer Science
Cornell University
xw458@cornell.edu

Yexiang Xue

Mark Whitmore

Carla Gomes

Dept. of Computer Science
Cornell University
yx247@cornell.edu

Dept. of Natural Resources
Cornell University
mark.whitmore@cornell.edu

Dept. of Computer Science
Cornell University
gomes@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Cascades represent rapid changes in networks. A cascading phenomenon of ecological and economic impact is the
spread of invasive species in geographic landscapes. The
most promising management strategy is often biocontrol,
which entails introducing a natural predator able to control
the invading population, a setting that can be treated as two
interacting cascades of predator and prey populations. We formulate and study a nonlinear problem of optimal biocontrol:
optimally seeding the predator cascade over time to minimize the harmful prey population. Recurring budgets, which
typically face conservation organizations, naturally leads to
sparse constraints which make the problem amenable to approximation algorithms. Available methods based on continuous relaxations scale poorly, to remedy this we develop a
novel and scalable randomized algorithm based on a width
relaxation, applicable to a broad class of combinatorial optimization problems. We evaluate our contributions in the context of biocontrol for the insect pest Hemlock Wolly Adelgid (HWA) in eastern North America. Our algorithm outperforms competing methods in terms of scalability and solution
quality and ﬁnds near-optimal strategies for the control of the
HWA for ﬁne-grained networks – an important problem in
computational sustainability.

Figure 1: The insect pest HWA has recently invaded hemlock forests of eastern North America. By breeding and introducing a natural predator conservationists can control the
invasive population (Onken and Richard 2011). The challenge of optimal biocontrol is using available biocontrol resources across large and complicated ecosystems for maximum impact.

Introduction
Cascades in networks model settings such as idea propagation in social networks (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos
2003) or the spread of infectious diseases (Aspnes, Chang,
and Yampolskiy 2005). Of economic and ecologic importance is the cascading behavior of invasive species invading local ecosystems, two famous examples of invasives
species are the cane toad in Australia or the Nile Perch in
Lake Victoria, both having quickly devastated local ecology
(Goldschmidt, Witte, and Wanink 1993) (Burnett 1997). Invasive species cause billions of dollars in economic damage (Pimentel, Zuniga, and Morrison 2005) and the most
promising management strategy is often Biocontrol (Onken
and Richard 2011), which encompasses releasing a natural

predator that is able to control the invasive population. Conservation organizations face the challenge of judiciously using available biocontrol resources to minimize the ecological damage of harmful invading species, a problem we aim
to study from a computational perspective.
Drawing upon models from ecological literature we formulate a novel problem of optimal biocontrol. Predator and
prey populations are modeled as interacting cascades on a
graph, and the biocontrol problem entails optimally seeding the predator cascade over time to minimize the invading
prey population. Conservation organizations typically operate over long periods of time subject to yearly resource budgets; this is modeled as a number of resources (e.g. money,
available predators, equipment) with individual yearly budgets. We show that the resulting biocontrol problem is NP-

∗

Work was done while visiting Cornell.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

748

