The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Asynchronous Bidirectional Decoding
for Neural Machine Translation
Xiangwen Zhang,1 Jinsong Su,1∗ Yue Qin,1
Yang Liu,2 Rongrong Ji1 Hongji Wang1

Xiamen University, Xiamen, China1
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China2
xwzhang@stu.xmu.edu.cn, jssu@xmu.edu.cn, qinyue@stu.xmu.edu.cn
liuyang2011@tsinghua.edu.cn, rrji@xmu.edu.cn, hjw@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract

Source

The dominant neural machine translation (NMT) models apply uniﬁed attentional encoder-decoder neural networks for
translation. Traditionally, the NMT decoders adopt recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) to perform translation in a left-toright manner, leaving the target-side contexts generated from
right to left unexploited during translation. In this paper,
we equip the conventional attentional encoder-decoder NMT
framework with a backward decoder, in order to explore bidirectional decoding for NMT. Attending to the hidden state
sequence produced by the encoder, our backward decoder
ﬁrst learns to generate the target-side hidden state sequence
from right to left. Then, the forward decoder performs translation in the forward direction, while in each translation prediction timestep, it simultaneously applies two attention models to consider the source-side and reverse target-side hidden
states, respectively. With this new architecture, our model is
able to fully exploit source- and target-side contexts to improve translation quality altogether. Experimental results on
NIST Chinese-English and WMT English-German translation tasks demonstrate that our model achieves substantial
improvements over the conventional NMT by 3.14 and 1.38
BLEU points, respectively. The source code of this work can
be obtained from https://github.com/DeepLearnXMU/ABDNMT.

Reference
L2R
R2L

rı̀ fángwèitīng zhǎngguān : bú wàng jūnguó
lı̀shǐ zūnzhòng lı́nguó zūnyán
japan defense chief : never forget militaristic
history , respect neighboring nations ’ dignity
japan ’s defense agency chief : death
of
:::::::
militarism
respects its neighbors ’ dignity
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
japanese defense agency
has never forgotten
::::::::::::::::::::
militarism ’s history to respect the dignity of
neighboring countries

Table 1: Translation examples of NMT systems with different decoding manners. L2R/R2L denotes the translation
produced by the NMT system with left-to-right/right-to-left
decoding. Texts highlighted in wavy/dashed lines are incorrect/correct translations, respectively.

quickly become the de facto method.
Generally, most NMT decoders are based on recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) and generate translations in a leftto-right manner. Thus, despite the advantage of encoding
unbounded target words predicted previously for the prediction at each time step, these decoders are incapable of capturing the reverse target-side context for translation. Once
errors occur in previous predictions, the quality of subsequent predictions would be undermined due to the negative
impact of the noisy forward encoded target-side contexts.
Intuitively, the reverse target-side contexts are also crucial
for translation predictions, since they not only provide complementary signals but also bring different biases to NMT
model (Hoang, Haffari, and Cohn 2017). Take the example
in Table 1 into consideration. The latter half of the Chinese
sentence, misinterpreted by the conventional NMT system,
is accurately translated by the NMT system with right-toleft decoding. Therefore, it is important to investigate how
to integrate reverse target-side contexts into the decoder to
improve translation performance of NMT.
To this end, many researchers resorted to introducing bidirectional decoding into NMT (Liu et al. 2016; Sennrich,
Haddow, and Birch 2016a; Hoang, Haffari, and Cohn 2017).
Most of them re-ranked candidate translations using bidirectional decoding scores together, in order to select a translation with both proper preﬁxes and sufﬁxes. However, such

Introduction
Recently, end-to-end neural machine translation (NMT)
(Kalchbrenner and Blunsom 2013; Sutskever, Vinyals, and
Le 2014; Cho et al. 2014) has achieved promising results
and gained increasing attention. Compared with conventional statistical machine translation (SMT) (Koehn, Och,
and Marcu 2003; Chiang 2007) which needs to explicitly
design features to capture translation regularities, NMT aims
to construct a uniﬁed encoder-decoder framework based on
neural networks to model the entire translation process. Further, the introduction of the attention mechanism (Bahdanau,
Cho, and Bengio 2015) enhances the capability of NMT in
capturing long-distance dependencies. Despite being a relatively new framework, the attentional encoder-decoder NMT
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5698

