The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Single-Peakedness and Total Unimodularity: New
Polynomial-Time Algorithms for Multi-Winner Elections
Dominik Peters
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK
dominik.peters@cs.ox.ac.uk

set of k candidates that maximises this objective. Unsurprisingly, then, the winner determination problems of such rules
are typically NP-hard (Lu and Boutilier 2011). To tackle
the complexity of these problems, approximation algorithms
(Skowron, Faliszewski, and Slinko 2015) and ﬁxed-parameter
tractability approaches (Betzler, Slinko, and Uhlmann 2013;
Bredereck et al. 2015) have been developed for these problems, and integer programming formulations have also been
designed for them (Potthoff and Brams 1998).
Another approach seeks to exploit underlying structure in
the preferences reported by the agents (Elkind, Lackner, and
Peters 2017). A particularly inﬂuential preference restriction is the notion of single-peaked preferences, due to Black
(1948) and Arrow (1950). In this model, the alternative space
has a one-dimensional structure: alternatives are ordered on a
left-to-right axis; and agents’ preferences are monotonically
decreasing as we move further away from their peak (mostpreferred alternative). In particular, we can expect preferences to be structured this way when voting over the value of
a numerical quantity (such as a tax rate). While single-peaked
preferences were ﬁrst employed to escape impossibility results in social choice theory (Moulin 1991), it also yields positive algorithmic results: Notably, Betzler et al. (2013) showed
that Chamberlin–Courant’s (1983) multi-winner rule is efﬁciently computable for single-peaked preferences. This result
can be extended to some other multi-winner voting rules
(Elkind and Ismaili 2015), and to preferences that are singlecrossing, or single-peaked on trees (Skowron et al. 2013;
Elkind, Faliszewski, and Skowron 2014; Peters and Elkind
2016).
The Chamberlin–Courant rule usually takes as input preferences speciﬁed by linear orders, i.e., rankings of the candidates. An alternative way of specifying preferences is
by approval ballots, where voters submit a set of approved
candidates. Recent work has uncovered a rich variety of
multi-winner voting rules in this framework (Kilgour 2010).
A particularly well-studied rule is Proportional Approval Voting (PAV) due to Thiele (1895). PAV has particularly nice
axiomatic properties in terms of proportional representation
(Aziz et al. 2017), and has recently been axiomatically characterised as the only consistent extension of d’Hondt’s proportionality criterion for party list elections to the general setting
of approval votes (Lackner and Skowron 2017, see also Brill,
Laslier, and Skowron 2017). Like for Chamberlin–Courant,

Abstract
The winner determination problems of many attractive multiwinner voting rules are NP-complete. However, they often
admit polynomial-time algorithms when restricting inputs to
be single-peaked. Commonly, such algorithms employ dynamic programming along the underlying axis. We introduce
a new technique: carefully chosen integer linear programming
(IP) formulations for certain voting problems admit an LP relaxation which is totally unimodular if preferences are singlepeaked, and which thus admits an integral optimal solution.
This technique gives efﬁcient algorithms for ﬁnding optimal
committees under Proportional Approval Voting (PAV) and the
Chamberlin–Courant rule with single-peaked preferences, as
well as for certain OWA-based rules. For PAV, this is the ﬁrst
technique able to efﬁciently ﬁnd an optimal committee when
preferences are single-peaked. An advantage of our approach
is that no special-purpose algorithm needs to be used to exploit
structure in the input preferences: any standard IP solver will
terminate in the ﬁrst iteration if the input is single-peaked, and
will continue to work otherwise.

1

Introduction

In a departure from classical voting theory, a growing literature from computational social choice has recently studied
multi-winner voting rules (Faliszewski et al. 2017b). Given
diverse preferences of a collection of agents, instead of identifying a single best alternative, we are aiming for a (ﬁxed-size)
set of alternatives that jointly are able to represent the preferences of the agents best. Such procedures are useful in a
wide variety of circumstances: obvious examples include the
election of a parliament, or of a committee representing the interests of members of an organisation. Other applications can
be found in group recommendation systems, or for making
decisions about which products or services to offer: Which
courses should be offered at a university? Which movies
should be presented on an airline entertainment system?
Several attractive rules for such tasks have been designed
by researchers in political science (e.g., Chamberlin and
Courant 1983, Monroe 1995) and more recently by computer
scientists (Faliszewski et al. 2016a; 2016b; Skowron, Faliszewski, and Lang 2015). Many of these rules are deﬁned in
terms of some objective function: a winning committee is a
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1169

