The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Event Detection via Gated Multilingual Attention Mechanism
Jian Liu,1,2 Yubo Chen,1 Kang Liu,1,2 Jun Zhao,1,2
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
{jian.liu, yubo.chen, kliu, jzhao}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

To date, many methods (Li, Ji, and Huang 2013; Chen et
al. 2015; 2017; Nguyen and Grishman 2015; 2016; Liu et
al. 2016; 2017; Feng et al. 2016) have been proposed and
obtain state-of-the-art performance. However, most of these
methods are indeed monolingual approaches and focus only
on exploiting textual clues in monolingual data. We argue
that at least two problems hinder their performance:
Data scarcity. We analysis the widely used ACE 2005
corpus and show the statistics in Figure 1. The corpus deﬁnes 33 event types, however, nearly 70% of them only
have instances fewer than 100. (Three types have instances
even fewer than ten). The inadequacy of training data hinders the performance of the currently existing methods,
which are under supervised learning paradigm and rely on
huge amount of training examples to guarantee good performance. Besides, obtaining extra instances for training is
also difﬁcult. Valid data for training must be in accordance
with the ACE 2005 annotation guideline, which is a 77-page
document where the detailed event schemas and annotation
speciﬁcations are elaborately illustrated.

Abstract
Identifying event instance in text plays a critical role in building NLP applications such as Information Extraction (IE)
system. However, most existing methods for this task focus
only on monolingual clues of a speciﬁc language and ignore the massive information provided by other languages.
Data scarcity and monolingual ambiguity hinder the performance of these monolingual approaches. In this paper, we
propose a novel multilingual approach — dubbed as Gated
MultiLingual Attention (GMLATT) framework — to address the two issues simultaneously. In speciﬁc, to alleviate data scarcity problem, we exploit the consistent information in multilingual data via context attention mechanism.
Which takes advantage of the consistent evidence in multilingual data other than learning only from monolingual data. To
deal with monolingual ambiguity problem, we propose gated
cross-lingual attention to exploit the complement information
conveyed by multilingual data, which is helpful for the disambiguation. The cross-lingual attention gate serves as a sentinel modelling the conﬁdence of the clues provided by other
languages and controls the information integration of various languages. We have conducted extensive experiments on
the ACE 2005 benchmark. Experimental results show that our
approach signiﬁcantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

Statistics of ACE 2005

Instance Count

1250

Introduction
The goal of Event Detection (ED) is to recognize event instance of particular type in plain text. Speciﬁcally, given a
sentence, ED requires to decide whether the sentence contains events of interest. If so, it also needs to identify the speciﬁc event type and locate the event trigger for each event.
Take the following sentence for example:

1000
750
500
250
0
Attack

Elect

ChargeIndict

Marry

ReleaseParole

Fine

Acquit

Event Type

In Baghdad, a cameraman died when an American tank
ﬁred on the Palestine hotel.

Figure 1: Statistics of ACE 2005 corpus. Dashed line indicates the threshold of 100.

According to the ACE 2005 annotation guideline1 , two
events are mentioned here: a Die event triggered by “died”,
and an Attack event triggered by “ﬁred”. An ED system
should be able to identify all of them. Building a robust ED
system is challenging. According to (Ji and Grishman 2008),
human annotator achieves only about 73% of F1 score on the
ACE 2005 evaluation task.

Monolingual ambiguity. Monolingual ambiguity is another problem appears in ED task. On the one hand, the identical event can be described by completely different expressions which have different trigger words. On the other hand,
the same word can express completely different events. To
illustrate, consider the following sentences:
s1: An American tank ﬁred on the Palestine hotel.
s2: Two airline pilots were reportedly ﬁred for stripping
down.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://goo.gl/C9T6Fg

4865

