The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Tensorized Projection for High-Dimensional Binary Embedding
Weixiang Hong, Jingjing Meng, Junsong Yuan
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{wxhong,jingjing.meng,JSYUAN}@ntu.edu.sg

Representation learning using deep neural networks
(DNN) (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al.
2016) has shown that DNN features are useful for various vision tasks such as object classiﬁcation and image retrieval.
Unlike traditional hand-crafted features like SIFT (Lowe
2004) and GIST (Oliva and Torralba 2001), these DNN features are usually of thousands of dimensions or even more.
Meanwhile, although compact binary codes are preferred to
save the storage, recent works have demonstrated that the
long codes can bring superior performance to compact ones,
especially when the feature vectors are of thousands of dimensions (Gong et al. 2013; Sánchez and Perronnin 2011;
Xia et al. 2015; Yu et al. 2014). For example, the long binary
codes of 4096 dimensions can achieve the mAP of 82% on
DNN-4096 dataset (Xia et al. 2015), while the mAP of 256dimensional binary codes is only 51%.
However, the large projection matrix for generating long
binary codes can cause two challenges: (1) the high computational cost of high-dimensional matrix-vector multiplications, and (2) the risk of over-ﬁtting. For the ﬁrst challenge, it has been noticed that for high-dimensional input feature vector of dimensionality d, the length b of binary codes required to achieve reasonable accuracy is usually O(d) (Sánchez and Perronnin 2011; Gong et al. 2013;
Yu et al. 2014). When d is large and b ∼ O(d), the projection
matrix R ∈ Rb×d could involve millions or even billions of
parameters. Such a high cost is not favorable when we encode a big dataset of visual features, or when the computational resource is a concern, e.g., on a mobile platform. For
the second challenge, there have been efforts to address it
by regulating the projection matrix and reducing the number
of free parameters. Interestingly, such regularizations may
also bring fast matrix-vector multiplication and improve the
computational efﬁciency.
Representative works for high-dimensional binary embedding include Bilinear Projection(BP) (Gong et al. 2013),
Sparse Projection(SP) (Xia et al. 2015), Circulant Binary
Embedding(CBE) (Yu et al. 2014), Fast Orthogonal Projection (KBE) (Zhang et al. 2015) and Fried Binary Embedding (FBE) (Hong, Yuan, and Das Bhattacharjee 2017), etc.
Unfortunately, these existing methods either achieve high
accuracy but still suffer from the O(d2 ) complexity like SP,
or are promising in efﬁciency but at the cost of accuracy
such as KBE, CBE and FBE. In detail, CBE and FBE cannot

Abstract
Embedding high-dimensional visual features (d-dimensional)
to binary codes (b-dimensional) has shown advantages in various vision tasks such as object recognition and image retrieval. Meanwhile, recent works have demonstrated that to
fully utilize the representation power of high-dimensional
features, it is critical to encode them into long binary codes
rather than short ones, i.e., b ∼ O(d) (Sánchez and Perronnin
2011). However, generating long binary codes involves large
projection matrix and high-dimensional matrix-vector multiplication, thus is memory and computationally intensive.
To tackle these problems, we propose Tensorized Projection
(TP) to decompose the projection matrix using Tensor-Train
(TT) format, which is a chain-like representation that allows
to operate tensor in an efﬁcient manner. As a result, TP can
drastically reduce the computational complexity and memory cost. Moreover, by using the TT-format, TP can regulate
the projection matrix against the risk of over-ﬁtting, consequently, lead to better performance than using either dense
projection matrix (like ITQ (Gong and Lazebnik 2011)) or
sparse projection matrix (Xia et al. 2015). Experimental comparisons with state-of-the-art methods over various visual
tasks demonstrate both the efﬁciency and performance advantages of our proposed TP, especially when generating high
dimensional binary codes, e.g., when b ≥ d.

1. Introduction
Nearest neighbor (NN) search is a fundamental research
topic in artiﬁcial intelligence (Shakhnarovich, Darrell, and
Indyk 2006). The straightforward solution, linear scan, is
memory intensive and computationally expensive in largescale high-dimensional cases; hence approximate nearest
neighbor (ANN) search is usually favored in practice.
Binary embedding (Gong and Lazebnik 2011; Yu et al.
2014; Wang et al. 2016), which aims at encoding highdimensional feature vectors to compact binary codes, has
recently arisen as an effective and efﬁcient way for ANN
search. By encoding high-dimensional features into binary
codes, one can perform rapid ANN search because (1) operations with binary vectors (such as computing Hamming
distance) are very fast thanks to hardware support, and (2)
the entire dataset can ﬁt in (fast) memory rather than slow
memory or disk.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

69

