The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Rocket Launching: A Universal and Efﬁcient
Framework for Training Well-Performing Light Net
Guorui Zhou,1∗ Ying Fan,1 Runpeng Cui,2 Weijie Bian1
Xiaoqiang Zhu1 and Kun Gai1
1
Alibaba Inc, Beijing, China
Department of Automation, Tsinghua university
{guorui.xgr, fanying.fy, weijie.bwj, xiaoqiang.zxq}@alibaba-inc.com,
cuirunpeng@gmail.com, jingshi.gk@taobao.com
2

vertisements for one user in several milliseconds, which restricts the complexity of model. Only simple and shallow
structure meets the stringent response time requirements in
industry.
Accuracy and latency are the two points that we pay attention to. In general, there are two solutions to reduce
runtime complexities while keeping a decent performance.
Some works make use of factorizing or compressing to directly simplify the computation, such as matrix SVD (Denton et al. 2014), MobileNet (Howard et al. 2017), and ShufﬂeNet (Zhang et al. 2017). Other approaches adopt the
teacher-student strategy. They use light networks with fewer
layers and parameters to decrease the inference time, while
the light nets are trained helped by a complicated teacher
network that trained in advance, like knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015) and FitNet (Romero
et al. 2014). These teacher-student methods decrease the
runtime complexities, and can be further combined with approaches of the ﬁrst category. In this work, we propose a
novel universal framework to train decent small networks,
motivated by the potential of teacher-student methods.
In this work, we develop a novel network training process dubbed rocket launching. The light net is the target
network for inference, the booster relates to the deeper and
more complex network from the architecture. Both the light
and the booster net compose the architecture of rocket network. At the training stage, the light and booster networks
are trained simultaneously on the same task. Besides, the
light net also keeps getting knowledge learned by the booster
through the optimization of the hint loss, which is included
in the objective function to make both nets have similar behaviour during training. The booster guides the optimization
of the target light network along all the training process. At
the inference stage, only the trained light network is used.
Different from previous teacher-student methods (Hinton,
Vinyals, and Dean 2015; Romero et al. 2014), we make the
light model share some lower layers with the cumbersome
one and train them simultaneously.
In this paper, we propose a universal method aiming to
obtain a well-behaved light net considering limitations on
inference time. Our method is suitable to many different network structures. In brief, our contributions can be summa-

Abstract
Models applied on real time response tasks, like click-through
rate (CTR) prediction model, require high accuracy and rigorous response time. Therefore, top-performing deep models
of high depth and complexity are not well suited for these
applications with the limitations on the inference time. In order to get neural networks of better performance given the
time limitations, we propose a universal framework that exploits a booster net to help train the lightweight net for prediction. We dub the whole process rocket launching, where
the booster net is used to guide the learning of our light net
throughout the whole training process. We analyze different
loss functions aiming at pushing the light net to behave similarly to the booster net. Besides, we use one technique called
gradient block to improve the performance of light net and
booster net further. Experiments on benchmark datasets and
real-life industrial advertisement data show the effectiveness
of our proposed method.

Introduction
Deep networks have achieved state-of-the-art results in
many areas, such as computer vision (Huang et al. 2016) and
nature language processing (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio
2014). From AlexNet (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2012) to recently proposed DenseNet (Huang et al. 2016),
better performances are accompanied with deeper and wider
networks and more complex and adaptable structures. A
more complex structure of neural networks means longer
inference time, which is not tolerated in industrial environment. Networks mentioned above only consider the evaluation criterion of accuracy, while neglect the necessity of
real-time response in industrial applications.
At the same time, some nets like DIN (Zhou et al. 2017)
and wide & deep model (Cheng et al. 2016) get more and
more attention. These nets share some characteristics: nets
are shallow, layers are very simple and with less computation cost. In industrial applications, e.g. online advertising
systems, models have to make prediction of hundreds of ad∗
Correspondence author is Guorui Zhou. The source code is
available at https://github.com/zhougr1993/Rocket-Launching.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4580

