The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Maximum-Variance Total Variation Denoising
for Interpretable Spatial Smoothing
Wesley Tansey*

Jesse Thomason,† James G. Scott‡§

Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
wt2274@cumc.columbia.edu

University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
jesse@cs.utexas.edu
james.scott@mccombs.utexas.edu
monotonicity constraints has been shown to perform well
in video-ranking tasks where interpretability was a prerequisite (Gupta et al. 2016). The interpretability of the system
enables users to investigate the model, gain conﬁdence in
its recommendations, and guide future recommendations. In
the two- and three- dimensional regression scenario often
found in spatiotemporal data, the Convex Regression via
Interpretable Sharp Partitions (CRISP) method (Petersen,
Simon, and Witten 2016) has recently been introduced as
a way to achieve a good trade off between accuracy and
interpretability by inferring sharply-deﬁned 2-dimensional
rectangular regions of constant value. Such a method is readily useful, for example, when making business decisions or
executive actions that must be explained to a non-technical
audience.
Data-adaptive, interpretable sharp partitions are also useful in the creation of areal data from a set of spatial pointreferenced data—turning a continuous spatial problem into a
discrete one. A common application of the framework arises
when dividing a city, state, or other region into a set of contiguous cells, where values in each cell are aggregated to
help anonymize individual demographic data and create welldeﬁned neighborhoods for resource allocation. Ensuring that
the number and size of grid cells remains tractable, handling low-data regions, and preserving spatial structure are
all important considerations for this problem. Ideally, one
cell should contain data points which all map to a similar
underlying value, and cell boundaries should represent significant change points in the value of the signal being estimated.
If a cell is empty or contains a small number of data points,
the statistical strength of its neighbors should be leveraged
to both improve the accuracy of the reported areal data and
further aid in anonymizing the cell, which may otherwise be
particularly vulnerable to deanonymization. Viewed through
this lens, we can interpret the areal-data creation task as
a machine learning problem, one focused on ﬁnding sharp
partitions that still achieve acceptable predictive loss.1
In this paper we propose MVTV: a method for inter-

Abstract
We consider the problem of spatial regression where interpretability of the model is a high priority. Such problems
appear frequently in a diverse set of ﬁelds from climatology to
epidemiology to predictive policing. For cognitive, logistical,
and organizational reasons, humans tend to infer regions or
neighborhoods of constant value, often with sharp discontinuities between regions, and then assign resources on a perregion basis. Automating this smoothing process presents a
unique challenge for spatial smoothing algorithms, which tend
to assume stationarity and smoothness everywhere.
To address this problem, we propose Maximum Variance Total
Variation (MVTV) denoising, a novel method for interpretable
nonlinear spatial regression. MVTV divides the feature space
into blocks of constant value and smooths the value of all
blocks jointly via a convex optimization routine. Our method
is fully data-adaptive and incorporates highly robust routines
for tuning all hyperparameters automatically. We compare
our approach against the existing CART and CRISP methods
via both a complexity-accuracy tradeoff metric and a human
study, demonstrating that that MVTV is a more powerful and
interpretable method.

Introduction
Many modern machine learning techniques, such as deep
learning and kernel machines, tend to focus on the “big data,
big features” regime. In such a scenario, there are often so
many features—and highly non-linear interations between
features—that model interpretability is a secondary consideration. Instead, effort is focused solely on a measure of model
performance such as root mean squared error (RMSE). Under
that research paradigm, only a model that out-performs the
previous champion method warrants an investigation into
understanding its decisions.
By contrast, there is a parallel recent line of machinelearning research in interpretable low-dimensional regression,
with relatively few features and with human intelligibility
as a primary concern. For example, lattice regression with
* Department of Systems Biology

1
We note that such a task will likely only represent a single step
in a larger anonymization pipeline that may include other techniques
such as additive noise and spatial blurring. While we provide no
proofs of how strong the anonymization is for our method, we
believe it is compatible with other methods that focus on adherence
to a speciﬁed k-anonymity threshold (e.g., (Cassa et al. 2006)).

†

Department of Computer Science
‡
Department of Information, Risk, and Operations Management
§
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2460

