The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Combinatory Categorial Grammars for Plan Recognition
Christopher W. Geib

Pavan Kantharaju

SIFT LLC.
319 1st Ave. South, Suite 400
Minneapolis, MN 55401
cgeib@sift.net

Department of Computer Science, Drexel University
3141 Chestnut St
Philadelphia, PA 19104
pk398@drexel.edu

basic types exists for reasoning about actions. Thus, using
these algorithms for plan grammars requires removing some
of the linguistic intuitions that guided their formulation.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: First, it
presents related work on action and plan learning, and CCG
induction in NLP. Second, it provides an introduction to plan
CCGs and ELEXIR. Third, it presents a new plan CCG
learning algorithm, LEXlearn and its experimental evaluation and concludes with a discussion of future work.

Abstract
This paper deﬁnes a learning algorithm for plan grammars
used for plan recognition. The algorithm learns Combinatory
Categorial Grammars (CCGs) that capture the structure of
plans from a set of successful plan execution traces paired
with the goal of the actions. This work is motivated by past
work on CCG learning algorithms for natural language processing, and is evaluated on ﬁve well know planning domains.

Introduction

Related Work

Combinatory Categorial Grammars (CCGs) (Steedman
2001) are a well known and effective grammar formalism
developed for natural language processing (NLP). Past work
has shown that plan recognition (PR) (the problem of recognizing an agent’s plans based on observations of their
actions (Schmidt, Sridharan, and Goodson 1978) ) can be
viewed as parsing a stream of observations using a grammar
that deﬁnes the possible acceptable plans(Vilain 1990). Recent work, implemented in the ELEXIR system(Geib 2009;
Geib and Goldman 2011) has very effectively used probabilistic CCGs to represent and recognize plans in a number of domains. It also demonstrated a number of advantages over previous work including efﬁcient recognition of
partially-ordered plans, multiple interleaved plans, and plans
with loops. That said, such plan CCGs encode signiﬁcant
domain knowledge, and in past research, required time consuming hand-coding. This paper presents an incremental,
domain-independent, supervised, probabilistic learning algorithm, LEXlearn , for the plan CCGs required by ELEXIR.
This work builds on prior work (Zettlemoyer and Collins
2005; Kwiatkowski et al. 2010), inducing CCGs for natural
language grammars. Like this prior work, LEXlearn learns
probabilistic CCGs based on sequences of observations (in
their case words, in ours actions) paired with a representation of the sequence’s ”meaning” ( logical form of the sentence’s meaning for them, goal state for us). This said, it
is worth noting that plan recognition is inherently different
from sentence parsing. Linguists have tentatively identiﬁed
the basic parts of speech a word could take on (eg. noun,
verb, article, adverb, etc...) and this knowledge is used to
inform NLP learning algorithms. However, no such set of

There are three areas of related work for this research: 1)
action learning, 2) plan hierarchy learning, and 2) CCG induction in NLP. We consider each of these in turn starting
with action learning. The objective of action learning is to
learn a set of precondition and effect rules that describe the
results of executing a ”basic action” in various world states.
Successful work in this area has been based on both PDDL
(Yang, Wu, and Jiang 2007) and STRIPS style action descriptions (Mourao et al. 2012). While such work is important, it is not the focus of this work. Instead, this work learns
plan hierarchies that abstract common sequences of actions
into more abstract plan structures like those in Hierarchical
Task Networks (HTNs) (Erol, Hendler, and Nau 1994) .
Next, we consider work on learning such HTN plan structures that is much closer to this work. In addition to having
low-level, executable actions, HTNs also have more abstract
tasks that capture complex sequences of actions. Tasks are
deﬁned by one or more methods: a production rule with a
task name on the left hand side and a sequence of basic actions and task names on the right:
task → {action∗ task∗ }∗
Such methods can straightforwardly be seen as context free
grammar (CFG) rules(Erol, Hendler, and Nau 1994). The
addition of methods and a decompositional approach to the
planning process, similar to CFG grammar rewriting methods, are the hallmark of HTN planning. Some formulations
of HTNs augment methods with ordering constraints, preconditions, and even effects that we will not focus on here.
Learning HTN plan hierarchies amounts to learning the
methods that deﬁne abstract tasks. (Hogg, Muñoz Avila, and
Kuter 2008) successfully learns HTN methods from analyzing the state of the world before and after a given sequence

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3007

