The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

ATRank: An Attention-Based User Behavior
Modeling Framework for Recommendation
Chang Zhou,1 Jinze Bai,2 Junshuai Song,2 Xiaofei Liu,1 Zhengchao Zhao,1 Xiusi Chen,2 Jun Gao2
1

Alibaba Group
Key Laboratory of High Conﬁdence Software Technologies, EECS, Peking University
{ericzhou.zc, hsiaofei.hﬂ, buqing}@alibaba-inc.com, {baijinze, songjs, xiusichen, gaojun}@pku.edu.cn
2

as in the encoder-decoder framework. However, for RNN
based methods, long-term dependencies are still very hard
to preserve even using the advanced memory cell structures
like LSTM and GRU (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997;
Chung et al. 2014). RNN also has a disadvantage that both
the ofﬂine training and the online prediction process are
time-consuming, due to its recursive natural which is hard
to parallelize. Recently, it’s shown that CNN-based encoding methods can also achieve comparable performance
with RNN in many sequence processing tasks (Kim 2014).
Though it’s highly parallelizable, the longest length of the
interaction paths between any two positions in the CNN network is logk (n), where n is the number of user behaviors
and k is the kernel width.
Both the basic RNN and CNN encoders suffer from the
problem that the ﬁxed-size encoding vector may not support
both short and long sequences well. The attention mechanism is then introduced to provide the ability to reference
speciﬁc records dynamically in the decoder, which has already achieved great successes in ﬁelds like Machine Translation, Image Caption in recent years. Downstream applications of behavior modeling like recommendation can also
utilize the attention mechanism, since the item to be ranked
may only be related to very small parts of the user behaviors.
However, we show that the one-dimensional attention
score between any two vectors may neutralize their relationships in different semantic spaces. The attention-based
n

ai vi , where ai is
pooling can be formularized as C =

Abstract
A user can be represented as what he/she does along the history. A common way to deal with the user modeling problem
is to manually extract all kinds of aggregated features over the
heterogeneous behaviors, which may fail to fully represent
the data itself due to limited human instinct. Recent works
usually use RNN-based methods to give an overall embedding of a behavior sequence, which then could be exploited
by the downstream applications. However, this can only preserve very limited information, or aggregated memories of
a person. When a downstream application requires to facilitate the modeled user features, it may lose the integrity of the
speciﬁc highly correlated behavior of the user, and introduce
noises derived from unrelated behaviors. This paper proposes
an attention based user behavior modeling framework called
ATRank, which we mainly use for recommendation tasks.
Heterogeneous user behaviors are considered in our model
that we project all types of behaviors into multiple latent semantic spaces, where inﬂuence can be made among the behaviors via self-attention. Downstream applications then can
use the user behavior vectors via vanilla attention. Experiments show that ATRank can achieve better performance and
faster training process. We further explore ATRank to use one
uniﬁed model to predict different types of user behaviors at
the same time, showing a comparable performance with the
highly optimized individual models.

Introduction
As a word can be represented by the surrounding context
(Mikolov et al. 2013), a user can be represented by his/her
behaviors along the history. For downstream tasks like ranking in recommendation system, traditional ways to represent
a user are to extract all kinds of hand-crafted features aggregated over different types of user behaviors. This feature
engineering procedure guided by human instinct may fail to
fully represent the data itself, and it requires too much work.
Besides, the aggregated features also lose information of any
individual behavior that could be precisely related with the
object that needs to be predicted in the downstream application.
As the user behaviors naturally form a sequence over
the timeline, RNN/CNN structures are usually exploited to
encode the behavior sequence for downstream applications

i=1

a scalar. We can see that, each element in vi will multiply
by the same ai , such that different semantics of vi can only
compromise to use this overall multiplier, which makes it
hard to preserve only the highly related semantics while discard those unrelated parts in the weighted average vector.
Another important issue is that the user behaviors are
naturally heterogeneous, highly ﬂexible, and thus hard to
model. For large companies today, various kinds of user behaviors could be collected, which makes it increasingly important to utilize those user behaviors to provide better personalized services. Take the e-business recommendation service as an example, a user may browse/buy/mark items, receive/use coupons, click ads, search keywords, write down
reviews, or even watch videos and live shows offered by a
shop, each of which reveals some aspects of the user that

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4564

