The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

SqueezedText: A Real-Time Scene Text Recognition
by Binary Convolutional Encoder-Decoder Network
Zichuan Liu,1 Yixing Li,2 Fengbo Ren,2 Wang Ling Goh,1 Hao Yu3

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore1 , Arizona State Unviversity, the USA2
and Southern University of Science and Technology, China3
{zliu016@e., ewlgoh@}ntu.edu.sg1 , {yixingli,renfengbo}@asu.edu2 and yuh3@sustc.edu.cn3

represent the scene text image. Combining with deconvolution technique, we introduce a binary convolutional encoderdecoder network (B-CEDNet) for real-time one-shot character detection and recognition. The scene text recognition is
further enhanced with a back-end character-level sequential
correction and classiﬁcation, based on a bidirectional recurrent neural network (Bi-RNN). Instead of detecting characters sequentially (Bissacco et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2012; Shi,
Bai, and Yao 2015), our proposed method, called SqueezedText, can detect multiple characters simultaneously and extracts a length-variable character sequence with corresponding spatial information. This sequence will be subsequently
fed into a Bi-RNN, which then learns the detection error
characteristics from the previous stage to provides characterlevel correction and classiﬁcation based on the spatial and
contextual cues.
By training with over 1,000,000 synthetic scene text images, the proposed SqueezedText can achieve recall rate of
0.86, precision of 0.88 and F-score of 0.87 on ICDAR-03
(Lucas et al. 2003) dataset. More importantly, it achieves
state-of-the-art accuracy of 93.8%, 92.7%, 94.3% 96.1% and
83.6% on ICDAR-03, ICDAR-13, IIIT5K, STV and Synthe90K datasets. SqueezedText is realized on GPU with a
small network size of 1.01 MB for B-CEDNet and 3.23 MB
for Bi-RNN; and consumes less than 1 ms inference runtime on average. It is up to 4× faster and 6× smaller than
state-of-the-art work.
The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:

Abstract
A new approach for real-time scene text recognition is proposed in this paper. A novel binary convolutional encoderdecoder network (B-CEDNet) together with a bidirectional
recurrent neural network (Bi-RNN). The B-CEDNet is engaged as a visual front-end to provide elaborated character detection, and a back-end Bi-RNN performs characterlevel sequential correction and classiﬁcation based on learned
contextual knowledge. The front-end B-CEDNet can process
multiple regions containing characters using a one-off forward operation, and is trained under binary constraints with
signiﬁcant compression. Hence it leads to both remarkable
inference run-time speedup as well as memory usage reduction. With the elaborated character detection, the back-end
Bi-RNN merely processes a low dimension feature sequence
with category and spatial information of extracted characters
for sequence correction and classiﬁcation. By training with
over 1,000,000 synthetic scene text images, the B-CEDNet
achieves a recall rate of 0.86, precision of 0.88 and F-score
of 0.87 on ICDAR-03 and ICDAR-13. With the correction
and classiﬁcation by Bi-RNN, the proposed real-time scene
text recognition achieves state-of-the-art accuracy while only
consumes less than 1-ms inference run-time. The ﬂow processing ﬂow is realized on GPU with a small network size of
1.01 MB for B-CEDNet and 3.23 MB for Bi-RNN, which is
much faster and smaller than the existing solutions.

Introduction
The success of convolutional neural network (CNN) has resulted in a potential general machine learning engine for
various computer vision applications (LeCun et al. 1998;
Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), such as text detection, recognition and interpretation from images. Applications, such as Advanced Driver Assistance System (ADAS)
for road signs with text, however, require a real-time processing capability that is beyond the existing approaches
(Jaderberg et al. 2014; Jaderberg, Vedaldi, and Zisserman
2014) in terms of processing functionality, efﬁciency and latency.
For a real-time scene text recognition application, one
needs a method with memory efﬁciency and fast processing time. In this paper, we reveal that binary features (Courbariaux and Bengio 2016) can effectively and efﬁciently

• We propose a novel binary convolutional encoder-decoder
neural network model, which acts as a visual front-end
module to provide unconstrained scene text detection
and recognition. It effectively detects individual character
with high recall rate, realizing an extremely fast run-time
speed and small memory consumption.
• We reveal that the text features can be learned and encoded in binary format without loss of discriminative information. This information can be further decoded and
recovered to perform multi-character detection and recognition in parallel.
• We further design a back-end bidirectional RNN (BiRNN) to provide fast and robust scene text recognition
with correction and classiﬁcation.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7194

