The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Learning to Become an Expert:
Deep Networks Applied To Super-Resolution Microscopy
Louis-Émile Robitaille

Audrey Durand

Marc-André Gardner

LVSN, Université Laval, Canada

LVSN, Université Laval, Canada

LVSN, Université Laval, Canada

Christian Gagné

Paul De Koninck

Flavie Lavoie-Cardinal

LVSN, Université Laval, Canada

CERVO, Université Laval, Canada

CERVO, Université Laval, Canada

Abstract
With super-resolution optical microscopy, it is now possible
to observe molecular interactions in living cells. The obtained
images have a very high spatial precision but their overall
quality can vary a lot depending on the structure of interest
and the imaging parameters. Moreover, evaluating this quality is often difﬁcult for non-expert users. In this work, we
tackle the problem of learning the quality function of superresolution images from scores provided by experts. More
speciﬁcally, we are proposing a system based on a deep neural network that can provide a quantitative quality measure
of a STED image of neuronal structures given as input. We
conduct a user study in order to evaluate the quality of the
predictions of the neural network against those of a human
expert. Results show the potential while highlighting some of
the limits of the proposed approach.

(a) Confocal

(b) STED

(c) Merge

Figure 1: Fluorescence PSFs of TetraSpeck microspheres.
Scale: 200 nm.

In order to understand cellular mechanisms and their related disorders, we need to improve our knowledge of the
molecular components making those cells, on their spatial
dynamics, and on their signaling interactions inside subcellular compartments. These processes, occurring at the
nanoscale, can now be observed in living cells thanks to recent breakthroughs in optical methods which led to the development of optical super-resolution microscopy. Among
these methods, STimulated Emission Depletion (STED)
microscopy (Hell and Wichmann 1994; Klar et al. 2000;
Willig et al. 2006)1 overcomes the diffraction limit of light
and improves the resolution of an optical microscope down
to 20-25 nm (about 10 fold improvement over conventional
optical microscopy). This means that structures, such as cytoskeletal ﬁlaments or receptor clusters, closer than 200 nm
from each other, cannot be distinguished on a conventional
microscope but can be discerned on a STED microscope and
therefore studied. With STED microscopy, we can now observe molecular structures and protein complexes of living
cells in action (Sahl, Hell, and Jakobs 2017).
Based on a confocal laser scanning microscope, a STED
microscope overcomes the diffraction barrier using the combination of a Gaussian excitation beam and a donut-shaped
depletion beam (deactivation beam) for selective deactiva-

tion of ﬂuorescent markers. Fluorophores are chemical compounds or proteins having the property of emitting light each
time they are stimulated (excited) by a speciﬁc wavelength.
These can be either coupled to antibodies (chemical compounds) that will recognize a protein of interest or fused
directly on the protein (ﬂuorescent proteins) and therefore
make a structure visible on a ﬂuorescence microscope. Using the depletion beam, ﬂuorophores can be switched from a
ﬂuorescent on-state to a non-ﬂuorescent dark state by means
of stimulated emission and, due to the donut shape of the
depletion beam, only the ﬂuorophores in the middle of the
donut can still be detected. Saturation of the deactivation effectively reduces the size of the diffraction-limited ﬂuorescent spots that is emitted by the ﬂuorophores being imaged.
Figure 1 shows ﬂuorescence PSFs (Point Spread Functions)
obtained by confocal and STED imaging of TetraSpeck microspheres (100 nm), along with their merge. We observe
that the STED image has a much higher resolution than the
confocal image. Moreover, we can see the donut shape on
the merged image. Figure 2 shows neurons images obtained
by confocal and STED microscopy. We observe that STED
microscopy allows us to observe a periodical lattice structure
of the neuronal actin protein which is invisible with conventional confocal microscopy.
Super-resolution microscopes are highly specialized devices, signiﬁcantly more complex to use than conventional
optical microscopes. This reduces their accessibility, cir-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Stefan W. Hell was awarded a Nobel prize in 2014 for this
revolutionary microscopy technique.

7805

