The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

R3 : Reinforced Ranker-Reader for
Open-Domain Question Answering
Shuohang Wang,1∗ Mo Yu,2 Xiaoxiao Guo,2 Zhiguo Wang,2 Tim Klinger,2
Wei Zhang,2 Shiyu Chang,2 Gerald Tesauro,2 Bowen Zhou,3 Jing Jiang1
2

1
School of Information System, Singapore Management University
AI Foundations - Learning, IBM Research AI. Yorktown Heights NY, USA
3
JD.COM. Beijing, China
shwang.2014@smu.edu.sg, yum@us.ibm.com, xiaoxiao.guo@ibm.com

Q:
A:
P1

Abstract
In recent years researchers have achieved considerable success applying neural network methods to question answering (QA). These approaches have achieved state of the art
results in simpliﬁed closed-domain settings1 such as the
SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al. 2016) dataset, which provides a preselected passage, from which the answer to a given question
may be extracted. More recently, researchers have begun to
tackle open-domain QA, in which the model is given a question and access to a large corpus (e.g., wikipedia) instead of
a pre-selected passage (Chen et al. 2017a). This setting is
more complex as it requires large-scale search for relevant
passages by an information retrieval component, combined
with a reading comprehension model that “reads” the passages to generate an answer to the question. Performance in
this setting lags well behind closed-domain performance.
In this paper, we present a novel open-domain QA system
called Reinforced Ranker-Reader (R3 ), based on two algorithmic innovations. First, we propose a new pipeline for
open-domain QA with a Ranker component, which learns to
rank retrieved passages in terms of likelihood of extracting
the ground-truth answer to a given question. Second, we propose a novel method that jointly trains the Ranker along with
an answer-extraction Reader model, based on reinforcement
learning. We report extensive experimental results showing
that our method signiﬁcantly improves on the state of the art
for multiple open-domain QA datasets. 2

P2
P3

What is the largest island in the Philippines?
Luzon
Mindanao is the second largest and easternmost island
in the Philippines.
As an island, Luzon is the Philippine’s largest at
104,688 square kilometers, and is also the world’s 17th
largest island.
Manila, located on east central Luzon Island, is the national capital and largest city.

Table 1: An open-domain QA training example. Q: question,
A: answer, P: passages retrieved by an IR model and ordered
by IR score.
Recent deep learning-based research has focused on
open-domain QA based on large text corpora such as
Wikipedia, applying information retrieval (IR) to select
passages and reading comprehension (RC) to extract answer phrases (Chen et al. 2017a; Dhingra, Mazaitis, and
Cohen 2017). These methods, which we call Search-andReading QA (SR-QA), are simple yet powerful for opendomain QA. Dividing the pipeline into IR and RC stages
leverages an enormous body of research in both IR and
RC, including recent successes in RC via neural network
techniques (Wang and Jiang 2017b; Wang et al. 2016;
Xiong, Zhong, and Socher 2017; Wang et al. 2017).
The main difference between training SR-QA and standard RC models is in the passages used for training. In
standard RC model training, passages are manually selected to guarantee that ground-truth answers are contained
and annotated within the passage (Rajpurkar et al. 2016).3
By contrast, in SR-QA approaches (Chen et al. 2017a;
Dhingra, Mazaitis, and Cohen 2017), the model is given
only QA-pairs and uses an IR component to retrieve passages similar to the question from a large corpus. Depending
on the quality of the IR component, retrieved passages may
not contain or entail the correct answer, making RC training more difﬁcult. Table 1 shows an example which illustrates the difﬁculty. This ordering was produced by an offthe-shelf IR engine using the BM25 algorithm. The correct
answer is contained in passage P2. The top passage (P1), despite being ranked highest by the IR engine, is ineffective for

Introduction
Open-domain question answering (QA) is a key challenge in
natural language processing. A successful open-domain QA
system must be able to effectively retrieve and comprehend
one or more knowledge sources to infer a correct answer.
Knowledge sources can be knowledge bases (Berant et al.
2013; Yu et al. 2017) or structured or unstructured text passages (Ferrucci et al. 2010; Baudiš and Šedivỳ 2015).
∗
Work done when the author was at IBM.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In the QA community, “openness” can be interpreted as referring either to the scope of question topics or to the breadth and
generality of the knowledge source used to answer each question.
Following (Chen et al. 2017a) we adopt the latter deﬁnition.
2
Code: https://github.com/shuohangwang/mprc.

3
This forms a closed-domain QA by our adopted deﬁnition
where the domain consists of the given passage only.

5981

