The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Nonparametric Stochastic Contextual Bandits
Melody Y. Guan∗

Heinrich Jiang∗

Stanford University
450 Serra Mall
Stanford, California 94305
mguan@stanford.edu

Google
1600 Amphitheatre Pwky
Mountain View, California 94043
heinrich.jiang@gmail.com

which can learn over the entire context space with strong
guarantees, despite the difﬁculty that arises with allowing a
wide variety of reward functions. While this is not the ﬁrst
work which blends nonparametric statistics with bandits, we
are the ﬁrst to show simple and practical methods while still
maintaining strong theoretical guarantees.
We reanalyze the uniform and upper conﬁdence bound
sampling strategies and demonstrate what nonparametric approaches can offer to contextual bandit learning. No other
technique can adapt to the inherently difﬁcult and complex
real world reward functions while allowing such a strong
theoretical understanding of the underlying algorithms.
While nonparametric models are powerful in their ability to learn arbitrary functions free of distributional assumptions, a major weakness is the curse of dimensionality. In order to have any theoretical guarantees, they require
an exponential-in-dimension number of samples. However,
when the data lies on an unknown low-dimensional structure
such as a manifold, we show that our algorithms can converge as if the data was on a lower dimension and not in the
potentially much large ambient dimension. Another striking
fact is that no preprocessing of the data is required. This is of
practical importance because modern data has increasingly
more features but the underlying degrees of freedom often
remain small.
We then discuss recovering geometric structures in the
context space based on bandit performance. Speciﬁcally, we
recover the connected components of the context space in
which a particular bandit is the top-arm. Although learning
a context-to-arm mapping gives us the estimated top-arm
at each point in the context space, this alone does not tell
the space’s topological structure, such as the number and
shapes of connected components. We recover these structures with uniform consistency guarantees with mild assumptions, where the shapes and relative positions of the
components can be arbitrary and the number of such components is recovered automatically.
We then provide an extension to inﬁnite-armed bandits
and conclude with empirical results from simulations and
image classiﬁcation on the MNIST dataset.

Abstract
We analyze the K-armed bandit problem where the reward
for each arm is a noisy realization based on an observed context under mild nonparametric assumptions. We attain tight
results
fortop-arm identiﬁcation and a sublinear regret of
 1+D

2+D
O T
, where D is the context dimension, for a modiﬁed UCB algorithm that is simple to implement. We then
give global intrinsic dimension dependent and ambient dimension independent regret bounds. We also discuss recovering topological structures within the context space based
on expected bandit performance and provide an extension
to inﬁnite-armed contextual bandits. Finally, we experimentally show the improvement of our algorithm over existing
approaches for both simulated tasks and MNIST image classiﬁcation.

Introduction
Multi-armed bandits (MABs) are an important sequential
optimization problem introduced by Robbins (1985). These
models have extensively been used in a wide variety of ﬁelds
related to statistics and machine learning.
The classical MAB consists of K arms where at each
point in time the learner can sample (or pull) one of them
and observe a reward. Then various objectives can be established, such as ﬁnding the best arm (Top-Arm Identiﬁcation)
or minimizing some regret over time.
For contextual bandits (also referred to as bandits with
side information or covariates), the learner has access to a
context on which the payoffs depend. Then, based on the observations, we aim to determine the best policy (or contextto-arm mapping) and to optimize some notion of regret.
Most approaches to stochastic contextual bandits make
strong assumptions on the payoffs. A popular approach
models the mean reward for each arm as being linear in the
context space (Chu et al. 2011; Li et al. 2010). However,
this is rarely the case in real data. In this paper, we take a
more general approach and allow the reward functions to be
non-linear and of arbitrary shape.
Using recent developments in nonparametric statistics
(Jiang 2017b), we show that with simple and easily implementable techniques, we can construct bandit algorithms

Setup

∗

Equal Contribution.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Suppose there are K bandit arms indexed in [K]. At each
time-step t, the learner observes a context xt ∈ RD

3119

