The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Graph-Structured Sum-Product
Networks for Probabilistic Semantic Maps
Kaiyu Zheng, Andrzej Pronobis, Rajesh P. N. Rao∗

Abstract
We introduce Graph-Structured Sum-Product Networks
(GraphSPNs), a probabilistic approach to structured prediction for problems where dependencies between latent variables are expressed in terms of arbitrary, dynamic graphs.
While many approaches to structured prediction place strict
constraints on the interactions between inferred variables,
many real-world problems can be only characterized using
complex graph structures of varying size, often contaminated
with noise when obtained from real data. Here, we focus on
one such problem in the domain of robotics. We demonstrate
how GraphSPNs can be used to bolster inference about semantic, conceptual place descriptions using noisy topological
relations discovered by a robot exploring large-scale ofﬁce
spaces. Through experiments, we show that GraphSPNs consistently outperform the traditional approach based on undirected graphical models, successfully disambiguating information in global semantic maps built from uncertain, noisy
local evidence. We further exploit the probabilistic nature of
the model to infer marginal distributions over semantic descriptions of as yet unexplored places and detect spatial environment conﬁgurations that are novel and incongruent with
the known evidence.

Figure 1: Learning and inference with GraphSPNs for probabilistic semantic maps with topological spatial relations.

also perceive relations between such information, which become invaluable in real-world settings where inference is
performed with noisy data and under partial observability.
Semantic maps are an established framework for modeling relational spatial knowledge in robotics (Friedman,
Pasula, and Fox 2007; Zender et al. 2008; Pronobis and
Jensfelt 2012). They often form graph-structured environment representations by utilizing topological graphs consisting of place nodes connected with local spatial relations (see Fig. 1 for an example). This enables anchoring of high-level semantic information about places and
forms an accessible belief state representation for a planning algorithm (Hanheide et al. 2017). In order to integrate
the collected spatial knowledge, resolve ambiguities, and
make predictions about unobserved places, semantic mapping frameworks often employ structured prediction algorithms (Friedman, Pasula, and Fox 2007; Mozos et al. 2007;
Pronobis and Jensfelt 2012). Unfortunately, the relations
discovered by a robot exploring a real-world environment
tend to be complex and noisy, resulting in difﬁcult inference
problems. At the same time, topological graphs are dynamic
structures, growing as the robot explores its environment,
and containing a different number of nodes and relations for
every environment. Yet, many approaches to structured prediction place strict constraints on the interactions between

Introduction
Graph-structured data appear in a wide range of domains,
from social network analysis (Mislove et al. 2010), to computer vision (Johnson et al. 2015) and robotics. Often, the
global structure of such data varies, yet dependencies captured by elements of the structure persist and can serve as a
powerful source of information for various inference tasks.
In robotics, this phenomenon is common. While exploring
their environments, robots build a growing body of knowledge captured at different spatial locations, scales, and at
different levels of abstraction. However, importantly, they
∗
The authors are with Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, USA. A. Pronobis is also with Robotics,
Perception and Learning Lab, KTH, Stockholm, Sweden.
{kaiyuzh,pronobis,rao}@cs.washington.edu. This work was
supported by Ofﬁce of Naval Research (ONR) grant no. N0001413-1-0817, the Keck foundation, and Swedish Research Council
(VR) project 2012-4907 SKAEENet.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4547

