The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Reinforced Multi-Label Image
Classiﬁcation by Exploring Curriculum
1

Shiyi He,1,3 Chang Xu,2 Tianyu Guo,1,3 Chao Xu,1,3 Dacheng Tao2
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University, China
2
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, SIT, FEIT, University of Sydney, Australia
3
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Peking University, China
shiyiHe@pku.edu.cn, c.xu@sydney.edu.au, tianyuguo@pku.edu.cn
xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au
learning. For example, in the max-margin multi-label classiﬁer (M3L) (Hariharan et al. 2010), label dependencies are
represented by pairwise label correlations that are computed
from the training set. CNN-RNN (Wang et al. 2016a) framework was proposed to learn a joint image-label embedding
to characterize the semantic label dependencies.
Most existing algorithms simultaneously estimate all possible labels for an example. Though classiﬁer chain method
makes sequential prediction but it requires the pre-deﬁned
label sequence. In contrast, humans and animals learn much
better when the examples are not randomly presented but
organized in a meaningful order which illustrates gradually
more concepts, and gradually more complex ones. This idea
called curriculum learning (Bengio, Collobert, and Weston
2009) is inspired by the way children are taught: start with
easier concepts (for example, recognizing clearly visible objects) and build up to more complex ones (for example, recognizing partially occluded objects). This learning strategy
can be formalized into multi-label image classiﬁcation tasks
as well where a series of objects are recognized in a sequential order from easy to complex. Moreover, the size and
location of objects inﬂuence the recognition difﬁculty and
complexity of images to a great extent. Thus the prediction
order should be designed related to each single image following its inter curriculums, instead of a simple pre-deﬁned
one computed on the whole training set. Similar to our work,
ML-TLLT (Chen et al. 2016b), a multi-label propagation algorithm, also employed the curriculum mechanism to manipulate the propagation sequence from simple examples to
more difﬁcult ones. In other words, it tries to organize examples to learn each label. Instead, we organize labels to depict
each image.
Besides, real-world image tagging system used to recommend labels for users to annotate their uploaded images.
Instead of accepting all the recommended labels, users are
more likely to select some labels from the recommended set
according to their understandings of the images. However,
the user feedbacks have rarely been investigated by traditional multi-label learning algorithms.
In this paper, we propose a novel Reinforced Multilabel Image Classiﬁcation (RMIC) by exploring curriculum method to solve multi-label image classiﬁcation problem. Consistent with curriculum learning mechanism, we
compose the image feature and previously predicted labels

Abstract
Humans and animals learn much better when the examples
are not randomly presented but organized in a meaningful
order which illustrates gradually more concepts, and gradually more complex ones. Inspired by this curriculum learning
mechanism, we propose a reinforced multi-label image classiﬁcation approach imitating human behavior to label image
from easy to complex. This approach allows a reinforcement
learning agent to sequentially predict labels by fully exploiting image feature and previously predicted labels. The agent
discovers the optimal policies through maximizing the longterm reward which reﬂects prediction accuracies. Experimental results on PASCAL VOC2007 and 2012 demonstrate the
necessity of reinforcement multi-label learning and the algorithm’s effectiveness in real-world multi-label image classiﬁcation tasks.

Introduction
Traditional single-label image classiﬁcation deals with images that are associated with a single label from a ﬁnite set
of disjoint labels. However, real-world images often correspond to more than one label. For example, an image can
belong to “table” as well as “bottle”. Recently, this multilabel image classiﬁcation problem has attracted signiﬁcant
attention in various applications, such as semantic annotation of images (Gong et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2017), and
videos (Oh et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2016b) and structured
prediction (Lampert 2011).
The most common approach to solve the problem is the
binary relevance method (BR) (Luaces et al. 2012). BR
transforms a multi-label problem into multiple binary classiﬁcation problems. However, BR fails to model the dependencies between multiple labels, which widely exist in realworld multi-label data, e.g. one image containing “sky” has a
great probability containing “clouds”. One simple yet effective approach to handle label dependencies is the classiﬁers
chains (CC) method (Read et al. 2011). It incorporates label
correlations implicitly by training a chain of binary classiﬁers in a given sequential order, with the feature set of each
binary classiﬁer augmented by labels that have been previously trained. Besides CC, lots of different techniques have
been developed to discover label dependences in multi-label
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3183

