The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Semi-Supervised Learning from Crowds Using Deep Generative Models
Kyohei Atarashi

Satoshi Oyama

Masahito Kurihara

Hokkaido University
atarashi k@complex.ist.hokudai.ac.jp

Hokkaido University/RIKEN AIP
oyama@ist.hokudai.ac.jp

Hokkaido University
kurihara@ist.hokudai.ac.jp

from multiple workers and inferring the true ones by using a
majority voting strategy. Although majority voting is widely
used, it is implicitly based on an unreasonable assumption
that all workers have the same ability for all data points. Several methods have been proposed for accurately inferring the
true labels (Dawid and Skene 1979; Welinder et al. 2010;
Whitehill et al. 2009; Oyama et al. 2013). They take into
account the expertise of each worker, the difﬁculty of each
instance, and so on. Many of the previous studies for inferring the true labels have proposed the use of a generative
model of the labeling process in which the true labels are included as latent labels. In such models, the expertise of each
worker, the difﬁculty of each instance etc. are included as
latent variables or parameters. They also proposed estimating the true labels and the model parameters by using the
expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm.
One can obtain a classiﬁer by using labels inferred as
described above, i.e., by ﬁrst obtaining labels through repeated labeling and majority voting (or a more sophisticated method) and then applying a general supervised learning method along with the inferred labels. However, after
the inferring the true labels, several types of additional information about each instance, e.g., the difﬁculty of it, are
lost. In a supervised learning scenario, the goal is not to infer the true labels for training data but to obtain an accurate classiﬁer for future unknown data, and additional information from crowds may be useful for that goal as well
as for training. A number of studies have proposed methods for obtaining accurate classiﬁers from crowdsourced
labels, called learning from crowds (Raykar et al. 2010;
Kajino, Tsuboi, and Kashima 2012; Yan et al. 2010b; 2010a;
Bi et al. 2014; Rodrigues, Pereira, and Ribeiro 2013). Many
of these studies also have proposed using a generative
model, which includes the true labels as latent variables generated from the classiﬁer. Like the above-mentioned methods for inferring the true labels, the parameters of these models are usually estimated using an EM algorithm. One can
obtain a classiﬁer after estimating the parameters, including
the parameters of the distribution of true labels.
Although one can obtain labels at relatively low cost by
crowdsourcing, the amount of data that can be accessed is
becoming larger and larger, so it is not realistic to require
labels for all data. Practically, one may be faced with having repeatedly labeled data from crowdsourcing and much

Abstract
Although supervised learning requires a labeled dataset, obtaining labels from experts is generally expensive. For this
reason, crowdsourcing services are attracting attention in the
ﬁeld of machine learning as a way to collect labels at relatively low cost. However, the labels obtained by crowdsourcing, i.e., from non-expert workers, are often noisy. A number of methods have thus been devised for inferring true labels, and several methods have been proposed for learning
classiﬁers directly from crowdsourced labels, referred to as
learning from crowds. A more practical problem is learning from crowdsourced labeled data and unlabeled data, i.e.,
semi-supervised learning from crowds. This paper presents a
novel generative model of the labeling process in crowdsourcing. It leverages unlabeled data effectively by introducing latent features and a data distribution. Because the data distribution can be complicated, we use a deep neural network for
the data distribution. Therefore, our model can be regarded as
a kind of deep generative model. The problems caused by the
intractability of latent variable posteriors is solved by introducing an inference model. The experiments show that it outperforms four existing models, including a baseline model,
on the MNIST dataset with simulated workers and the Rotten Tomatoes movie review dataset with Amazon Mechanical
Turk workers.

1

Introduction

Machine learning, especially supervised learning, techniques have achieved excellent performance in many tasks.
However, supervised learning requires a labeled dataset, and
obtaining ground truth labels from experts is costly in terms
of money and time for the machine learning user and tedious for the expert. Hence, crowdsourcing services like
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (AMT) are being used more and
more to obtain labels.
Although one can obtain labels at relatively low cost
by crowdsourcing, the labels collected from crowdsourcing
workers are usually noisy because they are not experts. Furthermore, some workers are simply spammer who provide
random labels to easily earn money. Using these noisy labels
in supervised learning may result in an inaccurate classiﬁer.
A straightforward way to solve this problem is repeated
labeling, i.e., obtaining multiple labels for each data point
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1555

