The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Vector Autoregressive Models with Latent Processes
∗

Saber Salehkaleybar,∗ Jalal Etesami,∗† Negar Kiyavash,†‡ Kun Zhang♦
Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, USA.
†
Department of ISE, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Urbana, USA.
‡
Department of ECE, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, USA.
♦
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA.
{sabersk,etesami2,kiyavash}@illinois.edu,kunz1@cmu.edu
and Scheines 2000). In (Eichler 2012), an overview of various deﬁnitions of causation is given for time series.
In this work, we study the causal identiﬁcation problem in
VAR models when only a subset of times series is observed.
More precisely, we assume that the available measurements
are a set of random processes 
X(t) ∈ Rn which, together
with another set of latent random processes 
Z(t) ∈ Rm ,
where m ≤ n form a ﬁrst order VAR model as follows:

Abstract
We study the problem of learning the support of transition
matrix between random processes in a Vector Autoregressive (VAR) model from samples when a subset of the processes are latent. It is well known that ignoring the effect of
the latent processes may lead to very different estimates of
the inﬂuences among observed processes, and we are concerned with identifying the inﬂuences among the observed
processes, those between the latent ones, and those from the
latent to the observed ones. We show that the support of transition matrix among the observed processes and lengths of all
latent paths between any two observed processes can be identiﬁed successfully under some conditions on the VAR model.
From the lengths of latent paths, we reconstruct the latent
subgraph (representing the inﬂuences among the latent processes) with a minimum number of variables uniquely if its
topology is a directed tree. Furthermore, we propose an algorithm that ﬁnds all possible minimal latent graphs under some
conditions on the lengths of latent paths. Our results apply to
both non-Gaussian and Gaussian cases, and experimental results on various synthetic and real-world datasets validate our
theoretical results.



 
 + 1)
X(t
A11
 + 1) = A21
Z(t

A12
A22



 


X(t)
ωX (t + 1)

+
. (1)

ωZ (t + 1)

Z(t)

Here we assume that observed data were measured at the
right causal frequency of the VAR process; otherwise one
may need to consider the effect of the sampling procedure
such as subsampling or temporal aggregation (Danks and
Plis 2013; Gong et al. 2015; 2017). Under certain assumptions (e.g., causal sufﬁciency), the support of the transition
matrix corresponds to the causal structure between these
processes (Granger 1969; Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines
2000; Pearl 2009). If we ignore the inﬂuence of latent processes and just regress 
X(t + 1) on 
X(t), we may get a
wrong estimate of the transition matrix between observed
processes (see the example in (Geiger et al. 2015)). Hence,
it is crucial to consider the presence of latent processes and
their inﬂuences on the observed processes.
Contributions: The contributions of this paper are as follows: we propose a learning approach that recovers the observed sub-network (support of A11 ) by regressing the ob + 1) on a set of its past observations (not
served vector X(t

just X(t)) as long as the graph representation of latent subnetwork (support of A22 ) is a directed acyclic graph (DAG)1 .
We also derive a set of sufﬁcient conditions under which we
can uniquely recover the inﬂuences from latent to observed
processes, (support of A12 ) and also the inﬂuences among
the latent variables, (support of A22 ). Additionally, we propose a sufﬁcient condition under which the support of the
complete transition matrix can be recovered uniquely.
More speciﬁcally, we show that under an assumption on
the observed to latent noise power ratio, if neither of the sub-

Introduction
Identifying causal inﬂuences among time series is a problem
of interest in many ﬁelds. In macroeconomics, for instance,
researchers seek to understand what factors contribute to
economic ﬂuctuations and how they interact with each other
(Lütkepohl and Krätzig 2004). In neuroscience, many researchers focus on learning the interactions between different regions of brain by analyzing neural spike trains (Roebroeck, Formisano, and Goebel 2005; Kim et al. 2014).
Granger causality (Granger 1969), transfer entropy
(Schreiber 2000), and directed information (Massey 1990;
Marko 1973; Quinn, Kiyavash, and Coleman 2013; Etesami and Kiyavash 2014) are some of the most commonly
used measures in the literature to calculate time-delayed dependence structures in time series. Measuring the reduction
of uncertainty in one variable after observing another variable is the key concept behind such measures. Under certain assumptions, these measures may represent causal relations among the variables (Pearl 2009; Spirtes, Glymour,

Support of matrix A is a matrix with the same size where entry
(i, j) is equal to one if the corresponding entry in A is nonzero.
Otherwise, it would be zero.
1

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4000

