The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Explicit Reasoning over End-to-End
Neural Architectures for Visual Question Answering
Somak Aditya, Yezhou Yang, Chitta Baral
School of Computing, Informatics and Decision Systems Engineering
Arizona State University
{saditya1,yz.yang,chitta}@asu.edu

of natural language understanding and commonsense reasoning, and thus fail to answer correctly when additional
knowledge is required.
To complement the current successful end-to-end systems, we developed two major add-on components: 1) a
semantic parsing module for questions and captions, and
2) an augmented reasoning engine based on Probabilistic
Soft Logic (PSL) (Bach et al. 2015). The rationale behind
adding these two components are mainly threefold. Firstly,
the semantic parser for question understanding helps the
system to represent the information suitably for the reasoning engine; and the semantic parser for dense captions
generated from the images (Johnson, Karpathy, and Fei-Fei
2016) adds on a structured source of semantics. Secondly,
questions such as “Is the airplane about to take off?, Is
it going to rain?” (prospective) and “What is common between the animal in the image and an elephant?” (ontological) require various kinds of background and commonsense
knowledge to answer. To reason with such knowledge together with the probabilistic nature of image understanding outputs, we develop an augmented PSL based reasoning engine. Most importantly, with the question understanding component and the reasoning engine, we are able to
track the intermediate outputs (see Figure 1) for interpreting the system itself. These intermediate outputs along with
the generated evidential predicates show a promising pathway to conduct insightful performance analytics, which is
incredibly difﬁcult with existing end-to-end technologies.
Thus, the presented augmentations can help the community to gain insight behind the answers, and take a step towards explainable AI (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016;
Lombrozo 2012).
While an explicit reasoning layer is novel, there are other
works that studied the reasoning aspect of VQA. Very recently, researchers have started exploring the role of language understanding and multiple-step compositional reasoning for VQA (Johnson et al. 2016). Instead of working
on unconstrained images from original VQA corpus (Antol et al. 2015), the researchers switched to collecting a new
corpus under a constrained setting. While the questions are
designed to track aspects of multi-step reasoning, the constrained setting reduces the noise introduced by the image
understanding pipelines, and simpliﬁes the challenge that
a reasoning module might face in an unconstrained envi-

Abstract
Many vision and language tasks require commonsense reasoning beyond data-driven image and natural language processing. Here we adopt Visual Question Answering (VQA)
as an example task, where a system is expected to answer a
question in natural language about an image. Current state-ofthe-art systems attempted to solve the task using deep neural
architectures and achieved promising performance. However,
the resulting systems are generally opaque and they struggle in understanding questions for which extra knowledge
is required. In this paper, we present an explicit reasoning
layer on top of a set of penultimate neural network based
systems. The reasoning layer enables reasoning and answering questions where additional knowledge is required, and at
the same time provides an interpretable interface to the end
users. Speciﬁcally, the reasoning layer adopts a Probabilistic
Soft Logic (PSL) based engine to reason over a basket of inputs: visual relations, the semantic parse of the question, and
background ontological knowledge from word2vec and ConceptNet. Experimental analysis of the answers and the key
evidential predicates generated on the VQA dataset validate
our approach.

Introduction
Many vision and language tasks are considered as compelling “AI-complete” tasks which require multi-modal
knowledge beyond a single sub-domain. One such recently
proposed popular task is Visual Question Answering (VQA)
by (Antol et al. 2015), which requires a system to generate
natural language answers to free-form, open-ended, natural
language questions about an image. Needless to say, this task
is extremely challenging since it falls on the junction of three
domains in Artiﬁcial Intelligence: image understanding, natural language understanding, and commonsense reasoning.
With the rapid development in deep neural architectures
for image understanding, end-to-end networks trained from
pixel level signals together with word embeddings of the
posed questions to the target answer, have achieved promising performance (Malinowski, Rohrbach, and Fritz 2015;
Gao et al. 2015; Lu et al. 2016b). Though the resulting answers are impressive, the capabilities of these systems are
still far from being satisfactory. We believe the primary reason is that many of these systems overlook the critical roles
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

629

