The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Deep Semi-Random Features
for Nonlinear Function Approximation
Kenji Kawaguchi∗

Bo Xie,∗ Le Song

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Georgia Institute of Technology

approach to tackle such issues is to approximate kernel
functions using random features (Rahimi and Recht 2008;
Sindhwani, Avron, and Mahoney 2014; Pennington, Yu,
and Kumar 2015). One drawback of random features is
that its approximation powers suffer from the curse of
dimensionality (Barron 1993) because its bases are not
adaptive to the data.

Abstract
We propose semi-random features for nonlinear function approximation. The ﬂexibility of semi-random feature lies between the fully adjustable units in deep learning and the random features used in kernel methods. For one hidden layer
models with semi-random features, we prove with no unrealistic assumptions that the model classes contain an arbitrarily
good function as the width increases (universality), and despite non-convexity, we can ﬁnd such a good function (optimization theory) that generalizes to unseen new data (generalization bound). For deep models, with no unrealistic assumptions, we prove universal approximation ability, a lower
bound on approximation error, a partial optimization guarantee, and a generalization bound. Depending on the problems,
the generalization bound of deep semi-random features can
be exponentially better than the known bounds of deep ReLU
nets; our generalization error bound can be independent of the
depth, the number of trainable weights as well as the input dimensionality. In experiments, we show that semi-random features can match the performance of neural networks by using
slightly more units, and it outperforms random features by using signiﬁcantly fewer units. Moreover, we introduce a new
implicit ensemble method by using semi-random features.

• Neural networks use adjustable basis functions and learn
their parameters to approximate the target nonlinear function (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015). Such adaptive
nature allows neural networks to be compact yet expressive. As a result, they can be efﬁciently trained on
some of the largest datasets today. By incorporating domain speciﬁc network architectures, neural networks have
also achieved state-of-the-art results in many applications. However, learning the basis functions involves difﬁcult non-convex optimization. Few theoretical insights
are available in the literature and more research is needed
to understand the working mechanisms and theoretical
guarantees for neural networks (Choromanska, LeCun,
and Arous 2015; Swirszcz, Czarnecki, and Pascanu 2016;
Shamir 2016).
Can we have the best of both worlds? Can we develop a
framework for big nonlinear problems which has the ability to adapt basis functions, has low computational and storage complexity, while at the same time retaining some of
the theoretical properties of random features? Towards this
goal, we propose semi-random features to explore the space
of trade-off between ﬂexibility, provability and efﬁciency
in nonlinear function approximation. We show that semirandom features have a set of nice theoretical properties, like
random features, while possessing a (deep) representation
learning ability, like deep learning. More speciﬁcally:

Introduction
Many recent advances, such as human-level image classiﬁcation (Deng et al. 2009) and game playing (Bellemare et al.
2013; Silver et al. 2016) in machine learning are attributed to
large-scale nonlinear function models. There are two dominating paradigms for nonlinear modeling in machine learning: kernel methods and neural networks:
• Kernel methods employ pre-deﬁned basis functions,
k(x, x ), called kernels to represent nonlinear functions
(Scholkopf and Smola 2001; Shawe-Taylor and Cristianini 2004). Learning algorithms that use kernel methods
often come with nice theoretical properties–globally optimal parameters can be found via convex optimization, and
statistical guarantees can be provided rigorously. However, kernel methods typically work with matrices that
are quadratic in the number of samples, leading to unfavorable computation and storage complexities. A popular

• Despite the nonconvex learning problem, semi-random
feature model with one hidden layer has no bad local minimum;
• Depending on the problems, the generalization bound of
deep semi-random features can be exponentially better
than known bounds of deep ReLU nets;
• Semi-random features can be composed into multi-layer
architectures, and going deep in the architecture leads to
more expressive model than going wide;
• Semi-random features also lead to statistical stable func-

∗

Equal contribution
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3382

