The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

AutoEncoder by Forest∗
Ji Feng, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology
and Industrialization, Nanjing 210023, China
{fengj, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

supervised learning, tree ensembles have also achieved great
success in other tasks, such as isolation forest (Liu, Ting, and
Zhou 2008) which is an efﬁcient unsupervised method for
anomaly detection. Recently, deep model based on forests
has also been proposed (Zhou and Feng 2017), and demonstrated competitive performance with DNNs across a broad
range of tasks with much fewer hyper-parameters.
In this paper, we present the EncoderForest (abbrv. eForest), the ﬁrst tree ensemble based auto-encoder model. Concretely, the eForest enables a tree ensemble to perform forward encoding and backward decoding thus making it possible to construct an auto-encoder by forest. In addition, the
eForest model can be trained in both supervised or unsupervised fashion and experimental results showed the eForest
approach has the following advantages:

Abstract
Auto-encoding is an important task which is typically realized by deep neural networks (DNNs) such as convolutional neural networks (CNN). In this paper, we propose EncoderForest (abbrv. eForest), the ﬁrst tree ensemble based
auto-encoder. We present a procedure for enabling forests
to do backward reconstruction by utilizing the MaximalCompatible Rule (MCR) deﬁned by the decision paths of
the trees, and demonstrate its usage in both supervised and
unsupervised setting. Experiments show that, compared with
DNN based auto-encoders, eForest is able to obtain lower reconstruction error with fast training speed, while the model
itself is reusable and damage-tolerable.

Introduction

• Accurate: Its experimental reconstruction error is lower
than a MLP or CNN based auto-encoders.

Auto-encoder (Vincent et al. 2010) is a class of models
which aim to map the input to a latent space and map it back
to the original space, with low reconstruction error as its objective. Previous approaches for building such device mainly
came from the neural network community. For instance, a
neural network based auto-encoder usually consists of an
encoder and a decoder. The encoder maps the input to a hidden layer and the decoder maps it back to the input space. By
concatenating the two parts and setting the reconstruction error as learning objective, back-propagation can be used for
training such models. It is widely used for dimensionality
reduction (Hinton, Osindero, and Simon 2006), representation learning (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013), as well
as some more recent works for generative tasks such as Variational Auto-encoders (Kingma and Welling 2013).
Ensemble learning (Zhou 2012) is a powerful learning
paradigm which trains multiple learners and combines to
tackle the problem. It is widely used in a broad range of
tasks and has demonstrated great performance. Tree ensemble methods, or forests, such as Random Forest (Breiman
2001), for instance, is one of the best off-the-shelf methods for supervised learning (Fernández-Delgado et al. 2014).
Other successful tree ensembles such as gradient based decision trees (GBDTs) also proven its ability during the past
decade(Friedman 2001; Chen and Guestrin 2016). Besides

• Efﬁcient: eForest on a single KNL (many-core CPU) runs
even faster than a CNN auto-encoder runs on a Titan-X
GPU for training.
• Damage-tolerable: The trained model works well even
when it is partially damaged.
• Reusable: A model trained from one dataset can be directly applied on the other datasets in the same domain.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: ﬁrst we
introduce related works, followed by the proposed eForest
model, then experimental results are presented, ﬁnally conclusion and future works are discussed.

Related Work
Auto-encoder is an important class of models for representation learning, and is one of the key ingredients of
deep learning. (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016;
Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013). The study of autoencoder dates back to Bourlard and Kamp (1988), of which
the goal is to learning association from data. Most of the
previous approaches on building such devices are neural network based methods. For instance, the under-complete autoencoder is designed for dimensionality reduction (Hinton
and Salakhutdinov 2006), sparse auto-encoder, on the other
hand, gives a sparsity penalty on the activation layer (Hinton and Ranzato 2010), which is related with sparse coding

∗
This research was supported by NSFC (61333014) and 973
Program (2014CB340501).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2967

