The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Binary Residual Representations
for Domain-Speciﬁc Video Streaming
Yi-Hsuan Tsai,1 Ming-Yu Liu,2 Deqing Sun,2
Ming-Hsuan Yang,1,2 Jan Kautz2
1

University of California, Merced
2
NVIDIA

videos, is difﬁcult to compress because it contains highly
non-linear patterns. Neither linear predictive coding nor linear transform coding can effectively compress the residual.
In this paper, we hypothesize that one can effectively
compress the residual information if one is willing to limit
the use of the video compression method to a speciﬁc domain. In other words, we no longer wish to have a video
compression method that works universally well on all
videos. We only wish to have a method that works particularly well in one speciﬁc domain. Although this setting
may appear inconvenient at a ﬁrst glance as one needs to
have a video compressor for each domain, it does ﬁt well
with several major video streaming applications, such as
video game streaming and sports streaming. For example,
for video game streaming services such as GeForce Now
and Twitch, the gamer chooses a game title to play, and
the video content is rendered on the server and delivered to
client’s mobile console. During the game playing period, all
the video content in the stream is in the same video game
domain and a domain-speciﬁc video compression method
is entirely appropriate. The setting also ﬁts other user cases
such as streaming sports, which are often limited to a particular discipline, as well as things like compressing dash cam
videos, as all the videos are about street scenes.
To verify our hypothesis, we leverage deep learning models, which have been established as powerful non-linear
function approximators, to encode the highly nonlinear
residual information. In our video compression pipeline, we
ﬁrst apply H.264 to compress videos in a speciﬁc domain
and train a novel binary autoencoder to encode the resulting
residual information frame-by-frame into a binary representation. We then apply Huffman coding (Cover and Thomas
2006) to compress the binary representations in a lossless
manner. The compressed binary representations can be sent
to the client in the meta data ﬁeld in the H.264 streaming
packet. This way, our method can be integrated into the existing video streaming standard. We illustrate our method in
Figure 1. We show that with our proposed binary residual
representation, one can achieve a better video quality (at a
chosen bandwidth) by sending the video stream using H.264
at a smaller bandwidth and utilizing the saved bandwidth to
transmit the learned binary residual representation.
We conduct extensive experiments to verify our hypothesis that we can improve state-of-the-art video compression

Abstract
We study domain-speciﬁc video streaming. Speciﬁcally, we
target a streaming setting where the videos to be streamed
from a server to a client are all in the same domain and
they have to be compressed to a small size for low-latency
transmission. Several popular video streaming services, such
as the video game streaming services of GeForce Now and
Twitch, fall in this category. While conventional video compression standards such as H.264 are commonly used for this
task, we hypothesize that one can leverage the property that
the videos are all in the same domain to achieve better video
quality. Based on this hypothesis, we propose a novel video
compression pipeline. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst apply H.264 to
compress domain-speciﬁc videos. We then train a novel
binary autoencoder to encode the leftover domain-speciﬁc
residual information frame-by-frame into binary representations. These binary representations are then compressed and
sent to the client together with the H.264 stream. In our experiments, we show that our pipeline yields consistent gains
over standard H.264 compression across several benchmark
datasets while using the same channel bandwidth.

Introduction
Video streaming services, such as Netﬂix and YouTube, are
popular methods of viewing entertainment content nowadays. Due to large video sizes and limited network bandwidth, video compression is required for streaming video
content from a server to a client. While video compression
can reduce the size of a video, it often comes with undesired compression artifacts, such as image blocking effects
and blurry effects.
Decades of efforts were made towards delivering the best
possible video quality under bandwidth constraint. Stateof-the-art video compression methods such as MPEG-4 (Li
2001), H.264 (Wiegand et al. 2003), and HEVC (Sullivan
et al. 2012) combine various classical techniques including
image transform coding, predictive coding, source coding,
and motion estimation in a carefully-engineered framework.
These methods are general and can be applied to various
video domains for effectively compressing most of the information in a video. However, the residual information, which
is the difference between the uncompressed and compressed
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7363

