The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Splitting an LPMLN Program
Bin Wang, Zhizheng Zhang,∗ Hongxiang Xu, Jun Shen
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China
{kse.wang, seu zzz, xhx1693, junshen}@seu.edu.cn

with weak constraints (Calimeri et al. 2012) to LPMLN respectively. Lee and Yang (2017) also presented a translation from LPMLN to ASP with weak constraints. Balai
and Gelfond (2016) presented a translation from LPMLN
to P-log. These results demonstrate the expressivity of
LPMLN and open a way to implement an LPMLN solver. In
the practical aspect, several solvers of LPMLN have been
developed through using the above translations, such as
LPMLN2ASP, LPMLN2MLN (Lee, Talsania, and Wang
2017), and LPMLN-Models (Wang and Zhang 2017). In particular, LPMLN-Models is a parallel LPMLN solver. These
implementations also stimulate the study and use of LPMLN
conversely.
Usually, an LPMLN program is much harder to solve than
its unweighted ASP counterpart. Hence, to use LPMLN in
more practical scenarios, we need to investigate more useful properties to simplify the inference tasks for an LPMLN
program, and develop more effective ways to promote an
LPMLN solver. Our goal in this paper is to investigate the
splitting set theorem for LPMLN programs and show the usefulness of the theorem in simplifying the inference tasks for
LPMLN and promoting an LPMLN solver.
In this paper, we propose the splitting set theorem for
LPMLN ﬁrstly, which shows that the tasks of computing stable models and their weight degrees of an LPMLN program
can be converted into the same kind of tasks of the corresponding “top part” and “bottom part”. Secondly, we investigate a special kind of LPMLN programs called independently
divisible LPMLN programs, and derive the splitting set theorem for such kind of programs. This special theorem directly implies that all basic LPMLN inference tasks discussed
in this paper can be simpliﬁed for an independently divisible
LPMLN program. Finally, we give two parallel approaches
for solving normal and independently divisible LPMLN programs respectively, which is a straightforward application
of the splitting set theorem. The preliminary experimental
results show that these approaches are alternative ways to
promote an LPMLN solver.

Abstract
The technique called splitting sets has been proven useful
in simplifying the investigation of Answer Set Programming
(ASP). In this paper, we investigate the splitting set theorem
for LPMLN that is a new extension of ASP created by combining the ideas of ASP and Markov Logic Networks (MLN).
Firstly, we extend the notion of splitting sets to LPMLN programs and present the splitting set theorem for LPMLN . Then,
the use of the theorem for simplifying several LPMLN inference tasks is illustrated. After that, we give two parallel
approaches for solving LPMLN programs via using the theorem. The preliminary experimental results show that these
approaches are alternative ways to promote an LPMLN solver.

Introduction
The notion of splitting sets introduced by Lifschitz and
Turner (1994) has been regarded as one of the most important tools on both theoretical and practical aspects in Answer
Set Programming (ASP) (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988). Intuitively, a splitting set of an ASP program is a set of literals,
by which the program can be divided into two parts, called
“bottom part” and “top part”. Then, the stable models of
the original ASP program can be computed by solving these
two parts. It has been shown in several works (Lifschitz and
Turner 1994; Ji et al. 2015) that the splitting set theorem
can be used to simplify ASP programs and the proofs of
some properties of ASP, and to develop more effective ASP
solvers. Meanwhile, it is also shown that the splitting set
theorem is a useful property for several extensions of ASP
such as CR-Prolog (Balduccini 2009), Epistemic Speciﬁcation (Watson 2000) etc.
LPMLN (Lee and Wang 2016) is a new extension of ASP
that incorporates the idea of Markov Logic Networks (MLN)
(Richardson and Domingos 2006) and can be viewed as
a weighted ASP program. In recent years, several results
on LPMLN have been presented. In the theoretical aspect,
the relationships between LPMLN and some other knowledge representation languages have been investigated. For
example, Lee and Wang (2016) presented the translations
from MLN, P-log (Baral, Gelfond, and Rushton 2009),
ProbLog (De Raedt, Kimmig, and Toivonen 2007) and ASP

Preliminaries
LPMLN

∗

Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

An LPMLN program is a ﬁnite set of weighted rules w : r,
where w is either a real number or the symbol α denoting

1997

