The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

RelNN: A Deep Neural Model for Relational Learning
Seyed Mehran Kazemi, David Poole
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada
{smkazemi, poole}@cs.ubc.ca

they like). This problem is challenging when the property
of each object in the class depends on a varying number
of other objects’ properties and relationships. In the StarAI
community, this problem is known as aggregation.
With numerous advances in learning deep networks for
many different applications, using deep neural approaches
for relational data has been the focus of several recent studies. In this paper, we develop a framework for learning ﬁrstorder deep neural models to learn from and reason with relational data. Our model is developed through deepening
relational logistic regression (RLR) models (Kazemi et al.
2014), the directed analogue of Markov logic (Richardson
and Domingos 2006), by enabling them to learn latent object
properties both directly and through general rules, and connecting multiple RLR layers as a graph to produce relational
neural networks (RelNNs). Similar to (Niepert, Ahmed, and
Kutzkov 2016; Pham et al. 2017), we identify the relationship between our model and convolutional neural networks
(ConvNets). Identifying this relationships allows RelNNs to
be understood and implemented using well-known ConvNet
primitives. Each training iteration of RelNNs is order of the
amount of data times the size of the RelNN, making RelNNs
highly scalable.
We evaluate RelNNs on three real-world datasets and
compare them to well-know relational learning algorithms.
We show how RelNNs address a relational learning issue
raised in (Poole et al. 2014) who showed that as the population size increases, the probabilities of many variables go
to 0 or 1, making the model over-conﬁdent. Obtained results indicate that RelNNs are promising models for relational learning.

Abstract
Statistical relational AI (StarAI) aims at reasoning and learning in noisy domains described in terms of objects and relationships by combining probability with ﬁrst-order logic.
With huge advances in deep learning in the current years,
combining deep networks with ﬁrst-order logic has been the
focus of several recent studies. Many of the existing attempts,
however, only focus on relations and ignore object properties. The attempts that do consider object properties are
limited in terms of modelling power or scalability. In this
paper, we develop relational neural networks (RelNNs) by
adding hidden layers to relational logistic regression (the relational counterpart of logistic regression). We learn latent
properties for objects both directly and through general rules.
Back-propagation is used for training these models. A modular, layer-wise architecture facilitates utilizing the techniques
developed within deep learning community to our architecture. Initial experiments on eight tasks over three real-world
datasets show that RelNNs are promising models for relational learning.1

Introduction
Multi-relational data cannot be directly fed into traditional
machine learning approaches such as logistic regression,
SVMs, random forests, etc. Statistical relational AI (StarAI)
(De Raedt et al. 2016) aims at developing models that work
directly with relational data by capturing the interdependence among properties of the objects and the relationships
they are involved in.
In relational data, there are usually several classes of objects, each class has certain properties deﬁned for its members, and there are (various) relationships among the objects.
Many works on learning from relational data focus only on
predicting new relationships among objects given known relationships, and ignore predicting object properties. For the
works that do consider predicting object properties, a recent
comparative study shows that none of them perform well and
that this problem is still only poorly understood (Kazemi et
al. 2017). In this paper, we focus (primarily) on predicting a
property of the objects in one class based on the rest of the
data (e.g., predicting the gender of people given the movies

Relational Logistic Regression and Markov
Logic Networks
StarAI models aim at modelling the probabilities about relations among objects. Before knowing anything about the
objects, these models treat them identically and apply tied
parameters to them. In order to describe these models, ﬁrst
we need to introduce some deﬁnitions and terminologies.
A population is a ﬁnite set of objects. Logical variables
(logvars) start with lower-case letters, and constants denoting objects start with upper-case letters. Associated with a
logvar x is a population Δx with |Δx | representing the cardi-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code: https://github.com/Mehran-k/RelNN

6367

