The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

SELF: Structural Equational Likelihood
Framework for Causal Discovery
1

1

2

Ruichu Cai, Jie Qiao, Zhenjie Zhang, Zhifeng Hao

1, 3

1

School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology, China
Advanced Digital Sciences Center, Illinois at Singapore Pte. Ltd., Singapore
3
School of Mathmatics and Big Data, Foshan University, China
cairuichu@gdut.edu.cn, qiaojie.chn@qq.com, zhenjie@adsc.com.sg, zfhao@gdut.edu.cn
2

the problem in global and local views respectively. The approaches based on global view include the constraint-based
methods (Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2000; Pearl and
Verma 1995), and the score-based approaches (Tsamardinos, Brown, and Aliferis 2006; Lam and Bacchus 1994;
Ramsey et al. 2017). One common challenge behind the
global view methods is the problem of Markov equivalence
class (Andersson et al. 1997), such that certain causal graphical structures are indistinguishable based on marginal distribution information only, even when there is no noise injected
into the stochastic generative process.
The approaches based on local view attempt to tackle the
problem by looking into the coding complexity of the variables in the generative model, taking errors and noises into
account. Speciﬁcally, the complexity of the generative process from cause variables to effect variables is supposed to
be lower than the synthetic generative process on reversed direction. While the general Kolmogorov complexity is not
computable (Janzing and Schölkopf 2010), a number of
simpler complexity models are proposed in the literature,
based on various assumptions over the generative process
beneath the distributions, post-nonlinear model (Zhang and
Hyvärinen 2009), additive noise model (Hoyer et al. 2009;
Peters et al. 2014) and Information-geometric approach
(Janzing et al. 2012). Most of these approaches look at
a small number of variables, two in most cases, because
of limited scalability rooted at the theory and algorithms
(Mooij et al. 2016a). While a variety of scalability enhance
schemes are proposed in the literature (Xie and Geng 2008;
Cai, Zhang, and Hao 2013b), the improvement is limited,
especially when local views over the variables include inaccurate causal results.
We believe these two general methodologies based on
global and local views are not contradicted but complement to
each other. Local views provide more accurate insight into the
causal directions between individual pairs of variables, while
global views are capable of correcting minor mistakes of local
views by choosing most reasonable network structures over
various options of directed edges extracted from the local
views. The combination of these methodologies, however, is
non-trivial. The key is to design an optimization framework
with appropriate objective and constraints, unifying the local
and global views of the Bayesian network in a consistent
way.

Abstract
Causal discovery without intervention is well recognized as
a challenging yet powerful data analysis tool, boosting the
development of other scientiﬁc areas, such as biology, astronomy, and social science. The major technical difﬁculty
behind the observation-based causal discovery is to effectively
and efﬁciently identify causes and effects from correlated
variables given the existence of signiﬁcant noises. Previous
studies mostly employ two very different methodologies under Bayesian network framework, namely global likelihood
maximization and locally complexity analysis over marginal
distributions. While these approaches are effective in their respective problem domains, in this paper, we show that they can
be combined to formulate a new global optimization model
with local statistical signiﬁcance, called structural equational
likelihood framework (or SELF in short). We provide thorough
analysis on the soundness of the model under mild conditions
and present efﬁcient heuristic-based algorithms for scalable
model training. Empirical evaluations using XGBoost validate
the superiority of our proposal over state-of-the-art solutions,
on both synthetic and real world causal structures.

Introduction
Causal discovery is well recognized as a challenging yet powerful data analysis tool (Pearl 2009; Spirtes, Glymour, and
Scheines 2000), used to support a wide class of important
applications, including biology (Grosse-Wentrup et al. 2016;
Cai, Zhang, and Hao 2013a), computational astronomy
(Schölkopf et al. 2016) and social science (Cai et al. 2017).
Given a group of observation samples, causal discovery
identiﬁes the cause variables and effect variables, which
explains the underlying mechanism of the physical world.
While intervention is heavily exploited in the process of
traditional causal discovery, recent research efforts mostly
focus on analysis without intervention (Mooij et al. 2016b;
Spirtes and Zhang 2016), due to the forbidden cost.
Causal diagram is commonly used to model the causal
structure behind the multivariate observations, such that each
variable is statistically determined by only a number of causal
variables. The problem of causal discovery is therefore equivalent to the reconstruction of the causal structure, especially
over the target effect variables. There are two general methodologies explored in the existing studies, which look into
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1787

