The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

On Value Function Representation
of Long Horizon Problems
Lucas Lehnert,1,2 Romain Laroche,1 Harm van Seijen1

lucas lehnert@brown.edu, {romain.laroche, harm.vanseijen}@microsoft.com
1
Microsoft Maluuba, Montreal, QC, Canada
2
Brown University, Providence, RI, United States

of using a shorter than speciﬁed planning horizon (Jiang
et al. 2015), we focus on the case where using a shorter
planning horizon is not possible because the policy’s performance would degrade too much. In this case, we show that
representing the optimal value function can become challenging, even if the agent was given the optimal state and
action values. Previous work focuses on mistake or sample
complexity bounds and characterizes how well state and action values can be approximated given a certain amount of
data (Strehl et al. 2006; Strehl, Li, and Littman 2009). In
contrast to these results, this paper focuses on the structure
of the solution and considers how difﬁcult representing the
optimal value function is.

Abstract
In Reinforcement Learning, an intelligent agent has to make
a sequence of decisions to accomplish a goal. If this sequence
is long, then the agent has to plan over a long horizon. While
learning the optimal policy and its value function is a well
studied problem in Reinforcement Learning, this paper focuses on the structure of the optimal value function and how
hard it is to represent the optimal value function. We show
that the generalized Rademacher complexity of the hypothesis space of all optimal value functions is dependent on
the planning horizon and independent of the state and action
space size. Further, we present bounds on the action-gaps of
action value functions and show that they can collapse if a
long planning horizon is used. The theoretical results are veriﬁed empirically on randomly generated MDPs and on a gridworld fruit collection task using deep value function approximation. Our theoretical results highlight a connection between value function approximation and the Options framework and suggest that value functions should be decomposed
along bottlenecks of the MDP’s transition dynamics.

1

We present two results. The ﬁrst result characterizes the
value function space given a ﬁxed ﬁnite state and action
space. We express the complexity of this solution space using the generalized Rademacher complexity (Balcan 2011;
Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David 2014), which is deﬁned on
subsets of Rn . This complexity measure of the optimal value
function space increases with the planning horizon, and is
independent of the state and action space size. Our result
suggests that large state spaces only make learning more difﬁcult and do not have an effect on the complexity of the
solution space the agent has to search over. Subsequently
we present bounds on the action-gaps of the value function.
If action-gaps are large, value function approximation becomes easier (Bellemare et al. 2016b). However, if actiongaps collapse, then function approximation methods may
not be able to recover the optimal action, because it lacks the
necessary “resolution” to distinguish the optimal action from
sub-optimal actions. We show that action-gaps can collapse
if the planning horizon is long. Further, our analysis suggests that the state space should be partitioned along Bottlenecks (Bacon 2013; Stolle and Precup 2002), and for each
partition a separate shorter planning horizon should be used.
To support our results we present two sets of experiments.
The ﬁrst set is on randomly generated MDPs showing that
action-gaps can collapse depending on the transition structure of the MDP. The second set shows a fruit collection task
and compares approximations, made with neural networks,
of the optimal value function for different planning horizons.
We ﬁnd that predicting long planning horizons is more challenging, despite the fact that ground truth state values were
used for training.

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Kaelbling, Littman, and
Moore 1996; Sutton and Barto 1998) studies how to compute an optimal control strategy for interacting with an environment. This interaction consists of the agent making a
decision by choosing an action, observing a reward for selecting these actions, and observing a change in the environment’s state. The goal of the agent is to ﬁnd an actionselection strategy, also called policy, which maximizes the
overall received rewards.
Typically, an optimal policy is learned by incrementally
improving an intermediate policy. To improve a policy, the
agent has to estimate its utility, which is expressed by a value
function mapping a state to the return of a speciﬁc policy.
For example, recent algorithms such as DQN (Mnih et al.
2015) learn how to play Atari 2600 games (Bellemare et al.
2013) by using a deep neural network architecture to approximate the value function.
In this paper we consider Long Horizon Problems (LHPs)
where the agent is required to plan over many time steps
into the future. While recent work focused on the beneﬁts
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3457

