The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Who Said What: Modeling
Individual Labelers Improves Classiﬁcation
Melody Y. Guan∗

Varun Gulshan, Andrew M. Dai,
Geoffrey E. Hinton

Stanford University
450 Serra Mall
Stanford, California 94305
mguan@stanford.edu

Google Brain, 1600 Amphitheatre Pwky
Mountain View, California 94043
{varungulshan, adai, geoffhinton}@google.com

Abstract
Data are often labeled by many different experts with each
expert only labeling a small fraction of the data and each
data point being labeled by several experts. This reduces the
workload on individual experts and also gives a better estimate of the unobserved ground truth. When experts disagree,
the standard approaches are to treat the majority opinion as
the correct label and to model the correct label as a distribution. These approaches, however, do not make any use
of potentially valuable information about which expert produced which label. To make use of this extra information, we
propose modeling the experts individually and then learning
averaging weights for combining them, possibly in samplespeciﬁc ways. This allows us to give more weight to more
reliable experts and take advantage of the unique strengths of
individual experts at classifying certain types of data. Here we
show that our approach leads to improvements in computeraided diagnosis of diabetic retinopathy. We also show that our
method performs better than competing algorithms by Welinder and Perona (2010); Mnih and Hinton (2012). Our work
offers an innovative approach for dealing with the myriad
real-world settings that use expert opinions to deﬁne labels
for training.

Figure 1: Overview of proposed procedure to learn classiﬁcation from multiple noisy annotators.
age some time later (70.7%).1 Intuitively, we would expect
the quality of the training labels to provide an upper bound
on the performance of the trained net. In the following section we show that this intuition is incorrect.
Our paper’s main contribution is to show that there are
signiﬁcantly better ways to use the opinions of multiple experts than simply treating the consensus of the experts as
the correct label or using the experts to deﬁne a probability
distribution over labels.
Figure 1 summarizes our optimal procedure.

Introduction
Over the last few years, deep convolutional neural networks
have led to rapid improvements in the ability of computers to
classify objects in images and they are now comparable with
human performance in several domains. As computers get
faster and researchers develop even better techniques, neural networks will continue to improve, especially for tasks
where it is possible to get a very large number of accurately
labeled training examples. In the near future, we can expect
neural networks to start serving as alternatives to human experts. We would, in fact, like the neural networks to perform much better than the human experts used to provide
the training labels because these training labels are often unreliable as indicated by the poor agreement between different experts (55.4% for the datasets we consider) or even between an expert and the same expert looking at the same im-

Beating the Teacher
To demonstrate that a trained neural net can perform far better than its teacher we use the well-known MNIST handwritten digit benchmark for which the true labels are known
and we create unreliable training labels by corrupting the
true labels. This corruption is performed just once per experiment, before training starts, so the noise introduced by
the corruption cannot be averaged away by training on the
same example several times. MNIST has 60k training images and 10k test images and the task is to classify each

∗
Work done as a member of the Google Brain Residency program (g.co/brainresidency).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Inter-grader variability is a well-known issue in many settings
in which human interpretation is used as a proxy for ground truth,
such as radiology and pathology (Elmore et al. 1994; 2015).

3109

