The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Decentralized High-Dimensional Bayesian Optimization with Factor Graphs
Trong Nghia Hoang,§ Quang Minh Hoang,† Ruofei Ouyang,† Kian Hsiang Low†
Laboratory of Information and Decision Systems, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA§
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore†
nghiaht@mit.edu§ , {hqminh, ouyang, lowkh}@comp.nus.edu.sg†

2016), information-based (Hennig and Schuler 2012), and
upper conﬁdence bound (Srinivas et al. 2010).
While BO has demonstrated to be an effective optimization strategy in general, it has mostly found success in
the context of input spaces with low (effective) dimension
(Djolonga, Krause, and Cevher 2013; Wang et al. 2013).
However, several real-world application domains such as
computer vision (Bergstra, Yamins, and Cox 2013), networking (Hornby et al. 2006), and computational biology
(González et al. 2014) often require optimizing an objective function f over a high-dimensional input space without
knowing if its low (effective) dimension even exists. This
poses a grand challenge to the above conventional BO algorithms as the cost of maximizing an acquisition function
grows exponentially with the number of input dimensions.
To sidestep this issue, an extreme approach is to assume the
effects of all input components on the output of f to be pairwise independent (Kandasamy, Schneider, and Póczos 2015;
Wang and Jegelka 2017; Wang et al. 2017) (in the case of Li
et al. (2016), after some afﬁne projection of the input space).
The acquisition function can then be maximized along each
(projected) dimension separately, thus reducing its cost to
linear in the number of input dimensions. Despite its simplicity, such a decoupling assumption can severely compromise the BO performance since it rarely holds in practice:
The effects of different input components on the output of f
are usually interdependent (Naveršnik and Rojnik 2012). In
this paper, we argue and show that this highly restrictive assumption to gain scalability is an overkill: It is in fact possible to achieve the same scalability with a strong performance
guarantee while still taking into account the interdependent
effects of various input components on the output of f .
To achieve this, we ﬁrst observe that the interdependent
effects of many input components on the output of f tend to
be indirect: The effect of one input component (on the output
of f ) can only directly inﬂuence that of some components in
its immediate “neighborhood”, which in turn may inﬂuence
that of other components in the same manner. For example,
in a multi-project company, the poor performance of one employee in a collaborative project only indirectly affects the
performance of another employee in another project through
those who work on both projects. This is also the case for
many parameter tuning tasks with additive loss where different, overlapping subsets of parameters contribute to different

Abstract
This paper presents a novel decentralized high-dimensional
Bayesian optimization (DEC-HBO) algorithm that, in contrast to existing HBO algorithms, can exploit the interdependent effects of various input components on the output of the
unknown objective function f for boosting the BO performance and still preserve scalability in the number of input dimensions without requiring prior knowledge or the existence
of a low (effective) dimension of the input space. To realize
this, we propose a sparse yet rich factor graph representation of f to be exploited for designing an acquisition function
that can be similarly represented by a sparse factor graph and
hence be efﬁciently optimized in a decentralized manner using distributed message passing. Despite richly characterizing the interdependent effects of the input components on the
output of f with a factor graph, DEC-HBO can still guarantee
no-regret performance asymptotically. Empirical evaluation
on synthetic and real-world experiments (e.g., sparse Gaussian process model with 1811 hyperparameters) shows that
DEC-HBO outperforms the state-of-the-art HBO algorithms.

1

Introduction

Many real-world applications/tasks often involve optimizing an unknown objective function f given a limited budget
of costly function evaluations. Examples of such applications/tasks include automatic hyperparameter tuning for machine learning models (e.g., deep neural network) (Bergstra,
Yamins, and Cox 2013; Snoek, Hugo, and Adams 2012)
and parameter conﬁguration for robotic control strategies.
Whereas gradient-based methods fail to optimize a function
without an analytic form/derivative, Bayesian optimization
(BO) has established itself as a highly effective alternative.
In particular, a BO algorithm maintains a Gaussian process
(GP) belief of the unknown objective function f and alternates between selecting an input query to evaluate f and using its observed output to update the GP belief of f until the
budget is exhausted. Every input query is selected by maximizing an acquisition function that is constructed from the
GP belief of f . Intuitively, such an acquisition function has
to trade off between optimizing f based on its current GP belief (exploitation) vs. improving its GP belief (exploration).
Popular choices include improvement-based (Shahriari et al.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3231

