The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Video Summarization via Semantic Attended Networks
Huawei Wei, Bingbing Ni, Yichao Yan, Huanyu Yu, Xiaokang Yang
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Digital Media Processing and Transmission, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
weihuawei26@gmail.com,{nibingbing,yanyichao,yuhuanyu,xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

text supervision
$FRRNLVVWDFNLQJXSDFRQH

original video

The goal of video summarization is to distill a raw video into
a more compact form without losing much semantic information. However, previous methods mainly consider the diversity and representation interestingness of the obtained summary, and they seldom pay sufﬁcient attention to semantic
information of resulting frame set, especially the long temporal range semantics. To explicitly address this issue, we
propose a novel technique which is able to extract the most
semantically relevant video segments (i.e., valid for a long
term temporal duration) and assemble them into an informative summary. To this end, we develop a semantic attended
video summarization network (SASUM) which consists of a
frame selector and video descriptor to select an appropriate
number of video shots by minimizing the distance between
the generated description sentence of the summarized video
and the human annotated text of the original video. Extensive experiments show that our method achieves a superior
performance gain over previous methods on two benchmark
datasets.

keyframes

non-keyframes
keyframe

non-keyframe

Figure 1: Our network can distinguish keyframes and nonkeyframes determined by their relevance with the text description.

methods are not semantically rich due to their attention is
paid on the relevance with the exemplars.
With the expanding of research on cross-domain, especially from vision to language, many applications, such
as image retrieval (Ma et al. 2015) and video description (Venugopalan et al. 2015) have achieved great success.
It’s a natural idea to apply this technique on video summarization by adding language supervision. Lately, Plummer
et al. (2017) and Choi et al. (2017) take advantage of text
annotations to produce semantically rich video summaries
assisted by submodular function or hidden Markov model.
However, their proposed methods only exploit image-text
embedding models (Ma et al. 2015) such that their methods
cannot capture video’s continuous context.
In order to obtain more story-telling summaries, the relationship between dynamic visual content and its corresponding high-level semantics should be taken into account. To
this end, we develop a semantic attended video summarization network (SASUM), which considers about not only the
semantic richness but also the context continuity of the generated summary. Our inspiration comes from the fact that we
humans tend to ﬁlter out frames that are independent of the
meaning of the video when picking out the key parts of a
video. As shown in Figure 1, according to the description
“a cook is stacking up a cone”, we certainly will not select the ﬁrst frame whose content is a cook is mixing meat,
which is semantically unrelated to the provided description.
To mimic this selection manner, we train our SASUM su-

Introduction
With the upgrade of storage hardware and the faster and
faster internet speed, video recording is becoming cheaper
and more convenient. However, there is a large amount of
useless information in the stored content. Therefore, automatic video summarization (Elkhattabi, Tabii, and Benkaddour 2015) is an urgent problem to be solved, which can not
only save the storage resources but also save time for people
to browse videos.
The redundancy of videos includes content redundancy
and semantic redundancy. The best summary must satisfy
compactness and the relevance with the video’s topic. Previous video summarization methods (Gong et al. 2014;
Zhao and Xing 2014) mostly try to ﬁlter the repeated content
of a video but do not remove parts irrelevant with the video
theme. Recently, some methods have been used to alleviate
this issue by using exemplar videos or web images as priors (Khosla et al. 2013; Zhang et al. 2016a). However, they
are only suitable for summarizing category-speciﬁc videos
because of the need to collect a large number of videos on
the same topic. Moreover, summaries generated by these
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

216

