The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Game of Sketches: Deep Recurrent Models
of Pictionary-Style Word Guessing
Ravi Kiran Sarvadevabhatla,∗ Shiv Surya,∗ Trisha Mittal, R. Venkatesh Babu
Video Analytics Lab, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore 560012, INDIA
{ravika,shivparat,mittaltrisha22}@gmail.com,venky@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
The ability of machine-based agents to play games in humanlike fashion is considered a benchmark of progress in AI. In
this paper, we introduce the ﬁrst computational model aimed
at Pictionary, the popular word-guessing social game. We ﬁrst
introduce Sketch-QA, an elementary version of Visual Question Answering task. Styled after Pictionary, Sketch-QA uses
incrementally accumulated sketch stroke sequences as visual
data. Notably, Sketch-QA involves asking a ﬁxed question
(“What object is being drawn?”) and gathering open-ended
guess-words from human guessers. To mimic Pictionary-style
guessing, we propose a deep neural model which generates
guess-words in response to temporally evolving human-drawn
sketches. Our model even makes human-like mistakes while
guessing, thus amplifying the human mimicry factor. We evaluate our model on the large-scale guess-word dataset generated
via Sketch-QA task and compare with various baselines. We
also conduct a Visual Turing Test to obtain human impressions of the guess-words generated by humans and our model.
Experimental results demonstrate the promise of our approach
for Pictionary and similarly themed games.

1

Figure 1: We propose a deep recurrent model of Pictionarystyle word guessing. Such models can enable social robots
to participate in real-life game scenarios as shown above.
Picture credit:Trisha Mittal.

takes turns. For a given turn, a team’s member selects a card.
He/she then attempts to draw a sketch corresponding to the
word printed on the card in such a way that the team-mates
can guess the word correctly. The rules of the game forbid any
verbal communication between the drawer and team-mates.
Thus, the drawer conveys the intended guess-word primarily
via the sketching process.
Consider the scenario depicted in Figure 1. A group of
people are playing Pictionary. New to the game, a ‘social’
robot is watching people play. Passively, its sensors record
the strokes being drawn on the sketching board, guess-words
uttered by the drawer’s team members and ﬁnally, whether
the last guess is correct. Having observed multiple such game
rounds, the robot learns computational models which mimic
human guesses and enable it to participate in the game.
As a step towards building such computational models, we
ﬁrst collect guess-word data via Sketch Question Answering (Sketch-QA), a novel, Pictionary-style guessing task. We
employ a large-scale crowdsourced dataset of hand-drawn
object sketches whose temporal stroke information is available (Eitz, Hays, and Alexa 2012). Starting with a blank
canvas, we successively add strokes of an object sketch and
display this process to human subjects (see Figure 2). Every

Introduction

In the history of AI, computer-based modelling of human
player games such as Backgammon, Chess and Go has been
an important research area. The accomplishments of wellknown game engines (e.g. TD-Gammon (Tesauro 1994),
DeepBlue (DBL 1997), AlphaGo (Silver and others 2016))
and their ability to mimic human-like game moves has been
a well-accepted proxy for gauging progress in AI. Meanwhile, progress in visuo-lingual problems such as visual captioning (Xu et al. 2015; Chen and Lawrence Zitnick 2015;
Venugopalan et al. 2015) and visual question answering (Antol et al. 2015; Xu and Saenko 2016; Ren, Kiros, and Zemel
2015) is increasingly serving a similar purpose for computer
vision community. With these developments as backdrop, we
explore the popular social game PictionaryTM in this paper.
The game of Pictionary brings together predominantly the
visual and linguistic modalities. The game uses a shufﬂed
deck of cards with guess-words printed on them. The participants ﬁrst group themselves into teams and each team
∗

Both authors contributed equally.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7331

