The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Unsupervised Deep Learning of Mid-Level
Video Representation for Action Recognition
Jingyi Hou,1 Xinxiao Wu,1 Jin Chen,1 Jiebo Luo,2 Yunde Jia1
1. Beijing Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology, School of Computer Science,
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China
2. Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester, Rochester NY 14627, USA

Abstract
Current deep learning methods for action recognition rely
heavily on large scale labeled video datasets. Manually annotating video datasets is laborious and may introduce unexpected bias to train complex deep models for learning
video representation. In this paper, we propose an unsupervised deep learning method which employs unlabeled local spatial-temporal volumes extracted from action videos to
learn mid-level video representation for action recognition.
Speciﬁcally, our method simultaneously discovers mid-level
semantic concepts by discriminative clustering and optimizes
local spatial-temporal features by two relatively small and
simple deep neural networks. The clustering generates semantic visual concepts that guide the training of the deep networks, and the networks in turn guarantee the robustness of
the semantic concepts. Experiments on the HMDB51 and the
UCF101 datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed
method, even over several supervised learning methods.

;ĂͿ

;ďͿ

;ĐͿ

Figure 1: Left: Examples of problematic annotation (see text
for explanation). Right: The proposed method learns midlevel action representation using local video volumes.

Introduction

Zitnick, and Hebert (2016) proposed to use an unsupervised sequential veriﬁcation method to train a deep neural network for action recognition. The LSTM based methods (Du, Wang, and Wang 2015; Srivastava, Mansimov, and
Salakhutdinov 2015) learn ﬁxed-length global action features by reconstructing videos. All these methods of unsupervised learning for video representation are purely datadriven without considering the discriminative and semantic
information in videos.
High quality labels can provide crucial semantic information and supposed to beneﬁt learning more discriminative video representations. Actually, many classiﬁcation criteria are so ambiguous that manually annotated action categories are perplexing and at different semantic levels. Using
these kinds of labels as guidance to learn video representation might miss some spatial-temporal information of actions and even introduce bias. Here are two examples of unreasonable annotations: Figure 1(a) illustrates that different
classes may in fact share similar meaning. The two frames
are sampled from different videos which are classiﬁed as different actions, namely, “sword” and “fencing”. Figure 1(b)
shows the annotations at different semantic levels. The two
frames are sampled from one video classiﬁed as “shoot ball”
containing relatively low level semantic actions, “run” and
“jump”.

Recently, representation learning via deep neural networks
has proven to improve state-of-the-art performance dramatically for various computer vision tasks (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Szegedy et al. 2015; He et al. 2016; Lin et
al. 2016). Despite the great success of deep neural networks
on these image-based tasks, their superiorities are not that
remarkable on video-based tasks, especially for the task of
action recognition. While good performance of deep models
depends on large amounts of labeled training samples, it is
difﬁcult to collect sufﬁcient labeled data for action recognition because manually annotating a video is far more laborious and error-prone than an image.
Recently, more and more works focus on learning deep
video representation in unsupervised ways without the need
of annotated training data. Some approaches (Wiskott and
Sejnowski 2002; Taylor et al. 2010; Le et al. 2011) use the
convolutional operation to learn abstract and robust lowlevel spatio-temporal features of videos. Su et al. (2016) developed an unsupervised method to parse video sequences
and hierarchically encoded the segmented features to represent actions instead of learning low-level features. Misra,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6910

