The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Towards Training Probabilistic Topic Models on
Neuromorphic Multi-Chip Systems
Zihao Xiao, Jianfei Chen, Jun Zhu∗
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., TNList Lab, State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Sys.
Center for Bio-Inspired Computing Research, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
{xiaozh15, chenjian14}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn

Yuan et al. 2015). However, all these algorithms are implemented on general purpose computers (GPCs), which
are powerful in computing and ﬂexible in programming but
energy-consuming.
Neuromorphic multi-chip systems (NMSs) represent an
emerging hardware technology for low-energy implementations of spiking neural networks (SNNs). SNNs were originally studied to understand the computation in the brain,
where a neuron communicates with other neurons via voltage spikes. Different from GPCs, NMSs have some special
designs, making it highly nontrivial to implement an ordinary leaning algorithm. First, there are dedicated computing units calculating a weighted sum of the inputs and triggering spikes accordingly. Second, NMSs use distributed
memory (Merolla et al. 2014), and the on-chip memory is
typically limited (e.g., 52MB for TruthNorth (Merolla et
al. 2014) and 128MB for SpiNNaker (Furber et al. 2014)).
When a SNN is large, its neurons and model parameters
(e.g., synaptic weights) must reside on several chips. As
the inter-chip communication is only efﬁcient for spikes by
using the AER protocol (Mahowald 1994), parameter communication is either impossible or inefﬁcient. To extend the
storage size, a NMS can be integrated with an external memory (O’Connor et al. 2013) to store some infrequently accessed data. But in many scenarios where low-energy computing is required, the external memory can also be limited
(e.g., on a mobile phone). Thus, it is important to consider
the limited memory issue when implementing new models.
For topic models, existing learning algorithms do not
satisfy the basic computation and communication designs
of NMSs; thus cannot be directly implemented on NMSs.
For the popular collapsed Gibbs sampling (CGS) (Grifﬁths
and Steyvers 2004), the update of a model parameter (i.e.,
a count) only depends on its latest value, without needing parameter communication. But the sampling operation
in CGS is not implemented by SNN dynamics compatible
with NMSs. When the limited external memory is considered, CGS is undesirable because it stores the whole corpus and all topic assignments. Moreover, though the existing online or stochastic algorithms are memory-efﬁcient,
they require intensive parameter communications, i.e., the
update of one parameter depends on the exact value of another parameter. Speciﬁcally, the variational inference (VI)
methods (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003; Hoffman et al. 2013;

Abstract
Probabilistic topic models are popular unsupervised learning methods, including probabilistic latent semantic indexing (pLSI) and latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA). By now,
their training is implemented on general purpose computers (GPCs), which are ﬂexible in programming but energyconsuming. Towards low-energy implementations, this paper investigates their training on an emerging hardware technology called the neuromorphic multi-chip systems (NMSs).
NMSs are very effective for a family of algorithms called
spiking neural networks (SNNs). We present three SNNs to
train topic models. The ﬁrst SNN is a batch algorithm combining the conventional collapsed Gibbs sampling (CGS) algorithm and an inference SNN to train LDA. The other two
SNNs are online algorithms targeting at both energy- and
storage-limited environments. The two online algorithms are
equivalent with training LDA by using maximum-a-posterior
estimation and maximizing the semi-collapsed likelihood,
respectively. They use novel, tailored ordinary differential
equations for stochastic optimization. We simulate the new
algorithms and show that they are comparable with the GPC
algorithms, while being suitable for NMS implementation.
We also propose an extension to train pLSI and a method to
prune the network to obey the limited fan-in of some NMSs.

1

Introduction

Topic models have been widely used to discover latent semantic structures from a large corpus of text documents or
images in a bag-of-words format (Sivic et al. 2005). The
most popular models are probabilistic Latent Semantic Indexing (pLSI) (Hofmann 1999) and its Bayesian formulation
of Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei, Ng, and Jordan
2003). On mobile applications, LDA is a robust Bayesian
model that is suitable to learn from small, noisy data, e.g.,
images, texts and context logs (Bao et al. 2012). Moreover, some researchers have reported that learning LDA
with a hybrid architecture consisting of mobile devices and
servers reduces costs on the server end, as well as the response times on the mobile end (Robinson and Li 2015). On
servers, much recent progress has been made on developing efﬁcient algorithms to learn a large number of topics on
massive-scale datasets (Wang et al. 2014; Chen et al. 2016;
∗

corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6459

