The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Verifying Properties of Binarized Deep Neural Networks
Nina Narodytska

Shiva Kasiviswanathan

Leonid Ryzhyk

VMware Research
Palo Alto, USA

Amazon
Palo Alto, USA

VMware Research
Palo Alto, USA

Mooly Sagiv

Toby Walsh

VMware Research
Palo Alto, USA

UNSW and Data61
Sydney, Australia
al. 2016). These networks have a number of important features that are useful in resource constrained environments,
like embedded devices or mobile phones. Firstly, these networks are memory efﬁcient, as their parameters are primarily binary. Secondly, they are computationally efﬁcient as all
activations are binary, which enables the use of specialized
algorithms for fast binary matrix multiplication. These networks have been shown to achieve performance comparable
to traditional deep networks that use ﬂoating point precision
on several standard datasets (Hubara et al. 2016). Recently,
BNNs have been deployed for various embedded applications ranging from image classiﬁcation (McDanel, Teerapittayanon, and Kung 2017) to object detection (Kung et al.
2017).
The goal of this work is to analyze properties of binarized neural networks through the lens of Boolean satisﬁability (SAT). Our main contribution is a procedure for constructing a SAT encoding of a binarized neural network.
An important feature of our encoding is that it is exact and
does not rely on any approximations to the network structure. This means that this encoding allows us to investigate properties of BNNs by studying similar properties in
the SAT domain, and the mapping of these properties back
from the SAT to the neural network domain is exact. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work on verifying
properties of deep neural networks using an exact Boolean
encoding of a network. In our construction, we exploit attributes of BNN’s, both functional, e.g., most parameters of
these networks are binary, and structural, e.g., the modular structure of these networks. While these encodings could
be directly handled by modern SAT solvers, we show that
one can exploit the structure of these encodings to solve
the resulting SAT formulas more efﬁciently based on the
idea of counterexample-guided search (Clarke et al. 2000;
McMillan 2005; 2003).
While our encoding could be used to study many properties of BNNs, in this paper we focus on important properties
of network robustness and equivalence.

Abstract
Understanding properties of deep neural networks is an important challenge in deep learning. In this paper, we take a
step in this direction by proposing a rigorous way of verifying properties of a popular class of neural networks, Binarized Neural Networks, using the well-developed means of
Boolean satisﬁability. Our main contribution is a construction
that creates a representation of a binarized neural network as
a Boolean formula. Our encoding is the ﬁrst exact Boolean
representation of a deep neural network. Using this encoding,
we leverage the power of modern SAT solvers along with a
proposed counterexample-guided search procedure to verify
various properties of these networks. A particular focus will
be on the critical property of robustness to adversarial perturbations. For this property, our experimental results demonstrate that our approach scales to medium-size deep neural
networks used in image classiﬁcation tasks. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work on verifying properties
of deep neural networks using an exact Boolean encoding of
the network.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have become ubiquitous in machine
learning with applications ranging from computer vision to
speech recognition and natural language processing. Neural networks demonstrate excellent performance in many
practical problems, often beating specialized algorithms for
these problems, which led to their rapid adoption in industrial applications. With such a wide adoption, important
questions arise regarding our understanding of these neural networks: How robust are these networks to perturbations of inputs? How critical is the choice of one architecture over the other? Does certain ordering of transformations matter? Recently, a new line of research on understanding neural networks has emerged that look into a
wide range of such questions, from interpretability of neural networks to verifying their properties (Bau et al. 2017;
Szegedy et al. 2014; Bastani et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2017;
Katz et al. 2017).
In this work we focus on an important class of neural
networks: Binarized Neural Networks (BNNs) (Hubara et

1. Deep neural networks have been shown susceptible to
crafted adversarial perturbations which force misclassiﬁcation of the inputs. Adversarial inputs can be used to
subvert fraud detection, malware detection, or mislead
autonomous navigation systems (Papernot et al. 2016;
Grosse et al. 2016) and pose a serious security risk (e.g.,

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6615

