The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Cross-Lingual Propagation
for Deep Sentiment Analysis
Xin Dong

Gerard de Melo

Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ, USA
xd48@rutgers.edu

Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ, USA
gdm@demelo.org

2. We propose encoding this information in embedding vectors that capture sentiment properties along multiple dimensions and allow the model to adapt to different domains
and circumstances. This is different from previous work on
cross-lingual projection, which has considered generic sentiment polarity lexicons. Different words, however, may
have strikingly different connotations in different contexts.
For instance, hot is generally positive when referring to
music, but tends to be negative when referring to the temperature in a hotel room.
3. We incorporate the induced embeddings into a custom
convolutional neural network architecture and show that
our approach can lead to consistent gains across different
languages on diverse datasets from different domains.

Abstract
Across the globe, people are voicing their opinion in social
media and various other online fora. Given such data, modern
deep learning-based sentiment analysis methods excel at determining the sentiment polarity of what is being said about
companies, products, etc. Unfortunately, such deep methods
require signiﬁcant training data, while for many languages,
resources and training data are scarce. In this work, we present
a cross-lingual propagation algorithm that yields sentiment
embedding vectors for numerous languages. We then rely on a
dual-channel convolutional neural architecture to incorporate
them into the network. This allows us to achieve gains in deep
sentiment analysis across a range of languages and domains.

1

Introduction
2

Motivation. As more and more users come online across the
globe, increasing numbers of people are voicing their opinion
in social media, blogs, review sites, and other online fora.
Given such valuable data, modern deep learning-based sentiment analysis methods excel at determining the sentiment
polarity of what is being said about companies, products, etc.
(Wang et al. 2015). Unfortunately, such deep methods require
substantial amounts of training data, because multiple levels
of computation, each with additional weights and parameters,
need to be learned, typically via end-to-end training.
This is a signiﬁcant problem for many of the world’s languages, for which resources may be too costly to obtain and
training data is scarce, especially when one considers that
new training data is needed for each domain and genre. A
model trained on movie reviews, for instance, will fare very
poorly on the task of assessing digital camera reviews, let
alone social media postings such as tweets.
Contributions. In this work, we present a cross-lingual propagation algorithm to overcome these challenges and enable
improved deep sentiment analysis across a range of languages
and domains. Our approach relies on word vectors that are
cross-lingually projected from a source language such as
English to any number of target languages. Our key contributions are as follows:
1. We present an approach to project sentiment information
across languages.

2.1

Approach

Sentiment Embedding Induction

For many languages and domains, there is a paucity of available data and resources. In some cases, it may be challenging
to obtain sufﬁcient in-domain training data, both because
there may be less data available online and because it may be
somewhat harder to ﬁnd annotators. Hence, a question that
arises is whether one can assist deep networks by incorporating external cues that enable the model to generalize better.
We conjecture that vector representations are a suitable means
of injecting sentiment-related signals into neural models, as
a sort of external prior. Generic word vectors as produced
by word2vec (Mikolov et al. 2013a) are widely used to feed
generic semantic information into a model. Preinitialization
with such vectors often leads to noticeable gains compared
to randomly initialized embedding matrices (Kim 2014).
In our study, we consider the question of whether further
gains can be achieved by relying on cross-lingual induction to
obtain more targeted signals pertaining to a word’s sentiment
rather than to its general semantics. For this, we ﬁrst derive
embeddings for English words and then use a graph-based
propagation algorithm to project these to further languages.
To obtain sentiment embeddings for English words, we consider the following strategies.
Sentiment Lexicons. Despite their inherent limitations, lexicon-driven sentiment analysis methods remain
widespread. One of their advantages is that they may be
better-suited at performing robustly across different domains

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5771

