The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Water Advisor — A Data-Driven, Multi-Modal,
Contextual Assistant to Help With Water Usage Decisions
Jason Ellis, Biplav Srivastava, Rachel K. E. Bellamy, Andy Aaron
IBM T J Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, New York 10598

Abstract
We demonstrate Water Advisor, a multi-modal assistant
to help non-experts make sense of complex water quality data and apply it to their speciﬁc needs. A user can
chat with the tool about water quality and activities of
interest, and the system tries to advise using available
water data for a location, applicable water regulations
and relevant parameters using AI methods.

Figure 1: Sample advisories - by EPA for Flint residents
(left) and by state for visitors (right; Washington State).

Introduction
Water, due to its role as a critical resource for health, is relevant to many aspects of a person’s daily decisions about
living (e.g., drinking, bathing), profession (e.g., ﬁshing, irrigation) or recreation (e.g, boating). A decision in this space
needs to consider the activity (purpose) of the water use, relevant water quality parameters and their applicable regulatory standards for safety, and actual data. A further complication is that there may be missing data for a given location,
time or parameters of interest; there may be overlapping regulations and there may be alternative ways to measure a particular water quality parameter. Finally, end users need to
understand the suggested advice and not take it out of context.
Given the importance of water decisions, it is surprising
that there are not many assistant tools available. There are a
few public tools that make water quality data available such
as WaterLive mobile app for Australia 1 , Bath app for UK2 ,
and GangaWatch for India (Sandha, Srivastava, and Randhawa 2017), but their user interfaces are oriented towards
expert users.
As a consequence, public health challenges such as the
Flint water crisis (Pieper, Tang, and Edwards 2017) are hard
to manage. Figure 1 shows examples of advisories that the
US Environment Protection Agency (EPA) provides on its
website in response to a crisis or civic agencies give proactively. Water Advisor (WA) is intended to be a data-driven
assistant that can guide people who do not have any special
water expertise. Figure 2 shows the Water Advisor user interface.

Data, Analysis and (AI) Challenges
WA relies on the following data: a mapping of activities
(e.g., bathing, drinking, ﬁshing) to water quality parameters,
regulations applicable to activity plus water quality parameters, and actual water quality data. For mapping, we rely on
previous work by (Sandha, Randhawa, and Srivastava 2015).
For regulations, we rely on information provided by the
EPA for drinking and aquatic activities3 , state regulatory
bodies (Michigan4 and New York5 ) and regulations collected by (Sandha, Randhawa, and Srivastava 2015) for India. Some key decision-related challenges regarding regulations are: what regulation to use and what limits to apply depending on the region of interest, the purpose of water usage, the parameters for which data is available and
their safe limits depending on parameters characteristics. We
currently support four types of parameters, which is easily
extendible. (a) lowAccept: where a lower quantity is preferred, like Faecal Coliform (FC); (b) highAccept: where
higher quantity is preferred, like Dissolved Oxygen (DO);
(c) accept range: where non-trivial acceptable limit is directly speciﬁed, like pH; and (f) generic: where acceptable
limit is generally unknown and contextual, like temperature.
We provide this data publicly in JSON format for others
3

https://www.epa.gov/wqc/national-recommendedwater-quality-criteria-human-health-criteria-table;
https://www.epa.gov/wqc/national-recommended-water-qualitycriteria-aquatic-life-criteria-table
4
http://www.michigan.gov/deq/0,4561,7-1353313 3675 3691-9677–,00.html
5
https://www.health.ny.gov/regulations/nycrr/title 10/part 6/
subpart 6-2.htm

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://www.water.nsw.gov.au/realtime-data
2
2https://environment.data.gov.uk/bwq/proﬁles/

8198

