The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Urban Dreams of Migrants: A Case
Study of Migrant Integration in Shanghai
Yang Yang,† Chenhao Tan, Zongtao Liu,† Fei Wu,† Yueting Zhuang†
†

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
Department of Computer Science, University of Colorado Boulder, USA
yangya@zju.edu.cn, chenhao@chenhaot.com, {tomstream, wufei, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn


and moves around, and people that a migrant interacts with
and befriend. First, because cities are divided into neighborhoods with varying characteristics, there may exist systematic differences between locals and migrants in where they
live. For example, Fig. 1 shows the geographical distributions of locals and migrants compared to the overall average
in Shanghai. Somewhat surprisingly, locals are more active
in the periphery of the city, whereas migrants relatively concentrate in the center of Shanghai. This observation echoes
previous ﬁndings that existing residents ﬂee from central
cities, known as “white ﬂight” (Frey 1979). It yet remains
an open question how migrants’ active areas evolve as they
integrate into the city.
Another important aspect of migrant integration is how
migrants establish their personal connections. As humans
are social animals, whether a migrant can successfully develop a personal network is crucial in her integration process (Gurak and Caces 1992). In particular, Yue et al. show
that migrant-resident ties are signiﬁcantly associated with
migrant integration (Yue et al. 2013). However, it remains
unclear how a migrant makes initial friends and then gradually build a personal network in a new city. It is also unknown what characteristics differentiate the social networks
of migrants from those of locals.
In order to investigate the above two aspects, we conduct a case study of Shanghai, one of the biggest cities in
China, and present the ﬁrst large-scale quantitative exploration of migrant integration. We employ a one-month complete dataset of telecommunication metadata from China
Telecom,1 which contains 698 million call logs between 54
million mobile users in Shanghai. To identify a comparison
point of migrants, we deﬁne locals as the persons that were
born in Shanghai, the counterpart of migrants. As migrants
may undergo different stages in their integration, we further differentiate migrants that have been in a new city for
a while, settled migrants, from migrants that recently moved
to a new city, new migrants (Section 2).
First, we explore how locals, settled migrants, and new
migrants differ in their mobile communication networks and
geographical locations in Section 3. We ﬁnd interesting dif-

Abstract
Unprecedented human mobility has driven the rapid urbanization around the world. In China, the fraction of population
dwelling in cities increased from 17.9% to 52.6% between
1978 and 2012. Such large-scale migration poses challenges
for policymakers and important questions for researchers.
To investigate the process of migrant integration, we employ a
one-month complete dataset of telecommunication metadata
in Shanghai with 54 million users and 698 million call logs.
We ﬁnd systematic differences between locals and migrants
in their mobile communication networks and geographical locations. For instance, migrants have more diverse contacts
and move around the city with a larger radius than locals after they settle down. By distinguishing new migrants (who recently moved to Shanghai) from settled migrants (who have
been in Shanghai for a while), we demonstrate the integration
process of new migrants in their ﬁrst three weeks. Moreover,
we formulate classiﬁcation problems to predict whether a person is a migrant. Our classiﬁer is able to achieve an F1-score
of 0.82 when distinguishing settled migrants from locals, but
it remains challenging to identify new migrants because of
class imbalance. This classiﬁcation setup holds promise for
identifying new migrants who will successfully integrate into
locals (new migrants that misclassiﬁed as locals).

1

Introduction

More than half of the world’s population are now living in
urban areas (Nations 2014). This rapid urbanization process
involves a continuous ﬂow of migrants into the cities. For
example, the number of migrants now live in China is 236
million, 17% of the country’s entire population (Lin 2013).
These migrants play an important role in a city’s rapid development by strengthening its political and economic status and bringing diverse cultures to the city (Lee 2015).
However, great challenges arise because of the fast rate of
migration. Policymakers need to address a multitude of issues regarding migrants in modern cities, including environment, land, labor, segregation, and social inequality (Bai,
Shi, and Liu 2014; Lee 2015; Razavi and Staab 2010;
Goodburn 2009). It is thus an important research question
to understand how migrants integrate into a city.
In this work, we are interested in two central components
of migrant integration: the locations where a migrant lives

1

China Telecom Corporation is a Chinese state-owned telecommunication company and the third largest mobile service providers
in China.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

507

