The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Core Dependency Networks
Alejandro Molina

Alexander Munteanu

Kristian Kersting

alejandro.molina@tu-dortmund.de
CS Department
TU Dortmund, Germany

alexander.munteanu@tu-dortmund.de
CS Department
TU Dortmund, Germany

kersting@cs.tu-darmstadt.de
CS Department and
Centre for Cognitive Science
TU Darmstadt, Germany

weighted subsets of the data, which guarantee that models ﬁtting them will also provide a good ﬁt for the original data set, and have been studied before for clustering
(Badoiu, Har-Peled, and Indyk 2002; Feldman, Faulkner,
and Krause 2011; Feldman, Schmidt, and Sohler 2013;
Lucic, Bachem, and Krause 2016), classiﬁcation (Har-Peled,
Roth, and Zimak 2007; Har-Peled 2015; Reddi, Póczos, and
Smola 2015), regression (Drineas, Mahoney, and Muthukrishnan 2006; 2008; Dasgupta et al. 2009; Geppert et al.
2017), and the smallest enclosing ball problem (Badoiu and
Clarkson 2003; 2008; Feldman, Munteanu, and Sohler 2014;
Agarwal and Sharathkumar 2015); we refer to (Phillips
2017) for a recent extensive literature overview. Our contribution continues this line of research and generalizes the
use of coresets to probabilistic graphical modeling.
Unfortunately, this coreset result does not extend to Dependency Networks over members of the exponential family in general. We prove that Dependency Networks over
Poisson random variables (Allen and Liu 2013; Hadiji et al.
2015) do not admit (sublinear size) coresets: every single input point is important for the model and needs to appear in
the coreset.This is unfortunate when modeling count data—
the primary target of Poisson distributions—which is at the
center of many scientiﬁc endeavors such as citation counts,
number of web page hits, counts of procedures in medicine,
etc. Therefore, despite our worst-case result, we will provide
an argument why our coreset construction for Dependency
Networks can still work well in practice on count data. To
corroborate our theoretical results, we empirically evaluated
the resulting Core Dependency Networks (CDNs) on several real data sets and demonstrate signiﬁcant gains over no
or naive sub-sampling, even for count data.
We proceed as follows. We review Dependency Networks
(DNs), prove that Gaussian DNs admit sublinear size coresets, and discuss the possibility to generalize this result to
count data. Before concluding, we present empirical results.

Abstract
Many applications infer the structure of a probabilistic graphical model from data to elucidate the relationships between
variables. But how can we train graphical models on a massive data set? In this paper, we show how to construct
coresets—compressed data sets which can be used as proxy
for the original data and have provably bounded worst case
error—for Gaussian dependency networks (DNs), i.e., cyclic
directed graphical models over Gaussians, where the parents of each variable are its Markov blanket. Speciﬁcally, we
prove that Gaussian DNs admit coresets of size independent
of the size of the data set. Unfortunately, this does not extend to DNs over members of the exponential family in general. As we will prove, Poisson DNs do not admit small coresets. Despite this worst-case result, we will provide an argument why our coreset construction for DNs can still work
well in practice on count data. To corroborate our theoretical
results, we empirically evaluated the resulting Core DNs on
real data sets. The results demonstrate signiﬁcant gains over
no or naive sub-sampling, even in the case of count data.

Artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning have achieved
considerable successes in recent years, and an ever-growing
number of disciplines rely on them. Data is now ubiquitous, and there is great value in understanding the data,
e.g., building probabilistic graphical models to elucidate
the relationships between variables. In the big data era,
however, scalability has become crucial for any useful machine learning approach. In this paper, we consider the
problem of training graphical models, in particular, Dependency Networks (Heckerman et al. 2000), on massive data
sets. They are cyclic directed graphical models, where the
parents of each variable are its Markov blanket and have
been proven successful in various tasks, such as collaborative ﬁltering (Heckerman et al. 2000), phylogenetic analysis (Carlson et al. 2008), genetic analysis (Dobra 2009;
Phatak et al. 2010), network inference from sequencing
data (Allen and Liu 2013), and trafﬁc as well as topic modeling (Hadiji et al. 2015).
Speciﬁcally, we show that Dependency Networks over
Gaussians—arguably one of the most prominent type of distribution in statistical machine learning—admit coresets of
size independent of the size of the data set. Coresets are

Dependency Networks
Most of the existing AI and machine learning literature on
graphical models is dedicated to binary, multinomial, or certain classes of continuous (e.g. Gaussian) random variables.
Undirected models, aka Markov Random Fields (MRFs),
such as Ising (binary random variables) and Potts (multinomial random variables) models have found a lot of applica-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3820

