The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

From Monte Carlo to Las Vegas: Improving
Restricted Boltzmann Machine Training through Stopping Sets
Pedro H. P. Savarese

Mayank Kakodkar

Bruno Ribeiro

Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
Chicago, IL, 60637
savarese@ttic.edu

Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47903
mkakodkar@purdue.edu

Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47903
tribeiro@cs.purdue.edu

Hinton 2012) and as a pre-training step for feedforward neural networks (Salakhutdinov and Hinton 2009), among others
(see Bengio and Delalleau (2009) and Erhan et al. (2010)).
As computing Z(W) directly is intractable for large state
spaces, Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods are
widely used to compute statistics of these models (including estimating the gradient ∂p(x; W)/∂W). MCMC works
by running a Markov chain (MC) Φ(W) with steady state
p(x; W) to equilibrium. Metropolis-Hastings and Gibbs sampling are two general such approaches.
However, in the real world, one is expected to run the
MC Φ(W) for only K steps, returning a state x ∼ π̂(K),
“approximately sampled” from the Markov chain’s true steady
state distribution p(x; W). Starting from a random state, K
needs to be quite large for this method to work.
Contrastive Divergence (CD-K) (Hinton 2002; 2012), improves this procedure by starting the MC from the visible
states of the training data. Empirically, CD-K works tremendously well to train RBMs with few hidden units (nH small)
even for K as low as K = 1 (Carreira-Perpiñán and Hinton
2005; Hinton 2002; 2012).
For high-dimensional RBMs, CD-K is less efﬁcient
and the reason is conjectured to be the longer mixing
times (Sutskever and Tieleman 2010), although concrete evidence is anecdotal as mixing times are hard to assess in high
dimensions. While not the main focus of our paper, armed
with our techniques, we will further empirically explore possible reasons for this high-dimensional difﬁculty.

Abstract
We propose a Las Vegas transformation of Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) estimators of Restricted Boltzmann
Machines (RBMs). We denote our approach Markov Chain
Las Vegas (MCLV). MCLV gives statistical guarantees in exchange for random running times. MCLV uses a stopping
set built from the training data and has maximum number of
Markov chain steps K (referred as MCLV-K). We present
a MCLV-K gradient estimator (LVS-K) for RBMs and explore the correspondence and differences between LVS-K and
Contrastive Divergence (CD-K), with LVS-K signiﬁcantly
outperforming CD-K training RBMs over the MNIST dataset,
indicating MCLV to be a promising direction in learning generative models.

Introduction
Despite the signiﬁcant recent advances in training discriminative neural network models, training generative models
has proven more elusive. As with most neural network training methods, algorithms for training Restricted Boltzmann
Machines (RBMs) (Hinton 2002; 2012; Smolensky 1986), a
class of energy-based generative neural network models, are
unreasonably effective. Though, some argue, not yet effective enough for modern applications. In this work we seek to
better understand and improve the training of RBMs.
RBM is a family of energy-based models with probability
distribution over a state vector x = (v, h) (assumed discrete
w.l.o.g.), v ∈ {0, 1}nV (e.g. an image) and binary latent
variables h ∈ {0, 1}nH ,
p(x; W) =

1
e−E(x;W) ,
Z(W)

A Las Vegas transformation of RBM training. The main
focus of this paper is to recast MCMC estimation of RBMs
as a Markov chain algorithm with stopping sets obtained
from the training data. The size of the stopping set is a hyperparameter that can be dynamically adapted during training
based on computational trade-offs.
In standard RBM training using MCMC, the MC stops
after a predeﬁned number of K steps. In our approach, the
MCMC can also stop if it reaches one of the states in the
stopping set. Thus, MCMC running times are random (and
are, in average, shorter than K). This approach is closer to a
Las Vegas algorithm than a Monte Carlo algorithm: we aim
to get perfect samples of a quantity with an algorithm that
has random running times. We denote this approach Markov
Chain Las Vegas with K maximum steps (MCLV-K).

(1)


where Z(W) = x e−E(x;W) is a partition function with
ﬁnite mean, E[Z(W)] < ∞, and E(x; W) is an energy
function given by


E x = (v, h); W = (W , b, a)
= −vT W h − bT v − aT h.
RBMs proved highly successful in many tasks, such as data
generation (Hinton 2002; Hinton, Osindero, and Teh 2006;
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4016

