The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Semi-Supervised Biomedical Translation with Cycle Wasserstein Regression GANs
Matthew B. A. McDermott

Tom Yan

Tristan Naumann

MIT, Cambridge, MA
mmd@mit.edu

MIT, Cambridge, MA
tyyan@mit.edu

MIT, Cambridge, MA
tjn@mit.edu

Nathan Hunt

Harini Suresh

Peter Szolovits

Marzyeh Ghassemi

MIT, Cambridge, MA
nhunt@mit.edu

MIT, Cambridge, MA
hsuresh@mit.edu

MIT, Cambridge, MA
psz@mit.edu

MIT, Verily,
Cambridge, MA
mghassem@mit.edu

Challenge Learning from “extra” unpaired data is valuable
in settings where acquiring a large amount of paired data is
not feasible. In many clinical settings, paired dataset collection (e.g., patient data pre- and post-treatment) is impossible,
as doctors have an ethical imperative to intervene on patients
at times inconvenient for dataset curation. In gene expression
tasks, obtaining expression levels for transcripts corresponding to the entire genome is expensive, but there are large
corpora of smaller snippets, independently measured for the
purposes of individual studies.

Abstract
The biomedical ﬁeld offers many learning tasks that share
unique challenges: large amounts of unpaired data, and a high
cost to generate labels. In this work, we develop a method
to address these issues with semi-supervised learning in regression tasks (e.g., translation from source to target). Our
model uses adversarial signals to learn from unpaired datapoints, and imposes a cycle-loss reconstruction error penalty
to regularize mappings in either direction against one another.
We ﬁrst evaluate our method on synthetic experiments, demonstrating two primary advantages of the system: 1) distribution
matching via the adversarial loss and 2) regularization towards
invertible mappings via the cycle loss. We then show a regularization effect and improved performance when paired data is
supplemented by additional unpaired data on two real biomedical regression tasks: estimating the physiological effect of
medical treatments, and extrapolating gene expression (transcriptomics) signals. Our proposed technique is a promising
initial step towards more robust use of adversarial signals
in semi-supervised regression, and could be useful for other
tasks (e.g., causal inference or modality translation) in the
biomedical ﬁeld.

Goal Our goal is a mechanism of semi-supervised learning for regression problems that 1) leverages large amounts
of unpaired data to improve performance on tasks with a
scarcity of paired data, and 2) provides an approximately invertible solution from source to target domains. For example,
in estimating medical treatment effect, a patient may have
data from only a pre- or post- treatment rather than both. In
gene expression tasks, the inherent intracorrelations within
gene expression proﬁles implies that we should be able to
translate between different subsets of the transcriptome —
the set of all total gene transcription products in a cell — in
an invertible, non-lossy manner (Eisen et al. 1998).

Introduction

Solution We design a novel joint regression-adversarial
model (CWR-GAN) that uses cycle-consistent generative adversarial networks (GANs) for translation tasks. We demonstrate our method on synthetic datasets to illustrate its key
points and analyze its effects on two real-world biomedical
datasets: individual treatment effect (ITE) regression based
on electronic health record (EHR) data, and transcriptomics
(gene expression) extrapolation.

Motivation Relative to other ﬁelds which have seen recent
interest in multi-modal translation (e.g., images to text, or
audio to video), the biomedical ﬁeld lacks large datasets that
are “paired” — where two sets of data from the same subject
are available (e.g., at different times or in different modalities). Additionally, many biomedical translation tasks involve
regressions between source and target domains that are either
1) both representations of some shared, underlying state (e.g.
modality translation), or 2) driven by real, bio-physical mechanisms. In either case, we expect both directions of translation
to have meaningful, approximately invertible solutions. This
makes “cycle” consistency — mapping a particular source
example to the target domain and back — desirable. It also
means we can leverage the inferred cycle map to reframe
the previously independent regression problems as a joint,
multi-task learning problem.

Contributions We develop an end-to-end differentiable
architecture that uses adversarial signals for semi-supervised
bi-directional translation in the biomedical ﬁeld. In doing so,
we make the following speciﬁc contributions:
• We design a cycle-consistent regression adversarial network for semi-supervised regression learning.
• We demonstrate the regularization effect and discriminative performance boost of our method on synthetic data in
a semi-supervised setting.
• We evaluate our approach in two diverse real-world
biomedical datasets: 1) forecasting the individual treat-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2363

