The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Building Deep Networks
on Grassmann Manifolds
†

Zhiwu Huang,† Jiqing Wu,† Luc Van Gool†‡

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland ‡ VISICS, KU Leuven, Belgium
{zhiwu.huang, jiqing.wu, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

The popular applications of Grassmannian data motivate
us to build a deep neural network architecture for Grassmannian representation learning. To this end, the new network
architecture is designed to accept Grassmannian data directly as input, and learns new favorable Grassmannian representations that are able to improve the ﬁnal visual recognition tasks. In other words, the new network aims to deeply
learn Grassmannian features on their underlying Riemannian manifolds in an end-to-end learning architecture. In
summary, two main contributions are made by this paper:
• We explore a novel deep network architecture in the context of Grassmann manifolds, where it has not been possible to apply deep neural networks. More generally, treating Grassmannian data in deep networks can be very valuable in a variety of machine learning applications.
• We generalize backpropagation to train the proposed network with deriving an connection weight update rule on a
speciﬁc Riemannian manifold. Furthermore, we incorporate QR decomposition into backpropagation that might
prove very useful in other applications since QR decomposition is a very common linear algebra operator.

Abstract
Learning representations on Grassmann manifolds is popular
in quite a few visual recognition tasks. In order to enable deep
learning on Grassmann manifolds, this paper proposes a deep
network architecture by generalizing the Euclidean network
paradigm to Grassmann manifolds. In particular, we design
full rank mapping layers to transform input Grassmannian
data to more desirable ones, exploit re-orthonormalization
layers to normalize the resulting matrices, study projection
pooling layers to reduce the model complexity in the Grassmannian context, and devise projection mapping layers to respect Grassmannian geometry and meanwhile achieve Euclidean forms for regular output layers. To train the Grassmann networks, we exploit a stochastic gradient descent setting on manifolds of the connection weights, and study a matrix generalization of backpropagation to update the structured data. The evaluations on three visual recognition tasks
show that our Grassmann networks have clear advantages
over existing Grassmann learning methods, and achieve results comparable with state-of-the-art approaches.

Introduction
This paper introduces a deep network architecture on Grassmannians, which are manifolds of linear subspaces. In many
computer vision applications, linear subspaces have become
a core representation. For example, for face veriﬁcation
(Huang et al. 2015b), emotion estimation (Liu et al. 2014b)
and activity recognition (Cherian et al. 2017), the image
sets of a single person are often modeled by low dimensional subspaces that are then compared on Grassmannians. Besides, for video classiﬁcation, it is also very common
to use autoregressive and moving average (ARMA) model
(Vemulapalli, Pillai, and Chellappa 2013). The parameters
of the ARMA model are known to be modeled with a highdimensional linear subspace. For shape analysis, the widelyused afﬁne and linear shape spaces for speciﬁc conﬁgurations can be also identiﬁed by points on the Grassmann manifold (Anirudh et al. 2017). Applications involving dynamic
environments and autonomous agents often perform online
visual learning by using subspace tracking techniques like
incremental principal component analysis (PCA) to dynamically learn a better representational model as the appearance
of the moving target (Turaga et al. 2011).

Background
Grassmannian Geometry
A Grassmann manifold Gr(q, D) is a q(D − q) dimensional compact Riemannian manifold, which is the set of
q-dimensional linear subspaces of the RD . Thus, each point
on Gr(q, D) is a linear subspace that is spanned by the related orthonormal basis matrix X of size D × q such that
X T X = Iq , where Iq is the identity matrix of size q × q.
One of the most popular approaches to represent linear
subspaces and approximate the true Grassmannian geodesic
distance is the projection mapping framework Φ(X) =
XX T proposed by (Edelman, Arias, and Smith 1998).
As the projection Φ(X) is a D × D symmetric matrix, a natural choice of inner product is X1 , X2 Φ =
tr(Φ(X1 )T Φ(X2 )). The inner product induces a distance
metric named projection metric:
dp (X1 , X2 ) = 2−1/2 X1 X1T − X2 X2T F .

(1)

where  · F indicates the matrix Frobenius norm. As proved
in (Harandi et al. 2013), the projection metric can
√ approximate the true geodesic distance up to a scale of 2.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3279

