The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Multi-Modal Word Representation
Grounded in Visual Context
Éloi Zablocki, Benjamin Piwowarski, Laure Soulier, Patrick Gallinari
LIP6
UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR 7606, CNRS, Sorbonne Universités
F-75005, Paris, France
{eloi.zablocki, benjamin.piwowarski, laure.soulier, patrick.gallinari}@lip6.fr
RQ1

Abstract
Representing the semantics of words is a long-standing problem for the natural language processing community. Most
methods compute word semantics given their textual context
in large corpora. More recently, researchers attempted to integrate perceptual and visual features. Most of these works consider the visual appearance of objects to enhance word representations but they ignore the visual environment and context
in which objects appear. We propose to unify text-based techniques with vision-based techniques by simultaneously leveraging textual and visual context to learn multimodal word
embeddings. We explore various choices for what can serve
as a visual context and present an end-to-end method to integrate visual context elements in a multimodal skip-gram
model. We provide experiments and extensive analysis of the
obtained results.

1

textual contexts
the
red

RQ2
entity
apple

is
fusion
RQ3

juicy
sim

evaluation

banana

visual contexts

cat
Figure 1: Illustration of our approach and underlying research questions: RQ1 concerns using visual contexts for
the visual part of the model, RQ2 is about the integration
of the visual part with the text model and RQ3 deals with
the evaluation of the embeddings.

Introduction

Representing word semantics is a long-standing problem
that conditions major applications such as automatic translation (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015), sentiment analysis
(Maas et al. 2011), and text summarization (Rush, Chopra,
and Weston 2015). Distributional Semantic Models (DSMs)
leverage large text corpora under the Distributional Hypothesis (Harris 1954), a strong assumption which states that
words that occur in similar contexts should have similar
meanings, to produce ﬁxed-length vectorial representation
for words based on their co-occurrences in text corpora.
To further improve the quality of word representation,
leveraging multimodal information is crucial. Indeed, psychological studies have given pieces of evidence that the
meaning of words is grounded in perception (Glenberg and
Kaschak 2002; Barsalou 2008) and Gordon and Van Durme
(2013) report a bias between what is said in texts and what
can be seen in images. These observations outline the complementary roles of images and texts and bring new perspectives to multimodal approaches bridging textual information with visual ones to improve natural language processing tasks (Hill and Korhonen 2014; Lazaridou, Pham,
and Baroni 2015). Besides, it is worth mentioning that this
has become possible thanks to the exploitation of signiﬁcant advances in computer vision offering efﬁcient tools for

semantic extraction in images (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012; Xu et al. 2015).
In this context, multimodal representation learning models have been proposed to enhance word representations using either sequential (Kiela et al. 2014; Bruni, Tran, and Baroni 2014) or joint fusion techniques (Hill and Korhonen
2014; Lazaridou, Pham, and Baroni 2015). However, most
of these works ignore the visual context of objects. We posit
that learning representations of contexts in different modalities should be a key component of multimodal DSMs. The
importance of context is illustrated in a simple example (Figure 1). From an image of an apple on a black background,
we can see its color, its texture and shape. From its context,
e.g., growing on a tree, we can infer the relative size of apples with respect to the tree leaves, and that apples are fruits
that grow on trees. If there is someone that is eating the apple, we can infer that apples are edible, and so on. From
this example, we understand why exploiting the visual surroundings and context of objects might be useful to grasp
the semantics of words.
In this work, we propose a multimodal model for learning

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5626

