The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

On Recognising Nearly Single-Crossing Preferences
Florian Jaeckle, Dominik Peters, Edith Elkind
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK
ﬂorian.jaeckle@eng.ox.ac.uk, {dominik.peters, edith.elkind}@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
If voters’ preferences are one-dimensional, many hard problems
in computational social choice become tractable. A preference
proﬁle can be classiﬁed as one-dimensional if it has the singlecrossing property, which requires that the voters can be ordered
from left to right so that their preferences are consistent with
this order. In practice, preferences may exhibit some onedimensional structure, despite not being single-crossing in
the formal sense. Hence, we ask whether one can identify
preference proﬁles that are close to being single-crossing.
We consider three distance measures, which are based on
partitioning voters or candidates or performing a small number
of swaps in each vote. We prove that it can be eﬃciently
decided if voters can be split into two single-crossing groups.
Also, for every ﬁxed k ⩾ 1 we can decide in polynomial time
if a proﬁle can be made single-crossing by performing at most
k candidate swaps per vote. In contrast, for each k ⩾ 3 it is
NP-complete to decide whether candidates can be partitioned
into k sets so that the restriction of the input proﬁle to each set
is single-crossing.

1

distance metric

single-peaked

single-crossing

voter deletion
alternative deletion
voter partition
alternative partition
local swaps

NP-complete a,b
in P a
NP-complete a
open
NP-complete a

in P b
NP-complete b
in P for k = 2
NP-complete
in XP wrt k

Table 1: Overview of the complexity of deciding whether a
proﬁle is close to being structured. Bold results are new.
a proved by Erdélyi, Lackner, and Pfandler (2017).
b proved by Bredereck, Chen, and Woeginger (2016).

of polynomial-time algorithms proposed for several rules and
various notions of structure (Betzler, Slinko, and Uhlmann
2013; Skowron et al. 2015; Yu, Chan, and Elkind 2013;
Clearwater, Puppe, and Slinko 2015; Peters and Elkind 2016;
Peters and Lackner 2017).
The two best-known types of structured preferences are
single-peaked preferences (Black 1948; Arrow 1951) and
single-crossing preferences (Inada 1964; Mirrlees 1971;
Roberts 1977). Informally, the former notion is based on
ordering the candidates along a one-dimensional axis, while
the latter notion is based on ordering the voters from left to
right; in both cases, the voters’ preferences are required to be
consistent with this ordering. In particular, single-crossing
preferences arise when voters’ opinions depend only on a
single one-dimensional type or parameter. For example, in
political elections, this parameter may be the position of
the voter on the left-to-right ideological spectrum (if candidates, too, can be positioned on this spectrum, the voters’
preferences will be single-peaked, in addition to being singlecrossing, but single-crossing preferences may arise even if
this is not the case). Similarly, when voters choose among
several policies, the policy space may be complicated and
not obviously one-dimensional, but the voter’s preferences
could still be explainable by a single parameter (such as their
position on how to deal with a trade-oﬀ). The economics
literature considers many such scenarios, including taxation,
coalition formation, public goods, and education markets (see
Saporiti 2009).
Proﬁles that are single-peaked or single-crossing have
many attractive properties: for instance, for both domains it

Introduction

There is a growing body of literature in computational social choice that aims to identify notions of structure in collective preferences, and to provide eﬃcient algorithms for
recognising structured preferences; see a recent survey by
Elkind, Lackner, and Peters (2017). By discovering structural
properties of a preference proﬁle we obtain an explanatory
model of voters’ behavior. Often such models allow us to
solve preference aggregation and elicitation problems more
eﬃciently. This is particularly important in the context
of multiwinner voting: while multiwinner voting rules are
useful in a variety of applications ranging from group recommendation systems and design of marketing campaigns to
parliamentary elections, and have attracted intense interest in
recent years (see Faliszewski et al. 2017), for many appealing
multiwinner rules the winner determination problem is computationally hard (Lu and Boutilier 2011; Aziz et al. 2015;
Skowron, Faliszewski, and Lang 2016). Thus, it is important
to identify natural subdomains where winning sets can be
computed eﬃciently. The approach based on structured preferences has been very successful in this setting, with a number
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1079

