The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Explainable Cross-Domain Recommendations
through Relational Learning
Sirawit Sopchoke

Ken-ichi Fukui, Masayuki Numao

Graduate School of Information
Science and Technology,
Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan
sirawit@ai.sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp

Institute of Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research,
Osaka University, Ibaraki,
Osaka 567-0047, Japan
{surname}@ai.sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp
users and items. Hence, the relational learning captured our
interest to model and provide a potential solution for explainable cross-domain recommendations.
We propose a method to generate explainable recommendation rules on cross-domain problems using relational learning.
The generated rules explain why the system gives a particular
recommendation to a user. The rules are simple and understandable. Moreover, some novel recommendations in the
primary domain are generated based on the user’s preference
on additional domains.

Abstract
We propose a method to generate explainable recommendation
rules on cross-domain problems. Our two main contributions
are: i) using relational learning to generate the rules which are
able to explain clearly why the items were recommended to
the particular user, ii) using the user’s preferences of items
on different domains and item attributes to generate novel or
unexpected recommendations for the user. To illustrate that
our method is indeed feasible and applicable, we conducted
experiments on music and movie domains.

Recommender systems (RS) currently become one of
the most basic supportive techniques in an online landscape/world. RS has proven to be a major source of enhanced
functionality, user satisfaction, and revenue improvement.
The most common critical issues found with RS include
maximizing prediction accuracy, solving cold-start problem,
reducing sparsity, providing novelty, diversity and serendipity.
However, solving one problem may create another problem,
or a trade-off. All issues have not been perfectly solved since
many current recommender algorithms seem to be locked
away inside a black box. Once an algorithm is processed,
it is quite difﬁcult to understand why it gives a particular
recommendation to a set of data inputs. If we can understand
the reason behind the recommendation, we believe we will be
able to possibly ﬁnd the way to handle such problems more
effectively.
Cross-domain approach improves prediction accuracy by
reducing data sparsity and offering added values to recommendations by providing diversity, novelty and serendipity
predictions (Cantador et al. 2015). In cross-domain recommendation tasks, the systems recommend items in the target
domain to users in the source domain. There are two types of
cross-domain approach: Aggregating and Transferring and
they are different mainly based on how knowledge from the
source domain is exploited.
Relational learning has already shown its use in RS. The
evidences from the researches by Kouki et al. (2015) and
Catherine and Cohen (2016) indicate that relational learning
provides a better recommendation performance by incorporating additional information compared to traditional methods
with a single dyadic relationship between the objects, i.e.

Research Methodology
We ﬁrst investigated how a user’s taste of another type-level
item (e.g., movie, book, game) is used to predict the user’s
music taste, for example, could a user’s movie taste be used
to predict his music taste? and how?
Our initial experiments were mainly conducted over two
datasets, user’s music and movie preferences and item attributes, obtained from Amazon product dataset provided by
UCSD.1 The user preference dataset included reviews, product metadata and links. The item attribute dataset contained
attributes of music and movies listed in the ﬁrst dataset. This
dataset was developed using Amazon Product API.
Our two proposed methods used to generate the music
recommendation rules are described below.
Method1: Recommendations on cross domains using items.
This method was designed based on traditional recommendation approach. Pearson correlation was used to ﬁnd similarities between users, then deduce the certain recommendation
rules. For the user-based recommendation, the similar taste
on movies would lead to a similar taste on music. For the itembased recommendation, the high conﬁdence of the deﬁned
rule would result in a music recommendation. The ProbLog2
syntax was used to describe the model. The approach was
performed in three steps: deﬁne rule, query and select output.
Only output greater than or equal to the desired threshold
would be selected, some examples are shown below.
Example: User-based recommendation
%"Music" will be recommended to user2 if user1 likes
%that "Music" and his movie preference influences user2
Defined rule: likedMusic(U2,Music)
:- influencesUser(U1,U2), likedMusic(U1,Music).
Query: query(likedMusic(U2,Music)).
1

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

8159

http://jmcauley.ucsd.edu/data/amazon/
https://dtai.cs.kuleuven.be/problog/

