The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning to Compose Task-Speciﬁc Tree Structures
Jihun Choi, Kang Min Yoo, Sang-goo Lee
Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea
{jhchoi, kangminyoo, sglee}@europa.snu.ac.kr

(RvNNs1 ) (Socher et al. 2013; Irsoy and Cardie 2014;
Bowman et al. 2016), on which this paper focuses, rely on
structured input (e.g. parse tree) to encode sentences, based
on the intuition that there is signiﬁcant semantics in the hierarchical structure of words. It is also notable that RvNNs are
generalization of RNNs, as linear chain structures on which
RNNs operate are equivalent to left- or right-skewed trees.
Although there is signiﬁcant beneﬁt in processing a sentence in a tree-structured recursive manner, data annotated
with parse trees could be expensive to prepare and hard to
be computed in batches (Bowman et al. 2016). Furthermore,
the optimal hierarchical composition of words might differ
depending on the properties of a task.
In this paper, we propose Gumbel Tree-LSTM, which
is a novel RvNN architecture that does not require structured data and learns to compose task-speciﬁc tree structures without explicit guidance. Our Gumbel Tree-LSTM
model is based on tree-structured long short-term memory
(Tree-LSTM) architecture (Tai, Socher, and Manning 2015;
Zhu, Sobihani, and Guo 2015), which is one of the most
renowned variants of RvNN.
To learn how to compose task-speciﬁc tree structures
without depending on structured input, our model introduces
composition query vector that measures validity of a composition. Using validity scores computed by the composition
query vector, our model recursively selects compositions until only a single representation remains. We use StraightThrough (ST) Gumbel-Softmax estimator (Jang, Gu, and
Poole 2017; Maddison, Mnih, and Teh 2017) to sample compositions in the training phase. ST Gumbel-Softmax estimator relaxes the discrete sampling operation to be continuous in the backward pass, thus our model can be trained via
the standard backpropagation. Also, since the computation
is performed layer-wise, our model is easy to implement and
naturally supports batched computation.
From experiments on natural language inference and sentiment analysis tasks, we ﬁnd that our proposed model outperforms or is at least comparable to previous sentence encoder models and converges signiﬁcantly faster than them.
The contributions of our work are as follows:

Abstract
For years, recursive neural networks (RvNNs) have been
shown to be suitable for representing text into ﬁxed-length
vectors and achieved good performance on several natural
language processing tasks. However, the main drawback of
RvNNs is that they require structured input, which makes
data preparation and model implementation hard. In this paper, we propose Gumbel Tree-LSTM, a novel tree-structured
long short-term memory architecture that learns how to compose task-speciﬁc tree structures only from plain text data efﬁciently. Our model uses Straight-Through Gumbel-Softmax
estimator to decide the parent node among candidates dynamically and to calculate gradients of the discrete decision. We
evaluate the proposed model on natural language inference
and sentiment analysis, and show that our model outperforms
or is at least comparable to previous models. We also ﬁnd that
our model converges signiﬁcantly faster than other models.

Introduction
Techniques for mapping natural language into vector space
have received a lot of attention, due to their capability of
representing ambiguous semantics of natural language using dense vectors. Among them, methods of learning representations of words, e.g. word2vec (Mikolov et al. 2013)
or GloVe (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014), are relatively well-studied empirically and theoretically (Baroni,
Dinu, and Kruszewski 2014; Levy and Goldberg 2014), and
some of them became typical choices to consider when
initializing word representations for better performance at
downstream tasks.
Meanwhile, research on sentence representation is still
in active progress, and accordingly various architectures—
designed with different intuition and tailored for different tasks—are being proposed. In the midst of them, three
architectures are most frequently used in obtaining sentence representation from words. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Kim 2014; Kalchbrenner, Grefenstette, and
Blunsom 2014) utilize local distribution of words to encode sentences, similar to n-gram models. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Dai and Le 2015; Kiros et al. 2015;
Hill, Cho, and Korhonen 2016) encode sentences by reading words in sequential order. Recursive neural networks

1

In some RvNN papers, the term ‘recursive neural network’ is
often abbreviated to ‘RNN’, however to avoid confusion with recurrent neural network we decided to use the acronym ‘RvNN’.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5094

