The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Memory-Augmented Monte Carlo Tree Search
Chenjun Xiao, Jincheng Mei, Martin Müller
Computing Science, University of Alberta
Edmonton, Canada
{chenjun,jmei2,mmueller}@ualberta.ca

a deep neural network, which is trained ofﬂine from an expert move dataset or self-generated simulations (Silver et al.
2016).
Compared with the amount of research done on discovering generalization from an ofﬂine learning procedure, not
too much attention has focused on exploiting the beneﬁts of
generalization during the online real-time search. The current paper proposes and evaluates a Memory-Augmented
MCTS algorithm to provide an alternative approach that
takes advantage of online generalization. We design a memory, where each entry contains information about a particular state, as the basis to construct an online value approximation. We demonstrate that this memory-based framework
is useful for improving the performance of MCTS in both
theory and practice, using an experiment in the game of Go.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: After preliminaries introduced in Section 2, we theoretically
analyze the memory framework in Section 3. The proposed
Memory-Augmented MCTS algorithm is presented in Section 4. Related work and experimental results are shown in
Section 5 and 6, respectively. In Section 7, we come to our
conclusion and future work.

Abstract
This paper proposes and evaluates Memory-Augmented
Monte Carlo Tree Search (M-MCTS), which provides a new
approach to exploit generalization in online real-time search.
The key idea of M-MCTS is to incorporate MCTS with a
memory structure, where each entry contains information of
a particular state. This memory is used to generate an approximate value estimation by combining the estimations of
similar states. We show that the memory based value approximation is better than the vanilla Monte Carlo estimation
with high probability under mild conditions. We evaluate MMCTS in the game of Go. Experimental results show that MMCTS outperforms the original MCTS with the same number
of simulations.

Introduction
The key idea of Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) is to construct a search tree of states evaluated by fast Monte Carlo
simulations (Coulom 2006). Starting from a given game
state, many thousands of games are simulated by randomized self-play until an outcome is observed. The state value
is then estimated as the mean outcome of the simulations.
Meanwhile, a search tree is maintained to guide the direction of simulation, for which bandit algorithms can be employed to balance exploration and exploitation (Kocsis and
Szepesvári 2006). However, with large state spaces, the accuracy of value estimation cannot be effectively guaranteed,
since the mean value estimation is likely to have high variance under relatively limited search time. Inaccurate estimation can mislead building the search tree and severely degrade the performance of the program.
Recently, several machine learning approaches have been
proposed to deal with this drawback of MCTS. For example,
deep neural networks are employed to learn domain knowledge and approximate a state value function. They are integrated with MCTS to provide heuristics which can improve
the search sample efﬁciency in practice (Silver et al. 2016;
Tian and Zhu 2015).
The successes of the machine learning methods can be
mostly contributed to the power of generalization, i.e., similar states share information. Generalized domain knowledge
is usually represented by function approximation, such as

Preliminaries
The Setting
Let S be the set of all possible states of a search problem.
Ns
Rs,t denote the value
For s ∈ S, let V̂ (s) = N1s t=1
estimation of state s from simulations, where Rs,t is the
outcome of a simulation, and Ns is the number of simulations starting from state s. The true value of a state s is denoted by V ∗ (s). The main idea of our Memory-Augmented
MCTS algorithm is to approximate value estimations with
the help of a memory, each entry of which contains the feature representation and simulation statistics of a particular
state. The approximate value estimation is performed as follows: given a memory M and a state x, we ﬁnd the M
most similar states Mx ⊂ M according to a distance metric d(·, x), and compute a memory-based value estimation
M
M
V̂M (x) = i=1 wi (x)V̂ (i), s.t. i=1 wi (x) = 1.
Let Xs,t = |Rs,t − V ∗ (s)| be the sampling error from
the tth simulation of state s. In the analysis of the most popular MCTS algorithm UCT (Kocsis and Szepesvári 2006),
Xs,t is assumed to be σ 2 -subgaussian, so the sampling er-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1455

