The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Recursive Scenario Decomposition Algorithm for
Combinatorial Multistage Stochastic Optimisation Problems
David Hemmi,1,2 Guido Tack,1,2 Mark Wallace1
1

Faculty of IT, Monash University, Australia
2
Data61/CSIRO, Australia
{david.hemmi, guido.tack, mark.wallace}@monash.edu

or MiniZinc (Nethercote et al. 2007), have been developed
to express deterministic decision problems (without presence of uncertainty). These frameworks enable a user to
simply express a decision problem, irrespective of the solving approach used to determine a solution. Once modeled,
a wide range of solver technologies (such as Mixed Integer Linear Programming or Constraint Programming) can be
used to ﬁnd solutions. As mentioned by Watson, Woodruff,
and Hart (2012), the coherent chain of modeling and solving used for deterministic decision problems is not yet as
well developed for their stochastic counterparts, hindering
the widespread adoption of stochastic programming.
Over the last years, the mentioned modeling frameworks
have been extended to support decision models that are subject to uncertainty. The uncertainty is commonly expressed
using scenarios, where each scenario describes the stochastic problem when all the random variables are ﬁxed. Furthermore, each scenario has a given probability of occurrence. Given a model of a stochastic problem, two solving
paradigms are generally available to ﬁnd solutions. First, the
model can be transformed into the extensive form, the so
called deterministic equivalent (DE). The DE expresses all
scenarios together in one large model that can be solved by
standard Mixed Integer (MIP) or Constraint Programming
(CP) solvers. However, the DE does not scale well with
respect to the number of scenarios or decision stages, and
solving the DE is intractable for all but the smallest problem instances. Secondly, dedicated algorithms for stochastic programs have been developed. These algorithms typically exploit the model structure of stochastic programs and
iteratively solve the decision problem. The publicly available solvers DECIS (Infanger 1999) and FortSP (Ellison,
Mitra, and Zverovich 2010) employ the L-Shaped method
(Van Slyke and Wets 1969), a variation of Benders decomposition for solving stochastic programs. Watson, Woodruff,
and Hart (2012) propose to use Progressive Hedging (PH),
a scenario decomposition algorithm, as a back-end solver
for their modeling framework PySP. Both Progressive Hedging and the L-Shaped method are designed to solve problems with continuous variables and convex constraints; extensions exist that permit discrete variables.
The focus of this work is on scenario based multistage stochastic optimization problems with a combinatorial
structure, i.e., discrete variables and nonlinear constraints

Abstract
Stochastic programming is concerned with decision making
under uncertainty, seeking an optimal policy with respect to
a set of possible future scenarios. This paper looks at multistage decision problems where the uncertainty is revealed
over time. First, decisions are made with respect to all possible future scenarios. Secondly, after observing the random
variables, a set of scenario speciﬁc decisions is taken. Our
goal is to develop algorithms that can be used as a back-end
solver for high-level modeling languages. In this paper we
propose a scenario decomposition method to solve multistage
stochastic combinatorial decision problems recursively. Our
approach is applicable to general problem structures, utilizes
standard solving technology and is highly parallelizable. We
provide experimental results to show how it efﬁciently solves
benchmarks with hundreds of scenarios.

Introduction
Machine learning and statistical inference methods are increasingly popular to create value from data, for example in
forecasting customer demand, patient ﬂow in healthcare, or
travel times in transport systems. However, to harness the
real value of predictions, one has to understand how to use
this information to improve decision making. Importantly,
predictions are always subject to a certain conﬁdence level.
In order to make realistic decisions, it is thus crucial to take
this inherent uncertainty into account.
Modeling uncertainty when solving real-world decision
problems is crucial for producing robust solutions. Oftentimes, a substantial beneﬁt results when describing decision problems with multiple time stages (Huang and Ahmed
2009). Examples of multistage problems are the management of inventory over multiple weeks with uncertain
customer demand, or production planning over a longer
time horizon with uncertain processing times or due dates.
Stochastic programming has been widely studied and applied as a framework to model and solve decision problems
where the uncertainty is independent of the decisions made
(Birge and Louveaux 2011).
Modeling frameworks, such as GAMS (McCarl, Meeraus, and Van der Eijk 2012), AIMMS (Bisschop and
Roelofs 2006), AMPL (Fourer, Gay, and Kernighan 1989)
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1322

