The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

HodgeRank with Information Maximization for
Crowdsourced Pairwise Ranking Aggregation
1

Qianqian Xu,1,3 Jiechao Xiong,2,3 Xi Chen,4 Qingming Huang,5,6 Yuan Yao7,3,

SKLOIS, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS, Beijing, China, 2 Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
3
BICMR and School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China
4
Department of IOMS, Stern School of Business, New York University, USA
5
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, 6 IIP., ICT., CAS, Beijing, China
7,
Department of Mathematics, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
xuqianqian@iie.ac.cn, jcxiong@tencent.com, xichen@nyu.edu, qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn, yuany@ust.hk 
rank aggregation from pairwise comparison data. In an analog to Fourier decomposition in signal processing, Hodge
decomposition of pairwise comparison data splits the aggregated global ranking and conﬂict of interests into different
orthogonal components. It not only generalizes the classical
Borda count in social choice theory to determine a global
ranking from pairwise comparison data under various statistical models, but also measures the conﬂicts of interests (i.e.,
inconsistency) in the pairwise comparison data. The inconsistency shows the validity of the ranking obtained and can
be further studied in terms of its geometric scale, namely
whether the inconsistency in the ranking data arises locally
or globally.

Abstract
Recently, crowdsourcing has emerged as an effective
paradigm for human-powered large scale problem solving in
various domains. However, task requester usually has a limited amount of budget, thus it is desirable to have a policy
to wisely allocate the budget to achieve better quality. In this
paper, we study the principle of information maximization
for active sampling strategies in the framework of HodgeRank, an approach based on Hodge Decomposition of pairwise
ranking data with multiple workers. The principle exhibits
two scenarios of active sampling: Fisher information maximization that leads to unsupervised sampling based on a sequential maximization of graph algebraic connectivity without considering labels; and Bayesian information maximization that selects samples with the largest information gain
from prior to posterior, which gives a supervised sampling
involving the labels collected. Experiments show that the proposed methods boost the sampling efﬁciency as compared to
traditional sampling schemes and are thus valuable to practical crowdsourcing experiments.

A fundamental problem in crowdsourcing ranking is the
sampling strategy, which is crucial to collect data efﬁciently.
Typically, there are two ways to design sampling schemes:
random sampling and active sampling. Random sampling is
a basic type of sampling and the principle of random sampling is that every item has the same probability of being
chosen at any stage during the sampling process. The most
important beneﬁt of random sampling over active methods
is its simplicity which allows ﬂexibility and generality to
diverse situations. However, this non-selective manner does
not sufﬁciently use the information of past labeled pairs, thus
potentially increases the costs in applications. This motivates us to investigate efﬁcient schemes for active sampling.

Introduction
The emergence of online paid crowdsourcing platforms,
like Amazon Mechanical Turk, presents us new possibilities to distribute tasks to human workers around the world,
on-demand and at scale. Recently, there arises a plethora
of pairwise comparison data in crowdsourcing experiments
on Internet (Liu 2011; Xu et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2013;
Fu et al. 2014; Chen, Lin, and Zhou 2015), where the comparisons can be modeled as oriented edges of an underlying graph. As online workers can come and complete tasks
posted by a company, and work for as long or as little as they
wish, the data we collected are highly imbalanced where different alternatives might receive different number of comparisons, and incomplete with large amount of missing values. To analyze the imbalanced and incomplete data efﬁciently, the newly proposed Hodge theoretic approach (Jiang
et al. 2011) provides us a simple yet powerful tool.
HodgeRank, introduced by (Jiang et al. 2011), is an application of combinatorial Hodge theory to the preference or

In this paper, we present a principle of active sampling
based on information maximization in the framework of
HodgeRank. Roughly speaking, Fisher’s information maximization with HodgeRank leads to a scheme of unsupervised active sampling which does not depend on actual observed labels (i.e., a ﬁxed sampling strategy before the data
is observed). Since this sampling scheme does not need the
feedback from the worker, it is fast and efﬁcient. Besides, it
is insensitive to outliers. On the other hand, a Bayesian information maximization equips us a supervised active sampling scheme that relies on the history of pairwise comparison data. By exploiting additional information in labels, supervised sampling often exhibits better performances than
unsupervised active sampling and random sampling. However as the supervised sampling is sensitive to outliers, while
reliability/quality of each worker is heterogeneous and un-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4326

