The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Generalized Adjustment Under Confounding and Selection Biases
Juan D. Correa

Jin Tian

Elias Bareinboim

Computer Science Department
Purdue University
correagr@purdue.edu

Department of Computer Science
Iowa State University
jtian@iastate.edu

Computer Science Department
Purdue University
eb@purdue.edu

the incidence of cancer would decrease had smoking been
banned in the corresponding population.
The problem of identiﬁability gives formal dressing to
this issue (Pearl 2000, Ch. 3). Speciﬁcally, it is concerned
with determining the effect of a treatment (X) on an outcome (Y ), denoted P (y|do(x)), based on the observational, non-experimental distribution P (v) (where V represents observable variables) and causal assumptions commonly represented as a directed acyclic graph. The difference between P (y|do(x)) and its probabilistic counterpart,
P (y|x), is known as confounding bias (Bareinboim and
Pearl 2016). For the graph in Fig. 1(a), the probability distribution P (y|x) includes variations due to the “backdoor”
path X ← Z → Y , while the distribution P (y|do(x)) describes a regime (Fig. 1(b)) where the incoming arrows towards X are cut and only causal inﬂuence remains. Confounding bias, in this case, appears in the form of extraneous
variations of Y that are not legitimately explained by X, but
are generated by a third variable, Z in this case.
The problem of confounding has been extensively studied
in the literature. A systematic mathematical treatment was
given in (Pearl 1995), which included the do-calculus. The
do-calculus was shown complete for non-parametric identiﬁability (Tian and Pearl 2002; Huang and Valtorta 2006;
Shpitser and Pearl 2006; Bareinboim and Pearl 2012a).
Despite the generality of such results, in practice, the most
common and pervasive method for controlling confounding
bias is known as the backdoor-adjustment (Pearl 1995). The
backdoor-adjustment formula dictates that the effect of X
on Y can be computed by controlling for a set of covariates
Z, i.e., averaging the conditional distribution of outcome Y
given treatment X and Z, weighted by the marginal distribution of Z. Pearl provided a formal and graphical justiﬁcation
for under what conditions a set Z could make the adjustment
formula valid (for a survey, see (Pearl 1995)).
The second bias, selection, may appear because of preferential exclusion of units from the sample. For instance,
in a typical study of the effect of grades on college admission, subjects with higher achievement tend to report their
scores more frequently than those who scored lower. In this
case, the data-gathering process will reﬂect a distortion in
the sample’s proportions and, since the data is no longer a
faithful representation of the underlying population, biased
estimates will be produced regardless of the number of sam-

Abstract
Selection and confounding biases are the two most common
impediments to the applicability of causal inference methods
in large-scale settings. We generalize the notion of backdoor
adjustment to account for both biases and leverage external
data that may be available without selection bias (e.g., data
from census). We introduce the notion of adjustment pair and
present complete graphical conditions for identifying causal
effects by adjustment. We further design an algorithm for
listing all admissible adjustment pairs in polynomial delay,
which is useful for researchers interested in evaluating certain properties of some admissible pairs but not all (common
properties include cost, variance, and feasibility to measure).
Finally, we describe a statistical estimation procedure that can
be performed once a set is known to be admissible, which entails different challenges in terms of ﬁnite samples.

Introduction
A fundamental challenge pervasive throughout science is the
study of cause and effect relationships from a combination
of non-experimental observations and substantive knowledge about the phenomenon under investigation. Causal relations are deemed more interpretable and robust than their
statistical counterparts. They are more amenable to extrapolation to new, unforeseen situations. Understanding the
world and constructing explanations are almost invariably
accomplished through the presentation of causal knowledge
with a coherent articulation of a causal story (Pearl 2000;
Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2001; Bareinboim and Pearl
2016; Pearl, Glymour, and Jewell 2016).
Two of the most common obstacles to discovering causal
relations appear in the form of two biases – confounding and
selection. The ﬁrst one may arise from the lack of control
over the decision-making process and the selection of actions, possibly due to costs, ethical, or technical considerations. This implies that the data is collected under an observational regime, where the population follows its natural tendency. Our goal, however, is to predict how the population
will react when it undergoes a change (intervention), following a new, compulsory decision protocol. For instance,
one is usually not interested in estimating the correlation between smoking and cancer (natural), but to establish whether
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6335

