The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

MuseGAN: Multi-Track Sequential Generative
Adversarial Networks for Symbolic Music Generation and Accompaniment
Hao-Wen Dong,∗1 Wen-Yi Hsiao,∗1,2 Li-Chia Yang,1 Yi-Hsuan Yang1
1

Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
2
Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
salu133445@citi.sinica.edu.tw, s105062581@m105.nthu.edu.tw, {richard40148, yang}@citi.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract
Generating music has a few notable differences from generating images and videos. First, music is an art of time, necessitating a temporal model. Second, music is usually composed of multiple instruments/tracks with their own temporal
dynamics, but collectively they unfold over time interdependently. Lastly, musical notes are often grouped into chords,
arpeggios or melodies in polyphonic music, and thereby introducing a chronological ordering of notes is not naturally
suitable. In this paper, we propose three models for symbolic
multi-track music generation under the framework of generative adversarial networks (GANs). The three models, which
differ in the underlying assumptions and accordingly the network architectures, are referred to as the jamming model, the
composer model and the hybrid model. We trained the proposed models on a dataset of over one hundred thousand bars
of rock music and applied them to generate piano-rolls of ﬁve
tracks: bass, drums, guitar, piano and strings. A few intratrack and inter-track objective metrics are also proposed to
evaluate the generative results, in addition to a subjective user
study. We show that our models can generate coherent music
of four bars right from scratch (i.e. without human inputs).
We also extend our models to human-AI cooperative music
generation: given a speciﬁc track composed by human, we
can generate four additional tracks to accompany it. All code,
the dataset and the rendered audio samples are available at
https://salu133445.github.io/musegan/.

Figure 1: Hierarchical structure of a music piece.

(e.g., a bar). People pay attention to structural patterns related to coherence, rhythm, tension and the emotion ﬂow
while listening to music (Herremans and Chew 2017). Thus,
a mechanism to account for the temporal structure is critical.
Second, music is usually composed of multiple instruments/tracks. A modern orchestra usually contains four different sections: brass, strings, woodwinds and percussion; a
rock band often includes a bass, a drum set, guitars and possibly a vocal. These tracks interact with one another closely
and unfold over time interdependently. In music theory, we
can also ﬁnd extensive discussions on composition disciplines for relating sounds, e.g., harmony and counterpoint.
Lastly, musical notes are often grouped into chords,
arpeggios or melodies. It is not naturally suitable to introduce a chronological ordering of notes for polyphonic music. Therefore, success in natural language generation and
monophonic music generation may not be readily generalizable to polyphonic music generation.
As a result, most prior arts (see the Related Work section
for a brief survey) chose to simplify symbolic music generation in certain ways to render the problem manageable.
Such simpliﬁcations include: generating only single-track
monophonic music, introducing a chronological ordering of
notes for polyphonic music, generating polyphonic music as
a combination of several monophonic melodies, etc.
It is our goal to avoid as much as possible such simpliﬁcations. In essence, we aim to generate multi-track polyphonic
music with 1) harmonic and rhythmic structure, 2) multitrack interdependency, and 3) temporal structure.

Introduction
Generating realistic and aesthetic pieces has been considered as one of the most exciting tasks in the ﬁeld of AI.
Recent years have seen major progress in generating images, videos and text, notably using generative adversarial
networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Radford, Metz,
and Chintala 2016; Vondrick, Pirsiavash, and Torralba 2016;
Saito, Matsumoto, and Saito 2017; Yu et al. 2017). Similar
attempts have also been made to generate symbolic music,
but the task remains challenging for the following reasons.
First, music is an art of time. As shown in Figure 1, music has a hierarchical structure, with higher-level building
blocks (e.g., a phrase) made up of smaller recurrent patterns
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

34

