The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning to Guide Decoding
for Image Captioning
Wenhao Jiang,1 Lin Ma,1 Xinpeng Chen,2 Hanwang Zhang,3 Wei Liu1
1

Tencent AI Lab, 2 Wuhan University, 3 Nanyang Technological University
{cswhjiang, forest.linma}@gmail.com, xinpeng chen@whu.edu.cn,
hanwangzhang@gmail.com, wliu@ee.columbia.edu

with a vector, which captures objects and semantic information, while decoder generates natural sentences by consuming the image representation. However, this vector is unlikely to capture all necessary structural information needed
for generating the description in the subsequent decoding
phase. Moreover, decoder steps need to generate sentences
that both describe the image contents and ﬁt the trained language model. The decoder needs to balance the two factors
to avoid that either one dominates the generating process.
We noticed that sometimes the generated sentence seems to
be too common and only weakly related to the input image.

Abstract
Recently, much advance has been made in image captioning, and an encoder-decoder framework has achieved outstanding performance for this task. In this paper, we propose
an extension of the encoder-decoder framework by adding
a component called guiding network. The guiding network
models the attribute properties of input images, and its output is leveraged to compose the input of the decoder at each
time step. The guiding network can be plugged into the current encoder-decoder framework and trained in an end-to-end
manner. Hence, the guiding vector can be adaptively learned
according to the signal from the decoder, making itself to embed information from both image and language. Additionally, discriminative supervision can be employed to further
improve the quality of guidance. The advantages of our proposed approach are veriﬁed by experiments carried out on the
MS COCO dataset.

One direction to overcome the above limitations of the
encoder-decoder framework is to introduce attention mechanisms, which steer the captioning model to focus on the important information for generating image descriptions (Xu
et al. 2015). Models with attention have achieved promising
performance on the image captioning tasks and some variants (Chen et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2016) have also been proposed by providing better annotation vectors. Useful external information related to input images has also been introduced into the attention model to improve the performance,
including (You et al. 2016; Mun, Cho, and Han 2017).

Introduction
Recently, much progress has been made in the high-level
vision problems, such as image captioning (Vinyals et al.
2015; Xu et al. 2015; Fang et al. 2015). Generating descriptions of images automatically is very useful in practice, for
example, it can help visually impaired people understand
image contents and improve image retrieval quality by discovering salient contents.
Even though a great success has been achieved in object
recognition, describing the contents of images automatically
is still a very challenging task and more difﬁcult than visual classiﬁcation. Image captioning models need to have
a thorough understanding of a certain image, and capture
the complicated relationships among objects and ﬁnd salient
ones. Moreover, they have to understand the interactions between images and languages and translate the image representations into language representations. Finally, the sentences generated to express the captured information need to
be natural.
Inspired by the advance in machine translation, the
encoder-decoder framework was proposed to describe image contents automatically. The encoder is usually a convolutional neural network (CNN), while decoder is a recurrent
neural network (RNN). The encoder represents the image

Another direction to address the limitations of the
encoder-decoder framework is to inject useful information
into the decoder at each time step. Because the decoder
can access the information related images at each time step,
balancing between describing the input image and ﬁtting
the language model becomes easier. Some works have followed this direction and introduced predictions of word occurrences in captions (Yao et al. 2016), semantic vector (Jia
et al. 2015; Zhou et al. 2016) into the decoder step, and
promising performance have been presented. However, none
of these models could learn the injected information for the
decoder automatically. Hence, it could not be adaptively adjusted according to the decoder.
In this paper, we propose a novel model that can learn
an extra guiding vector for the sentence generation progress
automatically. The guiding vector is modeled with a guiding neural network, which is plugged into the decoder and
accepts error signals from the decoder at each time step.
Hence, it can be trained in a complete end-to-end way. Moreover, supervision from captions can be employed to perform
discriminative training to learn a better guidance.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6959

