The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Stream Reasoning in Temporal Datalog
Alessandro Ronca, Mark Kaminski,
Bernardo Cuenca Grau, Boris Motik, Ian Horrocks
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
{alessandro.ronca, mark.kaminski, bernardo.cuenca.grau, boris.motik, ian.horrocks}@cs.ox.ac.uk

only keep a limited history of previously received input facts
in memory to perform computations. These challenges have
been addressed by extending traditional database query languages with window constructs, which declaratively specify
the ﬁnite part of the input stream relevant to the answers at
the current time (Arasu, Babu, and Widom 2006).
In recent years, there has been an increasing interest in
extending traditional stream management systems with logical, rule-based, reasoning capabilities (Barbieri et al. 2010;
Calbimonte, Corcho, and Gray 2010; Anicic et al. 2011;
Le-Phuoc et al. 2011; Zaniolo 2012; Özçep, Möller, and
Neuenstadt 2014; Beck et al. 2015; Dao-Tran, Beck, and
Eiter 2015). Rules can be very useful in stream processing
applications for capturing complex analysis tasks in a declarative way, as well as for representing background knowledge
about the application domain.

Abstract
In recent years, there has been an increasing interest in extending traditional stream processing engines with logical,
rule-based, reasoning capabilities. This poses signiﬁcant theoretical and practical challenges since rules can derive new
information and propagate it both towards past and future
time points; as a result, streamed query answers can depend
on data that has not yet been received, as well as on data that
arrived far in the past. Stream reasoning algorithms, however,
must be able to stream out query answers as soon as possible,
and can only keep a limited number of previous input facts
in memory. In this paper, we propose novel reasoning problems to deal with these challenges, and study their computational properties on Datalog extended with a temporal sort
and the successor function—a core rule-based language for
stream reasoning applications.

1

Example 1. Consider a number of wind turbines scattered
throughout the North Sea. Each turbine is equipped with a
sensor, which continuously records temperature levels of key
devices within the turbine and sends those readings to a data
centre monitoring the functioning of the turbines. Temperature levels are streamed by sensors using a ternary predicate
Temp, whose arguments identify the device, the temperature
level, and the time of the reading. A monitoring task in the
data centre is to track the activation of cooling measures in
each turbine, record temperature-induced malfunctions and
shutdowns, and identify parts at risk of future malfunction.
This task is captured by the following set of rules:

Introduction

Query processing over data streams is a key aspect of Big
Data applications. For instance, algorithmic trading relies on
real-time analysis of stock tickers and ﬁnancial news items
(Nuti et al. 2011); oil and gas companies continuously monitor and analyse data coming from their wellsites in order
to detect equipment malfunction and predict maintenance
needs (Cosad et al. 2009); network providers perform realtime analysis of network ﬂow data to identify trafﬁc anomalies and DoS attacks (Münz and Carle 2007).
In stream processing, an input data stream is seen as
an unbounded, append-only, relation of timestamped tuples,
where timestamps are either added by the external device
that issued the tuple or by the stream management system receiving it (Babu and Widom 2001; Babcock et al.
2002). The analysis of the input stream is performed using a standing query, the answers to which are also issued
as a stream. Most applications of stream processing require
near real-time analysis using limited resources, which poses
signiﬁcant challenges to stream management systems. On
the one hand, systems must be able to compute query answers over the partial data received so far as if the entire
(inﬁnite) stream had been available; furthermore, they must
stream query answers out with the minimum possible delay.
On the other hand, due to memory limitations, systems can

Temp(x, high, t) → Flag(x, t)
Flag(x, t) ∧ Flag(x, t + 1) → Cool (x, t + 1)
Cool (x, t) ∧ Flag(x, t + 1) → Shdn(x, t + 1)
Shdn(x, t) → Malfunc(x, t − 2)
Shdn(x, t) ∧ Near (x, y) → AtRisk (y, t)
AtRisk (x, t) → AtRisk (x, t + 1)

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Rule (1) ‘ﬂags’ a device whenever a high temperature reading is received. Rule (2) says that two consecutive ﬂags on
a device trigger cooling measures. Rule (3) says that an additional consecutive ﬂag after activating cooling measures
triggers a pre-emptive shutdown. By Rule (4), a shutdown is
due to a malfunction that occurred when the ﬁrst ﬂag leading
to shutdown was detected. Finally, Rules (5) and (6) identify

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1941

