The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

AdGAP: Advanced Global Average Pooling
Arna Ghosh

Biswarup Bhattacharya∗

Somnath Basu Roy Chowdhury∗

McGill University
Montreal, QC H3A 0G4. Canada.
Email: arna.ghosh@mail.mcgill.ca

University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089. USA.
Email: bbhattac@usc.edu

Indian Institute of Technology
Kharagpur, WB 721302. India.
Email: brcsomnath@ee.iitkgp.ernet.in

up with an architecture where we do not need to alter the
connections of a network. The major motivation of our work
comes from the fact that different high level features correspond to different classes and the classiﬁcation of an image
to a particular class depends on certain features being excited more heavily than others.
Therefore, we present a novel architecture that can be
used to localize the positions of instances of all classes in
an image and then classify each of those hotspots. Unlike
previous methods, the architecture is not sensitive to the size
of the input image and hence has a wider scope of application. The experiments are done on the MNIST dataset and
further discussions are presented from the point of view of
text extraction from natural images as a proof of concept,
but can be easily extended to other datasets and domains.

Abstract
Global average pooling (GAP) has been used previously
to generate class activation maps. The motivation behind
AdGAP comes from the fact that the convolutional ﬁlters possess position information of the essential features and hence,
combination of the feature maps could help us locate the
class instances in an image. Our novel architecture generates promising results and unlike previous methods, the architecture is not sensitive to the size of the input image, thus
promising wider application.

Introduction
The current advances in computer vision and image recognition have seen a wide use of convolutional neural networks
(CNNs). Works by (Zhou et al. 2016) have shown that the
convolutional units of various layers of CNNs are capable of
detecting the position of object in the image without any supervision on the location of object. They show that although
earlier convolutional layers are capable of capturing only
the low-level features in the image, higher layers are able
to capture task-speciﬁc features. However, the information
about the location of these features in the image is lost when
fully connected layers are used for classiﬁcation. Some fully
convolutional networks have been proposed recently such as
GoogleNet (Szegedy et al. 2015), and Network in Network
(Lin, Chen, and Yan 2013) that aim to reduce the number
of network parameters while maintaining performance by
avoiding the fully-connected layers.
In the work of (Lin, Chen, and Yan 2013), the Global Average Pooling layers act as structural regularizer and prevent overﬁtting. However, (Zhou et al. 2016) shows that the
average pooling layers can be used to retain the localization ability of the ﬁnal layers of the network. This concept
is also used in (Bolanos and Radeva 2016) for localization
and recognition of food items. However, the use of Global
Average Pooling layers in these works requires differential
connection during training and deployment.
Looking into the biology of our nervous system, we know
that this is not the case for connections in the brain. Therefore, we looked into methods to bridge this gap and came

Architecture
We begin with a simple CNN architecture, although the
method proposed is easily scalable to any CNN. The network is trained on the MNIST dataset to classify images into
10 classes (digits in this case). Following the training of the
network to obtain a reasonably good classiﬁcation accuracy,
we try to ﬁgure out the importance of each ﬁlter in the last
layer for classifying the digits.
Since the ﬁnal layer ﬁlters have the information of the
spatial location of speciﬁc features as well, a linear combination of those ﬁlters could provide a heatmap of features in
the image that are required to be classiﬁed into one of the 10
classes. We use the error in classiﬁcation in absence of each
ﬁlter as a metric of the importance of that ﬁlter, unlike training another network as in (Zhou et al. 2016) and (Bolanos
and Radeva 2016). We record the error of classiﬁcation in
presence of all the ﬁlters as the baseline. The weights for the
generation of heatmap using a linear combination of these
ﬁlter responses is the difference of error from the baseline.
Therefore, if W represents the weight vector for heatmap
generation, the overall classiﬁcation error (error with all ﬁlters present) is e, and E is the error vector, where Ei represents the error in classiﬁcation when ﬁlter i is missing (or
response from ﬁlter i is blocked from propagating into further layers), then
(1)
W i = e − Ei
Suppose the ﬁlter response of the ﬁnal layer ﬁlters is represented as F where Fi represents the ﬁlter response of the

∗

Equal contribution
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8081

