The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Resource Allocation Polytope Games: Uniqueness of Equilibrium,
Price of Stability, and Price of Anarchy
Swapnil Dhamal,1 Walid Ben-Ameur,1 Tijani Chahed,1 Eitan Altman2
1

2

Samovar, Télécom SudParis, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, France
Institut National de Recherche en Informatique et en Automatique, Sophia Antipolis-Méditerranée, France
{dhamal s, walid.benameur, tijani.chahed}@telecom-sudparis.eu, {eitan.altman}@inria.fr

only because they have to invest on multiple nodes, but also
because there would be competition among the agents for
investing on the nodes. This results in a game whose players
are the agents and a player’s strategy is how to allocate its
resources among the nodes while respecting node capacities.
We now describe the setting in detail, and see how it belongs to the class of games called polytope games (Bhattacharjee, Thuijsman, and Vrieze 2000).

Abstract
We consider a two-player resource allocation polytope game,
in which the strategy of a player is restricted by the strategy of
the other player, with common coupled constraints. With respect to such a game, we formally introduce the notions of independent optimal strategy proﬁle, which is the proﬁle when
players play optimally in the absence of the other player; and
common contiguous set, which is the set of top nodes in the
preference orderings of both the players that are exhaustively
invested on in the independent optimal strategy proﬁle. We
show that for the game to have a unique PSNE, it is a necessary and sufﬁcient condition that the independent optimal
strategies of the players do not conﬂict, and either the common contiguous set consists of at most one node or all the
nodes in the common contiguous set are invested on by only
one player in the independent optimal strategy proﬁle. We
further derive a socially optimal strategy proﬁle, and show
that the price of anarchy cannot be bound by a common universal constant. We hence present an efﬁcient algorithm to
compute the price of anarchy and the price of stability, given
an instance of the game. Under reasonable conditions, we
show that the price of stability is 1. We encounter a paradox
in this game that higher budgets may lead to worse outcomes.

Setting
We label the two players as A and B, and the set of nodes as
N . Let n = |N |. Let wAi be the beneﬁt that A gets by investing a unit amount on node i. Similarly, let wBi be the beneﬁt
that B gets by investing a unit amount on i. Consistent with
most applications, we assume wAi , wBi > 0, ∀i ∈ N . Let
xi and yi be the respective investments made by A and B on
i. Since the beneﬁt that A gets by investing on i would be an
increasing function of xi and wAi , we assume the beneﬁt to
be wAi xi for analytical tractability. Similarly, wBi yi is the
beneﬁt that B gets by investing on i. Let wA = (wAi )i∈N ,
wB = (wBi )i∈N , x = (xi )i∈N , y = (yi )i∈N .
There may be correlation between the players’ utilities by
investing on a node, for example, A’s investment of xi on
node i could result in an added amount of αwAi xi in B’s
utility. This could be a beneﬁt if α > 0, a loss if α < 0,
or an uninﬂuential term if α = 0. So the marginal utility
that B gets from i is (wBi yi + αwAi xi ). Similarly, if B’s
investment of yi results in an added amount of βwBi yi in
A’s utility, the marginal utility that A gets from i is (wAi xi +
βwBi yi ). Let uA (x, y) and uB (x, y) denote their respective
utilities. So the net
 total utility of A summed over all nodes
=
is uA (x, y) 
i∈N (wAi xi + βwBi yi ) and that of B is
uB (x, y) = i∈N (wBi yi + αwAi xi ).
The players have budget constraints stating that A can invest a total of, say kA
, across all nodes,
 and B can invest a
total of kB . That is, i∈N xi ≤ kA , i∈N yi ≤ kB . Also,
the total amount that can be invested on a node is bounded.
We assume that all nodes have a common bound or capacity.
We assume this bound to be 1 without loss of generality. So
we have another set of constraints: xi +yi ≤ 1, ∀i, which are
common coupled constraints (a player’s constraints are satisﬁed if and only if constraints of the other player are satisﬁed
for every strategy proﬁle). We assume that kA + kB ≤ |N |,
that is, there are enough nodes to be able to invest on.

Introduction
The problem of resource allocation is relevant to a large
number and wide variety of applications, from small household applications to citywide, marketwide, and worldwide
applications (Johari and Tsitsiklis 2004; Wei et al. 2010;
Clearwater 1996; Thomas 1990). A primary goal of an agent
is to allocate its resources or budget in such a way that its
utility is maximized. In most scenarios, there exist competing agents who also aim to allocate their resources with the
aim of maximizing their own utilities. Furthermore, there
could be correlation among the agents’ utilities, for instance,
an investment by an agent on a node may beneﬁt or harm the
utility of another agent (Borodin, Filmus, and Oren 2010).
A node or machine for which the resources are to be allocated (or on which investments are to be made) may have
a bound or capacity beyond which it cannot be invested on.
So the set of feasible investment proﬁles would be restricted.
This would result in strategic investment by the agents, not
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

997

