The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Attention-via-Attention Neural Machine Translation
Shenjian Zhao

Zhihua Zhang

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
sword.york@gmail.com

Peking University
Beijing Institute of Big Data Research
zhzhang@math.pku.edu.cn

considerations behind the wide adoption of word-level modeling (Chung, Cho, and Bengio 2016). The vanishing gradient
problem of character-level models and lower calculation cost
of word-level models may be the major causes. However,
the word-level NMT systems are unable to utilize the lexical similarity and named entity similarity between language
pairs. Some explorations have been performed to incorporate the similarity of vocabularies. For instance, Gulcehre et
al. (2016) introduced a pointer network to copy words from
the source. However, they assumed that the target out-ofvocabulary (OOV) words are the same as the corresponding
source words. Obviously, this assumption is not always satisﬁed.
The character-level information is critical in neural machine translation. Suppose there are two languages that differ
only in the alphabets, e.g., Russian written in Cyrillic and
Russian written in Latin script. It would not be easy for a
purely word-level NMT to translate between such a language
pair, because the word-level model needs to establish the mapping between words. In contrast, the character-level model
only needs to establish the mapping between characters. Although there are no such language pairs in reality, we can still
make use of the similarity of languages from the character
level. In particular, we provide the following two sentences
to clarify what we are focusing on:

Abstract
Since many languages originated from a common ancestral
language and inﬂuence each other, there would inevitably
exist similarities between these languages such as lexical similarity and named entity similarity. In this paper, we leverage these similarities to improve the translation performance
in neural machine translation. Speciﬁcally, we introduce an
attention-via-attention mechanism that allows the information
of source-side characters ﬂowing to the target side directly.
With this mechanism, the target-side characters will be generated based on the representation of source-side characters
when the words are similar. For instance, our proposed neural
machine translation system learns to transfer the characterlevel information of the English word ‘system’ through the
attention-via-attention mechanism to generate the Czech word
‘systém’. Consequently, our approach is able to not only
achieve a competitive translation performance, but also reduce
the model size signiﬁcantly.

1

Introduction

A language family is a group of related languages that developed from a common ancestral language, such as the
Indo-European family, the Niger-Congo family and the Austronesian family. The languages in the same family are more
or less similar to each other. One of the measurements is
lexical similarity (Simons and Fennig 2017), which approximately measures the similarity between the lexicons of two
languages. Simons and Fennig (2017) calculated it by comparing a standardized set of wordlists and counting those
forms that show similarity in both form and meaning. Based
on such a method, English is evaluated to have a lexical similarity of 60% with German and 27% with French. Moreover,
language itself is an evolving system and the evolution of
lexicons in different languages never stops. Guestwords, foreignisms and loanwords from a language may be added to
the lexicon of another language. Although the languages are
different, many of the words (e.g., named entities) are usually
represented by similar characters.
Currently, many state-of-the-art neural machine translation (NMT) systems (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015;
Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Jean et al. 2015; Luong
and Manning 2016) are built on words. There are various

1) Aby legenda byla věrohodná , psalo se o ﬁlmovém
projektu ve specializovaných magazínech , pořádaly se
tiskové konference , ﬁktivní produkční společnost měla
reálnou kancelář . (Czech)
2) For the story to be believed , the ﬁlm project was
reported on in specialist magazines , press conferences
were organised , and the ﬁctitious production company
had a real ofﬁce . (English)
There are many similar words between two sentences. One
may speculate the meaning of some Czech words based
on the English words such as ‘projektu - project’,
‘magazínech - magazines’ and ‘konference conferences’. In this paper, we leverage these similarities from character level in NMT to improve the translation
performance, and reduce the model size simultaneously. In
accordance with expectation, our model is able to detect and
handle named entities, as shown in Section 6.
To sum up the above statements, the character-level lexicon

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

563

