The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Hierarchical LSTM for
Sign Language Translation
1

Dan Guo,1 Wengang Zhou,2 Houqiang Li,2 Meng Wang1
School of Computer and Information, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, 230009, China
2
EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, 230027, China
guodan@hfut.edu.cn, zhwg@ustc.edu.cn, lihq@ustc.edu.cn, eric.mengwang@gmail.com

in that video captioning uses grammar knowledge and semantics coherence with feature representation of object(s),
scene, motion or action for sentence generation, while SLT
emphasizes on semantic understanding with word-to-word
transition among independent sub-video clips. SLT suffers
the speciﬁc linguistics challenges, such as adverb modifying verb, e.g., the adverb in phase “run quickly” is signed
by speeding the word “run” up; uncertain directional verbs
and positional signs between the signer and referent(s); unknown words with ﬁnger spelling; non-hand features, e.g.,
facial expression and lip shape; etc. Learning visual word in
SLT is much more strict.
Our problem belongs to weakly supervised learning with
the lack of supervision on accurate temporal locations for
sign words. Several recent works made some success to
solve frame-level or gloss(word)-level alignment, such as
hybrid HMM and CTC embedded into deep learning (Koller,
Zargaran, and Ney 2017; Cui, Liu, and Zhang 2017). However, they are limited to a prerequisite that word label in
sentences is consistent to the order of corresponding visual content. If the word order is reversed or messed as
in NMT (Neural Machine Translation, e.g. from English to
French (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014)), they are unsuitable to tackle sequential frame-level classiﬁcation under
word labels in disorder for text generation.
Our work is free of such limitation. We adopt the encoderdecoder framework, which respectively learns visual content and word embedding. More importantly, to effectively
encode the visual semantic, a Hierarchical LSTM-based
(HLSTM) model is proposed. The key idea of our model
is to build a multi-layered visual-semantic embedding architecture with different granularities, i.e., frames, visemes
(sub-visual-word), visual-words and the entire video. Our
presupposition is tackling visual feature embedding of subsign units, i.e., visemes. We seek for the high level representation of visemes and focus on the transition among these
visemes to avoid directly bridging the whole video frames
and natural language. In other words, our model is characterized with a hierarchical and variable-sized temporal structure, which explores the spatio-temporal cues for variablesized chips of visemes.
The framework of our approach is illustrated in Figure 1.
A 3D CNN model (i.e., C3D (Tran et al. 2015)) is ﬁrstly
utilized to extract visual features. It’s because that in our

Abstract
Continuous Sign Language Translation (SLT) is a challenging task due to its speciﬁc linguistics under sequential gesture variation without word alignment. Current hybrid HMM
and CTC (Connectionist temporal classiﬁcation) based models are proposed to solve frame or word level alignment. They
may fail to tackle the cases with messing word order corresponding to visual content in sentences. To solve the issue,
this paper proposes a hierarchical-LSTM (HLSTM) encoderdecoder model with visual content and word embedding for
SLT. It tackles different granularities by conveying spatiotemporal transitions among frames, clips and viseme units.
It ﬁrstly explores spatio-temporal cues of video clips by 3D
CNN and packs appropriate visemes by online key clip mining with adaptive variable-length. After pooling on recurrent
outputs of the top layer of HLSTM, a temporal attentionaware weighting mechanism is proposed to balance the intrinsic relationship among viseme source positions. At last, another two LSTM layers are used to separately recurse viseme
vectors and translate semantic. After preserving original visual content by 3D CNN and the top layer of HLSTM, it
shortens the encoding time step of the bottom two LSTM layers with less computational complexity while attaining more
nonlinearity. Our proposed model exhibits promising performance on singer-independent test with seen sentences and
also outperforms the comparison algorithms on unseen sentences.

Introduction
This paper studies the problem of vision-based Sign Language Translation (SLT), which bridges the communication
gap between the deaf mute and normal people. It is related
to several video understanding topics that targets to interpret
video into understandable text and language. To be speciﬁc,
SLT is derived from single sign word recognition, which is
a kind of action recognition or video classiﬁcation (Cai et
al. 2016). But in normal dialogues (i.e., sentence videos),
continuous sign dynamics usually lack word alignment. It is
difﬁcult to precisely align sub-video clips to each sign word
and recognize them. Then on the other hand, SLT is similar
to video captioning in that the video is directly translated to
text sequences (Yao et al. 2015). The primary difference lies
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6845

