The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Identifying Emotional Support in Online Health Communities
Hamed Khanpour,1 Cornelia Caragea,2 Prakhar Biyani3
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of North Texas, Denton, TX
2
Department of Computer Science, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS
3
Oath Inc., Sunnyvale, CA
hamedkhanpour@my.unt.edu, ccaragea@ksu.edu, pxb5080@oath.com

–Originator: When my oncologist did the muga scan my heart
went from 68 to 63. I have never had a problem with my heart
at all. I’m Very nervous.
–Reply: I had much the same problem while doing chemo [...].
Try not to worry too much! [...] Blessings to you...
–Originator: Thanks so much I feel allot better now. [...]

Abstract
Extracting emotional support in Online Health Communities provides insightful information about patients’ emotional
states. Current computational approaches to identifying emotional messages, i.e., messages that contain emotional support, are typically based on a set of handcrafted features. In
this paper, we show that high-level and abstract features derived from a combination of convolutional neural networks
(CNN) with Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) networks can
be successfully employed for emotional message identiﬁcation and can obviate the need for handcrafted features.

Table 1: A sample of an emotional comment.
However, despite the success of lexicon-based features,
building comprehensive lexicons in different health domains
(e.g., cancer and diabetes) requires medical experts on each
domain to contribute intensively in a way that makes the process almost impractical. In this work, we propose a computational model for identifying emotional messages in OHCs
that eliminates the need for handcrafting features or building expensive lexicons that require experts’ knowledge. Our
proposed model called deep convolutional LSTM, or CLSTM for short, is described in the next section.

Introduction
Online health communities (OHCs) provide a user-friendly
environment for patients, and their families and friends to
share thoughts and socialize with each other on various topics such as therapeutic processes, prescribed medicines, side
effects, mental and emotional health. Patients who suffer
from life-threatening diseases (e.g., cancer or AIDS) feel
supported when they interact with their peers who experience similar problems (Qiu et al. 2011). Emotional support
is considered the principal function of OHCs that brings
better feelings and fewer mortality rates to patients (HoltLunstad, Smith, and Layton 2010). Table 1 shows an example message (i.e., the reply) that contains emotional support,
which improves the mood of the originator.
Thus, identifying messages that contain emotional support presents an insightful view of the users’ characteristics,
dynamics, and behavior. For example, analyzing emotional
messages provide the main constituents required for learning
the emotional states of patients through therapeutic process.
Prior studies (Wang, Kraut, and Levine 2012; Biyani et
al. 2014) proposed computational models for analyzing social support of thousands of messages in OHCs by handcrafting a set of features extracted from patients’ messages.
Examples of such features include bag-of-words, linguistic
features, lexicon-based features and word patterns. Biyani et
al. (2014) showed that the lexicons that include subjectivityanalysis-based words, drugs’ names, side effects and therapeutic processes are among the most effective features in
emotional vs. informational message classiﬁcation.

Deep Convolutional LSTM (C-LSTM)
We propose a combination of CNN and LSTM-based models that use the ﬁnal feature vectors from CNN as the input
vectors for LSTM to improve the performance of previous
works in emotional support identiﬁcation in OHCs. CNN is
used to extract high-level (abstract) features that capture the
semantic part of the text (Lai et al. 2015), whereas the feature transfer task allows the LSTM network to represent the
function learned by the CNN model. The proposed C-LSTM
captures both high-level and sequential information without
adding extra complexity as is the case with the memory or
attention mechanisms (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014).
Our proposed classiﬁcation model is similar to that described in Kim et al. (2016). However, Kim et al. (2016)
applied a character-level CNN to extract high-level features,
whereas our model works at word-level. We use the wordlevel input to CNN to take advantage of applying embedding
vectors, which are trained on health data from OHCs.

Data Collection and Annotation
We used two datasets for evaluating our model. The ﬁrst
dataset is provided by Biyani et al. (2014), which contains
1066 messages from the breast cancer discussion board, denoted as B-DS. For building the second dataset, we ran-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8099

