The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Tap and Shoot Segmentation
Ding-Jie Chen, Jui-Ting Chien, Hwann-Tzong Chen, Long-Wen Chang
National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
{djchen.tw, ydnaandy123}@gmail.com , {htchen, lchang}@cs.nthu.edu.tw

Abstract
We present a new segmentation method that leverages latent
photographic information available at the moment of taking
pictures. Photography on a portable device is often done by
tapping to focus before shooting the picture. This tap-andshoot interaction for photography not only speciﬁes the region of interest but also yields useful focus/defocus cues for
image segmentation. However, most of the previous interactive segmentation methods address the problem of image segmentation in a post-processing scenario without considering
the action of taking pictures. We propose a learning-based approach to this new tap-and-shoot scenario of interactive segmentation. The experimental results on various datasets show
that, by training a deep convolutional network to integrate
the selection and focus/defocus cues, our method can achieve
higher segmentation accuracy in comparison with existing interactive segmentation methods.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: An example of segmentation with the selection
and defocus cues. Notice that, the defocus map in (c) is just
for visualization. Our method in fact implicitly learns the defocus cue via a convolutional network. (a) A tap-and-shoot
image focusing on the gorilla. (b) The selection cue of (a), in
which the brighter intensity values represent the higher preferences to the target object according to the user’s tapping
position. (c) The defocus cue of (a), in which the brighter
intensity values represent the lower degrees of estimated defocus blur. (d) The predicted probability map of the target
object. The ﬁnal segmentation result can be easily derived
from the probability map via thresholding.

Introduction
Interactive image segmentation incorporates a human-inthe-loop mechanism to collect hints from the user as a guide
toward the expected segmentation result. Existing interactive segmentation algorithms adopt different types of user
inputs such as bounding boxes, scribbles, control points, or
simple clicks, which aim to specify the target object or the
region of interest. Most of the existing algorithms operate as
an interactive tool in a post-processing scenario, that is, the
to-be-segmented image is assumed ﬁxed and the user’s inputs are not necessarily relevant to how the image is taken.
We propose to consider the action of taking pictures as part
of the interactive segmentation process. In such a scenario,
the user may tap the touchscreen of the smartphone/camera
to focus on the target object. The tap-and-shoot interaction
provides useful latent information about the scene, and our
approach can learn to extract the selection and defocus cues
for segmenting the target object.
A camera with a lens is often preferable to a pinhole camera in that the exposure time can be greatly reduced when
taking a picture. However, a lens can focus at only one distance in a scene, and the other spots that are nearer or farther
from that distance will be out of focus and look blurry in
the captured image. This kind of blur is called the defocus

blur. The degree of defocus blur is correlated with the distance from the capture point to the camera, the position of
the focal plane, the lens focal length, and the lens aperture
size. The process of focusing the lens is to make the target
object locate on the focal plane so that it can look sharper.
In this work we build a convolutional network that learns to
extracts the inherent defocus cue in the image captured via
tap-and-shoot interaction.
Recently, semantic segmentation becomes a popular research topic owing to the greatly improved segmentation
accuracy via deep network learning. A semantic segmentation task aims to label the regions of some predeﬁned object classes. On the other hand, in a general ﬁgure-ground
segmentation problem the region of interest of a given image is ambiguous to deﬁne since different users may prefer
different regions of interest. We address the ﬁgure-ground

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2119

