The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

An Efﬁcient, Expressive and Local Minima-Free
Method for Learning Controlled Dynamical Systems
Ahmed Hefny

Carlton Downey

Geoffrey Gordon

Carnegie Mellon University

Carnegie Mellon University

Carnegie Mellon University

statistics (or features) of future observations and they use
method of moments to learn model parameters from data. 1
Initially introduced for linear-Gaussian systems (van
Overschee and de Moor 1996), these algorithms have been
extended to discrete systems (Hsu, Kakade, and Zhang
2009; Siddiqi, Boots, and Gordon 2010; Boots, Siddiqi, and
Gordon 2011) and then to general smooth continuous systems (Boots, Gretton, and Gordon 2013). More recently, it
has been shown that a wide class of spectral learning algorithms for uncontrolled systems is an instance of a two-stage
regression framework (Hefny, Downey, and Gordon 2015),
where system identiﬁcation is reduced to solving a set of regression problems. This framework allows for seamless integration of compressing non-linearities, sparsity (Xia 2016)
and online learning (Venkatraman et al. 2016) into system
identiﬁcation, and for establishing theoretical guarantees by
leveraging the rich literature on supervised regression.
Unfortunately, the formulation in (Hefny, Downey, and
Gordon 2015) is limited to uncontrolled systems. On the
contrary, we are interested in controlled systems, where the
user can affect the system through actions. This gives rise
to a key issue: the policy that determines the actions can
change at test time. For this reason, the representation of the
predictive state must be independent of the training policy
and therefore must encode a conditional distribution of future observations given future actions. To adopt such a representation into a practical method that retains the beneﬁts
of the two-stage regression formulation, there are a number
of challenges that need to be tackled.
First, we need a suitable state representation and dynamics model that can be used to represent a wide class of controlled dynamical systems while ensuring the learning problem remains tractable. Second, we would like to beneﬁt from
the two-stage regression view of (Hefny, Downey, and Gordon 2015) to facilitate model formulation. However, a key
assumption in that work is that future observations provide
an unbiased estimate of the predictive state, which is not true
when the state is a conditional distribution. A suitable state
estimation method needs to be provided. Third, having a different state representation and having action policy playing a

Abstract
We propose a framework for modeling and estimating the
state of controlled dynamical systems, where an agent can affect the system through actions and receives partial observations. Based on this framework, we propose Predictive State
Representation with Random Fourier Features (RFF-PSR). A
key property in RFF-PSRs is that the state estimate is represented by a conditional distribution of future observations
given future actions. RFFPSRs combine this representation
with moment-matching, kernel embedding and local optimization to achieve a method that enjoys several favorable
qualities: It can represent controlled environments which can
be affected by actions, it has an efﬁcient and theoretically justiﬁed learning algorithm, it uses a non-parametric representation that has expressive power to represent continuous nonlinear dynamics. We provide a detailed formulation, a theoretical analysis and an experimental evaluation that demonstrates the effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

Controlled dynamical systems, where an agent can inﬂuence
an environment through actions and receive partial observations, emerge in numerous applications in robotics and automatic control. Modeling and learning these systems from
data is of great importance in these ﬁelds.
The general problem of learning dynamical systems from
data (also known as system identiﬁcation) has been extensively studied and several methods were proposed to tackle
it. However, having an expressive, efﬁcient and consistent
method for non-linear controlled systems remains an open
problem.
Many system identiﬁcation methods rely on likelihoodbased optimization or sampling using EM, MCMC or gradient descent. which makes them prone to poor local optima.
There is another class of methods that alleviates the local optima problem and offers a tractable and statistically consistent approach to system identiﬁcation. These methods, usually referred to as spectral algorithms, have two key properties in common: predictive representation and method of
moments. Instead of the state being a latent variable, they
represent the estimated state by the expectation of sufﬁcient

1

There is a class of spectral algorithms that maintains the latent
variable view. This is exempliﬁed by tensor decomposition methods (Anandkumar et al. 2014).

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3191

