The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Generative Adversarial Network for Abstractive Text Summarization∗
Linqing Liu,1 Yao Lu,2 Min Yang,1 Qiang Qu,1,4 Jia Zhu,3 Hongyan Li4
1

2

Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute 3 School of Computer Science, South China Normal University
4
MOE Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Peking University
{likicode, 95luyao, min.yang1129}@gmail.com, qiang@siat.ac.cn
jzhu@m.scnu.edu.cn, lihy@cis.pku.edu.cn

generated by the decoder. This exposure bias leads to error
accumulation at test time.
To address the above challenge, in this paper, we propose
an adversarial framework to jointly train a generative model
G and a discriminative model D. Speciﬁcally, the generator
G takes the original text as input and generate the summary.
We use reinforcement learning (i.e., policy gradient) to optimize G for a highly rewarded summary. Thus, it effectively
bypasses exposure bias and non-differentiable task metrics
issues. We implement the discriminator D as a text classiﬁer
that learns to classify the generated summaries as machine
or human generated. The generator G and the discriminator D are optimized with a minimax two-player game. The
discriminator D tries to distinguish the ground truth summaries from the generated summaries by the generator G,
while the training procedure of generator G is to maximize
the probability of D making a mistake. Thus, this adversarial process can eventually adjust G to generate plausible and
high-quality abstractive summaries.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an adversarial process for abstractive text summarization, in which we simultaneously train a
generative model G and a discriminative model D. In particular, we build the generator G as an agent of reinforcement learning, which takes the raw text as input and predicts
the abstractive summarization. We also build a discriminator
which attempts to distinguish the generated summary from
the ground truth summary. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our model achieves competitive ROUGE scores
with the state-of-the-art methods on CNN/Daily Mail dataset.
Qualitatively, we show that our model is able to generate
more abstractive, readable and diverse summaries1 .

Introduction
Abstractive text summarization is the task of generating a
short and concise summary that captures the salient ideas
of the source text. The generated summaries potentially
contain new phrases and sentences that may not appear
in the source text. In the past decades, a ﬂurry of studies have been conducted on abstractive text summarization (Nallapati et al. 2016; See, Liu, and Manning 2017;
Paulus, Xiong, and Socher 2017). Despite the remarkable
progress of previous studies, abstractive summarization is
still challenged by (i) Neural sequence-to-sequence models
tend to generate trivial and generic summary, often involving
high-frequency phrases; (ii) The generated summaries have
limited grammaticality and readability; (iii) In most previous
work the standard sequence-to-sequence models are trained
to predict the next word in summary using the maximumlikelihood estimation (MLE) objective function. However,
this strategy has two major shortcomings. First, the evaluation metric is different from the training loss. Second, the
input of the decoder in each time step is often from the true
summary during the training. Nevertheless, in the testing
phase, the input of the next time step is the previous word

Our model
Similar to the standard training strategy (Goodfellow et al.
2014), we simultaneously train two models in an adversarial
manner: a generative model G and a discriminative model
D. We ﬁrst pre-train the generative model by generating
summaries given the source text. Then we pre-train the discriminator by providing positive examples from the humangenerated summaries and the negative examples produced
from the pre-trained generator. After the pre-training, the
generator and discriminator are trained alternatively.

Generative Model
The generator takes the source text x = {w1 , w2 , ..., wn } as
input and predicts the summary ŷ = {yˆ1 , yˆ2 , ..., yˆm }. Here,
the n is the length of the source text x and m is the length of
the predicted summary. We use a bi-directional LSTM encoder to convert the input text x into a sequence of hidden
states h = {h1 , . . . , hn }. Following (See, Liu, and Manning
2017), on time step t, an attention-based LSTM decoder is
then used to compute the hidden state st of the decoder and
a context vector ct . The reader can refer to the supplement
of this paper (or (See, Liu, and Manning 2017)) for the implementation details. The parameters of the generator G are
collectively represented by θ. The context vector ct is concatenated with the decoder state st and fed through a fully

∗

The work was partially supported by CAS Pioneer Hundred
Talents Program and the MOE Key Laboratory of Machine Perception at Peking University under grant number K-2017-02. Q.
Qu is the corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Supplemental material: http://likicode.com/textsum/

8109

