The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning the Joint Representation of Heterogeneous
Temporal Events for Clinical Endpoint Prediction
Luchen Liu,1 Jianhao Shen,1 Ming Zhang,1* Zichang Wang,1 Jian Tang2,3*
1

School of EECS, Peking University, Beijing China
HEC Montreal, 3 Montreal Institute for Learning Algorithms
liuluchen@pku.edu.cn, jhshen@pku.edu.cn, mzhang_cs@pku.edu.cn, dywzc123@163.com, tangjianpku@gmail.com
2

Abstract
The availability of a large amount of electronic health records
(EHR) provides huge opportunities to improve health care
service by mining these data. One important application is
clinical endpoint prediction, which aims to predict whether a
disease, a symptom or an abnormal lab test will happen in the
future according to patients’ history records. This paper develops deep learning techniques for clinical endpoint prediction, which are effective in many practical applications. However, the problem is very challenging since patients’ history
records contain multiple heterogeneous temporal events such
as lab tests, diagnosis, and drug administrations. The visiting
patterns of different types of events vary signiﬁcantly, and
there exist complex nonlinear relationships between different
events. In this paper, we propose a novel model for learning the joint representation of heterogeneous temporal events.
The model adds a new gate to control the visiting rates of different events which effectively models the irregular patterns
of different events and their nonlinear correlations. Experiment results with real-world clinical data on the tasks of predicting death and abnormal lab tests prove the effectiveness
of our proposed approach over competitive baselines.

Figure 1: Heterogeneous Temporal Events. The sampling
rates of different events vary signiﬁcantly from each other.
Different kinds of events are highly correlated.

However, the problem is challenging since patients’ historical records contain a variety of heterogeneous temporal
events such as different lab tests, routine vital signals, diagnosis, and drug administrations (See Fig. 1 as an example). The visiting rates of different events vary signiﬁcantly.
For example, a patient may take a blood test every morning while take a temperature test every two hours. Besides,
there is a high level of dependency among different kinds
of events. For instance, some diagnosis are made according
to the results of some lab tests. As a result, these heterogeneous temporal events yield heterogeneous event sequences
consisting of thousands of correlated event types, the visiting rate of which varies signiﬁcantly.
In the literature, learning representations of sequences are
widely studied especially in the domain of speech recognition and natural language understanding. The state-of-theart approaches for sequence modeling are recurrent neural
networks (Mikolov et al. 2010) (RNNs) with the Long Shortterm Memory (LSTM) units (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber
1997). RNNs are commonly used for modeling homogeneous sequences, but it is nontrivial to apply them for modeling heterogeneous event sequences. There are some recent
works based on multi-task Gauss Process (MTGP) (Ghassemi et al. 2015) for modeling the correlations between multiple sequences. However, the computational cost of MTGP
is too expensive for EHR data since there are thousands of
types of events. Therefore, we are seeking an approach that
is able to: (1) effectively model the irregular visiting patterns of different events; (2) model the complex nonlinear
relationships between different events; (3) scale up a large

Introduction
The volume of electronic health records (EHR) is expanding
at a staggering rate, providing a great opportunity for machine learning and data mining researchers to analyze these
data so as to provide better health care service. An important
application of machine learning in health care is predicting
the clinical endpoints such as a disease, symptom, or laboratory abnormality based on patients’ historical records.
This paper develops effective deep learning techniques for
clinical endpoint prediction since deep learning techniques
have been proved effective for predictive analysis in a variety of applications such as image recognition (He et al.
2016), speech recognition (Hinton et al. 2012), and natural
language understanding (Blunsom et al. 2017). The goal of
deep learning is to learn effective semantic representations
of the high-dimensional data such as images, speeches and
natural language. Therefore, our goal is to effectively represent patients’ historical records.
*corresponding authors
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

109

