The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Fat- and Heavy-Tailed Behavior in Satisﬁcing Planning
Eldan Cohen, J. Christopher Beck
Department of Mechanical & Industrial Engineering
University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada
{ecohen, jcb}@mie.utoronto.ca

2. We present a variant of greedy best-ﬁrst search that introduces a limited amount of randomization in the search
procedure and show that heavy-tailed behavior can be observed in multiple runs of the randomized search procedure on a single problem.

Abstract
In this work, we study the runtime distribution of satisﬁcing
planning in ensembles of random planning problems and in
multiple runs of a randomized heuristic search on a single
planning instance. Using common heuristic functions (such
as FF) and six benchmark problem domains from the IPC,
we ﬁnd a heavy-tailed behavior, similar to that found in CSP
and SAT. We investigate two notions of constrainedness, often used in the modeling of planning problems, and show
that the heavy-tailed behavior tends to appear in relatively
relaxed problems, where the required effort is, on average,
low. Finally, we show that as with randomized restarts in
CSP and SAT solving, recent search enhancements that incorporate randomness in the search process can help mitigate
the effect of the heavy tail.

1

3. We demonstrate how different notions of constrainedness
that are commonly used in the modeling of planning problems can lead to a fat- or heavy-tailed distribution of
search effort.
4. We show that recent methods of non-greedy random exploration can help mitigate the heavy-tailed behavior in a
similar manner to randomized restarts in CSPs.

2

Background

The study of full runtime distributions of algorithms over
a problem set, rather than just the median or the mean, often provides useful information that can contribute to the
design of better algorithms. Previous work found exceptionally hard instances in many kinds of computational problems
(e.g., Gent and Walsh, 1994), that were attributed to a fator heavy-tailed behavior on ensembles of random problems
in the easy region of the phase transition (Gomes, Selman,
and Crato 1997). This behavior does not appear in ensembles of highly constrained instances, for which the median
search effort is very high and all instances are uniformly
hard. However, as we relax the problems, we move to a
statistical regime in which the median effort is low, and the
hardest instances are exceptionally hard. The runtime distribution in this regime is characterized by a fat- or heavytailed behavior, i.e., a slow decay of the tail of the survival
function.
Later, Gomes et al. (2005) showed that heavy-tailed behavior can also be found in the runtime distribution of a randomized search procedure on a single instance, suggesting
that the ehps can be easily solved by minor changes in the
search procedure such as randomization. This result has motivated much work on eliminating the heavy-tailed behavior
using randomized restarts, portfolios, etc. (Gomes 2003).

Introduction

The study of runtime distributions of several computational
problems (most notably CSP and SAT) found heavy-tailed
behavior for both ensembles of random problems and multiple runs of a randomized backtracking search on a single
problem (Gomes 2003). This behavior accounted for the
phenomenon of exceptionally hard problems (ehps) that appear as outliers in ensembles of easy problems and helped
inspire search enhancements such as randomized restarts
and algorithm portfolios (Gomes 2003).
In domain-dependent satisﬁcing heuristic search, recent
works found a connection between problem difﬁculty and
problem constrainedness on ensembles of random problems
(Cohen and Beck 2017b) and discovered the existence of exceptionally hard instances (Cohen and Beck 2017a). These
results suggest that a heavy-tailed behavior, similar to the
one observed for CSPs and SATs, might be observed for satisﬁcing planning.
In this work, we focus on the heavy-tailed behavior in
domain-independent satisﬁcing planning and make the following contributions:
1. We show that fat- and heavy-tailed behavior can be observed on ensembles of random planning problems across
different domains and heuristic functions.

2.1

Fat- and Heavy-Tailed Distributions

The tail of a distribution is the very large (small) values of
the distribution that determines the shape of its right (left)
side (Verzani 2014). Fat- and heavy-tailed distributions have

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6136

