The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Perceiving, Learning, and Recognizing 3D Objects:
An Approach to Cognitive Service Robots
S. Hamidreza Kasaei,† Juil Sock,∗ Luı́s Seabra Lopes,† Ana Maria Tomé,† Tae-Kyun Kim∗
†

University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal
Imperial College London, London, UK
{seyed.hamidreza, lsl, ana}@ua.pt
{ju-il.sock08, tk.kim}@imperial.ac.uk
∗

Abstract
There is growing need for robots that can interact with people
in everyday situations. For service robots, it is not reasonable
to assume that one can pre-program all object categories. Instead, apart from learning from a batch of labelled training
data, robots should continuously update and learn new object
categories while working in the environment. This paper proposes a cognitive architecture designed to create a concurrent
3D object category learning and recognition in an interactive
and open-ended manner. In particular, this cognitive architecture provides automatic perception capabilities that will allow
robots to detect objects in highly crowded scenes and learn
new object categories from the set of accumulated experiences
in an incremental and open-ended way. Moreover, it supports
constructing the full model of an unknown object in an on-line
manner and predicting next best view for improving object
detection and manipulation performance. We provide extensive experimental results demonstrating system performance
in terms of recognition, scalability, next-best-view prediction
and real-world robotic applications.

Figure 1: The proposed system tested on two bin-picking
datasets that contain multiple objects in highly crowded
scenes: (left) juice box scenario; (right) coffee box scenario.
unsupervised Next-Best-View (NBV) prediction algorithm to
predict the next best camera pose to improve object detection
performance. We have tried to make the proposed architecture easy to integrate into other robotic systems. The ﬁrst
contribution follows our previous works on object perception
and open-ended perceptual learning (Kasaei et al. 2016b;
Oliveira et al. 2015; Kasaei et al. 2015). The present system
aims to be more active, handle more complex scenes, and
support concurrent object recognition and manipulation in
highly crowded scenes. In this work, “open-ended” implies
that the set of object categories to be learned is not known
in advance. The training instances are extracted from on-line
experiences of a robot, and thus become gradually available
over time, rather than being completely available at the beginning of the learning process. The cognitive architecture
provides the underlying object representations; memories
to keep both temporary (working memory) and long-term
(perceptual) knowledge; simultaneous access to memory;
detecting, tracking, learning and recognizing objects in the
environment, NBV prediction and graphical interfaces to enable human users to teach new categories and instruct the
robot to perform tasks. The NBV prediction follows our work
on multi-view 6D object pose estimation and camera motion
planning (Sock et al. 2017).

Introduction
In recent years, the role of open-ended learning in robotics
has been a topic of considerable interest. The general principle of open-ended learning is that humans learn to recognize
object categories ceaselessly over time (Kim et al. 2009).
This ability allows them to adapt to new environments, by
enhancing their knowledge from the accumulation of experiences and the conceptualization of new object categories.
Taking this as inspiration, an autonomous robot, apart from
learning from a batch of labelled training data, must process
visual information continuously and perform learning and
recognition simultaneously. This is important since no matter
how extensive the training data used for batch learning, a
robot might always be confronted with an unknown object
when operating in everyday environments.
This paper reports on the development of an adaptive
robotic agent using a cognitive architecture that is integrated
with perceptual and motor systems. The contributions presented here are the following: (i) a complete architecture
for perceiving, learning, and recognizing 3D objects in an
interactive and open-ended fashion. (ii) proposing a novel

Related Work

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Service robots are expected to be more autonomous and work
effectively in human-centric environments. This implies that

596

