The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Latent Sparse Modeling of
Longitudinal Multi-Dimensional Data
1

Ko-Shin Chen,1 Tingyang Xu,2∗ Jinbo Bi1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA
ko-shin.chen@uconn.edu, jinbo.bi@uconn.edu
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China, tingyangxu@tencent.com

2006) are common statistical approaches. They are generally
more accurate than those of classic regression analysis that
assumes independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.).
In GEE model, the correlation structure of outcomes is
presumed and the so-called ‘working’ correlation matrix, R,
is speciﬁed. However, in practice, the true correlation is often unknown. The GEE model with misspeciﬁed working
correlation matrix will no longer result optimal estimation of
coefﬁcients (Crowder 1995). In addition, the inverse of the
matrix R is essential that may cause poor estimation when
R has high dimension (Qu and Lindsay 2003). To overcome
these disadvantages, Qu, Lindsay, and Li suggest the QIF
model for which R−1 is approximated by a linear combination of several basis matrices. This method ensures that the
estimator always exists and does not require any estimation
for nuisance parameters associated with correlations. On the
feature selection criteria, penalized GEE (Fu 2003) and penalized QIF (Bai, Fung, and Zhu 2009) are proposed.
In this work, we study the lagged effect of covariates on
outcomes. In many studies, it is necessary and insightful
to model simultaneously the correlation among outcomes
and the lagged effects of covariates, which is the so-called
Granger causality (Granger 1980). For example, Shen et al.
point out evidences of brain diseases may appear in the functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) of an early diagnosis before clear symptoms are identiﬁed. Recent graphical Granger models such as (Arnold, Liu, and Abe 2007;
Lozano et al. 2009) ignore the temporal correlations. Xu,
Sun, and Bi have modeled such correlation through the GEE
method. But their model only applies to datasets with one
spatial dimension. Our goal is to develop a new penalized
QIF method in tensor setting to model the temporal prediction. Nowadays, tensor regressions have shown to be powerful in learning complex feature structures from multidimensional data. Many tensor techniques have been developed
and applied to a broad range of applications (Hoff 2015;
Zhou, Li, and Zhu 2013). However when focusing on feature selections (e.g., sparse tensor decomposition), most of
existing methods either assume i.i.d. samples, or assume correlated samples but do not model temporal additive effects.
We propose a new learning formulation that constructs
tensor-based predictive model as a function of covariates,
not only from the current observation but also from multiple previous consecutive observations. Simultaneously the

Abstract
We propose a tensor-based approach to analyze multidimensional data describing sample subjects. It simultaneously discovers patterns in features and reveals past temporal points that have impact on current outcomes. The model
coefﬁcient, a k-mode tensor, is decomposed into a summation of k tensors of the same dimension. To accomplish feature selection, we introduce the tensor ‘latent LF,1 norm’ as
a grouped penalty in our formulation. Furthermore, the proposed model takes into account within-subject correlations by
developing a tensor-based quadratic inference function. We
provide an asymptotic analysis of our model when the sample
size approaches to inﬁnity. To solve the corresponding optimization problem, we develop a linearized block coordinate
descent algorithm and prove its convergence for a ﬁxed sample size. Computational results on synthetic datasets and realﬁle fMRI and EEG problems demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed approach over existing techniques.

Introduction
In this paper we introduce a tensor-based quadratic inference function (TensorQIF) machine learning model that can
be used to analyze longitudinal data and select features efﬁciently. Longitudinal data consists of repeated sample observations during a given time period. They appear in a variety of areas, from ﬁnance (Arnold, Liu, and Abe 2007;
Sela and Simonoff 2012) to scientiﬁc research (Arnold, Liu,
and Abe 2007; Lozano et al. 2009; Wang, Zhou, and Qu
2012), health-care and medicine (Bi et al. 2013; Fowler and
Christakis 2008; Stappenbeck and Fromme 2010).
One notable feature of longitudinal data is repeatedmeasurement within each subject. Thus observed responses
are generally dependent and longitudinal correlation among
different outcomes must be considered to obtain correct predictions. There are several extended generalized linear models that can be applied to time-dependent data under different assumptions. Diggle et al. have provided a comprehensive overview of various models. For ﬁtting marginal model,
generalized estimating equation - GEE (Liang and Zeger
1986) and quadratic inference function - QIF (Qu and Li
∗
This work was done while T. Xu was with the Department of
Computer Science and Engineering at University of Connecticut.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2135

