The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

TorusE: Knowledge Graph Embedding on a Lie Group
Takuma Ebisu,1,2 Ryutaro Ichise2,1,3
1

SOKENDAI (The Graduate University for Advanced Studies)
2-1-2 Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, Japan
2
National Institute of Informatics
2-1-2 Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, Japan
3
National Institute of Advamced Industrial Science and Technology
2-3-26 Aomi, Koto-ku, Tokyo, Japan
{takuma,ichise}@nii.ac.jp
incomplete and have missing facts. Hence, it is required to
develop a system that can complete knowledge graphs automatically.

Abstract
Knowledge graphs are useful for many artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI) tasks. However, knowledge graphs often have missing
facts. To populate the graphs, knowledge graph embedding
models have been developed. Knowledge graph embedding
models map entities and relations in a knowledge graph to a
vector space and predict unknown triples by scoring candidate triples. TransE is the ﬁrst translation-based method and
it is well known because of its simplicity and eﬃciency for
knowledge graph completion. It employs the principle that
the diﬀerences between entity embeddings represent their relations. The principle seems very simple, but it can eﬀectively
capture the rules of a knowledge graph. However, TransE has
a problem with its regularization. TransE forces entity embeddings to be on a sphere in the embedding vector space.
This regularization warps the embeddings and makes it difﬁcult for them to fulﬁll the abovementioned principle. The
regularization also aﬀects adversely the accuracies of the link
predictions. On the other hand, regularization is important because entity embeddings diverge by negative sampling without it. This paper proposes a novel embedding model, TorusE,
to solve the regularization problem. The principle of TransE
can be deﬁned on any Lie group. A torus, which is one of
the compact Lie groups, can be chosen for the embedding
space to avoid regularization. To the best of our knowledge,
TorusE is the ﬁrst model that embeds objects on other than a
real or complex vector space, and this paper is the ﬁrst to formally discuss the problem of regularization of TransE. Our
approach outperforms other state-of-the-art approaches such
as TransE, DistMult and ComplEx on a standard link prediction task. We show that TorusE is scalable to large-size
knowledge graphs and is faster than the original TransE.

1

In a knowledge graph, facts are stored in the form
of a directed graph. Each node represents an entity
in the real world and each edge represents the relation between entities. A fact is described by a triple
(h, r, t), where h and t are entities and r is a relation
directed from h to t. Some relations are strongly related. For example, the relation HasNationality is related with the relation CityOfBirth. Hence, if the triple
(DonaldJohnTramp, HasNationality, U.S.) is not stored
while (DonaldJohnTramp, CityOfBirth, NewYorkCity)
is stored in a knowledge graph, the former can be easily predicted because most people born in New York City have the
nationality of U.S. Many kinds of models have been developed to predict unknown triples and to complete knowledge
graphs through a link prediction task to predict the missing
h or t.
TransE, the original translation-based model for link prediction tasks, was proposed by Bordes et al. (2013) and it
is well known because of its eﬀectiveness and simplicity.
TransE embeds triples and relations on a real vector space
with the principle h + r = t, where h, r and t are embeddings of h, r and t, respectively, if the triple (h, r, t) is
stored in the knowledge graph used as training data. Although it is very simple, the principle can capture the structure of a knowledge graph eﬃciently. Many extended versions of TransE have been proposed. These include TransH
(Wang et al. 2014), TransG (Xiao, Huang, and Zhu 2016)
and pTransE (Lin et al. 2015a). On the other hand, various types of bilinear models, such as DistMult (Yang et al.
2014), HolE (Nickel, Rosasco, and Poggio 2016) and ComplEx (Trouillon et al. 2016), have been proposed recently
and they achieve high accuracy on link prediction tasks with
the metric HITS@1. The TransE model does not yield good
results with the metric HITS@1, but TransE is competitive
with bilinear models with the metric HITS@10. We ﬁnd the
reason for the TransE results is its regularization. TransE
forces entity embeddings to be on a sphere in the embedding vector space. It conﬂicts with the principle of TransE
and warps embeddings obtained by TransE. In this way, it

Introduction

Knowledge graphs are one of the ways to describe facts of
the real world in a form that a computer can easily process.
Knowledge graphs such as YAGO (Suchanek, Kasneci, and
Weikum 2007), DBpedia (Auer et al. 2007) and Freebase
(Bollacker et al. 2008) are used for many tasks, such as question answering, content tagging, fact checking, and knowledge inference. Although some knowledge graphs contain
millions of entities and billions of facts, they still might be
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1819

