The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Understanding Image Impressiveness
Inspired by Instantaneous Human Perceptual Cues
Jufeng Yang,1 Yan Sun,1 Jie Liang,1 Yong-Liang Yang,2 Ming-Ming Cheng1
1

College of Computer and Control Engineering, Nankai University, No.38 Tongyan Road, Tianjin, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath, United Kingdom

Abstract
With the explosion of visual information nowadays, millions
of digital images are available to the users. How to efﬁciently
explore a large set of images and retrieve useful information thus becomes extremely important. Unfortunately only
some of the images can impress the user at ﬁrst glance. Others that make little sense in human perception are often discarded, while still costing valuable time and space. Therefore,
it is signiﬁcant to identify these two kinds of images for relieving the load of online repositories and accelerating information retrieval process. However, most of the existing image properties, e.g., memorability and popularity, are based
on repeated human interactions, which limit the research and
application of evaluating image quality in terms of instantaneous impression. In this paper, we propose a novel image
property, called impressiveness, that measures how images
impress people with a short-term contact. This is based on an
impression-driven model inspired by a number of important
human perceptual cues. To achieve this, we ﬁrst collect three
datasets in various domains, which are labeled according to
the instantaneous sensation of the annotators. Then we investigate the impressiveness property via six established human
perceptual cues as well as the corresponding features from
pixel to semantic levels. Sequentially, we verify the consistency of the impressiveness which can be quantitatively measured by multiple visual representations, and evaluate their
latent relationships. Finally, we apply the proposed impressiveness property to rank the images for an efﬁcient image
recommendation system.

Foreground

Aesthetic

Contrast

Arousal

Spectacularity Unusualness

Figure 1: Impressive images (top) vs. non-impressive images (bottom). The investigation shows that the impressiveness is mainly affected by the six human perceptual cues,
i.e., the variety between the foreground and the background,
the aesthetic, the contrast or the clarity, the strong arousal,
the spectacularity and the unusualness. Each column corresponds to a speciﬁc property of the impressiveness, e.g., for
the ﬁrst column, the top image exhibits strong variety between foreground and background, thus is impressive, while
the bottom one looks otherwise and thus unimpressive. The
label of the impressiveness is generated by annotators of
which the details are elaborated in the Dataset section.

information from long-term memories (Fiske and Taylor
1984), which are increasingly difﬁcult to access with the
rapid growth of the visual data. Also, the memory-based information is hard to be measured quantitatively, which restricts the development and application of the corresponding
model. As illustrated in (Lodge, McGraw, and Stroh 1989),
for evaluating the signiﬁcance of images, people rarely rely
on long-term memories but only require short-term perceptions with consistent logics. In contrast with the memorybased models, impression-driven processes investigate the
instantaneous perceptual information when the viewers encounter an image (Wyer and Srull 1986; Hastie and Park
1986). As the longer exposures do not signiﬁcantly alter
the prior sensation of viewers (Willis and Todorov 2006),
the instantaneous impression also preserves the consistency
of the quantitative measurement and enhances the identiﬁcation performance regarding both efﬁciency and effectiveness. Therefore, the impression-driven processes enable efﬁcient judgment of image signiﬁcance compared with longterm memory based models.

Introduction
In recent years, we have witnessed an explosive proliferation
of online digital images, a large proportion of which provide
little signiﬁcance yet cost considerable repository resources.
As a result, how to effectively identify meaningful images
from miscellaneous visual sources is highly important for
efﬁcient computation and storage, beneﬁting a number of
applications such as image exploration and retrieval.
In the psychology community, there are two types of
models evaluating the signiﬁcance of the given image,
i.e., the memory-based models and the impression-driven
models (Lodge, McGraw, and Stroh 1989; Newell 1972).
The former depends on the sustained retrieval of speciﬁc
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7469

