The Twenty-Third AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium

Spatio-Temporal Model for Wildlife Poaching Prediction
Evaluated through a Controlled Field Test in Uganda
Shahrzad Gholami
University of Southern California
481 Bloom Walk, SAL 300
Los Angeles, CA 90089

neighborhood effects that inﬂuence poaching activity. Finally, while ﬁeld tests are crucial in determining a model’s
efﬁcacy in the world, the difﬁculties involved in organizing
and executing ﬁeld tests often precludes them.

Abstract
Worldwide, conservation agencies employ rangers to protect
conservation areas from poachers. However, agencies lack the
manpower to have rangers effectively patrol these vast areas
frequently. While past work has modeled poachers behavior
so as to aid rangers in planning future patrols, those models
predictions were not validated by extensive ﬁeld tests. In my
thesis, I present a spatio-temporal model that predicts poaching threat levels and results from a ﬁve-month ﬁeld test in
Ugandas Queen Elizabeth Protected Area (QEPA). To my
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time that a predictive model has
been evaluated through such an extensive ﬁeld test in this
domain. These ﬁeld test will be extended to another park in
Uganda, Murchison Fall Protected Area, shortly. Main goals
of my thesis are to develop the best performing model in
terms of speed and accuracy and use such model to generate
efﬁcient and feasible patrol routes for the park rangers.

Related Works
(Nguyen et al. 2016) introduced a two-layered temporal
Bayesian Network predictive model (CAPTURE) that was
also evaluated on real-world data from QEPA. CAPTURE,
however, assumes one global set of parameters for all of
QEPA which ignores local differences in poachers’ behavior.
While CAPTURE includes temporal elements in its model,
it does not include spatial components and thus cannot capture neighborhood speciﬁc phenomena. In contrast to CAPTURE, (Kar et al. 2017) presented a behavior model, INTERCEPT, based on an ensemble of decision trees and was
demonstrated to outperform CAPTURE. While their model
accounted for spatial correlations, it did not include a temporal component. In contrast to these predictive models, our
model addresses both spatial and temporal components.
In game theory literature, learning adversary models has
been mostly done based on simulated games where data is
collected by human subject experiments in the laboratory
(Gholami et al. 2016) rather than real world poachers. It
is vital to validate predictive models in the real world, and
both (Critchlow et al. 2016) and (Kar et al. 2017) have conducted ﬁeld tests in QEPA. (Kar et al. 2017) conducted a
one month ﬁeld test in QEPA and demonstrated promising
results for predictive analytics. Unlike the ﬁeld test we conducted, however, that was a preliminary ﬁeld test and was
not a controlled experiment. On the other hand, (Critchlow
et al. 2016) conducted a controlled experiment where their
goal, by selecting three areas for rangers to patrol, was to
maximize the number of observations sighted per kilometer
walked by the rangers. Their test successfully demonstrated
a signiﬁcant increase in illegal activity detection, but they
did not provide comparable evaluation metrics for their predictive model. Also, our ﬁeld test was much larger in scale,
involving 27 patrol posts compared to their 9 posts.

Introduction
Wildlife poaching continues to be a global problem as key
species are hunted toward extinction. For example, the latest
African census showed a 30% decline in elephant populations between 2007 and 2014 (Chase et al. 2016). Wildlife
conservation areas have been established to protect these
species from poachers, and these areas are protected by park
rangers. These areas are vast, and rangers do not have sufﬁcient resources to patrol everywhere intensively.
At many sites now, rangers patrol and collect data related
to snares they conﬁscate, poachers they arrest, and other observations. Given rangers’ resource constraints, patrol managers could beneﬁt from tools that analyze these data and
provide future poaching predictions. However, this domain
presents unique challenges. First, this domain’s real-world
data are few, extremely noisy, and incomplete. To illustrate,
one of rangers’ primary patrol goals is to ﬁnd wire snares,
which are deployed by poachers to catch animals. However,
these snares are usually well-hidden (e.g., in dense grass),
and thus rangers may not ﬁnd these snares and (incorrectly)
label an area as not having any snares. Second, poaching
activity changes over time, and predictive models must account for this temporal component. Third, because poaching happens in the real world, there are mutual spatial and

Wildlife Crime Dataset

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

This study’s wildlife crime dataset is from two wildlife conservation parks in Uganda. There are several patrol posts sit-

8012

