The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

MUDA: A Truthful Multi-Unit Double-Auction Mechanism
Erel Segal-Halevi

Avinatan Hassidim, Yonatan Aumann

Ariel University
Ariel, Israel 40700

Bar-Ilan University
Ramat-Gan, Israel 52900

librium price exists whenever the agents have decreasingmarginal-returns (DMR) — the marginal utility for an agent
from having one more unit is weakly-decreasing in his current number of units (Gul and Stacchetti 2000). Moreover,
by the First Welfare Theorem, this mechanism attains the
maximum GFT (Nisan et al. 2007, Theorem 11.13). Unfortunately, this mechanism is not incentive-compatible (IC) —
agents have an incentive to misreport their valuations in order to manipulate the price.
The problem of designing an IC double-auction has already been considered by Vickrey. In his seminal paper
(Vickrey 1961) he described a variant of his famous secondprice auction for a two-sided market. Like its one-sided variant, it is dominant-strategy incentive-compatible (DSIC, aka
truthful) — it is a weakly-dominant strategy for each agent
to reveal its true valuation function. But unlike the one-sided
variant it is not budget-balanced (BB) — it has a deﬁcit
— it requires the market-maker to bring money from home.
While it is possible to charge entrance-fees to cover this cost,
this makes the mechanism not individually rational (IR) —
some traders might lose from participating.
Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983) proved that, in a twosided market, any mechanism that is IR, BB and IC cannot
be efﬁcient . Intuitively, the reason is that it is impossible to
truthfully determine prices for trading. Consider any mechanism that charges the buyer pb and pays the seller ps . If
ps < vb , then the seller is incentivized to bid (ps + vb )/2 to
force the price up (the mechanism has to do the deal since
it is still efﬁcient). Similarly, if pb > vs , the buyer is incentivized to force the price down. Setting ps = vb and pb = vs
leads to a deﬁcit. One way out is to determine take-it-orleave-it prices independently of the traders’ valuations, but
this might result in a total loss of GFT.
This impossibility result initiated a search for doubleauction mechanisms that are IC, IR and BB, and attain an
approximately maximal GFT. We deﬁne the competitive ratio of a mechanism as the minimum ratio (over all utility proﬁles) of its GFT divided by the optimal GFT. The
ﬁrst approximation mechanism was presented by McAfee
McAfee (1992) for the case when each seller has a single
unit and each buyer wants a single unit. McAfee’s mechanism is truthful — it is a weakly-dominant strategy for
each agent to report his true valuation for the item. Its
competitive-ratio is 1 − 1/k, where k is the number of units

Abstract
In a seminal paper, McAfee (1992) presented a truthful
mechanism for double auctions, attaining asymptoticallyoptimal gain-from-trade without any prior information on
the valuations of the traders. McAfee’s mechanism handles single-parametric agents, allowing each seller to sell
a single unit and each buyer to buy a single unit. This
paper presents a double-auction mechanism that handles
multi-parametric agents and allows multiple units per trader,
as long as the valuation functions of all traders have decreasing marginal returns. The mechanism is prior-free,
ex-post individually-rational, dominant-strategy truthful and
strongly-budget-balanced. Its gain-from-trade approaches the
optimum when the market size is sufﬁciently large.

1

Introduction

In a two-sided market, there are several sellers who hold
items for sale and several buyers who consider buying these
items. Examples are stock exchanges, used-car markets,
emission trading markets (Godby 1999; Sturm 2008), Internet advertisements (Feldman and Gonen 2016) and markets
for spectrum reallocation (Leyton-Brown, Milgrom, and Segal 2017). Each trader has a different valuation to each bundle of items. In contrast to a one-sided market, here the valuations of both the buyers and the sellers are their private information, and both sides might act strategically. A double
auction is a mechanism for organizing a two-sided market
— deciding who will buy, who will sell and at what prices.
An important requirement from a double-auction is efﬁciency, which is measured by its gain-from-trade (GFT) —
the total value gained by the buyers minus the total value
contributed by the sellers. As an example, in a used-car market with a single buyer and a single seller holding a single
car, if the seller values the car as vs and the buyer as vb > vs ,
then the potential GFT is vb − vs .
The most commonly used double-auction mechanism is
the Walrasian mechanism (Rustichini, Satterthwaite, and
Williams 1994; Babaioff et al. 2014). It computes an equilibrium price — a price at which the supply equals the demand:
the total number of units that sellers are interested to sell at
this price equals the total number of units that buyers are interested to buy at this price. In a single-good market, an equic 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1193

