The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Metric-Based Auto-Instructor for
Learning Mixed Data Representation
†

Songlei Jian,†‡ Liang Hu,‡ Longbing Cao,‡ Kai Lu†

College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, China
Advanced Analytics Institute, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
jiansonglei@163.com, rainmilk@gmail.com, longbing.cao@uts.edu.au, kailu@nudt.edu.cn
‡

Ou, and Yu 2012; Cao 2015). For example, k-prototype
(Huang 1997) quantiﬁes the distance between mixed types
of objects with the summation of Euclidean distance for continuous parts and Hamming distance for categorical parts.
This method treats features independently and ignores the
couplings between features. Other methods discretize continuous data into categorical ones and then calculate the
interactions in terms of categorical ways. For example,
mADD (Ahmad and Dey 2007) models the interactions between continuous and categorical features by incorporating
weights on distance which are calculated based on equallength discretization. SpectralCAT (David and Averbuch
2012) and CoupledMC (Wang et al. 2015) both conduct kmeans clustering on continuous features and use a validity
index to choose clustering label as new continuous features.
These methods calculate the couplings based on discretized
continuous data which may fail to capture the distribution of
the continuous data and lead to information loss.
Several model-based methods try to capture the heterogeneous couplings in a transformed data space. For example, EGMCM (Rajan and Bhattacharya 2016) learns the dependency between features with Gaussian mixture copulas
based on the rank transformation of data during clustering,
which may not only result in loss of information but also
fail to capture the discriminative information between objects. In recent years, deep neural networks have enabled
representation learning (Hinton and Salakhutdinov 2006;
Vincent et al. 2010; Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013).
For example, autoencoder (Vincent et al. 2010) is a typical neural model with full connections between features and
hidden units. This network structure somehow captures the
latent couplings between features and generates a distributed
representation in the hidden layer. However, these methods
focus on feature-level representation for each object without
enhancing the discrimination between objects.
By constructing two compatibly encoded feature spaces
to capture feature-level complex couplings in mixed data
by neural models, we propose an auto-instructive representation learning scheme to enhance object-level discrimination in representation. Speciﬁcally, this auto-instructive representation learning scheme consists of two collaborative instructors. One instructor derives a contrastive order over a
triplet by measuring their relative similarity (Frome et al.
2007). Then, the contrastive order serves as the supervi-

Abstract
Mixed data with both categorical and continuous features are
ubiquitous in real-world applications. Learning a good representation of mixed data is critical yet challenging for further learning tasks. Existing methods for representing mixed
data often overlook the heterogeneous coupling relationships
between categorical and continuous features as well as the
discrimination between objects. To address these issues, we
propose an auto-instructive representation learning scheme
to enable margin-enhanced distance metric learning for a
discrimination-enhanced representation. Accordingly, we design a metric-based auto-instructor (MAI) model which consists of two collaborative instructors. Each instructor captures the feature-level couplings in mixed data with fully connected networks, and guides the inﬁnite-margin metric learning for the peer instructor with a contrastive order. By feeding the learned representation into both partition-based and
density-based clustering methods, our experiments on eight
UCI datasets show highly signiﬁcant learning performance
improvement and much more distinguishable visualization
outcomes over the baseline methods.

Introduction
The performance of machine learning methods is heavily
dependent on the choice of data representation (Bengio,
Courville, and Vincent 2013). Mixed data, which contains
both categorical (or discrete) features and continuous (or
numerical) features, are ubiquitous in the real world, but
only a limited number of representation learning methods
for mixed data are available. At the feature level, a good
representation should capture the heterogeneous coupling
relationships (e.g., complex interactions, dependencies) between categorical and continuous features (Cao 2015). Further, at the object level, a good representation should express
the discrimination and margins between objects to fertilize learning tasks. However, most current methods lying in
the feature-level representation learning framework fail to
consider object-level discrimination. This paper learns the
mixed data representation to capture the feature-level couplings as well as object-level discrimination.
Most of the existing representation methods for mixed
data ignore or only partially address the heterogeneous couplings between categorical and continuous features (Cao,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3318

