The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Enhancing Constraint-Based
Multi-Objective Combinatorial Optimization
Miguel Terra-Neves, Inês Lynce, Vasco Manquinho
INESC-ID / Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal
{neves, ines, vmm}@sat.inesc-id.pt

puting (Zheng et al. 2016), there is more than one objective (also known as cost function) to be optimized. In MultiObjective Combinatorial Optimization (MOCO), there may
exist multiple optimal solutions, known as Pareto optimal
solutions, each of them favoring certain objectives at the expense of others. Furthermore, ﬁnding the Pareto front, i.e.
all Pareto optimal solutions, is well-known to be very hard.
Hence, for large MOCO problem instances, current algorithms are usually just able to approximate the Pareto front.
There is a wide variety of algorithms to solve MOCO
problems, ranging from evolutionary algorithms that approximate the Pareto front (Deb et al. 2000; Xu and Fortes
2010) to exact methods (Jackson et al. 2009). Nevertheless, despite all its success in optimization with a single cost
function, only very recently have constraint-based methods
been proposed to solve MOCO. For instance, the Guided
Improvement Algorithm (GIA) (Jackson et al. 2009), is implemented in the optimization engine of solver Z3 for ﬁnding Pareto optimal solutions of Satisﬁability Modulo Theories (SMT) instances with multiple cost functions. Recently,
it has been shown that one can ﬁnd the Pareto front of a
MOCO instance by enumerating the set of MCSs (TerraNeves, Lynce, and Man qui nho 2017) or the P -minimal
models (Soh et al. 2017) of a propositional formula.
This paper enhances constraint-based approaches for solving MOCO with the following contributions: (1) a proof
that enumeration of MCSs can be used even when the cost
functions in MOCO are deﬁned as divisions of linear expressions; (2) two new diversiﬁcation methods for enumerating
MCSs in order to quickly ﬁnd better approximations of the
Pareto front; (3) an extensive experimental evaluation on instances of the virtual machine consolidation (VMC) problem
taken from the Google Cluster Data project that show the
impact of the proposed ideas in solving MOCO instances.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces
several basic deﬁnitions, including a formal deﬁnition of
MOCO. In section 3, a constraint-based method is proposed
for solving MOCO problem instances containing cost functions that are divisions of linear expressions. Section 4 proposes MCS sampling and path-based enumeration to obtain
a wider diversiﬁcation of MCS, resulting in an improved approximation of the Pareto front. Section 5 shows the effectiveness of the proposed techniques in a MOCO formulation
of the VMC problem, and section 6 concludes the paper.

Abstract
Minimal Correction Subsets (MCSs) have been successfully
applied to ﬁnd approximate solutions to several real-world
single-objective optimization problems. However, only recently have MCSs been used to solve Multi-Objective Combinatorial Optimization (MOCO) problems. In particular, it
has been shown that all optimal solutions of MOCO problems with linear objective functions can be found by an MCS
enumeration procedure.
In this paper, we show that the approach of MCS enumeration can also be applied to MOCO problems where objective functions are divisions of linear expressions. Hence, it is
not necessary to use a linear approximation of these objective functions. Additionally, we also propose the integration
of diversiﬁcation techniques on the MCS enumeration process in order to ﬁnd better approximations of the Pareto front
of MOCO problems. Finally, experimental results on the Virtual Machine Consolidation (VMC) problem show the effectiveness of the proposed techniques.

1

Introduction

The integration of propositional satisﬁabilty (SAT) solvers
in algorithms to solve optimization problems such as Maximum Satisﬁability (MaxSAT) or Pseudo-Boolean Optimization (PBO) resulted in a new generation of highly effective
tools to solve optimization problems. Nevertheless, there
are still a wide variety of problems where state of the art
MaxSAT or PBO solvers cannot ﬁnd an optimal solution in
useful time. A well-known approach to approximate optimal
solutions for these optimization problems is by enumerating
Minimal Correction Subsets.
A Minimal Correction Subset (MCS) of an unsatisﬁable set of constraints F is a minimal subset C such that
if all constraints in C are removed from F , then F becomes satisﬁable. Recently, several algorithms for effective
MCS enumeration have been proposed (Bacchus et al. 2014;
Felfernig, Schubert, and Zehentner 2012; Grégoire, Lagniez,
and Mazure 2014; Marques-Silva et al. 2013) and successfully applied to obtain good quality solutions for problems
where complete algorithms are unable to do it.
In many real-world applications, such as scheduling (Iturriaga, Dorronsoro, and Nesmachnow 2017) or green comc 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6649

