The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Perception-Action-Learning System for
Mobile Social-Service Robots using Deep Learning

1

Beom-Jin Lee,1 Jinyoung Choi,2 Chung-Yeon Lee,1 Kyung-Wha Park,3 Sungjun Choi,1
Cheolho Han,1 Dong-Sig Han,1 Christina Baek,3 Patrick Emaase,1 Byoung-Tak Zhang123

School of Computer Science and Engineering, 2 Cognitive Science Program, 3 Interdisciplinary Program in Neuroscience,
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, Republic of

Abstract
We introduce a robust integrated perception-action-learning
system for mobile social-service robots. The state-of-the-art
deep learning techniques were incorporated into each module which signiﬁcantly improves the performance in solving
social service tasks. The system not only demonstrated fast
and robust performance in a homelike environment but also
achieved the highest score in the RoboCup2017@Home Social Standard Platform League (SSPL) held in Nagoya, Japan.

Introduction
Recent release of various standardized social-service robots
with their idealistic promotional videos are drawing the public’s interest in the possibility of co-existing with robots.
This is also increasing the public’s expectation of socialservice robots to become more human-like, capable of providing natural social services to the customers in dynamic
environments such as houses, restaurants, hotels and even
airports. However, this has been a challenging goal for researchers in the ﬁeld of social-service robotics.
One promising approach is developing an integrated system of methodologies from many different research areas.
This multi-module integrated intelligent robotic system has
been widely accepted and its performance has been well
known from previous studies (Brooks 1986; Siepmann et al.
2014). However, with the individual roles of each module in
the integrated system, perception modules mostly suffered
from desynchronization between each other and difﬁculty in
adapting to dynamic environments (Rodrı́guez et al. 2016).
This occurred because of the different process time and scale
of coverage of the adopted vision techniques (Collet et al.
2011). To overcome such difﬁculties, developers usually upgraded or added expensive sensors (hardware) to the robot
to improve performances. Though this may have provided
some solutions to the limitations, it made companies difﬁcult to release a standardized robot because of increased cost
of the robot.
We propose a novel and robust integrated system for mobile social-service robots that at least includes an RGB-D
camera and any kind of obstacle detecting sensors (laser,

Figure 1: Perception-Action-Learning System for Mobile
Social-Service Robots using Deep Learning
bumper, sonar). We incorporated state-of-the-art deep learning methods to overcome the conventional perception issues
for robots to perform various social service tasks in realtime with robustness. Moreover, by designing the system
inspired by the cognitive perception-action-learning cycle
(Badre 2008), we achieved adaptability to dynamic environments.

System Architecture and Methodology
As illustrated in Figure 1, our system’s perception-actionlearning cycle works in real-time (∼0.2 s/cycle) where the
arrows indicates the ﬂow of each modules. The system was
implemented on a server of I7 CPU, 32Gb RAM and GTX
Titan 12Gb GPU. Using ROS topics, the communication between the server and the robot were achieved and the ROS
topics were passed through 5GHz Wi-Fi connection. The
overall information about the implemented modules are organized in Table 1, 2 and 3.
We used our system on SoftBank Pepper, a standardized
mobile social-service robot, and achieved the highest score
in every scenario performed at the RoboCup2017@Home
SSPL, winning ﬁrst place overall.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8208

