The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multiagent Connected Path Planning:
PSPACE-Completeness and How to Deal with It
Davide Tateo, Jacopo Banﬁ, Alessandro Riva,
Francesco Amigoni, Andrea Bonarini
Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria
Politecnico di Milano
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 32, Milano, Italy
{davide.tateo, jacopo.banﬁ, alessandro.riva, francesco.amigoni, andrea.bonarini}@polimi.it
In (Hollinger 2010; Hollinger and Singh 2012), it is
claimed that the decision version of MCPP asking for the
existence of a plan that can be executed in at most a
given number of steps is NP-complete. The NP membership proof, however, is not detailed. In this paper, we show
that, in fact, even deciding whether a feasible plan exists is
a PSPACE-complete problem. Our theoretical result implies
that, not only a polynomial-time feasibility algorithm is unlikely to exist (unless P=PSPACE), but also feasibility certiﬁcates of polynomial size might be out of reach (unless
NP=PSPACE). We also consider a variation of MCPP able
to model collisions among agents, generalizing the graphbased Multirobot Path Planning problem (MPP) introduced
by (Yu and LaValle 2013b), and show that our proof holds
even in this case. This is interesting, since the MPP feasibility decision problem is in P (Yu and Rus 2015), while
MPP time- and distance-optimal decision problems are NPcomplete (Yu 2016; Banﬁ, Basilico, and Amigoni 2017).
Our negative theoretical result on the complexity of
MCPP does not rule out the existence of problem instances
that can be solved efﬁciently. Therefore, as an additional
contribution, we present three algorithms for MCPP working
under different search paradigms and we empirically show
that they may efﬁciently obtain a feasible plan, if any exists,
in different settings. To the best of our knowledge, these are
the ﬁrst practical algorithms speciﬁcally designed for MCPP.
It is worth mentioning that MCPP shares some similarities with the problem of connectivity maintainance as investigated by the Control community. In that case, the agents are
usually required to maintain global connectivity either while
pursuing basic coordinated tasks (like rendez-vous, formation control, and ﬂocking) (Zavlanos, Egerstedt, and Pappas
2011) or in response to additional control terms, such as the
teleoperation of one of the team members (Sabattini et al.
2013).

Abstract
In the Multiagent Connected Path Planning problem (MCPP),
a team of agents moving in a graph-represented environment
must plan a set of start-goal joint paths which ensures global
connectivity at each time step, under some communication
model. The decision version of this problem asking for the
existence of a plan that can be executed in at most a given
number of steps is claimed to be NP-complete in the literature. The NP membership proof, however, is not detailed.
In this paper, we show that, in fact, even deciding whether a
feasible plan exists is a PSPACE-complete problem. Furthermore, we present three algorithms adopting different search
paradigms, and we empirically show that they may efﬁciently
obtain a feasible plan, if any exists, in different settings.

Introduction
The Multiagent Connected Path Planning problem, MCPP
for short, was formally introduced in (Hollinger 2010;
Hollinger and Singh 2012) as a simpler version of the Multirobot Informative Path Planning with Periodic Connectivity
problem (MIPP-PC). In MCPP, a team of agents moving in a
graph-represented environment must plan a set of start-goal
joint paths which ensures global (multi-hop) connectivity at
each time step, under some communication model.
Besides being useful in the context of MIPP-PC, the computational study of this problem is interesting on its own
since it may silently appear as a subproblem in several
information-gathering missions. For instance, in multirobot
exploration, adopting continuous connectivity with a supervising base station can ensure the possibility of manually intervening in case of robots’ faults and of delivering video
streams from the robots to the base station (Rooker and
Birk 2007). Another example is given by connectivity-aware
planning for search and rescue (Feo Flushing et al. 2013),
where particular connectivity requirements can give rise to
a MCPP subproblem to solve. In (Bhattacharya, Likhachev,
and Kumar 2010), distance constraints are incorporated in
a simultaneous path planning and task execution problem.
Distance constraints can be interpreted as particular communication constraints when full communication within a given
range is assumed.

Problem Deﬁnition
We consider an environment modeled as a multigraph G =
(V, E, C) describing both its physical and communication
features. Locations are modeled by the set of vertices V that
can be obtained by discretizing the environment either by
hand, or with the help of some automated technique (see,
e.g., (Stump et al. 2011)). The ﬁrst edge set, E, encodes
the physical topology of the environment. The second set

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4735

