The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Sweep-Based Propagation for String Constraint Solving
Roberto Amadini, Graeme Gange, Peter J. Stuckey
Department of Computing and Information Systems
The University of Melbourne, Australia
{roberto.amadini,gkgange,pstuckey}@unimelb.edu.au

In a nutshell, given an alphabet Σ, a dashed string is a concatenation S1l1 ,u1 S2l2 ,u2 · · · Sklk ,uk of k blocks, where each
block Sili ,ui represents the set of all the strings of Σ having
length in [li , ui ] and characters in Si ⊆ Σ. Unfortunately,
the dynamic programming algorithm used in (Amadini et
al. 2017) for propagating equality, here referred as C OVER,
suffers its own scalability troubles: its worst-case behaviour
is cubic in the number of blocks, so performance degrades
rapidly when dealing with long ﬁxed strings.
In this paper, we introduce the S WEEP algorithm for propagating equality between dashed strings. In essence, the algorithm performs linear-time sweeps across a dashed string,
collecting the earliest and latest positions a given block
could be matched. The S WEEP algorithm provides weaker
propagation than C OVER, but has much lower worst-case
complexity: as we shall see, this can dramatically improve
the resolution when the number of blocks becomes large.
We implemented the S WEEP algorithm by extending GS TRINGS, a string solver introduced in (Amadini et al.
2017) which represents string variables with dashed strings,
and we compared its performance against the C OVER algorithm (already implemented in G-S TRINGS) and other stateof-the-art approaches such as: the CP-based string solver
G ECODE+S (Scott et al. 2017); the CP solvers C HUFFED,
G ECODE, I Z PLUS (by mapping strings into array of integers); the SMT-based string solvers Z3 STR 3 (Berzish,
Zheng, and Ganesh 2017) and CVC4 (Liang et al. 2014).
To make the empirical evaluation more meaningful, we
extended the benchmarks used in (Amadini et al. 2017) by
generating new instances of the SQL problem introduced in
(Amadini et al. 2016). Empirical results indicate that sweepbased propagation allows us to considerably outperform all
the aforementioned approaches.

Abstract
Solving constraints over strings is an emerging important
ﬁeld. Recently, a Constraint Programming approach based
on dashed strings has been proposed to enable a compact
domain representation for potentially large bounded-length
string variables. In this paper, we present a more efﬁcient
algorithm for propagating equality (and related constraints)
over dashed strings. We call this propagation sweep-based.
Experimental evidences show that sweep-based propagation
is able to signiﬁcantly outperform state-of-the-art approaches
for string constraint solving.

Introduction
Constraint solving over strings is an important ﬁeld, given
the ubiquity of strings in different domains such as, e.g.,
software veriﬁcation and testing (Emmi, Majumdar, and Sen
2007; Bjørner, Tillmann, and Voronkov 2009), model checking (Gange et al. 2013), and web security (Bisht et al. 2011;
Thomé et al. 2017).
Various approaches of disparate nature have been proposed, based for instance on bit-vectors (Kiezun et al.
2012), automata (Hooimeijer and Weimer 2012; Li and
Ghosh 2013; Tateishi, Pistoia, and Tripp 2013), SMT extensions (Berzish, Zheng, and Ganesh 2017; Liang et al. 2014;
Abdulla et al. 2015; Trinh, Chu, and Jaffar 2014; Yu, Alkhalaf, and Bultan 2010; Saxena et al. 2010), and constraint programming (Scott et al. 2017; Amadini et al. 2017).
Typically, we aim to solve problems with bounded-length
strings, i.e., strings having a maximum length. These problems are mainly addressed with some variant of unfolding:
a string s of length (up to) k is translated into a sequence of
single-character variables s1 , . . . , sk , and string constraints
are imposed in terms of these variables. However, methods
which unfold eagerly face scalability problems when the upper bounds on string length becomes large, and committing
to absolute character positions makes it difﬁcult to reason
precisely when combining strings of non-ﬁxed length.
Dashed strings, an alternative representation for modelling the domain of string variables through sub-sequences
of uncertain length, were described in (Amadini et al. 2017).

Dashed Strings
In this Section we give some preliminary notions about
dashed strings, including the C OVER algorithm introduced
in (Amadini et al. 2017) for equating dashed strings,1 and
the CP solver G-S TRINGS, which implements C OVER.
1
In (Amadini et al. 2017) the C OVER algorithm is actually
called E QUATE. Here we call it C OVER to differentiate it from
the S WEEP algorithm, since both C OVER and S WEEP are used for
equating dashed strings.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6557

