The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Safe Exploration and Optimization of
Constrained MDPs Using Gaussian Processes
Akifumi Wachi

Yanan Sui and Yisong Yue

Masahiro Ono

University of Tokyo
wachi@space.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Calfornia Institute of Technology
{ysui, yyue}@caltech.edu

Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
California Institute of Technology
ono@jpl.nasa.gov

transitions, i.e., that all states are assumed to be reachable.
In practical applications, an agent is not necessarily able
to reach all (safe) states because of (blocking) hazardous
states. On the other hand, especially in the ﬁeld of robotics,
there is a signiﬁcant body of work on safety-constrained
decision-making (Fleming and McEneaney 1995; Schwarm
and Nikolaou 1999; Blackmore et al. 2010; Ono et al. 2015).
While these methods consider uncertainty what state one
is in, they assume that unsafe states are known a priori.
Removing this assumption requires exploration of safety,
which is a central focus of our work.
To develop a tractable approach for exploring the safe
region, we make regularity assumptions that similar states
have similar safety levels. In particular, we model the safety
function as a Gaussian process (GP) (Rasmussen 2006), with
an appropriate kernel to capture similarity between states.
Previous work on safe optimization using GP have largely
focused on the state-less setting, such as in Bayesian optimization (Mockus 2012). Another typical limitation is when
the reward function and the safety function are identical (Sui
et al. 2015), e.g., an unsafe state is one where the reward
function is too low.
In stateful settings, such as Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs), previous work on safe optimization either ignore additional structure (Moldovan and Abbeel 2012), or
can only exploit structure for exploring the safe region
(Turchetta, Berkenkamp, and Krause 2016) (i.e., pure exploration). The former suffers from longer convergence times
since it cannot exploit the GP structure, and the latter suffers
from not actually optimizing the reward function.
Our Contributions. In this paper, we propose a novel
safe-constrained exploration and optimization approach that
maximizes discounted cumulative reward while guaranteeing safety. As demonstrated in Figure 1, we optimize over
constrained MDPs with a priori unknown two functions, one
for reward and the other for safety. A state is considered safe
if the safety function value is above a threshold.
As alluded to above, compared to previous work on
jointly exploring and optimizing safety-constrained MDPs
(Moldovan and Abbeel 2012), our approach is unique in two
aspects. First, (Moldovan and Abbeel 2012) puts no assumption on the structure of reward and safety functions. While
that approach is more general, in practice, nearby states often have the similar levels of safety. For example, if a Mars

Abstract
We present a reinforcement learning approach to explore
and optimize a safety-constrained Markov Decision Process
(MDP). In this setting, the agent must maximize discounted
cumulative reward while constraining the probability of entering unsafe states, deﬁned using a safety function being
within some tolerance. The safety values of all states are not
known a priori, and we probabilistically model them via a
Gaussian Process (GP) prior. As such, properly behaving in
such an environment requires balancing a three-way trade-off
of exploring the safety function, exploring the reward function, and exploiting acquired knowledge to maximize reward.
We propose a novel approach to balance this trade-off. Specifically, our approach explores unvisited states selectively; that
is, it prioritizes the exploration of a state if visiting that state
signiﬁcantly improves the knowledge on the achievable cumulative reward. Our approach relies on a novel information
gain criterion based on Gaussian Process representations of
the reward and safety functions. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on a range of experiments, including
a simulation using the real Martian terrain data.

Introduction
In many environments, an autonomous agent must discover
both potential hazards as well as rewards on-the-ﬂy. For
example, in case of NASA’s rovers exploring the surface
of Mars, the driving safety and scientiﬁc gain of unvisited
places cannot be perfectly known a priori. Hence, at the end
of each Martian day, called Sol (approximately 24 hours and
40 minutes), the rover takes a set of panorama images and
send it to the Earth. The ground operators identify science
targets as well as hazards in the images, and plan a path for
the next Sol, which is typically less than 100 meters. This
process is exploratory by nature; the rover needs to explore
unvisited regions in order to make discoveries, but in a way
to assure safety. However, the agent is not fully autonomous
in this case because there does not exist a good algorithm to
fully drive the decision-making process in situ.
Traditional exploration approaches in reinforcement
learning (Sutton and Barto 1998; Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis
1995) are agnostic to safety, and instead focus on efﬁcient
exploration under the assumption of ergodicity of the state
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6548

