The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Source Traces for
Temporal Difference Learning
Silviu Pitis
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA, USA 30332
spitis@gatech.edu

The speed of one-step TD methods is limited, however, as
they require many repeat experiences to generalize.
Several families of methods achieve faster generalization
by propagating TD errors several steps per real experience.
Eligibility trace methods keep a short-term memory vector
that accumulates the (decaying) “eligibilities” of recently
visited states, and use it to propagate TD errors to past states
in proportion to their eligibility (Sutton 1988). Experience
replay (ER) (Lin 1992) and Dyna (Sutton 1990) methods
learn from replayed or generated experiences, so that several
value function backups occur per real experience. Unlike eligibility traces, ER and Dyna employ a long-term model to
speed up learning with respect to known potential causes.
This paper introduces source traces. Source traces are
like eligibility traces, but model potential histories rather
than immediate ones. This allows for propagation of TD errors to potential causal states and leads to faster learning.
Source traces can be thought of as the model-based, backward view of successor representations (SR) (Dayan 1993).
This backward view suggests several new ideas: a provablyconvergent TD(λ)-like algorithm for learning and the concept of partial source traces and SR (Section 3), a novel algorithm for learning the source map (Section 4), the triple
model learning algorithm (Section 4), and new perspectives
on the source map, which allow, among other things, the use
of source traces to enhance experience replay (Section 5).
For clarity and brevity, and as a building block to future
work, this paper focuses on the tabular MRP-valuation setting. It is likely, however, given existing extensions of SR
(e.g., Barreto et al. 2016), that source traces can be effectively extended to control settings requiring approximation,
which is discussed brieﬂy in the conclusion (Section 6).

Abstract
This paper motivates and develops source traces for temporal
difference (TD) learning in the tabular setting. Source traces
are like eligibility traces, but model potential histories rather
than immediate ones. This allows TD errors to be propagated
to potential causal states and leads to faster generalization.
Source traces can be thought of as the model-based, backward
view of successor representations (SR), and share many of
the same beneﬁts. This view, however, suggests several new
ideas. First, a TD(λ)-like source learning algorithm is proposed and its convergence is proven. Then, a novel algorithm
for learning the source map (or SR matrix) is developed and
shown to outperform the previous algorithm. Finally, various
approaches to using the source/SR model are explored, and it
is shown that source traces can be effectively combined with
other model-based methods like Dyna and experience replay.

1

Introduction

When we, as humans, ﬁrst learn that some state of the world
is valuable (or harmful), we adjust our behavior. For instance, suppose we burn our hand on a hot pan. At least
three types of generalization enable useful learning. First,
we generalize to substantially similar causal states: we will
be more careful handling hot pans on Tuesdays, even if the
burn happened on a Monday. Second, we generalize back
through time from direct causes to indirect ones. Rather than
simply stopping at the last second, we may now instinctively
reach for an oven mitt before approaching the pan. Finally,
we generalize not only to actual causes, but also to potential
causes. Our burn may make us less willing to keep our hand
close to a campﬁre while roasting marshmallows.
Reinforcement learning mirrors human learning in many
respects, including the three modes of generalization just
discussed. The ﬁrst—generalizing to substantially similar
causes—is a direct result of function approximation (e.g.,
Mnih et al. 2015). The latter two—generalization to indirect
causes and generalization to potential causes—though aided
by function approximation, are driven primarily by temporal
difference (TD) learning (Sutton 1988). TD learning uses a
value function to bootstrap learning, allowing new information to ﬂow backward, state-by-state, from effects to causes.

2

Ideal Source Traces

We consider an n-state discounted Markov Reward Process
(MRP) with inﬁnite time horizon, formally described as the
tuple (S, p, r, γ), where: S is the state space; p is the transition function, which takes two states, s, s ∈ S, and returns
the probability of transitioning to s from s; r is the reward
function, which takes a state, s, and returns a real-valued
reward for that state; and γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor.
If the size of the state space, |S|, is ﬁnite, then p can be
described by the |S|×|S| probability matrix P whose ij-th
entry is p(si , sj ). Similarly, r can be described by the |S|-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3952

