The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

FLIC: Fast Linear Iterative
Clustering with Active Search
Jiaxing Zhao, Bo Ren∗

Qibin Hou, Ming-Ming Cheng

Paul L. Rosin

Nankai University

Nankai University

Cardiff University

adhere to image boundaries very well, and the complexity is high. GraphCut (Boykov, Veksler, and Zabih 2001;
Veksler, Boykov, and Mehrani 2010) regarded the segmentation problem as an energy optimization process. It solved
the compactness problem by using min-cut/max-ﬂow algorithms (Boykov and Kolmogorov 2004; Kolmogorov and
Zabin 2004), but their parameters are hard to control. Turbopixel (Levinshtein et al. 2009) is another method that is
proposed to solve the compactness problem. However, the
inefﬁciency of the underlying level-set method (Osher and
Sethian 1988) restricts its applications. Bergh et al. (2012)
proposed an energy-driven algorithm SEEDS whose results
adhered to the boundaries well, but unfortunately it suffers
from irregularity and the number of superpixels is uncertain. ERS (Liu et al. 2011), although it performs well on
the Berkeley segmentation benchmark, has a high computational cost that limits its practical use.

Abstract
In this paper, we reconsider the clustering problem for image over-segmentation from a new perspective. We propose a
novel search algorithm named “active search” which explicitly considers neighboring continuity. Based on this search
method, we design a back-and-forth traversal strategy and
a “joint” assignment and update step to speed up the algorithm. Compared to earlier works, such as Simple Linear Iterative Clustering (SLIC) and its follow-ups, who use ﬁxed
search regions and perform the assignment and the update
step separately, our novel scheme reduces the number of iterations required for convergence, and also improves the boundary sensitivity of the over-segmentation results. Extensive
evaluations on the Berkeley segmentation benchmark verify
that our method outperforms competing methods under various evaluation metrics. In particular, lowest time cost is reported among existing methods (approximately 30 fps for a
481 × 321 image on a single CPU core). To facilitate the
development of over-segmentation, the code will be publicly
available.

1

Achanta et al. (2012) proposed a linear clustering based
algorithm SLIC. It generates superpixels based on Lloyd’s
algorithm (Lloyd 1982) (also known as Voronoi iteration or
k-means). In the assignment step of SLIC, as a key point to
speed up the algorithm, each pixel p is associated with those
cluster seeds whose search regions overlap its location. Such
a strategy is also adopted by most subsequent works based
on SLIC. SLIC is widely used in various applications (Wang
et al. 2011) because of its high efﬁciency and good performance. Inspired by SLIC, Wang et al. (2013a) implemented
an algorithm SSS that considered the structural information within images. It uses the geodesic distance (Peyré et
al. 2010) computed by the geometric ﬂows instead of the
simple Euclidean distance. However, efﬁciency is poor because of the bottleneck caused by the high computational
cost of measuring geodesic distances. Very recently, Liu et
al. proposed Manifold SLIC (2016) that generated contentsensitive superpixels by computing Centroidal Voronoi Tessellation (CVT) (Du, Faber, and Gunzburger 1999) in a
special feature space. Such an advanced technique makes
it much faster than SSS but still slower than SLIC owing to the cost of its mapping, splitting and merging processes. From the aforementioned descriptions, we see that
the above-mentioned methods improve the results by either
using more complicated distance measurements or providing more suitable transformations of the feature space. However, the assignment and update steps within these methods

Introduction

Superpixels, generated by image over-segmentation, take
the place of pixels to become the fundamental units in
various computer vision tasks, including image segmentation (Cheng et al. 2016), image classiﬁcation (Wang et al.
2013b), 3D reconstruction (Hoiem, Efros, and Hebert 2005),
object tracking (Wang et al. 2011), etc. Such a technique
can greatly reduce computational complexity, avoid undersegmentation, and reduce the inﬂuence caused by noise.
Therefore, how to generate superpixels with high efﬁciency
plays an important role in many vision and image processing
applications.
Generating superpixels has been an important research
issue, and a group of classical methods have been developed, including FH (Felzenszwalb and Huttenlocher 2004),
Mean Shift (Comaniciu and Meer 2002), Watershed (Vincent and Soille 1991), etc. The lack of compactness and
the irregularity of superpixels restrict their applications, especially when contrast is poor or shadows are present. To
solve the above-mentioned problems, Shi and Malik proposed Normalized Cuts (NC) (Shi and Malik 2000) that generated compact superpixels. However, this method does not
∗

Bo Ren is the corresponding author: rb@nankai.edu.cn.

7574

