The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Dependence Guided Unsupervised Feature Selection
Jun Guo,1 Wenwu Zhu1,2

1

2

Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institue, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, China
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
eeguojun@outlook.com, wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

class labels of data which contain the essential discrimination. Supervised feature selection methods have drawn much
attention over the past decade. However, the acquisition of
label information is laborious and time-consuming, which
makes some related tasks more challenging. In contrast, unsupervised feature selection (Law, Figueiredo, and Jain 2004;
Boutsidis, Drineas, and Mahoney 2009; Witten and Tibshirani 2010) is desired to explore the properties of unlabeled
data in real-world applications.
Most unsupervised feature selection methods are based on
ﬁlters (Dash et al. 2002), wrappers (Roth and Lange 2004),
or embedding (Hou et al. 2014; Guo et al. 2017). In the past
decade, the success of manifold and sparse learning boosts
the research of embedding-based unsupervised feature selection. To achieve encouraging performance, most existing
studies on embedding methods introduce pseudo-labels into
l2,1 -norm based sparse learning and emphasize too much
on the resulting optimization problem. They usually adopt
a two-step strategy. After the overall sparse learning, these
unsupervised feature selection methods ﬁrst calculate the
importance for each feature dimension based on some predeﬁned variables, e.g., Laplacian score (He, Cai, and Niyogi
2005), row/column-wise l2 -norm of the latent feature matrix (Wang, Tang, and Liu 2015) or projection matrix (Nie,
Zhu, and Li 2016). Next, a score vector can be obtained and
then sorted in descending order. Accordingly, previous works
select the top-m features to conduct K-means clustering.
However, this two-step strategy for unsupervised feature
selection will select a group of sub-optimal features. The
main reasons and analyses are two-folds:

Abstract
In the past decade, various sparse learning based unsupervised
feature selection methods have been developed. However,
most existing studies adopt a two-step strategy. i.e., selecting the top-m features according to a calculated descending
order and then performing K-means clustering, resulting in a
group of sub-optimal features. To address this problem, we
propose a Dependence Guided Unsupervised Feature Selection (DGUFS) method to select features and partition data
in a joint manner. Our proposed method enhances the interdependence among original data, cluster labels, and selected
features. In particular, a projection-free feature selection model
is proposed based on l2,0 -norm equality constraints. We utilize the learned cluster labels to ﬁll in the information gap
between original data and selected features. Two dependence
guided terms are consequently proposed for our model. More
speciﬁcally, one term increases the dependence of desired
cluster labels on original data, while the other term maximizes the dependence of selected features on cluster labels
to guide the process of feature selection. Last but not least,
an iterative algorithm based on Alternating Direction Method
of Multipliers (ADMM) is designed to solve the constrained
minimization problem efﬁciently. Extensive experiments on
different datasets consistently demonstrate that our proposed
method signiﬁcantly outperforms state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

In many applications, high-dimensional features are often
correlated, redundant, or even noisy, which may lead to adverse effects such as heavy computational complexity and
poor performance (John, Kohavi, and Pﬂeger 1994; Liu and
Motoda 2007). Therefore, various feature selection methods (Zhao and Liu 2007; He et al. 2012; Chang et al. 2014;
Wang et al. 2016; Han and Shen 2016; Li, Tang, and Liu 2017;
Cheng, Li, and Liu 2017) are proposed to ﬁlter out the unimportant features of high-dimensional data.
In terms of label availability, feature selection can be generally grouped into two major categories, i.e., supervised and
unsupervised (Kira and Rendell 1992; Kononenko 1994).
Supervised feature selection (Raileanu and Stoffel 2004;
Yang et al. 2013; Jian et al. 2016; Fan et al. 2017) aims
to select a group of discriminative features with the provided

• These methods do not directly select m features in the
optimization process. Feature selection aims to determine
a subset of m features from d (d > m) features, and the
selected subset should outperform other Cdm − 1 subsets1 .
The two-step strategy evaluates the importance for all d
features, then selects the top-m sorted ones. It is obviously
unreasonable to select m features without removing the
information of other d − m features in the learning phase.
• The two-step strategy suppresses the inter-dependence
among original data, cluster labels, and selected features.
From a general perspective, the three aspects are naturally

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1 m
Cd denotes the number of m-combinations from a given set
of d elements.

2232

