The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Dictionary Learning
in Optimal Metric Space
Jiexi Yan,1 Cheng Deng,1∗ Xianglong Liu2
1

School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xian 710071, China
2
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
jxyan@stu.xidian.edu.cn, chdeng.xd@gmail.com, xlliu@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn

et al. 2009a), supervised problem (Mairal et al. 2009b;
Zhang and Li 2010; Jiang, Lin, and Davis 2011) and semisupervised problems (Wang et al. 2013). Among these approaches, some learn dictionary without any prior information, while the others require label information. However,
when dealing with real-world problems, we often only get
the side information i.e. pairwise constrains which indicate
whether two objects in a pair belong to the same class.
Without the use of the side information, data representation obtained from traditional unsupervised dictionary learning method such as (Aharon, Elad, and Bruckstein 2006) is
not good enough. To take full advantage of the side information, we use metric learning method as a preprocessing step
and process dictionary learning after this step. But in this
way, the obtained metric space is only suboptimal and the
learned dictionary on this suboptimal metric space is also
not optimal. So this simple two-step method is heuristic but
not optimal.
To handle the above problem, we naturally integrate metric learning to dictionary learning to enhance dictionary
learning model with fully utilizing the side information and
derive a novel uniﬁed model. As shown in Figure 1, the
proposed method updates metric space and dictionary adaptively and iteratively, so we can learn both optimal metric
space and optimal dictionary. In this uniﬁed model, we explicitly incorporate a sparse coding reconstruction error criterion and a trace ratio of pairwise constraints criterion into
a uniﬁed objective function. In addition, because of using
metric learning to reduce the dimension of the original data,
our method can deal well with high-dimensional data, in
which redundant features may confuse dictionary learning.
And then we introduce an optimization algorithm to update
dictionary D and metric space W alternatively and iteratively. We perform image clustering experiments on several
real-world image data sets, including human face recognition benchmark data sets and objective recognition benchmark data sets. Results show that our proposed dictionary
learning in optimal projection subspace model works effectively and outperforms other compared methods.

Abstract
Dictionary learning has been widely used in machine learning
ﬁeld to address many real-world applications, such as classiﬁcation and denoising. In recent years, many new dictionary
learning methods have been proposed. Most of them are designed to solve unsupervised problem without any prior information or supervised problem with the label information.
But in real world, as usual, we can only obtain limited side information as prior information rather than label information.
The existing methods don’t take into account the side information, let alone learning a good dictionary through using
the side information. To tackle it, we propose a new uniﬁed
unsupervised model which naturally integrates metric learning to enhance dictionary learning model with fully utilizing
the side information. The proposed method updates metric
space and dictionary adaptively and alternatively, which ensures learning optimal metric space and dictionary simultaneously. Besides, our method can also deal well with highdimensional data. Extensive experiments show the efﬁciency
of our proposed method, and a better performance can be derived in real-world image clustering applications.

Introduction
Dictionary Learning (Toi and Frossard 2011) and sparse representation (Olshausen and Field 1997) are crucial tools in
machine learning ﬁeld. Dictionary is able to learn an adaptive set of basis elements (dictionary) from data instead of
predeﬁned ones (Mallat 1999), so that every data sample
can be represented by sparse linear combination of these basis vectors. Since dictionary learning has proven its effectiveness on numerous machine learning tasks, such as classiﬁcation (Zhang and Li 2010), denoising (Aharon, Elad,
and Bruckstein 2006) and self-taught learning (Wang, Nie,
and Huang 2013), many researchers worked on this topic
and a large amount of algorithms and methods were proposed to solve dictionary learning problem. (Olshausen and
Field 1997; Lewicki and Sejnowski 2006; Aharon, Elad, and
Bruckstein 2006; Mairal et al. 2009a)
In the past two decades, many researchers have proposed
different kinds of dictionary learning approaches to adapt
and solve different application problem, such as unsupervised problem (Aharon, Elad, and Bruckstein 2006; Mairal

Related Work
In this section, we give a brief review of the development of
dictionary learning and sparse coding.
As we know, dictionary learning is widely used in the ﬁeld

∗

Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4350

