The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Self-View Grounding Given
a Narrated 360 Degree Video
†

Shih-Han Chou,† Yi-Chun Chen,† Kuo-Hao Zeng,†
Hou-Ning Hu,† Jianlong Fu,‡ Min Sun†

Department of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University
‡
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
{happy810705, yichun8447}@gmail.com, khzeng@cs.stanford.edu
{eborboihuc@gapp, sunmin@ee}.nthu.edu.tw, jianf@microsoft.com

Abstract

360Ʊ Panoramic video
360Ʊ

Narrated 360◦ videos are typically provided in many touring scenarios to mimic real-world experience. However, previous work has shown that smart assistance (i.e., providing
visual guidance) can signiﬁcantly help users to follow the
Normal Field of View (NFoV) corresponding to the narrative. In this project, we aim at automatically grounding the
NFoVs of a 360◦ video given subtitles of the narrative (referred to as “NFoV-grounding”). We propose a novel Visual
Grounding Model (VGM) to implicitly and efﬁciently predict
the NFoVs given the video content and subtitles. Speciﬁcally,
at each frame, we efﬁciently encode the panorama into feature map of candidate NFoVs using a Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) and the subtitles to the same hidden space
using an RNN with Gated Recurrent Units (GRU). Then, we
apply soft-attention on candidate NFoVs to trigger sentence
decoder aiming to minimize the reconstruct loss between the
generated and given sentence. Finally, we obtain the NFoV
as the candidate NFoV with the maximum attention without any human supervision. To train VGM more robustly, we
also generate a reverse sentence conditioning on one minus
the soft-attention such that the attention focuses on candidate
NFoVs less relevant to the given sentence. The negative log
reconstruction loss of the reverse sentence (referred to as “irrelevant loss”) is jointly minimized to encourage the reverse
sentence to be different from the given sentence. To evaluate
our method, we collect the ﬁrst narrated 360◦ videos dataset
and achieve state-of-the-art NFoV-grounding performance.

NFOV

NFOV
NFOV

t-1

180Ʊ

t

User’s
perspective

t+1

Each room has its own
private bathroom…

… and texas sized
spacious closet.

The furniture in each bedroom
includes a full size bed.

Time

Figure 1: Illustration of NFoV-grounding. In a 360◦ video
(top-panel), a video player displays a predeﬁned Normal
Field of View (NFoV) (bottom-panel). Our VGM can automatically ground narrative into a corresponding NFoV (orange boxes) at each frame.

guidance, the NFoV described by the narrative needs to be
inferred. We deﬁne this new task as “NFoV-grounding”.
The task of NFoV-grounding is related to but different
from grounding language in normal images in two main
ways. First of all, the panoramic image in 360◦ video has
a large ﬁeld of view with high resolution. Hence, the regions
described by narrative often are relatively small compared
to the panoramic image. As a result, grounding language
in panoramic image is harder and computationally expensive. Secondly, rather than grounding to an object, our task
is grounding to an NFoV, which could correspond to objects
and/or scene regions. In this case, existing object proposal
methods cannot be leveraged. To the best of our knowledge,
NFoV-grounding is a unique task which hasn’t been tackled.
We propose a novel Visual Grounding Model (VGM) to
implicitly and efﬁciently predict the NFoVs given the video
content and subtitles. Speciﬁcally, at each frame, we encode
the panorama into feature map using a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and embed candidate NFoVs onto the

Introduction
Thanks to the availability of consumer-level 360◦ video
cameras, many 360◦ videos are shared on websites like
YouTube and Facebook. Among these videos, a subset of
them is narrated with natural language phrases describing
the video content. For instance, many videos consist of the
guided tour of real estates (e.g., houses and apartments) or
tourist locations. Intuitively, a 360◦ touring video provides
viewers the freedom to follow the narrative and select Normal Field of Views (NFoVs) provided by typical video players (see Fig. 1). However, a study in Lin et al. (2017) suggests that visual guidance (i.e., assistance through visual indicator) is preferred to assist viewers to follow the NFoV
described by the narrative. In order to provide the visual
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6748

