The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Transferable Subspace
for Human Motion Segmentation
∗

Lichen Wang,∗ Zhengming Ding,∗ Yun Fu∗†
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, USA
†
College of Computer & Information Science, Northeastern University, Boston, USA
wanglichenxj@gmail.com, allanding@ece.neu.edu, yunfu@ece.neu.edu

Abstract

$FWLRQ

Temporal data clustering is a challenging task. Existing methods usually explore data self-representation strategy, which
may hinder the clustering performance in insufﬁcient or corrupted data scenarios. In real-world applications, we are easily accessible to a large amount of related labeled data. To
this end, we propose a novel transferable subspace clustering approach by exploring useful information from relevant
source data to enhance clustering performance in target temporal data. We manage to transform the original data into
a shared low-dimensional and distinctive feature space by
jointly seeking an effective domain-invariant projection. In
this way, the well-labeled source knowledge can help obtain a
more discriminative target representation. Moreover, a graph
regularizer is designed to incorporate temporal information
to preserve more sequence knowledge into the learned representation. Extensive experiments based on three human motion datasets illustrate that our approach is able to outperform
state-of-the-art temporal data clustering methods.

0$''DWDVHW
3URMHFWLRQ

$FWLRQ

$FWLRQ

$FWLRQ

/DEHOHG6RXUFH'DWD

«
&OXVWHUHG
$FWLRQ

&OXVWHUHG
$FWLRQ
&OXVWHUHG
$FWLRQ

:HL]PDQQ'DWDVHW

6HJPHQWDWLRQ/DEHO

3URMHFWHG
&RPPRQ
1HZ6SDFH

8QODEHOHG7DUJHW'DWD

Figure 1: Framework of our approach. The information of
source attempts to help target data clustering through knowledge transfer, which is used to reconstruct the target data.
Furthermore, we seek a domain-invariant projection to align
different distributions between the two datasets.

Introduction

(Smyth 1999; Xiong and Yeung 2003), temporal-proximitybased (Keogh and Kasetty 2003) and representation-based
algorithms (Dimitrova and Golshani 1995; Chen and Chang
2000). Among them, representation-based approach is the
most popular one, especially the methods based on subspace
clustering algorithms.
Subspace clustering has ideal performance in wide applications. Several representative subspace clustering methods
have been proposed, including sparse subspace clustering
(SSC) (Elhamifar and Vidal 2009), least-square regression
(LSR) (Lu et al. 2012) as well as low-rank representation
(LRR) (Liu et al. 2013), etc. The core idea of subspace clustering is learning a distinctive and low-dimensional data representations. The representations are used as input for existing clustering algorithms, which are applicable to temporal
data clustering. Several methods are designed for temporal
data segmentation. (Li, Li, and Fu 2015) designed a dictionary which is simultaneously updated in the learning process to obtain expressive codings. (Talwalkar et al. 2013)
proposed a novel divide-and-conquer algorithm for largescale subspace segmentation. Since these methods utilize
self-representation strategy, and thus, they may hinder the
clustering performance when the data are insufﬁcient or corrupted. Furthermore, since the methods belong to unsuper-

Temporal data segmentation is a critical technique utilized
in many real-world applications as data preprocessing process, such as natural language processing, motion analysis
and action recognition. The goal is to divide a long temporal
data sequence into several short, non-overlapping, meaningful and reasonable segments. Temporal segmentation can be
easily concatenated with other post-processing methods to
further enhance task performances. Assume there is a video
sequence which contains several continuous actions. Since
conventional action recognition approach is designed to recognize videos which only contain a single action. Thus, a
preprocessing segmentation process is essential.
Compared with independent static data, the successive information residing in data points is a unique cue to guide the
clustering algorithms. And it is effective to fully utilize the
data dependency to improve clustering performance. A comprehensive survey (Keogh and Kasetty 2003) reveals that
temporal data clustering is difﬁcult due to the data dimension and complex temporal connection. Based on the categorization mentioned in (Yang and Chen 2011), there are three
lines of temporal clustering methods, including model-based
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4195

