The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

High Rank Matrix Completion
with Side Information
1

Yugang Wang,1 Ehsan Elhamifar2
School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University

2010; Chen et al. 2011; Chiang, Hsieh, and Dhillon 2015),
assumes that data lie in a single low-dimensional subspace
and try to recover a completion of the data that has a minimum or a small ﬁxed rank. The second group of algorithms,
including Mixture of Probabilistic PCA (MPPCA) (Tipping
and Bishop 1999a; Gruber and Weiss 2004), Mixture of
Factor Analyzers (MFA) (Ghahramani, Hinton, and others
1996), K-GROUSE (Balzano et al. 2012), SSC-Lifting (Elhamifar 2016) and (Eriksson, Balzano, and Nowak 2012),
addresses the more general and challenging scenario where
data lie in a union of low-dimensional subspaces. The goals
in this case are to recover missing entries and cluster data
according to subspaces. The union of subspaces models
many real-world problems, including motion and activity
segmentation in videos, recommender systems and multilabel learning, where there exists multiple groups in data
corresponding to different classes or categories, where each
group is modeled by a single subspace. Since the union of
low-dimensional subspaces is often high/full-rank, methods
in the ﬁrst category are not effective for data completion.

Abstract
We address the problem of high-rank matrix completion
with side information. In contrast to existing work dealing
with side information, which assume that the data matrix is
low-rank, we consider the more general scenario where the
columns of the data matrix are drawn from a union of lowdimensional subspaces, which can lead to a high rank matrix.
Our goal is to complete the matrix while taking advantage
of the side information. To do so, we use the self-expressive
property of the data, searching for a sparse representation
of each column of matrix as a combination of a few other
columns. More speciﬁcally, we propose a factorization of
the data matrix as the product of side information matrices
with an unknown interaction matrix, under which each column of the data matrix can be reconstructed using a sparse
combination of other columns. As our proposed optimization, searching for missing entries and sparse coefﬁcients, is
non-convex and NP-hard, we propose a lifting framework,
where we couple sparse coefﬁcients and missing values and
deﬁne an equivalent optimization that is amenable to convex relaxation. We also propose a fast implementation of our
convex framework using a Linearized Alternating Direction
Method. By extensive experiments on both synthetic and real
data, and, in particular, by studying the problem of multi-label
learning, we demonstrate that our method outperforms existing techniques in both low-rank and high-rank data regimes.

Matrix Completion with Side Information. In many realworld problems, we have access to additional information
about the entries of the data matrix, referred to as side information, which can guide the matrix completion in order
to obtain more accurate solutions (Adams, Dahl, and Murray 2010; Agarwal and Chen 2009; Menon et al. 2011a;
Porteous, Asuncion, and Welling 2010). For example, in
the classical Netﬂix problem, which aims to predict the unobserved entries of a users-movies rating matrix, besides
the rating history, we have access to information/features
of users, such as age, gender, etc., as well as information/features of movies, such as suspense, science ﬁction,
etc. Also, in the multi-label learning problem, whose goal
is to ﬁnd all relevant labels to each sample, in addition to
the incomplete observed labels, the features describing instances are often given at the same time. Indeed, such side
information can be leveraged in matrix completion for better recovery performance, especially, when very few matrix
entries are observed.
Despite its signiﬁcance, the problem of matrix completion
with side information has only been recently studied, where
all existing techniques have addressed the problem when the
data matrix is low-rank (Goldberg et al. 2010; Menon et al.
2011b; Natarajan and Dhillon 2014; Jain and Dhillon 2013;

Introduction
Matrix completion, which is the problem of estimating missing entries of an incomplete matrix, is a fundamental task
in machine learning with numerous applications, including,
collaborative ﬁltering for recommender systems (Rennie and
Srebro 2005; Sindhwani et al. 2010), multi-label learning
(Natarajan and Dhillon 2014; Xu, Jin, and Zhou 2013; Argyriou, Evgeniou, and Pontil 2008), semi-supervised clustering (Chiang et al. 2014) and global positioning (Singer
and Cucuringu 2010; Singer 2008; Biswas et al. 2006).
Existing algorithms that deal with missing entries in data
can be divided into two main categories. The ﬁrst group
of algorithms, such as Probabilistic PCA (PPCA) (Tipping and Bishop 1999b), Factor Analysis (FA) (Knott and
Bartholomew 1999) and Convex Low-Rank Matrix Completion (Candes and Recht 2009; Keshavan, Montanari, and Oh
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4252

