The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Efﬁcient Probabilistic Performance
Bounds for Inverse Reinforcement Learning
Daniel S. Brown, Scott Niekum
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
{dsbrown,sniekum}@cs.utexas.edu

from an expert (Argall et al. 2009). One popular variant of
LfD is Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) (Ng and Russell 2000) where the goal is to infer a reward function that
explains the demonstrated behavior. LfD techniques based
on IRL have potential applications in many settings such
as manufacturing, home and hospital care, and autonomous
driving. In these types of real-world settings it is important,
and perhaps critical, to provide performance bounds on an
agent’s learned policy. For example, consider a hospital assistant robot that has learned from demonstrations how to
lift a patient out of bed. Before deploying this learned policy, we would want to provide a high-conﬁdence bound on
the difference in performance between the robot’s learned
policy and the optimal policy under the expert’s reward. If
this bound on policy loss is too high, then the robot could request additional demonstrations until, with high conﬁdence,
its policy loss with respect to the optimal policy is within
some allowable error margin.
We propose a general method for obtaining highconﬁdence performance bounds in the inverse reinforcement learning setting—where the true reward function is unknown and only samples of expert behavior are given. Given
demonstrated trajectories of a task, our goal is to allow an
agent to bound the difference in expected return between the
agent’s own policy and the optimal policy for the task, under
the expert’s unknown reward function. Because the problem of Inverse Reinforcement Learning is ill-posed (there
are an inﬁnite number of reward functions that result in the
same optimal behavior), we seek a risk-sensitive bound on
this performance difference that takes into account the uncertainty in the posterior distribution over reward functions,
conditioned on the demonstrations.
We perform Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling using
Bayesian Inverse Reinforcement Learning (Ramachandran
and Amir 2007) to sample likely reward functions given the
demonstrations. Using these sampled reward functions, we
compute samples of the expected return difference between
the optimal policy under the expert’s reward function and
the agent’s policy. These samples are then used to calculate
a (1 − δ) probabilistic upper bound on the α-worst-case policy loss. We obtain this bound without knowing the expert’s
policy or true reward function.
Our main contributions are (1) we formalize the problem of high-conﬁdence policy evaluation in the inverse re-

Abstract
In the ﬁeld of reinforcement learning there has been recent
progress towards safety and high-conﬁdence bounds on policy performance. However, to our knowledge, no practical
methods exist for determining high-conﬁdence policy performance bounds in the inverse reinforcement learning setting—
where the true reward function is unknown and only samples
of expert behavior are given. We propose a sampling method
based on Bayesian inverse reinforcement learning that uses
demonstrations to determine practical high-conﬁdence upper
bounds on the α-worst-case difference in expected return between any evaluation policy and the optimal policy under the
expert’s unknown reward function. We evaluate our proposed
bound on both a standard grid navigation task and a simulated
driving task and achieve tighter and more accurate bounds
than a feature count-based baseline. We also give examples
of how our proposed bound can be utilized to perform riskaware policy selection and risk-aware policy improvement.
Because our proposed bound requires several orders of magnitude fewer demonstrations than existing high-conﬁdence
bounds, it is the ﬁrst practical method that allows agents that
learn from demonstration to express conﬁdence in the quality
of their learned policy.

Introduction
There is a growing interest in safety and risk-sensitive metrics for machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence systems, especially for systems that interact with their environment (Garcıa and Fernández 2015; Amodei et al. 2016;
Thomas et al. 2017). Risk-aware approaches have been recently proposed and applied to many different problems including planning in Markov decision processes (Chow et al.
2015), physical search problems (Brown et al. 2016), reinforcement learning (Tamar, Glassner, and Mannor 2015;
Garcıa and Fernández 2015), and imitation learning (Santara
et al. 2017); however, to the best of our knowledge, no one
has investigated how to obtain sample-efﬁcient, risk-aware
conﬁdence bounds on the performance of a policy under an
unknown reward function, as is the case when learning from
demonstrations.
Learning from demonstration (LfD) is a popular method
to learn a skill or policy by simply observing demonstrations
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2754

