The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Qualitative Reasoning about Cardinal Directions
Using Answer Set Programming∗
Yusuf Izmirlioglu, Esra Erdem
Sabanci University
Istanbul, Turkey

disaster, as in search and rescue), and should be able to understand a human if she provides information by directions,
reason about the qualitative constraints provided by the humans, and describe qualitatively the outcome of its reasoning.
We consider a particular sort of qualitative spatial relations, cardinal directions (e.g., west, south, northeast, southwest, and their combinations), between spatial entities, as
in Cardinal Direction Calculus (CDC) (Skiadopoulos and
Koubarakis 2004; 2005). In CDC, qualitative directional relations between spatial entities are described by means of
constraints, like “the missing child is to the south of Store
A”. In real world, the regions occupied by these entities may
have holes (e.g., Store A may have a small garden in the
middle) or may be disconnected (e.g., Store A may consist
of two parts across a small street). Moreover, the given set of
constraints may be incomplete (i.e., qualitative spatial relations between some spatial objects are not known) or some
constraints may involve disjunctions (e.g., missing child is
to the south of Store A or to the north of Store B). In such
cases, with uncertainty or incomplete knowledge, checking
the consistency of a given set of constraints is NP-complete
(Table 1).
Furthermore, we consider qualitative constraints that necessitate commonsense knowledge like defaults (e.g., food
truck is normally to the west of Store X). Such constraints
are not considered as part of CDC, so we introduce a new
sort of constraints, called default CDC constraints.
We propose a novel formal method to represent and
reason about cardinal directions with respect to this extended set of CDC constraints, using Answer Set Programming (ASP) (Brewka, Eiter, and Truszczynski 2016). ASP
is a knowledge representation and reasoning framework that
can be used to declaratively solve NP-complete problems
(e.g., CDC consistency checking). Its expressive languages
(like ASP-Core-2 (Calimeri et al. 2013)) and solvers (like
C LINGO (Gebser et al. 2011)) support nonmonotonic constructs (e.g., to express default qualitative spatial relations),
aggregates (e.g., to identify inﬁmum/supremum of projections of spatial regions), and disjunctions (e.g., to express
uncertainty of qualitative directional relations).
In particular, we model consistency checking as a set of
formulas in ASP, so that an ASP solver can be used with this
general formulation to decide for the consistency of a given

Abstract
We propose a novel method for representing and reasoning about an incomplete set of constraints about basic/disjunctive qualitative direction relations over simple/connected/disconnected regions, using Answer Set Programming, and prove its correctness with respect to cardinal
direction calculus. We extend this method further with default qualitative direction constraints, and discuss its usefulness with some sample scenarios.

Introduction
Various tasks, like navigating to a destination or describing
the location of an object, involve dealing with spatial properties and relations of objects. For higher precision of solutions, if data is available, quantitative approaches can be
employed to ﬁnd metric solutions for these tasks. On the
other hand, for some applications (e.g., exploration of an
unknown environment), quantitative data may not always be
available due to incomplete knowledge about the environment; and, for some applications (e.g., that involve humanrobot interactions) sociable and understandable interactions
and acceptable explanations are often more desirable than
high precision (Kuipers 1983). For these applications, qualitative spatial relations seem more suitable. They can deal
with describing imprecise data about spatial relations in environments, and their verbal descriptions are sufﬁcient and
understandable for describing a way to some destination or
the location of an entity.
Consider, for instance, an agent helping a parent to ﬁnd
her missing child in a shopping mall that is not completely
known to the agent nor to the parents. If the agent receives
some sightings of the child (e.g., “to the south of Store A”),
it will be useful (i) if the agent can understand the relative
location of the child described qualitatively, and (ii) if the
agent can ﬁnd out where the child might be, based on such
qualitative direction constraints, and (iii) describe qualitatively in which direction (e.g., “to north”) the parents might
go to ﬁnd their child. In another scenario, a robot may not
have quantitative description of an environment (e.g., after a
∗
This work is partially supported by TUBITAK Grant 114E491
and Chist-Era COACHES.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1880

