The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Spatial as Deep: Spatial CNN
for Trafﬁc Scene Understanding
Xingang Pan,1 Jianping Shi,2 Ping Luo,1 Xiaogang Wang,1 Xiaoou Tang,1
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 SenseTime Group Limited
{px117, pluo, xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, shijianping@sensetime.com, xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are usually built by
stacking convolutional operations layer-by-layer. Although
CNN has shown strong capability to extract semantics from
raw pixels, its capacity to capture spatial relationships of pixels across rows and columns of an image is not fully explored. These relationships are important to learn semantic
objects with strong shape priors but weak appearance coherences, such as trafﬁc lanes, which are often occluded or not
even painted on the road surface as shown in Fig. 1 (a). In
this paper, we propose Spatial CNN (SCNN), which generalizes traditional deep layer-by-layer convolutions to slice-byslice convolutions within feature maps, thus enabling message passings between pixels across rows and columns in a
layer. Such SCNN is particular suitable for long continuous
shape structure or large objects, with strong spatial relationship but less appearance clues, such as trafﬁc lanes, poles, and
wall. We apply SCNN on a newly released very challenging
trafﬁc lane detection dataset and Cityscapse dataset1 . The results show that SCNN could learn the spatial relationship for
structure output and signiﬁcantly improves the performance.
We show that SCNN outperforms the recurrent neural network (RNN) based ReNet and MRF+CNN (MRFNet) in the
lane detection dataset by 8.7% and 4.6% respectively. Moreover, our SCNN won the 1st place on the TuSimple Benchmark Lane Detection Challenge, with an accuracy of 96.53%.

Figure 1: Comparison between CNN and SCNN in (a) lane
detection and (b) semantic segmentation. For each example,
from left to right are: input image, output of CNN, output
of SCNN. It can be seen that SCNN could better capture the
long continuous shape prior of lane markings and poles and
ﬁx the disconnected parts in CNN.
appearance clues like lane markings and poles, which have
long continuous shape and might be occluded. For instance,
in the ﬁrst example in Fig. 1 (a), the car at the right side fully
occludes the rightmost lane marking.
Although CNN based methods (Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2012; Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015) have
pushed scene understanding to a new level thanks to the
strong representation learning ability. It is still not performing well for objects having long structure region and could
be occluded, such as the lane markings and poles shown in
the red bounding boxes in Fig. 1. However, humans can easily infer their positions and ﬁll in the occluded part from the
context, i.e., the viewable part.
To address this issue, we propose Spatial CNN (SCNN),
a generalization of deep convolutional neural networks to
a rich spatial level. In a layer-by-layer CNN, a convolution
layer receives input from the former layer, applies convolution operation and nonlinear activation, and sends result to
the next layer. This process is done sequentially. Similarly,
SCNN views rows or columns of feature maps as layers and
applies convolution, nonlinear activation, and sum operations sequentially, which forms a deep neural network. In
this way information could be propagated between neurons
in the same layer. It is particularly useful for structured object such as lanes, poles, or truck with occlusions, since the
spatial information can be reinforced via inter layer propagation. As shown in Fig. 1, in cases where CNN is discon-

Introduction
In recent years, autonomous driving has received much attention in both academy and industry. One of the most challenging task of autonomous driving is trafﬁc scene understanding, which comprises computer vision tasks like lane
detection and semantic segmentation. Lane detection helps
to guide vehicles and could be used in driving assistance
system (Urmson et al. 2008), while semantic segmentation
provides more detailed positions about surrounding objects
like vehicles or pedestrians. In real applications, however,
these tasks could be very challenging considering the many
harsh scenarios, including bad weather conditions, dim or
dazzle light, etc. Another challenge of trafﬁc scene understanding is that in many cases, especially in lane detection,
we need to tackle objects with strong structure prior but less
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code is available at https://github.com/XingangPan/SCNN

7276

