The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Overlap-Robust Decision Boundary
Learning for Within-Network Classiﬁcation
Sharad Nandanwar

M. N. Murty

Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore,India
sharadnandanwar@csa.iisc.ernet.in

Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore,India
mnm@csa.iisc.ernet.in

al. 2008), language models (Tang et al. 2015), web search
(Page et al. 1999), patent analysis (Chakrabarti, Dom, and
Indyk 1998), etc. However, analyzing these large complex
networks is non-trivial and poses many challenges. Some of
the key challenges involve social inﬂuence analysis, community detection in large graphs, inference of social ties, classiﬁcation of entities in a network, etc. In this paper, we focus
on the problem of within-network classiﬁcation of entities.
Entities in a network can be tagged based on their characteristic properties. These tags or labels are generally assigned
manually. Nevertheless, it is very common to come across
entities in a network which are not labeled. Inferring labels for such entities becomes crucial in many applications.
Given a partially labeled network, the within-network classiﬁcation problem is concerned with labeling unlabeled nodes.
Formally it can be stated as

Abstract
We study the problem of within network classiﬁcation, where
given a partially labeled network, we infer the labels of the remaining nodes based on the link structure. Conventional loss
functions penalize a node based on a function of its predicted
label and target label. Such loss functions under-perform
while learning on a network having overlapping classes. In relational setting, even though the ground truth is not known for
the unlabeled nodes, some evidence is present in the form of
labeling acquired by the nodes in their neighborhood. We propose a structural loss function for learning in networks based
on the hypothesis that loss is induced when a node fails to
acquire a label that is consistent with the labels of the majority of the nodes in its neighborhood. We further combine this
with a novel semantic regularizer, which we call homophily
regularizer, to capture the smooth transition of discriminatory
power and behavior of semantically similar nodes. The proposed structural loss along with the regularizer permits relaxation labeling. Through extensive comparative study on
different real-world datasets, we found that our method improves over the state-of-the-art approaches.

1

Deﬁnition 2 Given a graph G(V, E) and a set of labeled
nodes Vl (⊂ V) with respective set of labels Yl ∈ Γ|Vl | where
Γ = 2{C1 ,C2 ,...,Ck } , for k classes labeled C1 , . . . , Ck , the objective is to learn a model for inferring labels of unlabeled
nodes Vu ⊂ V, where Vu = V \ Vl .

Introduction

Classiﬁcation of nodes in a relational setting is exempliﬁed
by graph-based semi-supervised learning methods (Macskassy, Provost, and Provost 2005), which infer label information of all the nodes collectively; collective classiﬁers
are known to perform well. On the contrary, conventional
classiﬁers like Support Vector Machine (SVM), which are
known for their robustness, fail to deliver. These classiﬁers
work on the assumption of independent and identically distributed patterns, which does not hold in a relational setting.
In relational data, patterns to be classiﬁed are related to one
another. Because of homophily in a network, it is expected
that nodes related to each other will have similar behavior
and hence the same class label.
Graph kernel based approaches (Kandola, Cristianini, and
Shawe-taylor 2002; Smola and Kondor 2003; Kondor and
Lafferty 2002) exploit homophily and capture networkbased global similarity among nodes using a graph kernel. However, these methods do not scale well to deal with
large networks. Nandanwar et al. proposed structural neighborhood based classiﬁcation (Nandanwar and Murty 2016),
which performs recursive classiﬁcation using a global neighborhood of the node under consideration. However, the ap-

The omnipresence of networks has led to a recent paradigm
shift towards the analysis of network data. This has been
witnessed by an inﬂux of advancements for efﬁcient storage
and retrieval of such data. Presence of networks in day to
day life is better observed through social networking sites
(like Facebook, Twitter), e-Commerce sites (like Amazon,
eBay), review sites (like Yelp, IMDb), etc. Network data
models the relationship between the entities of a network,
like the friendship between users, products co-purchased by
customers, products reviewed by reviewers, etc. It is customary to represent network data in the form of a graph which
is deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 1 A network is modeled as a graph G(V, E),
where V is the set of |V| = n interacting entities or nodes,
E ⊆ V × V is the set of edges indicating relationship or interactions among the nodes.
Modeling and analyzing the data in the form of networks
has been shown to be effective across various domains; be
it product recommendation (McAuley et al. 2015; Baluja et
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3844

