The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Maximizing Activity in Ising Networks via the TAP Approximation
Christopher W. Lynn

Daniel D. Lee

Department of Physics & Astronomy
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA

Department of Electrical & Systems Engineering
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA

Given the wealth of real-world systems that are quantitatively described by maximum entropy models, it is of fundamental practical and scientiﬁc interest to understand how
external inﬂuence affects the dynamics of these systems.
Fortunately, all maximum entropy models are similar, if not
formally equivalent, to the Ising model, which has roots in
statistical physics (Brush 1967) and has a rich history in machine learning as a model of neural networks (Coughlin and
Baran 1995). The state of an Ising system is described by
the average activity of its nodes. For populations of neurons in the brain, an active node represents a spiking neuron
while inactivity represents silence. In the context of humans
in social networks, node activity could represent the sending of an email or the consumption of online entertainment,
while inactivity represents moments in which an individual
does not perform an action. By applying external inﬂuence
to a particular node, one can shift the average activity of that
node. Furthermore, this targeted inﬂuence also has indirect
effects on the rest of the system, mediated by the underlying network of interactions. For example, if an individual is
incentivized to send more emails, this shift in behavior induces responses from her neighbors in the social network,
resulting in increased activity in the population as a whole.
As a ﬁrst step toward understanding how to control such
complex systems, we study the problem of maximizing the
total activity of an Ising network given a budget of external
inﬂuence. This so-called Ising inﬂuence maximization problem was originally proposed in the context of social networks (Lynn and Lee 2016), where it has a clear practical
interpretation: If a telephone company or an online service
wants to maximize user activity, how should it distribute its
limited marketing resources among its customers? However,
we emphasize that the broader goal—to develop a unifying
control theory for understanding the effects of external inﬂuence in complex systems—could prove to have other important applications, from guiding healthy brain development
(Goddard, McIntyre, and Leech 1969) and intervening to alleviate diseased brain states (Goddard 1967) to anticipating
trends in ﬁnancial markets (Mantegna and Stanley 1999) and
preventing viral epidemics (Pastor-Satorras and Vespignani
2001).
We divide our investigation into two settings: (i) the continuous setting where one can tune the inﬂuence applied to
each node, and (ii) the discrete setting in which one forces

Abstract
A wide array of complex biological, social, and physical systems have recently been shown to be quantitatively described
by Ising models, which lie at the intersection of statistical
physics and machine learning. Here, we study the fundamental question of how to optimize the state of a networked Ising
system given a budget of external inﬂuence. In the continuous setting where one can tune the inﬂuence applied to each
node, we propose a series of approximate gradient ascent algorithms based on the Plefka expansion, which generalizes
the naı̈ve mean ﬁeld and TAP approximations. In the discrete
setting where one chooses a small set of inﬂuential nodes,
the problem is equivalent to the famous inﬂuence maximization problem in social networks with an additional stochastic
noise term. In this case, we provide sufﬁcient conditions for
when the objective is submodular, allowing a greedy algorithm to achieve an approximation ratio of 1 − 1/e. Additionally, we compare the Ising-based algorithms with traditional
inﬂuence maximization algorithms, demonstrating the practical importance of accurately modeling stochastic ﬂuctuations
in the system.

Introduction
The last 10 years have witnessed a dramatic increase in the
use of maximum entropy models to describe a diverse range
of real-world systems, including networks of neurons in the
brain (Schneidman et al. 2006; Ganmor, Segev, and Schneidman 2011), ﬂocks of birds in ﬂight (Bialek et al. 2012),
and humans interacting in social networks (Lynn et al. 2017;
Galam 2008), among an array of other social and biological
applications (Kapur 1989; Phillips, Anderson, and Schapire
2006; Mora et al. 2010; Lezon et al. 2006). Broadly speaking, the maximum entropy principle allows scientists to formalize the hypothesis that large-scale patterns in complex
systems emerge organically from an aggregation of simple
ﬁne-scale interactions between individual elements (Jaynes
1957). Indeed, intelligence itself, either naturally-occurring
in the human brain and groups of animals (Hillis 1988)
or artiﬁcially constructed in learning algorithms and autonomous systems (Mataric 1993; Namatame, Kurihara, and
Nakashima 2007), is increasingly viewed as an emergent
phenomenon (Lévy 1997), the result of repeated underlying
interactions between populations of smaller elements.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

679

