Merge or Not? Learning to Group
Faces via Imitation Learning
Yue He,1* Kaidi Cao,1* Cheng Li,1 Chen Change Loy2

1

SenseTime Group Limited, {heyue,caokaidi,chengli}@sensetime.com
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, ccloy@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract





Face grouping remains a challenging problem despite the remarkable capability of deep learning approaches in learning
face representation. In particular, grouping results can still
be egregious given proﬁle faces and a large number of uninteresting faces and noisy detections. Often, a user needs to
correct the erroneous grouping manually. In this study, we
formulate a novel face grouping framework that learns clustering strategy from ground-truth simulated behavior. This
is achieved through imitation learning (a.k.a apprenticeship
learning or learning by watching) via inverse reinforcement
learning (IRL). In contrast to existing clustering approaches
that group instances by similarity, our framework makes sequential decision to dynamically decide when to merge two
face instances/groups driven by short- and long-term rewards.
Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets show
that our framework outperforms unsupervised and supervised
baselines.





Person A

Person B

Negative Edge

Figure 1: Cosine angle in a deep feature space. We measure the cosine angle between the deep feature vector of two
faces. It is noted that even for two men with signiﬁcantly
different appearances, the angle between their proﬁles and
noise faces (gray dash lines with 0.39∼0.44) is much larger
than one’s frontal and his own proﬁle (0.17 and 0.22).

Introduction
Given a large number of unlabeled face images, face grouping aims at clustering the images into individual identities
present in the data. This task is an actively researched computer vision problem due to its enormous potential in commercial applications. It not only allows users to organize and
tag photos based on faces but also retrieve and revisit huge
quantity of relevant images effortlessly.
The performance of face grouping signiﬁcantly beneﬁts from the recent emergence of deep learning approaches (Chen, Patel, and Chellappa 2016; Parkhi, Vedaldi,
and Zisserman 2015; Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin
2015; Sun et al. 2014; Taigman et al. 2014; Wen et al. 2016).
Nevertheless, we still observe some challenges when we apply existing methods on real-world photo albums. In particular, we found that deeply learned representation can still
perform poorly given proﬁle faces and false detections. In
addition, there is no obvious mechanism to disambiguate
large quantity of non-interested faces (e.g. faces in the background) that are captured under the same condition with the
person of interests.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*
indicate shared ﬁrst authorship.

We provide an illustrative example in Fig. 1, of which results were obtained from the Inception-v3 model (Szegedy
et al. 2015) ﬁne-tuned with MS-Celeb-1M (Guo et al. 2016)
dataset. Despite the model achieves an accuracy of 99.27%
on LFW (Huang et al. 2007), which is on par with the accuracy reported by a state-of-the-art method (Wen et al. 2016),
its performance on the open-world face grouping task is
unsatisfactory. Learning such an open-world model is still
far from being solved due to highly imbalanced data (much
more frontal faces compared to proﬁle instances in existing
datasets) and a large negative space to cover.
We human execute a visual grouping task in sequence
with intermediate decision to govern our next step, like playing a jigsaw puzzle (Xie, Antle, and Motamedi 2008) with
pieces of varying visual complexity. First we will link pieces
with strong correlation and high conﬁdence, then gain insights and accumulate visual evidence from these stable
clusters. Consequently, a larger group can be formed through
merging ambiguous positives and discarding uninteresting
outliers. In the process, we may exploit contextual cues and
global picture considering other samples. The above intuition motivates a novel face grouping framework. Our goal
is not to design a better deep representation, but learning

