The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Vertical Domain Text Classiﬁcation: Towards
Understanding IT Tickets Using Deep Neural Networks
Jianglei Han, Mohammad Akbari
SAP Innovation Center, Singapore
{ray.han, mohammad.akbari}@sap.com

Abstract
It is challenging to directly apply text classiﬁcation models without much feature engineering on domain-speciﬁc use
cases, and expect the state of art performance. Much more
so when the number of classes is large. Convolutional Neural Network (CNN or ConvNet) has attracted much in text
mining due to its effectiveness in automatic feature extraction from text. In this paper, we compare traditional and deep
learning approaches for automatic categorization of IT tickets in a real world production ticketing system. Experimental
results demonstrate the good potential of CNN models in our
task.

(a) By words

(b) By characters

Figure 1: Title length distribution

dispatching framework. Since each group is responsible for
a few problem types, the task is similar to ticket classiﬁcation problem that we concern ourselves with, but with much
fewer categories (less than 80 processing groups). Although
some research has been devoted to ticket classiﬁcation, they
mostly focus on speciﬁc cases and datasets and fail to generalize to other scenarios and so their effectiveness is hardly
comparable.
Recent years witnessed an increasing trend of applying
deep neural network in a variety of machine learning problems in text processing. Some promising results are shown
when applied on text categorization (Zhang, Zhao, and LeCun 2015; Kim 2014). A deep neural network learns latent
features from data without explicit feature engineering. It is
also known to scale well with lots of training data. In this
paper, we present the results of conventional neural network
approaches for categorization of IT tickets as part of a reallife industrial project.

Introduction
In Information Technology (IT) support environments, customers’ incidents, problems, and change requests are commonly managed in the form of tickets. A ticket is created by
a customer or the system at fault, before being sent to a centralized ticketing system. Subsequently, it is dispatched to
an appropriate domain expert to investigate the issue. Dispatching decisions are made based on the ticket type, which
is usually selected by the customers. In an extensive support
system, the number of categories can easily expand to over
a few thousand, making manual selection costly in terms of
both time and labor. Further, choosing the correct ticket category requires domain expertises of which grassroots users
may not be aware, introducing error in choosing a proper
category. For instance, in the system we studied, categories
for nearly 40% of the tickets need to be modiﬁed after initial
assignment. Therefore, in this paper, we leverage machine
learning techniques to automatically classify IT tickets.
Automatic categorization of IT tickets can reduce the
overall ticket turnaround time, beneﬁt both service providers
and customers. Prior studies have proposed various approaches. For instance, Diao, Jamjoon, and Loewenstern
(2009) designed a set of rules to perform multi-class classiﬁcation on IT tickets. However, rule-based system is hard to
extend and to cope with a large number of classes. SmartDispatch (Agarwal, Sindhgatta, and Sengupta 2012) is proposed
to classify tickets to their perspective processing groups in
which an SVM-based classiﬁer is used in a semi-automated

Dataset Description
We study data exported from a real production ticketing
system from a software enterprise. We randomly sampled
177, 851 tickets among tickets which were created in 2016
and solutions had been accepted by customers. For the this
investigation, we only consider ticket titles. Distributions of
the data are illustrated in Figure 1a and 1b, respectively.
Each ticket has a label veriﬁed by experts indicating the
functional area the problem originated from. We considered
these labels as ground truths. Figure 2 shows the cumulative
frequency of tickets from 559 labels in the dataset.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8202

