The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Label Distribution Learning by
Exploiting Label Correlations
Xiuyi Jia,1 Weiwei Li,2∗ Junyu Liu,1 Yu Zhang3
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
College of Astronautics, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
3
School of Information Science and Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, China

biguity after the label distribution learning was presented.
Geng et al. (2010) proposed a method based on IIS-LDL
by transforming the original single label data set to the label distribution data set to solve the problem of age estimation. Through this strategy, one face image can contribute
to both the learnings of its chronological age and adjacent
ages. By using neural network based on conditional probability, the conditional probability neural network (CPNN)
algorithm (Geng, Yin, and Zhou 2013) was proposed to
further improve the accuracy of age estimatio. The literarue (Geng and Ji 2014) expanded the IIS-LDL algorithm
by using the quasi-Newton optimization algorithm, which
formed the BFGS-LDL algorithm. In order to solve the
problem of shortage and imbalance of training data, Geng
et al. (2015) proposed a method based on LDL for effective population estimation in public video surveillance. Yang
et al. (2015) developed a deeply label distribution learning
(DLDL) algorithm by combining the LDL with deep learning to deal with the apparent age estimation problem.

Abstract
Label distribution learning (LDL) is a newly arisen machine
learning method that has been increasingly studied in recent
years. In theory, LDL can be seen as a generalization of multilabel learning. Previous studies have shown that LDL is an effective approach to solve the label ambiguity problem. However, the dramatic increase in the number of possible label
sets brings a challenge in performance to LDL. In this paper,
we propose a novel label distribution learning algorithm to
address the above issue. The key idea is to exploit correlations
between different labels. We encode the label correlation into
a distance to measure the similarity of any two labels. Moreover, we construct a distance-mapping function from the label set to the parameter matrix. Experimental results on eight
real label distributed data sets demonstrate that the proposed
algorithm performs remarkably better than both the state-ofthe-art LDL methods and multi-label learning methods.

Introduction
How to overcome the label ambiguity problem has become a hot research topic in the ﬁelds of machine learning and data mining. To solve this issue, the most popular used methods are either based on single-label learning or multi-label learning (Zhang and Zhang 2010). The
former assigns a single label while the latter assigns multiple labels for each instance. A large number of studies
have indicated that multi-label learning is an effective and
widely used learning paradigm. However, there are still
some problems which are hard to solve by using multi-label
learning. For example, an expression usually contains several different emotional components. In some scenarios, the
learning tasks require us to know not only what emotions
are contained in an expression but also the importance of
these emotional components (Zhou, Xue, and Geng 2015).
To solve this kind of learning problem with label ambiguity, a new machine learning paradigm called label distribution learning (LDL) (Geng, Smith-Miles, and Zhou 2010;
Geng and Ji 2014) has arisen and increasingly studied in the
past few years.
A growing number of studies (Geng and Ling 2017;
Hou et al. 2017) had tried to solve the problem of label am-

The methodology of LDL generally consists of three
parts: objective function, output model and optimization algorithm. The classical LDL algorithm (Geng, Smith-Miles,
and Zhou 2010) adopted Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
as the objective function, the maximum entropy model as the
output model and the BFGS algorithm for model optimization. After that, Geng et al. (2015) proposed the LDSVR algorithm based on the MSVR algorithm (Tuia et al. 2011) and
label distribution learning to solve the problem that the output of MSVR algorithm may be negative. Based on a linear
model, Xing et al. (2016) extended the maximum entropy
model of traditional LDL to a more general LDL model
family. The above-mentioned algorithms provided improved
performance to deal with the problem of label ambiguity
in the ﬁeld of facial expression recognition, crowd counting and age estimation. However, none of them took the potentially important correlation between labels into account.
Investigating the correlation between labels may provide additional information especially when the training data of
some labels are limited. The existing literature on solving
the label ambiguity problem exploited the label correlation
mainly in two different ways: (1) estimates the prior knowledge of relationship between each two labels. For instance,
Zhou et al. (2016) solved the problem of text emotions classiﬁcation using the emotional wheel (Paul 1992) to obtain

∗

Corresponding author: Weiwei Li (liweiwei@nuaa.edu.cn).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3310

