The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Margin Based PU Learning
Tieliang Gong,1 Guangtao Wang,2 Jieping Ye,2 Zongben Xu,1 Ming Lin2
1

School of Mathematics and Statistics,
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, Shaanxi, P. R. China
2
Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA

category is the one-stage methods (Elkan and Noto 2008;
Blanchard, Lee, and Scott 2010) which regard all unlabeled
data as negative instances in training.
Recently, the iterative multi-stage training strategy enjoys
increasing popularity in curriculum learning (CL) (Bengio
et al. 2009) and self-paced learning (SPL) (Kumar, Packer,
and Koller 2010). The basic idea is to start the learning
task with a small set of easy instances. After the initial
training stage, more difﬁcult instances are gradually appended to the training set. Many real-world applications verify the effectiveness of this training strategy (Pentina, Sharmanska, and Lampert 2015; Supancic and Ramanan 2013;
Jiang et al. 2014; Zhao et al. 2015). The main reason for
its success comes down to the easy-to-hard information revealed in the consecutive training stages.
Inspired by this idea, a natural question has raised: can
PU learning beneﬁt from a similar strategy? To answer this
question, we develop a general framework to study the PU
learning problem. We ﬁnd that the iterative multi-stage training cannot guarantee to improve the classiﬁer under agnostic PU learning setting. Therefore additional assumptions
must be implicitly or explicitly made if one expects success. To this end, we introduce a large positive margin oracle
which claims that the positive instances are located far away
from the decision boundary. Different from the conventional
margin deﬁnition, the positive margin oracle only relates
with positive instances while the conventional margin is deﬁned on both positive and negative instances (Vapnik 1998;
Schapire et al. 1998). This oracle is critical to the success
of PU learning. It allows us to design an efﬁcient iterative multi-stage algorithm, named Positive Margin-based PU
(PMPU) learning algorithm, to solve the PU regression and
classiﬁcation problems. The main idea of PMPU is to estimate the labels of unlabeled data in each iteration according
to the positive margin shrinkage and then retrain the classiﬁer based on random sampling. The detailed algorithm is
given in Section 3.
From theoretical side, there are several early works on
studying the error bounds of PU learning. Denis et al. (Denis
1998) established the PAC bound for PU learning. Plessis et
al. (Plessis, Niu, and Sugiyama 2014) √
proved that the error
of PU classiﬁcation is no worse than 2 2 times of the fully
supervised one when the numbers of labeled and unlabeled
examples are equal. Niu et al. (Niu et al. 2016) pointed out

Abstract
The PU learning problem concerns about learning from
positive and unlabeled data. A popular heuristic is to
iteratively enlarge training set based on some marginbased criterion. However, little theoretical analysis has
been conducted to support the success of these heuristic methods. In this work, we show that not all marginbased heuristic rules are able to improve the learned
classiﬁers iteratively. We ﬁnd that a so-called large positive margin oracle is necessary to guarantee the success
of PU learning. Under this oracle, a provable positivemargin based PU learning algorithm is proposed for
linear regression and classiﬁcation under the truncated
Gaussian distributions. The proposed algorithm is able
to reduce the recovering error geometrically proportional to the positive margin. Extensive experiments on
real-world datasets verify our theory and the state-ofthe-art performance of the proposed PU learning algorithm.

Introduction
As an important branch of classiﬁcation problems, learning
a classiﬁer from positive and unlabeled data, also known
as the PU learning, has attracted a great deal of attention
in machine learning (Letouzey, Denis, and Gilleron 2000;
Scott and Blanchard 2009; Plessis, Niu, and Sugiyama 2015;
Blanchard, Lee, and Scott 2010) and data mining communities (Liu et al. 2003; Fung et al. 2006; Elkan and Noto 2008).
Different from supervised learning and semi-supervised
learning, the training set in PU learning consists of a set of
positive instances and a large number of unlabeled instances.
The main goal of PU learning is to make full use of the unlabeled data together with the limited positive data to learn a
reliable predictive model. To this end, a lot of attempts have
been made on designing efﬁcient PU learning algorithms.
These algorithms can be roughly divided into two categories,
characterized by two different ways of exploring unlabeled
data. One category can be boiled down to two-stage methods
(Liu et al. 2002; Yu, Han, and Chang 2002; Li and Liu 2003;
Yu 2005) which ﬁrst select high conﬁdence negative instances from the unlabeled data and then merge them with
available positive instance to train the classiﬁer. The other
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3037

