The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Predictive Coding Machine
for Compressed Sensing and Image Denoising
1

Jun Li,1 Hongfu Liu,1 Yun Fu1,2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
2
College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
junl.mldl@gmail.com, liu.hongf@husky.neu.edu, yunfu@ece.neu.edu

as accelerated proximal gradient method (APG) (Beck and
Teboulle 2009), and fast low rank representation (Xiao et al.
2015) are presented to accelerate the performance of these
algorithms. However, the iterations lead to the expensive inference because the inference requires some sort of iterative
minimization algorithms. Thus, these sparse and low rank
coding models are difﬁcult to fast compute the codes.
In order to overcome this shortcoming, some predictive
models, such as, predictive sparse decomposition (PSD)
(Kavukcuoglu, Ranzato, and LeCun 2008; Wang, Ling, and
Huang 2016; Li, Kong, and Fu 2017) and predictive nonnegative matrix factorization (PNMF) (Sprechmann, Bronstein, and Sapiro 2015), are presented by learning a deep
neural network (DNN) encoder from the observed data to
their representations. Unfortunately, these models have the
following limitations in both theory and application.
First, PSD and PNMF are two special cases in the predictive models as they learn DNN encoders to approximate
to the 1 codes and the non-negative matrix factorization,
respectively. In fact, many other sparse or low rank codes,
which are implemented by 0 , 1 s (Kim et al. 2007), or
nuclear norms (Liu et al. 2013), still need to learn DNN encoders for fast inference. Thus, the new predictive models
are in want of a normal model to unify them.
Second, there is no strict theoretical foundation to guarantee the convergence of the predictive models. They are empirically implemented by alternately using ISTA (Daubechies,
Defrise, and Mol 2004) to optimize the sparse or low-rank
codes, and employing the gradient descent (GD) algorithm
(Haykin 2009) to learn a DNN encoder to approximate the
codes. However, these works do not provide the theoretical
guarantee. Therefore, we will develop theoretical conditions
to ensure that the models are convergence to a critical point.
Third, the existing predictive models are usually applied in the classiﬁcation tasks, including object recognition (Kavukcuoglu et al. 2009), medical image classiﬁcation
(Chang et al. 2013) and video classiﬁcation (Farabet et al.
2011). Recently, the predictive sparse model, named sparse
coding based network (SCN), also has been applied into
image resolution (Wang et al. 2015b). The network parameters of these models are trained by using the learned ISTA
(LISTA) (Gregor and LeCun 2010). Unfortunately, LISTA
is a slower algorithm since APG has faster convergence rate
than ISTA (Beck and Teboulle 2009). Therefore, these appli-

Abstract
Sparse and low rank coding has widely received much attention in machine learning, multimedia and computer vision.
Unfortunately, expensive inference restricts the power of coding models in real-world applications, e.g., compressed sensing and image deblurring. In order to avoid the expensive
inference, we propose a predictive coding machine (PCM)
which aims to train a deep neural network (DNN) encoder to
approximate the codes. By this means, a test sample can be
fast approximated by the well-trained DNN. However, DNN
leads PCM to be a non-convex and non-smooth optimization problem, which is extremely hard to solve. To address
this challenge, we extend accelerated proximal gradient for
PCM by steering gradient descent of DNN. To the best of
our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to propose a gradient descent
algorithm guided by accelerated proximal gradient for solving
the PCM problem. Besides, a sufﬁcient condition is provided
to ensure the convergence to a critical point. Moreover, when
the coding√models are convex in PCM, the convergence rate
O(1/(m2 t)) can be held in which m is the iteration number
of accelerated proximal gradient, and t is the epoch of training
DNN. Numerical results verify the promising advantages of
PCM in terms of effectiveness, efﬁciency and robustness.

Introduction
Many sparse and low rank coding models have attracted
much attention over the last decade with numerous applications in different domains, such as multimedia (Tian
et al. 2016), statistics (Cai, Zhang, and Xu 2014), machine learning (Bruckstein, Donoho, and Elad 2009) and
computer vision (Li, Li, and Fu 2014; Luo et al. 2017;
Liu et al. 2013). In the coding methods, l0 -norm and rank are
usually relaxed by l1 -norm and nuclear norm, respectively, as
they lead to the convex optimization problem in many common practices (Yun 2014). Some coding algorithms approach
the sparse and low rank solutions by successively alternating one or more components, such as iterative shrinkage and
thresholding algorithm (ISTA) (Daubechies, Defrise, and Mol
2004), gradient projection for sparse reconstruction (GPSR)
(Figueiredo, Nowak, and Wright 2007), 1 s (Kim et al.
2007), and adaptively iterative thresholding (AIT) (Wang et
al. 2015a). Moreover, some faster version algorithms, such
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3506

