The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

CoDiNMF: Co-Clustering
of Directed Graphs via NMF
Woosang Lim

Rundong Du

Haesun Park

School of Computational Science
and Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
woosang.lim@cc.gatech.edu

School of Computational Science
and Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
rdu@gatech.edu

School of Computational Science
and Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
hpark@cc.gatech.edu

co-clustering (Dhillon, Mallela, and Modha 2003), multiview co-clustering (Sun et al. 2015), co-clustering based
on spectral approaches (Wu, Benson, and Gleich 2016;
Rohe, Qin, and Yu 2016), co-clustering based on NMF
(Long, Zhang, and Yu 2005; Wang et al. 2011). However,
most of co-clustering methods assume that the connections
between entities are symmetric or undirected, but many interactions in real networks are asymmetric or directed. For
example, the data set of patents and words contains a citation network among patents, and it can be represented as
a directed and asymmetric graph. For development of philosophy, there are inﬂuence ﬂow from one philosopher or
philosophy school to other philosophers or schools respectively, and these relationships can be directed and asymmetric. Rohe et al. recently proposed a spectral co-clustering
method for directed networks, called DI-SIM, which uses
the asymmetric regularized graph Laplacian for directed
graph (Rohe, Qin, and Yu 2016). DI-SIM computes the left
and right singular vectors of regularized graph Laplacian to
generate two lower-dimensional representations for sending
and receiving nodes. Then, by using an asymmetry score, it
discovers the asymmetries in the relationships and describe
the directional communities. However, DI-SIM can only be
applied to the data sets which consist of one kind of entity
distinguished by sending and receiving roles.

Abstract
Co-clustering computes clusters of data items and the related
features concurrently, and it has been used in many applications such as community detection, product recommendation, computer vision, and pricing optimization. In this paper,
we propose a new co-clustering method, called CoDiNMF,
which improves the clustering quality and ﬁnds directional
patterns among co-clusters by using multiple directed and
undirected graphs. We design the objective function of coclustering by using min-cut criterion combined with an additional term which controls the sum of net directional ﬂow between different co-clusters. In addition, we show that a variant of Nonnegative Matrix Factorization (NMF) can solve the
proposed objective function effectively. We run experiments
on the US patents and BlogCatalog data sets whose ground
truth have been known, and show that CoDiNMF improves
clustering results compared to other co-clustering methods in
terms of average F1 score, Rand index, and adjusted Rand
index (ARI). Finally, we compare CoDiNMF and other coclustering methods on the Wikipedia data set of philosophers,
and we can ﬁnd meaningful directional ﬂow of inﬂuence
among co-clusters of philosophers.

Introduction
Clustering is an essential task in unsupervised learning
which ﬁnds the inherent relationships and group structures
in the data sets. In particular, co-clustering simultaneously
computes co-clusters which consist of both features and
data items or higher order entities at the same time by exploiting the dualities. Since co-clustering is effective in analyzing the dyadic or higher-order relationships compared
to the traditional one-way clustering, it has many applications such as text mining (Dhillon 2001; Dhillon, Mallela,
and Modha 2003), bioinformatics (Cho et al. 2004), product recommendation (Vlachos et al. 2014), pricing optimization (Zhu, Yang, and He 2015), sense discovery (Chen et al.
2015), and community detection (Rohe, Qin, and Yu 2016).
Dhillon (Dhillon 2001) suggested Spectral Co-clustering
(SCo) to compute co-clusters by using the min-cut problem of a bipartite graph with documents and words as
parts. Since then, co-clustering has been studied with different ways over the last decades; information theoretic

In this paper, we propose a new NMF-based co-clustering
method, called CoDiNMF, which computes co-clusters by
using both directed and undirected relationships to improve
co-clustering quality. Especially, CoDiNMF is able to ﬁnd
directional relationships among co-clusters by controlling
the net directional ﬂow between different co-clusters. In the
later sections, we will derive CoDiNMF, and compare it with
other NMF-based co-clustering in terms of accuracy on the
US patents and BlogCatalog data sets. We will also demonstrate its ability for ﬁnding directional relationships on the
Wikipedia data set of philosophers.

Related Work
In this section, we brieﬂy discuss some of the existing
co-clustering methods in literature including spectral coclustering, and NMF based co-clustering.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3611

