The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Jointly Parse and Fragment
Ungrammatical Sentences
Homa B. Hashemi, Rebecca Hwa
Intelligent Systems Program, Computer Science Department
University of Pittsburgh
hashemi@cs.pitt.edu, hwa@cs.pitt.edu

sentential grammaticality judgment, which does not directly
test for the validity of the tree fragments themselves.
In this paper, we address the limitations of the previous
work by proposing to jointly parse and fragment ungrammatical sentences to avoid cascading parser errors on these
sentences. We introduce two methods to prune implausible dependency arcs of ungrammatical sentences that are
caused by grammar mistakes: a parser retraining method and
a sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) labeling method. Both are
developed based on a parallel corpus of ungrammatical sentences and their corrections. To better validate our hypothesis that the omission of implausible dependency arcs will
directly help downstream applications, we compare the effects of full parses and tree fragments of ungrammatical sentences on the task of semantic role labeling. Through our
experiments, we ﬁnd that both joint methods produce tree
fragment sets that are more similar to those produced by the
oracle method than the previous pipeline method; moreover,
the seq2seq method’s pruning decision has a signiﬁcantly
higher accuracy. In terms of downstream applications, we
show that dependency arc pruning is helpful for two applications: sentential grammaticality judgment and semantic role
labeling.

Abstract
This paper is about detecting incorrect arcs in a dependency
parse for sentences that contain grammar mistakes. Pruning
these arcs results in well-formed parse fragments that can
still be useful for downstream applications. We propose two
automatic methods that jointly parse the ungrammatical sentence and prune the incorrect arcs: a parser retrained on a
parallel corpus of ungrammatical sentences with their corrections, and a sequence-to-sequence method. Experimental results show that the proposed strategies are promising for detecting incorrect syntactic dependencies as well as incorrect
semantic dependencies.

1

Introduction

Many NLP applications beneﬁt from dependency-based syntactic structures. However, the sentences under analysis may
not always be grammatically correct. When a dependency
parser nonetheless produces fully connected, syntactically
well-formed trees for these sentences, the trees may be inappropriate and lead to errors. In fact, researchers have raised
valid questions about the merit of annotating dependency
trees for ungrammatical sentences (Ragheb and Dickinson
2012; Cahill 2015). On the other hand, previous work has
found that when those dependency arcs directly connected
to the erroneous words are ignored, the rest of the parses
tend to be well-formed (Hashemi and Hwa 2016a). Thus, for
downstream applications that are sensitive to syntactic relationships, it might be preferable to have a set of well-formed
parse fragments instead of the entire tree containing errors.
In an earlier work, we have introduced a framework
for extracting fragments from constituency parse trees
(Hashemi and Hwa 2016b). We proposed a practical fragmentation method using a feature-based classiﬁer and provided an oracle upper bound. However, that study has several limitations. First, there is a signiﬁcant performance
gap between the practical method and the oracle. Perhaps
a more sophisticated learning model is necessary. Second,
the framework is a pipeline: fragmentation is performed as a
post-hoc process on the outputs of off-the-shelf parsers. Perhaps a joint approach that directly builds parse fragments
would result in better outputs overall. Third, we have validated the framework on only one downstream application,

2

Dependency Arc Pruning

Figure 1a shows an example of an ungrammatical sentence
written by an English-as-a-Second Language (ESL) learner
and its dependency parse tree, along with the corrected version of the sentence and its parse tree.1 The ungrammatical
sentence has two small mistakes (a missing comma and a
phrase replacement error), but the impact of these mistakes
is signiﬁcant on the syntactic parse. Even though the parse
tree of the ungrammatical sentence seems well-formed, the
syntactic structure does not closely resemble the analysis
for the corrected sentence: the head of the ungrammatical
sentence is changed to “remember” from “known”, and the
“for ever” phrase is now seen as a preposition relation instead of a time adverb. These errors further impact the semantic interpretation of the sentence. Figure 1b shows the
same ungrammatical sentence along with its semantic de-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Dependency trees are produced by SyntaxNet parser (Andor et
al. 2016).

5165

