The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Warmstarting of Model-Based
Algorithm Conﬁguration
Marius Lindauer, Frank Hutter
University of Freiburg
{lindauer,fh}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

process from scratch when presented with a new set of
benchmark instances. Compared with the way humans exploit information from past benchmark sets, this is obviously
suboptimal. Inspired by the human ability to learn across different tasks, we propose to use performance measurements
for an algorithm on previous benchmark sets in order to
warmstart its conﬁguration on a new benchmark set. As we
will show in the experiments, our new warmstarting methods can substantially speed up AC procedures, by up to a
factor of 165. In our experiments, this amounts to spending
less than 20 minutes to obtain comparable performance as
could previously be obtained within two days.

Abstract
The performance of many hard combinatorial problem
solvers depends strongly on their parameter settings, and
since manual parameter tuning is both tedious and suboptimal the AI community has recently developed several algorithm conﬁguration (AC) methods to automatically address
this problem. While all existing AC methods start the conﬁguration process of an algorithm A from scratch for each new
type of benchmark instances, here we propose to exploit information about A’s performance on previous benchmarks in
order to warmstart its conﬁguration on new types of benchmarks. We introduce two complementary ways in which we
can exploit this information to warmstart AC methods based
on a predictive model. Experiments for optimizing a ﬂexible
modern SAT solver on twelve different instance sets show
that our methods often yield substantial speedups over existing AC methods (up to 165-fold) and can also ﬁnd substantially better conﬁgurations given the same compute budget.

Preliminaries
Algorithm conﬁguration (AC). Formally, given a target
algorithm with conﬁguration space Θ, a probability distribution D across problem instances, as well as a cost metric c
to be minimized, the algorithm conﬁguration (AC) problem
is to determine a parameter conﬁguration θ∗ ∈ Θ with low
expected cost on instances drawn from D:

Introduction
Many algorithms in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence rely
crucially on good parameter settings to yield strong performance; prominent examples include solvers for many hard
combinatorial problems (e.g., the propositional satisﬁability
problem SAT (Hutter et al. 2017) or AI planning (Fawcett
et al. 2011)) as well as a wide range of machine learning algorithms (in particular deep neural networks (Snoek,
Larochelle, and Adams 2012) and automated machine learning frameworks (Feurer et al. 2015)). To overcome the tedious and error-prone task of manual parameter tuning for a
given algorithm A, algorithm conﬁguration (AC) procedures
automatically determine a parameter conﬁguration of A with
low cost (e.g., runtime) on a given benchmark set. General
algorithm conﬁguration procedures fall into two categories:
model-free approaches, such as ParamILS (Hutter et al.
2009), irace (López-Ibáñez et al. 2016) or GGA (Ansótegui,
Sellmann, and Tierney 2009), and model-based approaches,
such as SMAC (Hutter, Hoos, and Leyton-Brown 2011) or
GGA++ (Ansótegui et al. 2015).
Even though model-based approaches learn to predict the
cost of different conﬁgurations on the benchmark instances
at hand, so far all AC procedures start their conﬁguration

θ∗ ∈ arg min Eπ ∼D [c(θ, π)].
θ∈Θ

(1)

In practice, π ∼ D is typically approximated by a ﬁnite
set of instances Π drawn from D. An example AC problem is to set a SAT solver’s parameters to minimize its average runtime on a given benchmark set of formal veriﬁcation instances. Througout the paper, we refer to algorithms
for solving the AC problem as AC procedures. They execute
the target algorithm with different parameter conﬁgurations
θ ∈ Θ on different instances π ∈ Π and measure the resulting costs c(θ, π).
Empirical performance models (EPMs). A core ingredient in model-based approaches for AC is a probabilistic
regression model ĉ : Θ × Π → R that is trained based on
the cost values x = [θ, π], y = c(θ, π) observed thus far
and can be used to predict the cost of new parameter conﬁgurations θ ∈ Θ on new problem instances π ∈ Π. Since this
regression model predicts empirical algorithm performance
(i.e., its cost), it is known as an empirical performance model
(EPM; Leyton-Brown, Nudelman, and Shoham; Hutter et
al. 2009; 2014b). Random forests have been established as

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1355

