The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Deep Ranking Model for Spatio-Temporal
Highlight Detection from a 360◦ Video
Youngjae Yu, Sangho Lee, Joonil Na,
Jaeyun Kang, Gunhee Kim
Seoul National University
{yj.yu, sangho.lee, joonil}@vision.snu.ac.kr, {kjy13411}@gmail.com, gunhee@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

Training Time
Inference Time

360O input
video segment

We address the problem of highlight detection from a
360◦ video by summarizing it both spatially and temporally. Given a long 360◦ video, we spatially select pleasantlylooking normal ﬁeld-of-view (NFOV) segments from unlimited ﬁeld of views (FOV) of the 360◦ video, and temporally
summarize it into a concise and informative highlight as a
selected subset of subshots. We propose a novel deep ranking model named as Composition View Score (CVS) model,
which produces a spherical score map of composition per
video segment, and determines which view is suitable for
highlight via a sliding window kernel at inference. To evaluate the proposed framework, we perform experiments on the
Pano2Vid benchmark dataset (Su, Jayaraman, and Grauman
2016) and our newly collected 360◦ video highlight dataset
from YouTube and Vimeo. Through evaluation using both
quantitative summarization metrics and user studies via Amazon Mechanical Turk, we demonstrate that our approach outperforms several state-of-the-art highlight detection methods.
We also show that our model is 16 times faster at inference
than AutoCam (Su, Jayaraman, and Grauman 2016), which is
one of the ﬁrst summarization algorithms of 360◦ videos.

Fully-convolutional
CVS model
Project ݇ ൈ ݇ (k=3)
position scores to a
position on a sphere
Layered
score map
݇ଶ
݇
Position-pooled
Score ݂

݇

ࢌ

ࢌ

Training ranking
Professional

Casual

Spatial Summary
Random

SpatioTemporal
Summary

Figure 1: The intuition of the proposed Composition
View Score (CVS) model for highlight detection from a
360◦ video. For each 360◦ video segment, fully convolutional CVS model generates a layered spherical score map to
determine which view is suitable for highlight. It learns the
ﬁdelity of views from the professional videos of the same
topic (e.g. wedding) as reference, and at inference, a sliding
window kernel computes the composition scores of views.

Introduction
◦

User-generated 360 videos are ﬂooding online, with emergence of virtual reality and active support by major social
network platforms such as Facebook and YouTube. Since
360◦ videos provide panoramic views of the entire scene,
they free viewers not to get caught up in the intent of the
videographer. However, without proper guidance, viewer experience can be severely handicapped, due to difﬁculty of
understanding the entire content with limited human’s ﬁeldof-view. Therefore, like normal user videos, the highlight
detection is also highly necessitated for much of online
360◦ content, to quickly browse the overview of the content.
One important difference of the 360◦ video highlight detection is that the video summarization should be achieved both
spatially and temporally. The spatial summarization selects
pleasantly-looking normal ﬁeld-of-view (NFOV) segments
from unlimited ﬁeld of views (FOV) of 360◦ videos. Next,
the temporal summarization generates a concise and informative highlight of a long video by selecting a subset of
subshots.

We address the problem of highlight detection from a long
360◦ video by summarizing the video spatially and temporally. That is, we aim at selecting a pleasantly-looking
NFOV within a 360◦ FOV, and at the same time producing
a concise highlight. To this end, we propose a novel deep
ranking neural network, named as Composition View Score
(CVS) model. Given a 360◦ video, the CVS model produces
a spherical score map of composition. Here we use the term
composition to refer to a uniﬁed index to determine which
view is suitable for highlight, considering all relevant properties such as the presence or absence of key objects, and
the framing of objects. Based on the composition score map,
we ﬁrst perform spatial summarization by ﬁnding out a best
NFOV subshot per 360◦ video segment, and then temporal
summarization by selecting N top-ranked NFOV subshots

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7525

