The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
with Distribution Matching Machines
Yue Cao, Mingsheng Long,∗ Jianmin Wang
KLiss, MOE; NEL-BDS; TNList; School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
caoyue10@gmail.com mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn jimwang@tsinghua.edu.cn

The major computational problem of domain adaptation is
how to reduce the distribution difference between domains.
One successful approach to this problem is learning domaininvariant features by jointly minimizing a distance metric
that well characterizes the cross-domain discrepancy (Pan,
Kwok, and Yang 2008; Pan et al. 2011; Duan, Xu, and Tsang
2012; Duan, Tsang, and Xu 2012; Long et al. 2013; Zhang
et al. 2013; Long et al. 2015a; Ganin and Lempitsky 2015;
Sun, Feng, and Saenko 2016). However, when the crossdomain discrepancy is substantially large, there will always
be some source instances that are irrelevant to the target domain even using domain-invariant features, which may introduce large bias to the transfer-classiﬁer (Long et al. 2014;
Aljundi et al. 2015). Another principled strategy is to estimate the weights (importance) of the source instances such
that the distribution discrepancy can be minimized for the
empirical risk minimization learning (Huang et al. 2006;
Bruzzone and Marconcini 2010; Chen, Weinberger, and
Blitzer 2011; Yu and Szepesvári 2012; Chu, De la Torre, and
Cohn 2013). However, when the cross-domain discrepancy
is substantially large, a large number of source instances will
be down-weighed, leading to a smaller set of effective instances for training the transfer-classiﬁer. This will result
in a domain-unbiased but high-variance transfer-classiﬁer,
which is not robust to large cross-domain discrepancy.

Abstract
Domain adaptation generalizes a learning model across
source domain and target domain that follow different distributions. Most existing work follows a two-step procedure:
ﬁrst, explores either feature matching or instance reweighting
independently, and second, train the transfer classiﬁer separately. In this paper, we show that either feature matching
or instance reweighting can only reduce, but not remove, the
cross-domain discrepancy, and the knowledge hidden in the
relations between the data labels from the source and target
domains is important for unsupervised domain adaptation.
We propose a new Distribution Matching Machine (DMM)
based on the structural risk minimization principle, which
learns a transfer support vector machine by extracting invariant feature representations and estimating unbiased instance
weights that jointly minimize the cross-domain distribution
discrepancy. This leads to a robust transfer learner that performs well against both mismatched features and irrelevant
instances. Our theoretical analysis proves that the proposed
approach further reduces the generalization error bound of
related domain adaptation methods. Comprehensive experiments validate that the DMM approach signiﬁcantly outperforms competitive methods on standard domain adaptation
benchmarks.

Introduction

In the aforementioned challenging scenario, either feature matching or instance reweighting can only reduce, but
not remove, the cross-domain discrepancy, and it is inevitable to perform feature matching and instance reweighting jointly for robust unsupervised domain adaptation (Long
et al. 2014; Aljundi et al. 2015). FurthSRMore, the knowledge hidden in the relations between the data labels from
the source and target domains is important for learning a
transfer classiﬁer that is coherent with discriminative structure underlying the data distributions. However, most existing work follows a two-step procedure: ﬁrst, explores either
feature matching or instance reweighting independently, and
second, train the transfer classiﬁer separately. All in all, the
knowledge that is safely transferable across domains should
be (1) invariant to feature representations, (2) unbiased to irrelevant instances, and (3) consistent with the discriminative
structure. To our best knowledge, there is no previous work
that can optimize all the three inevitable learning criteria in a
uniﬁed learning model for unsupervised domain adaptation.

Standard supervised learning machines will encounter poor
generalization performance with limited training data, while
manual labeling of sufﬁcient training data for emerging application domains is prohibitive. Hence there is motivation
to design effective algorithms to reduce the labeling cost by
leveraging rich labeled data from relevant source domains to
the target domains. Domain adaptation (Quionero-Candela
et al. 2009; Pan and Yang 2010) addresses the problem that
we have data from two related domains but under different
distributions. The domain discrepancy poses a major obstacle for adapting predictive models across domains. Domain
adaptation establishes knowledge transfer from the labeled
source domain to the unlabeled target domain by exploring domain-invariant knowledge structures that manifest the
similarity between domains under substantial discrepancy.
∗

Corresponding author: Mingsheng Long
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2795

