The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Guiding Exploratory Behaviors for
Multi-Modal Grounding of Linguistic Descriptions
Jesse Thomason

Jivko Sinapov

Raymond J. Mooney

Peter Stone

Computer Science Dept.
Univ. of Texas at Austin
jesse@cs.utexas.edu

Computer Science Dept.
Tufts University
jsinapov@cs.tufts.edu

Computer Science Dept.
Univ. of Texas at Austin
mooney@cs.utexas.edu

Computer Science Dept.
Univ. of Texas at Austin
pstone@cs.utexas.edu

be able to explore those objects quickly to learn the concepts before traveling to the kitchen to identify the referent.
Exhaustively performing all actions when exploring new objects to learn a novel predicate will, in expectation, yield the
best accuracy, but scales poorly as the number of exploratory
behaviors and objects increases.
In this work, we investigate using exploratory behaviors
to learn a novel predicate on a time budget without sacriﬁcing grounding accuracy. We use two datasets of predicateobject relationships that include both visual (“red,” “cylinder”) and non-visual (“heavy,” “full”) predicates that require
haptic and auditory feedback from an embodied robot. We
compare methods for deciding which behaviors to perform
when exploring objects in order to learn a new predicate, beyond the obvious time-consuming option of performing all
behaviors. One possibility is to utilize unsupervised information in the form of word embeddings, such as those produced by Word2Vec (Mikolov et al. 2013). The distance between two words’ embedding vectors suggests their semantic similarity. If “green” is close to “red” in the embedding
space, a robot may be able to learn “green” using just the
exploratory behaviors that determine whether an object is
“red.” Another possibility, if a robot is operating in a shared
space with humans, is to ask a human which behaviors they
would perform to evaluate the predicate.
We demonstrate that word embeddings help learn predicates using fewer behaviors. Our approach is independent of
the embedding vectors, and we compare embeddings from
two different corpora, noting that as the categorical quality of the embeddings improve (e.g. colors close to colors,
weights close to weights), so should the gains achieved by
our approach. We also show that using them together with
human-provided behavior annotations speeds up learning in
a domain of real-world objects with predicates from organic
human descriptions in an embodied setting where behaviors
must be performed in a certain order (e.g. an object must be
grasped before it can be lifted).

Abstract
A major goal of grounded language learning research is to
enable robots to connect language predicates to a robot’s
physical interactive perception of the world. Coupling object
exploratory behaviors such as grasping, lifting, and looking
with multiple sensory modalities (e.g., audio, haptics, and vision) enables a robot to ground non-visual words like “heavy”
as well as visual words like “red”. A major limitation of existing approaches to multi-modal language grounding is that
a robot has to exhaustively explore training objects with a variety of actions when learning a new such language predicate.
This paper proposes a method for guiding a robot’s behavioral
exploration policy when learning a novel predicate based on
known grounded predicates and the novel predicate’s linguistic relationship to them. We demonstrate our approach on two
datasets in which a robot explored large sets of objects and
was tasked with learning to recognize whether novel words
applied to those objects.

Introduction
The symbol grounding problem is that of connecting natural language phrases to objects in the real world (Harnad
1990). To perform this task, a robot must represent words
like “green” and “heavy” not in terms of other words (like
dictionary deﬁnitions), but in terms of its own sensory perception. This is the task of grounded language learning. Past
work has demonstrated that using sensory data beyond vision to ground language predicates improves robotic performance over using vision alone (Thomason et al. 2016). Nonvisual exploratory behaviors such as pushing, grasping, and
lifting the object can be costly in terms of time (e.g. localizing an object with a camera in order to press down on it) and
operator intervention (e.g. pushing a ball off a table, requiring an operator to retrieve it).
In many settings, a robot needs to perform object exploration for a speciﬁc grounding task. For example, if someone asks a household robot to “get the heavy mug from the
kitchen,” the robot may need to explore some novel objects
in the kitchen to determine which one satisﬁes “heavy” and
“mug.” If a dataset of unexplored objects labeled as “heavy”
(or not) and “mug” (or not) is available, the robot should

Related Work
Most past research in language grounding has focused on
using the visual sensory modality. Recent research has
demonstrated that non-visual modalities can also be used
to improve a robot’s ability to ground semantic information
(Araki et al. 2012; Chu et al. 2013; Silberer and Lapata 2014;

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5520

