The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Modelling Iterative Judgment Aggregation
Zoi Terzopoulou

Ulle Endriss

Institute for Logic, Language and Computation
University of Amsterdam
The Netherlands
z.terzopoulou@uva.nl

Institute for Logic, Language and Computation
University of Amsterdam
The Netherlands
ulle.endriss@uva.nl

to submit their judgments and observe the behaviour of their
colleagues in real time. Subsequently, every agent may modify her declared judgment, if such an act induces an outcome
on p that is more desirable to herself.
In our model, in each round of the decision process, each
agent (maybe partially) observes the judgments reported by
her peers and decides whether or not to update her own reported judgment in view of this information. The ﬁrst agent
to indicate she wishes to update gets granted permission to
do so. This process is repeated ad inﬁnitum or until none of
the agents want to make any further updates. If and when the
process terminates, an aggregation rule is used to map the ﬁnal proﬁle of individual judgments into a collective decision.
In our analysis, we address two broad types of questions:

Abstract
We introduce a formal model of iterative judgment aggregation, enabling the analysis of scenarios in which agents repeatedly update their individual positions on a set of issues,
before a ﬁnal decision is made by applying an aggregation
rule to these individual positions. Focusing on two popular
aggregation rules, the premise-based rule and the plurality
rule, we study under what circumstances convergence to an
equilibrium can be guaranteed. We also analyse the quality,
in social terms, of the ﬁnal decisions obtained. Our results not
only shed light on the parameters that determine whether iteration converges and is socially beneﬁcial, but they also clarify
important differences between iterative judgment aggregation
and the related framework of iterative voting.

1

• Under what circumstances will the process of iterative
judgment aggregation converge to a stable outcome, and
how many iterations are required in the worst case?

Introduction

Judgment aggregation is a rich formal framework for modelling decision making by groups of autonomous agents
in complex domains that may require agreement on several interdependent issues (List and Puppe 2009; Grossi and
Pigozzi 2014; Endriss 2016). Due to its broad applicability
as a modelling tool, judgment aggregation has received attention from legal scholars, philosophers, economists, and
computer scientists alike. However, one important feature of
group decision making has so far not been thoroughly explored in the literature on judgment aggregation, namely the
fact that complex decisions typically are arrived at in an iterative fashion, with each agent having the opportunity to reﬁne her own stance multiple times as she ﬁnds out about the
positions taken by her peers. To ﬁll this gap, in this paper we
propose a simple model of iterative judgment aggregation
and study some of its fundamental properties.
To illustrate the idea, consider a group of colleagues that
have to decide on whether to start working on a new project
(proposition p). All of them think that they should proceed
with p if and only if (a) their old project has reached a
good stage of progress and (b) the new project is promising. Hence, every agent expresses a binary (yes / no) judgment on these two criteria and her judgment on p follows
logically. Then, ﬁxing the judgments of the whole group, a
collective decision is made via an aggregation rule. In practice, online applications such as Doodle enable the agents

• What is the quality, in social terms, of the decisions obtained by means of iterative judgment aggregation?
Answers to these questions will depend on a number of parameters, most notably the aggregation rule used. We provide answers for two aggregation rules, the premise-based
rule and the plurality rule. The former is probably the most
widely studied judgment aggregation rule in the literature
(Pettit 2001; Chapman 2002; Dietrich and List 2007; Dietrich and Mongin 2010; Hartmann and Sprenger 2012), while
the latter is closely related to the most widely analysed rule
in voting theory (Zwicker 2016). We have chosen these rules
for two reasons: First, they are computationally simple—
unlike most other popular aggregation rules, such as the
distance-based rule (Endriss, Grandi, and Porello 2012;
Lang and Slavkovik 2014; de Haan and Slavkovik 2017).
And second, they are guaranteed to always return a logically consistent collective judgment, i.e., they are not subject
to the famous “doctrinal paradox” (Kornhauser and Sager
1993)—which is not the case for most other computationally simple rules, notably the majority rule (List and Pettit
2002).
Our model of iterative judgment aggregation is inspired
by a recent line of research on iterative voting, initiated
by Meir et al. (2010). For instance, we adopt the notion of
truth bias employed by Obraztsova, Markakis, and Thompson (2013) and we model partial information similarly to

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1234

