The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

R-FCN++: Towards Accurate Region-Based
Fully Convolutional Networks for Object Detection
1

Zeming Li,1 Yilun Chen,2 Gang Yu,2 Yangdong Deng1

School of Software, Tsinghua University, {lizm15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, dengyd@tsinghua.edu.cn }
2
Megvii Inc. (Face++), {chenyilun, yugang}@megvii.com

Abstract
Region based detectors like Faster R-CNN (Ren et al. 2015)
and R-FCN (Li et al. 2016) have achieved leading performance on object detection benchmarks. However, in Faster
R-CNN, RoI pooling is used to extract feature of each region, which might harm the classiﬁcation as the RoI pooling
loses spatial resolution. Also it gets slow when a large number of proposals are utilized. R-FCN is a fully convolutional
structure that uses a position-sensitive pooling layer to extract
prediction score of each region, which speeds up network by
sharing computation of RoIs and prevents the feature map
from losing information in RoI-pooling. But R-FCN can not
beneﬁt from fully connected layer (or global average pooling), which enables Faster R-CNN to utilize global context
information.
In this paper, we propose R-FCN++ to address this issue
in two-fold: ﬁrst we involve Global Context Module to improve the classiﬁcation score maps by adopting large, separable convolutional kernels. Second we introduce a new pooling method to better extract scores from the score maps, by
using row-wise or column-wise max pooling. Our approach
achieves state-of-the-art single-model results on both Pascal
VOC and MS COCO object detection benchmarks, 87.3% on
Pascal VOC 2012 test dataset and 42.3% on COCO 2015 testdev dataset. Code will be made publicly available.

Figure 1: Comparison of Faster R-CNN, R-FCN, and our
R-FCN++. Faster R-CNN uses RoI pooling layer to sample feature, then involving fully connected layer to do ﬁnal
prediction. R-FCN uses 1 × 1 convolution to generate score
maps. Scores are obtained by average voting every part of
the RoI, and each part is pooled by Position Sensitive RoI
Pooling (PSPooling). Our R-FCN++ includes Global Context Model (GCM) to generate score map and Row-Column
Max Pooling (RCMPooling) to pool the parts of high response for the ﬁnal prediction.

Introduction
We are witnessing signiﬁcant progresses in generic object
detection, partly due to the rapid development of deep convolutional neural networks. Among various CNN-based object detectors, one of the most notable work is Region-based
Convolutional Neural Network (R-CNN) (Girshick et al.
2014). R-CNN exploits deep CNN to classify regions. Following region-based detection pipeline, Faster R-CNN (Ren
et al. 2015) and R-FCN (Li et al. 2016) are proposed to further improve the accuracy and speed.
Compared with single-stage pipeline such as
YOLO (Redmon et al. 2016) and SSD (Liu et al.
2016), Faster R-CNN achieves better performance by
a second-stage classiﬁcation and a bounding-box regression. However, Faster R-CNN is time-consuming when the
number of object proposals in its ﬁrst-stage is large. Also,

Faster R-CNN needs to perform a RoI-pooling (may lose information due to regular sampling) on the cropped features,
which might be harmful to the region classiﬁcation. To
avoid those shortcomings, R-FCN uses Fully Convolutional
Network (FCN) to generate a classiﬁcation score map and
a location map. It efﬁciently gets the ﬁnal prediction by
simply averaging the scores of the object parts. However,
the part in R-FCN might be too local to be discriminative
enough because there is no fully connected layer or global
average pooling layer to provide the global context.
In order to improve the classiﬁcation capability of RFCN, we need to let the network to see a larger context.
However, it is inherently contradictory to employ a fully
connected layer or a global average pooling into a FCN.
Also, taking larger convolution kernel is expensive and

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7073

