The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Deep Region Hashing for Generic Instance Search from Images
Jingkuan Song, Tao He, Lianli Gao, Xing Xu, Heng Tao Shen∗
Center for Future Media and School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China.
{jingkuan.song, hetaoconquer}@gmail.com, {lianli.gao,xing.xu}@uestc.edu.cn, shenhengtao@hotmail.com

classiﬁcation and retrieval have demonstrated their advantage over prior state-of-the-art (Ng, Yang, and Davis 2015;
Razavian et al. 2014; Gao et al. 2017). More recently, we
have witnessed the research attention shifted from features
extracted from the fully-connected layers to deep convolutional layers (Babenko and Lempitsky 2015), and it turns
out that convolutional layer activations have superior performance in image retrieval. To improve the search efﬁciency, lots of hashing methods were proposed, from traditional handcrafted based hashing methods (Liu et al. 2013;
Song et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2014a;
Zhu, Zhang, and Huang 2014; Song et al. 2013; Yang et
al. 2016; Zhu et al. 2013; 2017) to deep learning based
hashing methods (Zhao et al. 2015; Lin et al. 2015; Li,
Wang, and Kang 2016; Yao et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2016;
Song et al. 2018). However, using image-level features may
fail to search instances in images. As illustrated in Fig.
1, sometimes a target region is only a small portion of a
database image. Directly comparing the query image and a
whole image in the database may result an inaccurate matching. Therefore, it is necessary to consider the local region
information.

Abstract
Instance Search (INS) is a fundamental problem for many
applications, while it is more challenging comparing to traditional image search since the relevancy is deﬁned at the instance level. Existing works have demonstrated the success
of many complex ensemble systems that are typically conducted by ﬁrstly generating object proposals, and then extracting handcrafted and/or CNN features of each proposal
for matching. However, object bounding box proposals and
feature extraction are often conducted in two separated steps,
thus the effectiveness of these methods collapses. Also, due
to the large amount of generated proposals, matching speed
becomes the bottleneck that limits its application to largescale datasets. To tackle these issues, in this paper we propose an effective and efﬁcient Deep Region Hashing (DRH)
approach for large-scale INS using an image patch as the
query. Speciﬁcally, DRH is an end-to-end deep neural network which consists of object proposal, feature extraction,
and hash code generation. DRH shares full-image convolutional feature map with the region proposal network, thus
enabling nearly cost-free region proposals. Also, each highdimensional, real-valued region features are mapped onto a
low-dimensional, compact binary codes for the efﬁcient object region level matching on large-scale dataset. Experimental results on four datasets show that our DRH can achieve
even better performance than the state-of-the-arts in terms of
mAP, while the efﬁciency is improved by nearly 100 times.

Recently, many successful INS approaches (Tao et al.
2014; Mohedano et al. 2016) were proposed by combining fast ﬁltering with more computationally expensive spatial veriﬁcation and query expansion. More speciﬁcally, all
images in a database are ﬁrstly ranked according to their
distances to the query, and then a spatial veriﬁcation is applied to re-rank the search results, and ﬁnally a query expansion is followed to improve the search performance. An
intuitive way for spatial veriﬁcation is the sliding window
strategy. It generates sliding windows at different scales and
aspect ratios over an image. Each window is then compared
to the query instance in order to ﬁnd the optimal location
that contains the query. A more advanced strategy is to use
object proposal algorithms (Uijlings et al. 2013; Girshick
et al. 2014; Pont-Tuset et al. 2016; Chavali et al. 2016).
It evaluates many image locations and determines whether
they contain the object or not. Therefore, the query instance
only need to compare with the object proposal instead of
all the image locations. Existing works (Tao et al. 2014;
Tao, Smeulders, and Chang 2015) have demonstrated the
success of many complex ensemble systems that are conducted by ﬁrstly generating object bounding box propos-

Introduction
Large-scale instance search (INS) is to efﬁciently retrieve
the images containing a speciﬁc instance in a large scale image dataset, giving a query image of that instance. It has long
been a hot research topic due to the many applications such
as image classiﬁcation and detection (Vedaldi and Zisserman
2012; Wang et al. 2016).
Early research (Philbin et al. 2007; Qin, Wengert, and
Gool 2013) usually extracts image-level handcrafted features such as color, shape and texture to search a user
query. Recently, due to the development of deep neural
networks, using the outputs of last fully-connected network layers as global image descriptors to support image
∗

Heng Tao Shen and Lianli Gao are the corresponding authors.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

402

