The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Asking Friendly Strangers:
Non-Semantic Attribute Transfer
Nils Murrugarra-Llerena, Adriana Kovashka
Department of Computer Science
University of Pittsburgh
{nineil, kovashka}@cs.pitt.edu

al. 2014). What should we do if we have a limited amount of
data for the task of interest, and no data from semantically
related categories? For example, let us imagine we have an
entirely new domain of objects (e.g. deep sea animals) which
is visually distinct from other objects we have previously encountered, and we have very sparse labeled data on that domain. Let us assume we have plentiful data from unrelated
domains, e.g. materials, clothing, and natural scenes. Could
we still use that unrelated data?
We examine how we can transfer knowledge from attribute classiﬁers on unrelated domains, as shown in Fig. 1.
For example, this might mean we want to learn a model
for the animal attribute “hooved” from scene attribute “natural”, texture attribute “woolen”, etc. We deﬁne semantic
transfer as learning a target attribute using the remaining
attributes in that same data set as source models. This is
the approach used in prior work (Chen and Grauman 2014;
Liu and Kovashka 2016; Han et al. 2014). In contrast, in nonsemantic transfer (our proposed approach), we use source attributes from other datasets. We show that allowing transfer
from diverse datasets allows us to learn more accurate models, but only when we intelligently select how to weigh the
contribution of the source models. The intuition behind our
approach is that the same visual patterns recur in different
realms of the visual world, but language has evolved in such
a way that they receive different names depending on which
domain of objects they occur in.
We propose an attention-guided transfer network. Brieﬂy,
our approach works as follows. First, the network receives
training images for attributes in both the source and target domains. Second, it separately learns models for the attributes in each domain, and then measures how related each
target domain classiﬁer is to the classiﬁers in the source domains. Finally, it uses these measures of similarity (relatedness) to compute a weighted combination of the source classiﬁers, which then becomes the new classiﬁer for the target
attribute. We develop two methods, one where the target and
source domains are disjoint, and another where there is some
overlap between them. Importantly, we show that when the
source attributes come from a diverse set of domains, the
gain we obtain from this transfer of knowledge is greater
than if only use attributes from the same domain.
We test our method on 272 attributes from ﬁve datasets of
objects, animals, scenes, shoes, and textures, and compare

Abstract
Attributes can be used to recognize unseen objects from a textual description. Their learning is oftentimes accomplished
with a large amount of annotations, e.g. around 160k-180k,
but what happens if for a given attribute, we do not have many
annotations? The standard approach would be to perform
transfer learning, where we use source models trained on
other attributes, to learn a separate target attribute. However
existing approaches only consider transfer from attributes in
the same domain i.e. they perform semantic transfer between
attributes that have related meaning. Instead, we propose to
perform non-semantic transfer from attributes that may be in
different domains, hence they have no semantic relation to
the target attributes. We develop an attention-guided transfer architecture that learns how to weigh the available source
attribute classiﬁers, and applies them to image features for
the attribute name of interest, to make predictions for that attribute. We validate our approach on 272 attributes from ﬁve
domains: animals, objects, scenes, shoes and textures. We
show that semantically unrelated attributes provide knowledge that helps improve the accuracy of the target attribute
of interest, more so than only allowing transfer from semantically related attributes.

Introduction
Semantic visual attributes have allowed researchers to recognize unseen objects based on textual descriptions (Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2009; Parikh and Grauman 2011; Akata et al. 2013), learn object models expediently by providing information about multiple object classes
with each attribute label (Kovashka, Vijayanarasimhan, and
Grauman 2011; Parkash and Parikh 2012), interactively recognize ﬁne-grained object categories (Branson et al. 2010;
Wah and Belongie 2013), and learn to retrieve images from
precise human feedback (Kumar et al. 2011; Kovashka,
Parikh, and Grauman 2015). Recent ConvNet approaches
have shown how to learn accurate attribute models through
multi-task learning (Fouhey, Gupta, and Zisserman 2016;
Huang et al. 2015) or by localizing attributes (Xiao and
Jae Lee 2015; Singh and Lee 2016). However, deep learning
with ConvNets requires a large amount of data to be available for the task of interest, or for a related task (Oquab et
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7268

