The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Community-Based Trip Sharing for Urban Commuting
Mohd. Haﬁz Hasan, Pascal Van Hentenryck,
Ceren Budak, Jiayu Chen, Chhavi Chaudhry
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109

Abstract

3. Guaranteed ride back home (Correia and Viegas 2011);

This paper explores Community-Based Trip Sharing which
uses the structure of communities and commuting patterns to
optimize car or ride sharing for urban communities. It introduces the Commuting Trip Sharing Problem (CTSP) and proposes an optimization approach to maximize trip sharing. The
optimization method, which exploits trip clustering, shareability graphs, and mixed-integer programming, is applied to
a dataset of 9000 daily commuting trips from a mid-size city.
Experimental results show that community-based trip sharing
reduces daily car usage by up to 44%, thus producing significant environmental and trafﬁc beneﬁts and reducing parking
pressure. The results also indicate that daily ﬂexibility in pairing cars and passengers has signiﬁcant impact on the beneﬁts
of the approach, revealing new insights on commuting patterns and trip sharing.

4. Low coordination costs (Arning, Zieﬂe, and Muehlhans
2013);

1

5. Low trust concerns (Arning, Zieﬂe, and Muehlhans 2013;
Correia and Viegas 2011);
6. Clear commuter roles (Buliung et al. 2010; Richardson
and Young 1981).
The ﬁrst two principles reduce the per-trip costs by matching commuters based on their schedules and locations. The
third principle highlights the importance of accounting for
the commute needs for the entire day–individuals who cannot be matched for the return trip should not be matched
for the incoming one. Principles (4–6) account for various
psychological factors by limiting the perceived coordination
costs, by alleviating trust concerns, and by assigning clear
commuter roles to individuals.
To address these challenges, this paper explores the concept of community-based trip sharing which uses the structure of communities and commuting patterns to optimize
trip sharing for urban communities. Community-based trip
sharing identiﬁes matches according to the schedules and
locations of riders and guarantees a ride home and hence it
satisﬁes guiding Principles (1–3) by construction. The implementation of community-based trip sharing ﬁrst clusters
commuters by communities before applying an optimization
model to determine optimal trip-sharing solutions minimizing daily car usage. Community-based trip sharing can be
applied both to car pooling, where commuters use their own
cars, and to car sharing, where a community has at its disposal a pool of cars for commuting purposes.
This paper also studies the cost of implementing Principles (4–6). The implementation of each of these principles reduces the opportunities for trip sharing and the tradeoff between the effectiveness of a trip-sharing platform and
these guiding principles is largely unexplored. To provide
new insights on this issue, the paper proposes a series of
optimization models for community-based trip sharing that
incrementally enforce additional constraints to implement
these principles. For instance, Principle (6) forces a given
commuter to be either a driver or a passenger in all her trips,
which may minimize opportunities for trip sharing as her
schedule may vary on different days.

Introduction

Carpooling services provide an appealing alternative for urban mobility due to their potential beneﬁts, be it in reducing trafﬁc congestion, energy consumption, greenhouse gas
emissions, or parking utilization. For instance, a case study
on the CarLink carpooling program of about 50 people revealed up to 43.5% reduction in the number of single occupant vehicle trips, a 23 miles reduction in average commute
vehicle travel distance per day, and reduced parking utilization (Shaheen and Rodier 2005). Private cars however have
remained as the primary choice for daily commuting due to
a number of challenges associated with carpooling. For instance, a survey by (Li et al. 2007) indicated difﬁculty in
ﬁnding people with matching schedules and locations as the
primary reason for not carpooling. This highlights the potential for matching platforms which alleviate this burden and
automatically identify commuting groups based on factors
determined to be consequential to individuals’ commuting
decisions. A meta-analysis of related work reveals the following set of guiding principles that should ideally be supported by car-pooling and car-sharing platforms:
1. Spatial proximity of riders (Richardson and Young 1981;
Buliung et al. 2009);
2. Temporal proximity of riders (Tsao and Lin 1999; Buliung et al. 2010; Poulenez-Donovan and Ulberg 1994);
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6589

