The Eighth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence 2018 (EAAI-18)

Introducing AI to Undergraduate Students
via Computer Vision Projects
Kaiman Zeng, Yancheng Li, Yida Xu, Di Wu, Nansong Wu
Arkansas Tech University, Russellville, Arkansas 72801
{kzeng, yli, yxu1, dwu2, nwu}@atu.edu

Abstract
Computer vision, as a subﬁeld in the general artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), is a technology can be visualized and easily found in a large number of state-of-art applications. In
this project, undergraduate students performed research on a
landmark recognition task using computer vision techniques.
The project focused on analyzing, designing, conﬁguring,
and testing the two core components in landmark recognition: feature detection and description. The project modeled
the landmark recognition system as a tour guide for visitors to the campus and evaluated the performance in the real
world circumstances. By analyzing real-world data and solving problems, student’s cognitive skills and critical thinking
skills were sharpened. Their knowledge and understanding
in mathematical modeling and data processing were also enhanced.

Figure 1: Eight Direction Imaging Positions

Introduction

in a computer vision project and report our current progress
of the project.

It has been studied that through research experiences students become better learners, more engaged in their education programs, and more inclined to pursue graduate studies.
It is also reported that students’ problem-solving skills are
improved, communication and interpersonal skills are improved, and self-conﬁdence increased. (Eagan Jr et al. 2013)
When considering research projects for undergraduate students, it is of great beneﬁt to involving students in projects
that are closely related to their life and even from ideas that
are generated from themselves.
Computer vision, as a subﬁeld in the general AI, has
drawn great attention among students. They are curious
about how Facebook automatically tags their friends in a
photo. They are also fascinated by augmented reality, turned
on by Pok’mon GO. This research is originated from freshman students’ experience, the frustration to locate buildings
on campus. At Arkansas Tech University, more than 50%
students are reported as ﬁrst-generation college students.
Even a minor setback could be a major roadblock at the beginning of their college life. When the students know the
techniques in computer vision can automatically recognize
the buildings by image, they are excited and motivated by
this landmark recognition project. In this paper, we will describe our experience in mentoring undergraduate students

Problem Analysis and Data Collection
A goal of this project is to provide the students an experience of analyzing and solving the real-world problems. The
landmark recognition system was modeled as a mobile tour
guide for visitors to the campus, where the visitor can ask the
mobile device for information about the building in his/her
view. The students were guided to research the layout and
history of Arkansas Tech University to obtain the basic information of landmarks on campus. They conducted a survey to gather the data of popular or hard-to-ﬁnd locations
among students and visitors. Then, an imaging plan was
initialized for acquiring reference images of the landmarks.
Each building was designed to be imaged from eight directions, as shown in Figure 1. If space allows, images were
obtained from three positions in each direction. And the reference images were taken at different lighting conditions,
i.e. in the morning and afternoon of a day. The longitude and
latitude coordinates were also recorded with the images. Figure 2 shows the library on campus layered with the imaging
positions. Currently, the campus landmarks dataset contains
3725 images for 23 buildings.
After collecting the reference images, the students analyzed the scene of the reference images, discussed the challenges of recognition task, and explored the modern algo-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7956

