The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Assertion-based QA with Question-Aware Open Information Extraction

§

Zhao Yan§∗ , Duyu Tang‡ , Nan Duan‡ , Shujie Liu‡ , Wendi Wang ,
Daxin Jiang , Ming Zhou‡ and Zhoujun Li§†

State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
‡
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China  Microsoft, Beijing, China
{yanzhao, lizj}@buaa.edu.cn {dutang, nanduan, shujliu, wendw, djiang, mingzhou}@microsoft.com

Question
Method
PBQA

Abstract
We present assertion based question answering (ABQA), an
open domain question answering task that takes a question
and a passage as inputs, and outputs a semi-structured assertion consisting of a subject, a predicate and a list of arguments. An assertion conveys more evidences than a short
answer span in reading comprehension, and it is more concise than a tedious passage in passage-based QA. These advantages make ABQA more suitable for human-computer interaction scenarios such as voice-controlled speakers. Further progress towards improving ABQA requires richer supervised dataset and powerful models of text understanding.
To remedy this, we introduce a new dataset called WebAssertions, which includes hand-annotated QA labels for 358,427
assertions in 55,960 web passages. To address ABQA, we develop both generative and extractive approaches. The backbone of our generative approach is sequence to sequence
learning. In order to capture the structure of the output assertion, we introduce a hierarchical decoder that ﬁrst generates
the structure of the assertion and then generates the words of
each ﬁeld. The extractive approach is based on learning to
rank. Features at different levels of granularity are designed
to measure the semantic relevance between a question and
an assertion. Experimental results show that our approaches have the ability to infer question-aware assertions from a
passage. We further evaluate our approaches by incorporating the ABQA results as additional features in passage-based
QA. Results on two datasets show that ABQA features signiﬁcantly improve the accuracy on passage-based QA.

MRC
ABQA

who killed jfk
Answer
A ten-month investigation from November 1963
to September 1964 by the Warren Commission
concluded that Kennedy was assassinated by
Lee Harvey Oswald, acting alone, and that Jack
Ruby also acted alone when he killed Oswald
before he could stand trial.
Lee Harvey Oswald
<Kennedy; was assassinated; by Lee
Harvey Oswald>

Table 1: An example to illustrate the difference between
three QA tasks, i.e. ABQA, MRC and PBQA.

sage guided by the content of the question. We believe that
ABQA has many promising advantages. From an industry
perspective, ABQA could improve smart speakers such as
Amazon Echo, Google Home and Microsoft Invoke, where
the scenario is to answer a user’s question through reading out a concise and semantically adequate utterance. In
this scenario, a short answer span does not convey enough
supporting evidences, while a passage is too tedious for a
speaker. From a research perspective, ABQA is a potential
direction to drive explainable question answering. It explicitly reveals the knowledge embodied in the document that
answers the question. Moreover, the results from ABQA
could be used to improve other QA tasks such as answer
sentence selection. An assertion graph could also be built on
top of these assertions through aggregating the same nodes,
which makes explicit reasoning practical (Khashabi et al.
2016; Khot, Sabharwal, and Clark 2017).
The ABQA task is related to the answer sentence/passage
selection (PBQA) task and the machine reading comprehension (MRC) task. The difference between ABQA and others
is obvious although they all take question-passage pair as
the input. As Table 1 shows, the assertion is organized into a structure with complete and concise information. The
ABQA task differs from knowledge based QA (KBQA) in
that the knowledge in KBQA is typically curated or extracted from large scale web documents. The goal of ABQA is
deep document understanding and to answer question based
on that. Various representations of a meaning makes directly
linking the knowledge in KB to the document a challenging

Introduction
Open-domain question answering (Open-QA) is a long-term
goal in natural language processing area, which empowers
the computer to answer questions for open domain. In
this work, we present assertion-based question answering
(ABQA), an open QA task that answers a question with
semi-structured assertion instead of answer span in machine reading comprehension (Rajpurkar et al. 2016) or sentence/passage in answer selection (Yang, Yih, and Meek
2015). Here an assertion is a group of words with subjectpredicate-object structure which is inferred from the pas∗

Contribution during internship at Microsoft Research Asia
Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

6021

