The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Approximating Bribery in Scoring Rules
Orgad Keller

Avinatan Hassidim

Noam Hazon

Department of Computer Science
Bar-Ilan University
Israel
orgad.keller@gmail.com

Department of Computer Science
Bar-Ilan University
Israel
avinatan@cs.biu.ac.il

Department of Computer Science
Ariel University
Israel
noamh@ariel.ac.il

for example, the number of manipulators or bribed voters,
respectively.
The importance of the aforementioned manipulation
forms ranges beyond their immediate deﬁnition. First, various manipulation forms model various aspects of campaign
management: which electorate or demographic should a candidate target during his campaign, and where should his or
her campaign manager direct the campaign funds. In recent years, the signiﬁcance of targeting speciﬁc electorates
in election campaigns had skyrocketed, see (Peters and Alcindor 2016) for one example out of many. In this context,
bribery models the act of targeting prospective voters and
convincing them to change their vote, and UCM models the
act of urging people not planning on voting to exercise their
right to vote (when it is done by an interested third party
supporting one candidate).
Second, they can also be seen as means by which we measure how well did a candidate do in the election, or equivalently how far away was her from winning it. They achieve
so by calculating the effort needed to promote her enough
in order to win (Faliszewski, Skowron, and Talmon 2017).
In some way, such measures are more robust compared to
intrinsic measures like the candidate score in the election.
In response to the Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem, extensive research on the computational aspects of social choice
focused on providing some hope against manipulation by
showing that in many scenarios, ﬁnding a manipulative strategy is computationally hard. In such cases research naturally
shifts its focus to devising approximations and heuristics.
In this paper, we shall focus on one of the most important families of voting rules, known as positional scoring
rules, or scoring rules for short. For a given score vector
α = (α0 , . . . , αm ), where α0 ≤ · · · ≤ αm and m + 1
is the number of candidates, a scoring rule Rα is a voting
rule where each voter awards αm , . . . , α0 points to the candidates he ranked in places 1, 2, . . . , m+1, respectively. The
winners are the candidates with maximum aggregate score.
Popular cases of scoring rules are the Plurality, Veto, and
Borda voting rules.
A string of results researched both the hardness and approximability of UCM for various voting rules, and in particular scoring rules. However, is seems that the equivalent
landscape for bribery is lacking: while several results had
shown that Borda-Bribery is NP-hard, and that the same

Abstract
The classic bribery problem is to ﬁnd a minimal subset of
voters who need to change their vote to make some preferred
candidate win. We ﬁnd an approximate solution for this problem for a broad family of scoring rules (which includes Borda
and t-approval), in the following sense: if there is a strategy
which requires bribing k voters, we efﬁciently
ﬁnd a strategy
√
 k) voters.
which requires bribing at most k + O(
Our algorithm is based on a randomized reduction from
bribery to coalitional manipulation (UCM). To solve the
UCM problem, we apply the Birkhoff-von Neumann (BvN)
decomposition to a fractional manipulation matrix. This allows us to limit the size of the possible ballot search space
reducing it from exponential to polynomial, while still obtaining good approximation guarantees. Finding the optimal
solution in the truncated search space yields a new algorithm
for UCM, which is of independent interest.

Introduction
We study the popular preferential model for elections, where
each of the agents (also: voters) ranks the candidates. Then,
some function—known as a voting rule or a protocol—is
applied on the voter rankings in order to decide on the winner(s). Ideally, we would like the voters to be truthful: that
is, that the rankings submitted by each voter would correspond to his real preference over the alternatives. When
the voters might have the incentive to do otherwise, we refer to the voting protocol as manipulable. Unfortunately,
a celebrated result in social choice theory achieved independently by Gibbard and Satterthwaite (Gibbard 1973;
Satterthwaite 1975) shows that when the number of candidates is at least 3, any reasonable voting rule is manipulable.
Manipulation can take several different forms. In unweighted coalitional manipulation (UCM), a set of voters
(hereafter the manipulators) sharing a preference for a candidate p try to coordinate their voting so that p will win the
election. This is assuming that all other voters are truthful
and that their preferences are known. In bribery, an interested party is willing to pay some of the voters to change
their vote into a given ballot, such that p will prevail. In both
cases, the goal is to make p win using minimal resources,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1121

