The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Automatic Parameter Tying: A New Approach for
Regularized Parameter Learning in Markov Networks
Li Chou,1 Pracheta Sahoo,1 Somdeb Sarkhel,1,2 Nicholas Ruozzi,1 Vibhav Gogate1
1

Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Dallas
2
Adobe Research, San Jose, CA
{lkc130030,pxs167230}@utdallas.edu, sarkhel@adobe.com,
nicholas.ruozzi@utdallas.edu, vgogate@hlt.utdallas.edu
a fully observed dataset. This problem is typically solved
via maximum log-likelihood parameter estimation (MLE).
Since calculating the MLE is computationally intractable
in many real-world domains, alternative tractable approximations such as maximum pseudo-log-likelihood estimation (MPLE) are generally used. However, both MLE and
MPLE are susceptible to overﬁtting. To combat this issue,
L2 regularization is often employed in practice. L2 regularization uses an uninformed prior distribution to penalize
large parameter values, which helps smooth out the variations in the data. The penalty grows quadratically and thus
larger parameter values are penalized more than smaller
parameter values. Since the L2 regularization term is concave, combining it with either MLE or MPLE preserves
concavity and the resulting objective can be efﬁciently optimized using gradient-based methods.
An alternative regularization method is parameter tying,
namely partitioning the parameters into groups and forcing
all parameters in each group to take the same value. Parameter tying is typically performed a priori. For example, in
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al. 1998),
parameters are shared (tied) between various neurons to take
advantage of symmetries in images and to control the number of parameters. Similarly, in statistical relational learning (SRL) models (Getoor and Taskar 2007) such as Markov
logic networks (Domingos and Lowd 2009) and probabilistic soft logic (Bach et al. 2015), weights are tied in order to
exploit symmetries in relational domains.
A number of automatic tying schemes have also been investigated. (Nowlan and Hinton 1992) proposed utilizing a
Gaussian mixture prior for parameter sharing to simplify
neural networks. While Gaussian mixtures are a general
model, the trade-offs with this approach are signiﬁcant, e.g.,
added complexity resulting from an increase in the number
of parameters that need to be selected with validation data,
the creation of a large number of local minima, and slow
convergence. (Han, Mao, and Dally 2016) investigated compression and pruning in neural networks, utilizing a form
of k-means quantization and parameter tying. They incorporate these elements into their pipelined algorithm as a postprocessing step and empirically validate the performance.
(Liu and Page 2013) utilized k-means to initialize a nonparametric Bayesian (hard) tying approach. Recently, there has
been growing interest in locality-sensitive hashing (LSH)

Abstract
Parameter tying is a regularization method in which parameters (weights) of a machine learning model are partitioned
into groups by leveraging prior knowledge and all parameters in each group are constrained to take the same value. In
this paper, we consider the problem of parameter learning in
Markov networks and propose a novel approach called automatic parameter tying (APT) that uses automatic instead of a
priori and soft instead of hard parameter tying as a regularization method to alleviate overﬁtting. The key idea behind APT
is to set up the learning problem as the task of ﬁnding parameters and groupings of parameters such that the likelihood plus
a regularization term is maximized. The regularization term
penalizes models where parameter values deviate from their
group mean parameter value. We propose and use a block coordinate ascent algorithm to solve the optimization task. We
analyze the sample complexity of our new learning algorithm
and show that it yields optimal parameters with high probability when the groups are well separated. Experimentally,
we show that our method improves upon L2 regularization
and suggest several pragmatic techniques for good practical
performance.

Introduction
Markov networks (MNs) compactly represent a joint probability distribution over a large number of random variables
and are widely used in a variety of application domains such
as natural language processing and computer vision for representing and reasoning about uncertainty. They are often
described using an undirected graph which has one vertex
for each variable and each potential function, the latter describe relationships between various random variables. The
two key tasks over MNs are (1) learning the structure of
the graph and parameters of the potential functions from
data; and (2) answering probabilistic queries posed over the
learned model (e.g., ﬁnding the probability of a variable
given an assignment to a subset of variables). Because of
the generality, ﬂexibility, and wide applicability of MNs,
efﬁciently solving the two aforementioned tasks is of both
practical and theoretical interest in machine learning.
In this paper, we focus on the fundamental problem of
learning the parameters of a MN, given its structure, from
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2860

