The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Batchwise Patching of Classiﬁers
Sebastian Kauschke,1,2 Johannes Fürnkranz1
1

Knowledge Engineering Group, 2 Telecooperation Group
TU Darmstadt, Germany
{kauschke, fuernkranz}@ke.tu-darmstadt.de

to improve the model’s predictions. Of course, the adaptation should only occur where necessary and helpful, and
should in general not hamper the performance of the original model. A last example scenario is efﬁcient model re-use.
In deep learning, substantial amounts of data and computational power is needed to train a model. For pattern recognition, such models are then often re-used in slightly different
contexts by taking the ﬁrst layers of a generally trained image classiﬁcation network and re-training only the ﬁnal layer
for a new classiﬁcation task. However, this technique is speciﬁc to a neural network architecture, whereas we aim for a
generally applicable method.
In this paper, we propose classiﬁer patching, a technique
which allows to adapt general black-box classiﬁcation models to a new context. The key idea behind this approach is to
train classiﬁers that identify the regions of the instance space
in which adaptations are needed, and then train local classiﬁers for these regions. We assume a setting where batchwise
labels of incoming examples are available. The adaptation
is triggered when a decay in the performance of the base
model is detected, with the goal of ﬁnding local patches to
the global classiﬁcation model that act in a ﬂexible and efﬁcient way without having to re-train the model from scratch.
The structure of this document is as follows. In Section 2,
we formalize the problem, explain the patching approach,
and relate it to previous work in concept drift and transfer learning in Section 3. We then describe our evaluation
scenario and brieﬂy explain the datasets and algorithms we
compare our approach against (Section 4). We give a summary of the experimental results in Section 5, and conclude
our work in Section 6.

Abstract
In this work we present classiﬁer patching, an approach for
adapting an existing black-box classiﬁcation model to new
data. Instead of creating a new model, patching infers regions in the instance space where the existing model is errorprone by training a classiﬁer on the previously misclassiﬁed
data. It then learns a speciﬁc model to determine the error
regions, which allows to patch the old model’s predictions
for them. Patching relies on a strong, albeit unchangeable,
existing base classiﬁer, and the idea that the true labels of
seen instances will be available in batches at some point in
time after the original classiﬁcation. We experimentally evaluate our approach, and show that it meets the original design goals. Moreover, we compare our approach to existing
methods from the domain of ensemble stream classiﬁcation
in both concept drift and transfer learning situations. Patching adapts quickly and achieves high classiﬁcation accuracy,
outperforming state-of-the-art competitors in either adaptation speed or accuracy in many scenarios.

1

Introduction

In practical classiﬁcations, one occasionally faces a scenario
where a given classiﬁcation model needs to be adapted to
a changing environment, but neither can the model itself be
modiﬁed nor can it be re-trained because the necessary expert knowledge or training data are not available. For example, consider the need for adaptation of legacy or expert
models, which have often been developed and successfully
deployed over decades, so that the required expertise for reprogramming them is no longer available. Moreover, they
may be implemented in hardware, so that it may be infeasible and impractical to reprogram the entire system.
Another application scenario is the specialization of universal models. Often, classiﬁcation models have been developed for a general setting, but need to be reﬁned to a
particular context. A typical case is the personalization of a
general user model to an individual user. The general model
is trained on historical data gathered from many users, and
therefore gives a good approximation of the average person’s behavior. However, when considering the speciﬁc preferences, needs or abilities of a single person, it is possible

2

Patching Classiﬁers

In the following, we introduce the Patching framework,
starting with a formal problem description in Section 2.1.

2.1

Problem Description

We assume a general instance space D of instances x with
labels l(x), and a black-box classiﬁer C0 . C0 is immutable
and inscrutable and is able to classify the examples of D
well, i.e., with a high probability Pr(C0 (x) = l(x)). We
now receive new batches of examples Di , i > 0, for which
C0 makes imperfect predictions, presumably because the la-

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3374

