The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Improving Neural Fine-Grained
Entity Typing with Knowledge Attention
Ji Xin,1 Yankai Lin,2 Zhiyuan Liu,2∗ Maosong Sun2
1

Deaprtment of Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{xinj14,linyk14}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn {liuzy,sms}@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Entity-Context Separation. Existing methods typically
encode entity mentions and context words as separate features without considering correlations between them. However, it is intuitive that, the importance of each context word
is signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by the entity mention concerned.
For example, in the sentence “Gates and Allen co-founded
Microsoft, which became the largest software company”, the
context word company is important when we are determining types of the entity mention Microsoft, but less important
when determining types of Gates.
Text-Knowledge Separation. Knowledge bases (KBs,
also known as Knowledge Graphs), such as YAGO, Freebase, provide rich information of relations between entities
in form of triples (h, r, t), where h, t are head and tail entities, and r is the relationship between them. Such information describes relations and interactions between entities,
and is therefore helpful for entity typing. For example, given
a triple (USA, shares border with, Canada), it can be
deduced that Canada in a certain sentence is likely to be
a country. However, relational information has never been
used in previous work yet to the best of our knowledge.
In order to address the issues of entity-context separation
and text-knowledge separation, we propose KnowledgeAttention Neural Fine-Grained Entity Typing (KNET). As
illustrated in Figure 1, our model mainly consists of two
parts. Firstly, we build a neural network to generate context
and entity mention representations. Secondly, depending on
the entity mention, we use knowledge attention to focus on
important context words and improve the quality of context
representation. Knowledge attention is computed using entity embeddings, which are learned from KB relational information and reconstructed from the text. Considering we will
encounter both in-KB and out-of-KB entities in testing, we
propose a disambiguation procedure, which can provide not
only in-KB entities with precise KB information, but also
out-of-KB entities with useful knowledge.
We establish two datasets for experiments: one automatically built from Wikipedia and Freebase, one manually labeled. Experiment results show that our model signiﬁcantly
improves the performance of entity typing compared with
other state-of-the-art methods. Case studies demonstrate the
effectiveness of knowledge attention, both for incorporating
KB information into entity typing, and for capturing complex correlations between entities and context.

Abstract
Fine-grained entity typing aims to identify the semantic type
of an entity in a particular plain text. It is an important task
which can be helpful for a lot of natural language processing (NLP) applications. Most existing methods typically extract features separately from the entity mention and context words for type classiﬁcation. These methods inevitably
fail to model complex correlations between entity mentions
and context words. They also neglect rich background information about these entities in knowledge bases (KBs).
To address these issues, we take information from KBs into
consideration to bridge entity mentions and their context
together, and thereby propose Knowledge-Attention Neural
Fine-Grained Entity Typing. Experimental results and case
studies on real-world datasets demonstrate that our model
signiﬁcantly outperforms other state-of-the-art methods, revealing the effectiveness of incorporating KB information for
entity typing. Code and data for this paper can be found at
https://github.com/thunlp/KNET.

1

Introduction

Entity typing is the task of detecting semantic types of a
named entity in a plain text. It is an important task which
can narrow down the range of candidates for an entity mention, and is therefore beneﬁcial for a large number of natural language processing (NLP) tasks such as entity linking
(Chabchoub, Gagnon, and Zouaq 2016), relation extraction
(Liu et al. 2014), question answering (Yahya et al. 2013) and
knowledge base population (Carlson et al. 2010).
Fine-grained entity typing (FET), which classiﬁes entities
into a large set of ﬁne-grained types, is the more challenging
new trend of entity typing. Conventional FET methods usually derive features using NLP tools such as POS tagging
and parsing, and inevitably suffer from error propagation.
Dong et al. (2015) make the ﬁrst attempt to explore deep
learning in entity typing by using only word embeddings
as features and discarding complicated feature engineering.
Shimaoka et al. (2016; 2017) further introduce attention into
neural models for FET.
Neural models have achieved the state-of-the-art performance for FET. However, these models face the following
non-trivial challenges:
∗

Corresponding author: Zhiyuan Liu.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5997

