The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Modeling Scientiﬁc Inﬂuence for
Research Trending Topic Prediction
1

Chengyao Chen,1∗ Zhitao Wang,1∗ Wenjie Li,1 Xu Sun2,3

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University, China
3
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, China
{cscchen, csztwang, cswjli}@comp.polyu.edu.hk, xusun@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract
With the growing volume of publications in the Computer
Science (CS) discipline, tracking the research evolution and
predicting the future research trending topics are of great importance for researchers to keep up with the rapid progress
of research. Within a research area, there are many top conferences that publish the latest research results. These conferences mutually inﬂuence each other and jointly promote
the development of the research area. To predict the trending topics of mutually inﬂuenced conferences, we propose
a correlated neural inﬂuence model, which has the ability to
capture the sequential properties of research evolution in each
individual conference and discover the dependencies among
different conferences simultaneously. The experiments conducted on a scientiﬁc dataset including conferences in artiﬁcial intelligence and data mining show that our model consistently outperforms the other state-of-the-art methods. We
also demonstrate the interpretability and predictability of the
proposed model by providing its answers to two questions of
concern, i.e., what the next rising trending topics are and for
each conference who the most inﬂuential peer is.

NIPS

CVPR

ACL

૛૙૚૝

૛૙૚૞

Figure 1: The research evolution of conferences in AI research area.
topics through topic modeling (Grifﬁths and Steyvers 2004;
Steyvers et al. 2004) or perform a historical analysis on how
research topics change in the past (Wang and McCallum
2006; Wang, Zhai, and Roth 2013). However, few studies
have explored the problem of research trending topic prediction. Recently, (Prabhakaran et al. 2016) predict the rise
and fall of a speciﬁc research topic using the temporal analysis on the historical curve. However, they cannot precisely
produce the research topic distribution by ignoring the correlation among different research topics. Besides, they do
not provide a systematic study on the intrinsic mechanisms
of research preferences formation either. These limitations
hinder researchers from gaining deep insights into the future
research directions.
In each research area, there are often multiple top conferences promoting the research development jointly. Each
conference has its own research focus and interests. In the
meanwhile, inevitably, the conferences belonging to the
same area (also called peer conferences) are mutually inﬂuenced. We take three top conferences, ’NIPS’, ’CVPR’ and
’ACL’ in the Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) area, as an example.
Figure 1 illustrates the topic evolution of the three conferences. In 2014, a number of papers published in CVPR prove
the effectiveness of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
in the image processing. The success of CNN inspires researchers who work on the Natural Language Processing
(NLP) problems. The CNN model, which barely gains the

Introduction
The research in the Computer Science (CS) discipline has
made surprising progress over recent years. Accordingly,
the number of research papers published on CS venues
has been extremely increasing. Among all the venues, conferences are the most representative platforms to display
the latest research for the fast dissemination (Vrettas and
Sanderson 2015). The paper collections of conferences often
hold important clues about the dynamics of research topics
in according research areas. Exploring the research evolution from these conferences and being able to predict future trending topics are of great signiﬁcance for a variety of
communities. For instance, funding agencies can optimize
the funding allocation according to the promising topics and
technology companies can adjust the development strategies
in advance.
Considering the fast changing research trends and the
growing volume of publications, keeping up with the research trends is hard even for experts. Previously, prominent efforts have been made to detect the existing research
∗

Authors contributed equally.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2111

