The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Task-Speciﬁc Representation Learning for
Web-Scale Entity Disambiguation
Rijula Kar,* Susmija Reddy,* Sourangshu Bhattacharya*
Anirban Dasgupta,†, Soumen Chakrabarti‡

* IIT Kharagpur, India, †IIT Gandhinagar, India, ‡IIT Bombay, India
rijula.cse@iitkgp.ac.in, {jsreddy,sourangshu}@cse.iitkgp.ernet.in, anirbandg@iitgn.ac.in, soumen@cse.iitb.ac.in

entity type inference. (Lazic et al. 2015) describe Google’s
NED system, which uses a form of attention on context token features. (Globerson et al. 2016) describe an enhancement based on an attention mechanism on neighboring mentions. It outperforms the systems of (Durrett and Klein 2014)
and (Lazic et al. 2015). Entity embeddings have proved useful to NED. (He et al. 2013) have used Wikipedia deﬁnition
pages to embed entities. Like (Lazic et al. 2015), (Ganea
and Hofmann 2017) have focused attention on speciﬁc context words while also embedding words and entities to get
the best benchmark accuracy to date.

Abstract
Named entity disambiguation (NED) is a central problem
in information extraction. The goal is to link entities in a
knowledge graph (KG) to their mention spans in unstructured text. Each distinct mention span (like John Smith, Jordan or Apache) represents a multi-class classiﬁcation task.
NED can therefore be modeled as a multitask problem with
tens of millions of tasks for realistic KGs. We initiate an investigation into neural representations, network architectures,
and training protocols for multitask NED. Speciﬁcally, we
propose a task-sensitive representation learning framework
that learns mention dependent representations, followed by
a common classiﬁer. Parameter learning in our framework
can be decomposed into solving multiple smaller problems
involving overlapping groups of tasks. We prove bounds for
excess risk, which provide additional insight into the problem
of multi-task representation learning. While remaining practical in terms of training memory and time requirements, our
approach outperforms recent strong baselines, on four benchmark data sets.

By regarding the disambiguation of each distinct mention string as a task, NED can be formulated as a multitask learning (MTL) problem. Ideally, a model for the mention Jordan that can distinguish people from rivers and
countries should inform the model for Washington. Such
information sharing between mentions is a very natural
idea, but it is surprisingly unexplored. (Bunescu and Pasca
2006) demonstrated that a limited form of information sharing through types of candidate entities can improve accuracy. Ideally, MTL should be achieved without (being limited to) the explicit agency of types or other feature engineering. Of speciﬁc interest are MTL techniques that build
shared representations by combining information from different tasks. Note that this form of sharing between tasks
is quite distinct from collective NED (Kulkarni et al. 2009;
Hoffart and others 2011; Ratinov et al. 2011; Globerson et
al. 2016), which seeks to maximize a joint compatibility
score over the entity labels chosen for the mentions in a document.

Introduction and Related Work
Named entity disambiguation (NED) (Mihalcea and Csomai 2007; Cucerzan 2007; Milne and Witten 2008; Kulkarni et al. 2009; Hoffart and others 2011; Hoffart, Altun, and
Weikum 2014; Lazic et al. 2015; Globerson et al. 2016; Li et
al. 2016; Ganea and Hofmann 2017; Ji 2014) is a key problem in information extraction. The goal is to link canonical
entity nodes (such as en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Albert Einstein)
in a knowledge graph (KG), which may have aliases like
“Einstein” and “the dopey one”, to their mention spans in
unstructured text (such as “Albert”), using the mention context to disambiguate from other entities with similar aliases.
For a given mention, NED is a multi-class classiﬁcation
problem, where the input is obtained from the mention context, and the output is an entity which has an alias matching
the mention.
NED is a standard tool offered by IBM (IBM 2017),
Google (Google 2017) and Microsoft (Microsoft 2017)
cloud services. NED has seen sustained research since 2006,
and much recent interest. (Durrett and Klein 2014) present a
CRF model unifying NED with coreference resolution and

Recently, (Maurer, Pontil, and Romera-Paredes 2016)
proposed and analyzed a multitask representation learning
(MTRL) framework. They learned a common representation for instances of each task and used different classiﬁers
for each task. Using this technique for NED requires large
representation dimensions, which leads to massive parameter matrices. It also violates the intuition (Jin et al. 2014;
Lazic et al. 2015) that each mention has only a few important features. Another baseline approach would be to randomly project (Weinberger et al. 2009) raw mention context
features onto a lower dimensional space using random projections, followed by standard MTL techniques.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5812

