The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Attend and Diagnose: Clinical Time
Series Analysis Using Attention Models
Huan Song,† Deepta Rajan,‡∗ Jayaraman J. Thiagarajan,†† Andreas Spanias†
†

SenSIP Center, School of ECEE, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ
‡
IBM Almaden Research Center, 650 Harry Road, San Jose, CA
††
Lawrence Livermore National Labs, 7000 East Avenue, Livermore, CA

and building task-speciﬁc predictive models. Machine learning models are often challenged by factors such as need for
long-term dependencies, irregular sampling and missing values. In the recent years, recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
based on Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber 1997) have become the de facto solution
to deal with clinical time-series data. RNNs are designed
to model varying-length data and have achieved state-ofthe-art results in sequence-to-sequence modeling (Sutskever,
Vinyals, and Le 2014), image captioning (Xu et al. 2015)
and recently in clinical diagnosis (Lipton et al. 2015). Furthermore, LSTMs are effective in exploiting long-range dependencies and handling nonlinear dynamics.

Abstract
With widespread adoption of electronic health records, there
is an increased emphasis for predictive models that can effectively deal with clinical time-series data. Powered by Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) architectures with Long ShortTerm Memory (LSTM) units, deep neural networks have
achieved state-of-the-art results in several clinical prediction tasks. Despite the success of RNNs, its sequential nature prohibits parallelized computing, thus making it inefﬁcient particularly when processing long sequences. Recently,
architectures which are based solely on attention mechanisms have shown remarkable success in transduction tasks
in NLP, while being computationally superior. In this paper, for the ﬁrst time, we utilize attention models for clinical time-series modeling, thereby dispensing recurrence entirely. We develop the SAnD (Simply Attend and Diagnose)
architecture, which employs a masked, self-attention mechanism, and uses positional encoding and dense interpolation
strategies for incorporating temporal order. Furthermore, we
develop a multi-task variant of SAnD to jointly infer models
with multiple diagnosis tasks. Using the recent MIMIC-III
benchmark datasets, we demonstrate that the proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art performance in all tasks, outperforming LSTM models and classical baselines with handengineered features.

Attention in Clinical Data Analysis: RNNs perform
computations at each position of the time-series by generating a sequence of hidden states as a function of the previous hidden state and the input for current position. This
inherent sequential nature makes parallelization challenging. Though efforts to improve the computational efﬁciency
of sequential modeling have recently surfaced, some of the
limitations still persist. The recent work of Vaswani et. al.
argues that attention mechanisms, without any recurrence,
can be effective in sequence-to-sequence modeling tasks.
Attention mechanisms are used to model dependencies in
sequences without regard for their actual distances in the sequence (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014).
In this paper, we develop SAnD (Simply Attend and Diagnose), a new approach for clinical time-series analysis,
which is solely based on attention mechanisms. In contrast
to sequence-to-sequence modeling in NLP, we propose to
use self-attention that models dependencies within a single
sequence. In particular, we adopt the multi-head attention
mechanism similar to (Vaswani et al. 2017), with an additional masking to enable causality. In order to incorporate
temporal order into the representation learning, we propose
to utilize both positional encoding and a dense interpolation
embedding technique.

Introduction
Healthcare is one of the prominent applications of data mining and machine learning, and it has witnessed tremendous
growth in research interest recently. This can be directly attributed to both the abundance of digital clinical data, primarily due to the widespread adoption of electronic health
records (EHR), and advances in data-driven inferencing
methodologies. Clinical data, for example intensive care unit
(ICU) measurements, is often comprised of multi-variate,
time-series observations corresponding to sensor measurements, test results and subjective assessments. Potential inferencing tasks using such data include classifying diagnoses accurately, estimating length of stay, and predicting
future illness, or mortality.
The classical approach for healthcare data analysis has
been centered around extracting hand-engineered features

Evaluation on MIMIC-III Benchmark Dataset: Another important factor that has challenged machine learning research towards clinical diagnosis is the lack of universally accepted benchmarks to rigorously evaluate the modeling techniques. Consequently, in an effort to standardize
research in this ﬁeld, in (Harutyunyan et al. 2017), the au-

∗

The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4091

