The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Safe Reinforcement Learning via Shielding
Mohammed Alshiekh,1 Roderick Bloem,2 Rüdiger Ehlers,3
Bettina Könighofer,2 Scott Niekum,1 Ufuk Topcu 1
1

University of Texas at Austin, 210 East 24th Street, Austin, Texas 78712, USA
2
Graz University of Technology, Rechbauerstraße 12, 8010 Graz, Austria
3
University of Bremen and DFKI GmbH, Bibliothekstraße 1, 28359 Bremen, Deutschland
{malshiekh, sniekum, utopcu}@utexas.edu, {roderick.bloem, bettina.koenighofer}@iaik.tugraz.at, rehlers@uni-bremen.de
Abstract

reward
Learning Agent

Environment

Reinforcement learning algorithms discover policies that
maximize reward, but do not necessarily guarantee safety during learning or execution phases. We introduce a new approach to learn optimal policies while enforcing properties
expressed in temporal logic. To this end, given the temporal
logic speciﬁcation that is to be obeyed by the learning system,
we propose to synthesize a reactive system called a shield.
The shield monitors the actions from the learner and corrects
them only if the chosen action causes a violation of the speciﬁcation. We discuss which requirements a shield must meet
to preserve the convergence guarantees of the learner. Finally,
we demonstrate the versatility of our approach on several
challenging reinforcement learning scenarios.

observation
actions
Shield
safe action
Figure 1: Shielded reinforcement learning

its operation whenever absolutely needed in order to ensure
safety?”
In this paper, we introduce shielded learning, a framework that allows applying machine learning to control systems in a way that the correctness of the system’s execution
against a given speciﬁcation is assured during the learning
and controller execution phases, regardless of how fast the
learning process converges. The shield monitors the actions
selected by the learning agent and corrects them if and only
if the chosen action is unsafe.
In the traditional reinforcement learning setting, in every
step, the learning agent chooses an action and sends it to
the environment. The environment evolves according to the
action and sends the agent an observation of its state and a
reward associated with the underlying transition. The objective of the agent is to optimize the reward accumulated over
this evolution.
Our approach introduces a shield into the traditional reinforcement learning setting. The shield is computed upfront
from the safety part of the given system speciﬁcation and an
abstraction of the agent’s environment dynamics. It ensures
safety and minimum interference. With minimum interference we mean that the shield restricts the agent as little as
possible and forbids actions only if they could endanger safe
system behavior.
Shielding offers several pragmatic advantages: Even
though the inner working of learning algorithms is often
complex, shielding with respect to critical safety speciﬁcations may be manageable (as we demonstrate in upcoming sections). The algorithms we present for the computation of shields make relatively mild assumptions on the
input-output structure of the learning algorithm (rather than
its inner working). Consequently, the correctness guarantees

Introduction
Advances in learning enabled a new paradigm for developing controllers for autonomous systems that accomplish
complicated tasks in uncertain and dynamic environments.
For example, in reinforcement learning (RL), an agent acts
to optimize a long-term return that models the desired behavior for the agent and is revealed to it incrementally in a
reward signal as it interacts with its environment (Sutton and
Barto 1998). Increasing use of learning-based controllers in
physical systems in the proximity of humans strengthens the
concern of whether these systems will operate safely.
While convergence, optimality and data-efﬁciency of
learning algorithms are relatively well understood, safety
or more generally correctness during learning and execution of controllers has attracted signiﬁcantly less attention. A
number of different notions of safety were recently explored
(Garcı́a and Fernández 2015; Pecka and Svoboda 2014). We
approach the problem of ensuring safety in reinforcement
learning from a formal methods perspective. We begin with
an unambiguous and rich set of speciﬁcations of what safety
and more generally correctness mean. To this end, we adopt
temporal logic as a speciﬁcation language (Emerson 1990).
For algorithmic purposes, we focus on the safety fragment of
(linear) temporal logic (Manna and Pnueli 1995). We then
investigate the question “how can we let a learning agent
do whatever it is doing, and also monitor and interfere with
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2669

