The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Question-Focused Multi-Factor
Attention Network for Question Answering
Souvik Kundu, Hwee Tou Ng
Department of Computer Science
National University of Singapore
{souvik, nght}@comp.nus.edu.sg

attempted to alleviate this issue by proposing the NewsQA
dataset where the questions are formed only using the CNN
article summaries without accessing the full text. As a result, a signiﬁcant proportion of questions require reasoning
beyond simple word matching. Two even more challenging open-world QA datasets, TriviaQA (Joshi et al. 2017)
and SearchQA (Dunn et al. 2017), have recently been released. TriviaQA consists of question-answer pairs authored
by trivia enthusiasts and independently gathered evidence
documents from Wikipedia as well as Bing Web search. In
SearchQA, the question-answer pairs are crawled from the
Jeopardy archive and are augmented with text snippets retrieved from Google search.
Recently, many neural models have been proposed (Wang
et al. 2016; Pan et al. 2017; Seo et al. 2017; Wang and
Jiang 2017; Weissenborn, Wiese, and Seiffe 2017; Xiong,
Zhong, and Socher 2017; Yang et al. 2017), which mostly
focus on passage-question interaction to capture the context
similarity for extracting a text span as the answer. However,
most of the models do not focus on synthesizing evidence
from multiple sentences and fail to perform well on challenging open-world QA tasks such as NewsQA and TriviaQA. Moreover, none of the models explicitly focus on
question/answer type information for predicting the answer.
In practice, ﬁne-grained understanding of question/answer
type plays an important role in QA.
In this work, we propose an end-to-end question-focused
multi-factor attention network for document-based question
answering (AMANDA), which learns to aggregate evidence
distributed across multiple sentences and identiﬁes the important question words to help extract the answer. Intuitively, AMANDA extracts the answer not only by synthesizing relevant facts from the passage but also by implicitly
determining the suitable answer type during prediction. The
key contributions of this paper are:

Abstract
Neural network models recently proposed for question answering (QA) primarily focus on capturing the passagequestion relation. However, they have minimal capability to
link relevant facts distributed across multiple sentences which
is crucial in achieving deeper understanding, such as performing multi-sentence reasoning, co-reference resolution, etc.
They also do not explicitly focus on the question and answer
type which often plays a critical role in QA. In this paper,
we propose a novel end-to-end question-focused multi-factor
attention network for answer extraction. Multi-factor attentive encoding using tensor-based transformation aggregates
meaningful facts even when they are located in multiple sentences. To implicitly infer the answer type, we also propose a
max-attentional question aggregation mechanism to encode a
question vector based on the important words in a question.
During prediction, we incorporate sequence-level encoding
of the ﬁrst wh-word and its immediately following word as
an additional source of question type information. Our proposed model achieves signiﬁcant improvements over the best
prior state-of-the-art results on three large-scale challenging
QA datasets, namely NewsQA, TriviaQA, and SearchQA.

Introduction
In machine comprehension-based (MC) question answering
(QA), a machine is expected to provide an answer for a
given question by understanding texts. In recent years, several MC datasets have been released. Richardson, Burges,
and Renshaw (2013) released a multiple-choice question
answering dataset. Hermann et al. (2015) created a large
cloze-style dataset using CNN and Daily Mail news articles.
Several models (Hermann et al. 2015; Chen, Bolton, and
Manning 2016; Kadlec et al. 2016; Kobayashi et al. 2016;
Cui et al. 2017; Dhingra et al. 2017) based on neural attentional and pointer networks (Vinyals, Fortunato, and Jaitly
2015) have been proposed since then. Rajpurkar et al. (2016)
released the SQuAD dataset where the answers are freeform unlike in the previous MC datasets.
Most of the previously released datasets are closed-world,
i.e., the questions and answers are formulated given the text
passages. As such, the answer spans can often be extracted
by simple word and context matching. Trischler et al. (2016)

• We propose a multi-factor attentive encoding approach
based on tensor transformation to synthesize meaningful
evidence across multiple sentences. It is particularly effective when answering a question requires deeper understanding such as multi-sentence reasoning, co-reference
resolution, etc.
• To subsume ﬁne-grained answer type information, we
propose a max-attentional question aggregation mecha-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5828

