The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Automatic Generation of Text
Descriptive Comments for Code Blocks
Yuding Liang, Kenny Q. Zhu∗
liangyuding@sjtu.edu.cn, kzhu@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai, China 200240
in programs can be quite different from natural languages.
If methods are annotated with meaningful natural language
comments, then keyword matching or even fuzzy semantic
search can be achieved.
Even though comments are so useful, programmers are
not using them enough in their coding. Table 1 shows the
number of methods in ten actively developed Java repositories from Github, and those of which annotated with a descriptive comment. On average, only 15.4% of the methods
are commented.
To automatically generate descriptive comments from
source code, one needs a way of accurately representing the
semantics of code blocks. One potential solution is to treat
each code block as a document and represent it by a topic
distribution using models such as LDA (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003). However, topic models, when applied to source
code, have several limitations:

Abstract
We propose a framework to automatically generate descriptive comments for source code blocks. While this problem
has been studied by many researchers previously, their methods are mostly based on ﬁxed template and achieves poor
results. Our framework does not rely on any template, but
makes use of a new recursive neural network called CodeRNN to extract features from the source code and embed
them into one vector. When this vector representation is input
to a new recurrent neural network (Code-GRU), the overall
framework generates text descriptions of the code with accuracy (Rouge-2 value) signiﬁcantly higher than other learningbased approaches such as sequence-to-sequence model. The
Code-RNN model can also be used in other scenario where
the representation of code is required. 1

1

Introduction

Real-world software development involves large source
code repositories. Reading and trying to understand other
people’s code in such repositories is a difﬁcult and unpleasant process for many software developers, especially when
the code is not sufﬁciently commented. For example, if the
Java method in Fig. 1 does not have the comment in the beginning, it will take the programmer quite some efforts to
grasp the meaning of the code. However, with a meaningful sentence such as “calculates dot product of two points”
as a descriptive comment, programmer’s productivity can be
tremendously improved.

• a topic model treats documents as a bag of words and ignores the structural information such as programming language syntax and function or method calls in the code;
• the contribution of lexical semantics to the meaning of
code is exaggerated;
• comments produced can only be words but not phrases or
sentences.
One step toward generating readable comments is to use
templates (McBurney and McMillan 2014; Sridhara et al.
2010). The disadvantage is that comments created by templates are often very similar to each other and only relevant to parts of the code that ﬁt the template. For example,
the comment generated by McBurney’s model for Fig. 1 is
fairly useless: “This method handles the ccp dot and returns
a ﬂoat. ccpDot() seems less important than average because
it is not called by any methods.”
To overcome these problems, in this paper, we propose to
use Recursive Neural Network (RNN) (Socher et al. 2011a;
2011b) to combine the semantic and structural information
from code. Recursive NN has previously been applied to
parse trees of natural language sentences, such as the example of two sentences in Fig. 2. In our problem, source
codes can be accurately parsed into their parse trees, so recursive NN can be applied in our work readily. To this end,
we design a new recursive NN called Code-RNN to extract
the features from the source code.

/* Calculates dot product of two points.
* @return float */
public static float ccpDot(final CGPoint v1, final
CGPoint v2) {
return v1.x * v2.x + v1.y * v2.y;
}

Figure 1: source code example
A related scenario happens when one wants to search for
a piece of code with a speciﬁc functionality or meaning. Ordinary keyword search would not work because expressions
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Kenny Q. Zhu is the contact author.

5229

