The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Tool Auctions
Janosch Döcker

Britta Dorn

Ulle Endriss

University of Tübingen
Germany

University of Tübingen
Germany

ILLC, University of Amsterdam
The Netherlands

Ronald de Haan

Sebastian Schneckenburger

ILLC, University of Amsterdam
The Netherlands

University of Tübingen
Germany
single good that occurs both in the input set and the output
set: the tool. For example, in the context of the transformation
mapping {mixer, melon} to {mixer, juice}, the mixer is the
tool, while melon and juice are ordinary goods. In addition
to limiting each transformation to just one tool, to control
the complexity of the problem faced by the auctioneer, we
also put certain restrictions on the number of non-tool goods
involved in a single transformation.
Fully expressive mixed auctions are highly complex. The
winner determination problem, i.e., the problem of ﬁnding
a sequence that produces the desired set of goods at a given
price, is NP-complete (Cerquides et al. 2007). Fionda and
Greco (2013) have analysed this problem, as well as the related feasibility problem, where we ignore prices and simply
want to ﬁnd some sequence that does the job, in great detail.
They were able to identify a number of so-called tractability
islands, i.e., restrictions of the general setting where solving
an auction is possible in polynomial time. For example, they
were able to show that, when every transformation only admits a single input good and a single output good, then the
feasibility problem is polynomial. But even permitting two
output goods (and still just one input good) already turns the
problem NP-complete. In general, existing tractability results
only apply under very severe restrictions. The fundamental
intuition inspiring our new auction model is that introducing
constraints on the types of goods—tools vs. ordinary goods—
whilst at the same time relaxing constraints on the number of
goods involved in a transformation constitutes a promising
trade-off between tractability and expressivity.
The core of this paper is devoted to testing this intuition.
We provide a detailed complexity analysis of both the feasibility and the winner determination problem for tool auctions.
While solving tool auctions, just like most other kinds of
combinatorial auctions, is intractable in general, we are able
to identify several special cases of practical interest where designing efﬁcient algorithms is possible. In particular, we show
that several relevant decision problems are either polynomialtime solvable or ﬁxed-parameter-tractable.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 deﬁnes the model of tool auctions we propose, explains
its relationship to the existing model of mixed auctions, and
elucidates on some of the design choices made. Section 3
presents our complexity results, while Section 4 discusses
related work. Finally, Section 5 concludes with a brief dis-

Abstract
We introduce tool auctions, a novel market mechanism for
constructing a cost-efﬁcient assembly line for producing a
desired set of products from a given set of goods and tools.
Such tools can be used to transform one type of good into a
different one. We then study the computational complexity of
tool auctions in detail, using methods from both classical and
parameterized complexity theory. While solving such auctions
is intractable in general, just as for the related frameworks
of combinatorial and mixed auctions, we are able to identify
several special cases of practical interest where designing
efﬁcient algorithms is possible.

1

Introduction

“It looked to Sacharissa that the only tools a dwarf needed were his
axe and some means of making ﬁre. That’d eventually get him a
forge, and with that he could make simple tools, and with those he
could make complex tools, and with complex tools a dwarf could
more or less make anything.”
—Terry Pratchett, The tRuth

Auctions, and combinatorial auctions in particular, are a powerful family of market mechanisms for allocating resources,
which have been studied in depth in Economics, Operations
Research, and AI (Cramton, Shoham, and Steinberg 2006).
We propose a novel type of combinatorial auction that allows
the auctioneer to purchase a number of tools as well as other
goods. She can then use these tools to produce further such
tools and goods. Her objective is to pick a set of tools and
then to execute a suitable sequence of actions, each consisting
of an application of one of the tools she has access to, so as
to eventually obtain the set of goods she desires. A secondary
objective is to ﬁnd a sequence that is as short as possible.
Our model may be interpreted as a restricted—and thus
computationally less demanding—instance of the model of
mixed multi-unit combinatorial auctions of Cerquides et
al. (2007), which has applications in the domain of industrial
supply-chain management. In a mixed auction, the auctioneer
can purchase transformations, from input goods to output
goods, to compose a sequence of such transformations to
obtain the goods she desires. Our tool auctions are mixed
auctions in which, for each transformation, there is only a
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1015

