The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Assessing National Development Plans for Alignment with Sustainable
Development Goals via Semantic Search
Jonathan Galsurkar,1 Moninder Singh,1 Lingfei Wu,1 Aditya Vempaty,1 Mikhail Sushkov,2
Devika Iyer,3 Serge Kapto,3 Kush R. Varshney1
1

IBM Research and 2 IBM Watson, 1101 Kitchawan Road, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
United Nations Development Programme, 304 East 45th Street, New York, NY 10017, USA

3

tional development plans and sectoral plans with the SDGs
and their targets. (Plans typically outline a systematic path
of growth and prioritize the actions and legislation that must
be undertaken.) To help facilitate this objective, the UN Development Programme (UNDP) offers its policy experts as a
resource to review drafts of national plans at the request of
individual governments.
The ﬁrst step of this evaluation by policy experts is the
Rapid Integrated Assessment (RIA) methodology, which
consists of manually reviewing the national development
plans and assessing alignment of national targets with one or
more of the 169 targets of the 17 SDGs. Although containing the word ‘rapid,’ the RIA methodology requires policy
experts to review hundreds of pages of documents, taking
weeks to accomplish, and requiring the knowledge that only
policy experts possess. The speciﬁc task that the experts undertake is to read every paragraph and mark it as relevant to
one or more of the 169 SDG targets (or to none).
In this work, we develop natural language processing and
machine learning methods to help reduce the manual burden. Speciﬁcally, we use recently proposed word and document embedding techniques to effectively develop a semantic searching system for automating the RIA: properly assigning sentences of national development text to SDG targets. The proposed system has three phases: model training, ﬁnding sentences/paragraphs of new national plans that
match the UNDP targets, and returning the top matches
found for each target.
One unique feature of our problem is that we have access to previously-conducted RIAs from other countries. Because of this data, we have snippets of text known to match
the different SDG targets and thus we do not have a completely unsupervised problem at hand. We take advantage of
this information in the second phase of the proposed system
by not only matching to SDG target descriptions, but also to
extracts from previously conducted RIAs. This novel technical approach improves accuracy appreciatively and presents
a general tactic for other similar problems that may be encountered having unique semantics but little data.
The system has been quantitatively evaluated on the national plans of 5 countries with previously conducted manual RIAs: Liberia, Bhutan, Namibia, Cambodia, and Mauritius. The results are promising to form the basis for a deployed system. Moreover, it has been piloted for a country

Abstract
The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) helps
countries implement the United Nations (UN) Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), an agenda for tackling major
societal issues such as poverty, hunger, and environmental
degradation by the year 2030. A key service provided by
UNDP to countries that seek it is a review of national development plans and sector strategies by policy experts to assess alignment of national targets with one or more of the
169 targets of the 17 SDGs. Known as the Rapid Integrated
Assessment (RIA), this process involves manual review of
hundreds, if not thousands, of pages of documents and takes
weeks to complete. In this work, we develop a natural language processing-based methodology to accelerate the workﬂow of policy experts. Speciﬁcally we use paragraph embedding techniques to ﬁnd paragraphs in the documents that
match the semantic concepts of each of the SDG targets. One
novel technical contribution of our work is in our use of historical RIAs from other countries as a form of neighborhoodbased supervision for matches in the country under study. We
have successfully piloted the algorithm to perform the RIA
for Papua New Guinea’s national plan, with the UNDP estimating it will help reduce their completion time from an
estimated 3-4 weeks to 3 days.

Introduction
In 2015, the governments of the world adopted an ambitious agenda containing 17 Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) aiming to end poverty, combat inequality, and promote prosperity. The document agreed upon by consensus,
Transforming our World: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (UN General Assembly 2015), contains 169
very speciﬁc measurable targets within the goals, e.g. “By
2030, end all forms of malnutrition, including achieving,
by 2025, the internationally agreed targets on stunting and
wasting in children under 5 years of age, and address the
nutritional needs of adolescent girls, pregnant and lactating women and older persons” and “Adopt and strengthen
sound policies and enforceable legislation for the promotion
of gender equality and the empowerment of all women and
girls at all levels”.
Leaders of many of the member states of the United Nations (UN) are now aiming to align their own countries’ nac 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7753

