The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

τ -FPL: Tolerance-Constrained Learning in Linear Time
1

Ao Zhang,1 Nan Li,2 Jian Pu,1 Jun Wang,1 Junchi Yan,31 Hongyuan Zha14

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Computing, MOE International Joint Lab of Trustworthy Software,
School of Computer Science and Software Engineering, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2 Institute of Data Science and Technologies, Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
3 IBM Research – China 4 Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlante, USA
az.aozhang@gmail.com, nanli.ln@alibaba-inc.com, {jianpu,jwang,zha}@sei.ecnu.edu.cn, yanesta@163.com
cost-interval SVM (Liu and Zhou 2010) and cost-sensitive
boosting (Masnadi-Shirazi and Vasconcelos 2007; 2011).
Though effective and efﬁcient in handling different misclassiﬁcation costs, it is usually not easy to ﬁnd appropriate
misclassiﬁcation cost for speciﬁc FPR tolerance. Another
group of methods formulates this problem as a constrained
optimization problem, which has the FPR tolerance as an
explicit constraint (Mozer et al. 2002; Gasso et al. 2011;
Mahdavi, Yang, and Jin 2013). These methods often need to
ﬁnd the saddle point of Lagrange function, leading to timeconsuming alternate optimization. Moreover, a surrogate
loss is often used to simplify the optimization problem, possibly making the tolerance constraint not satisﬁed in practice. The third line of research is scoring-thresholding methods, which train a scoring function ﬁrst, then ﬁnd a threshold
to meet the target FPR tolerance (Drucker, Wu, and Vapnik
1999). In practice, the scoring function can be trained by
either class conditional density estimation (Tong 2013) or
bipartite ranking (Narasimhan and Agarwal 2013a). However, density estimation itself is another difﬁculty. Also most
bipartite ranking methods have super-linear training complexity, which limits their scalability. Meanwhile, there are
some methods paying special attention to the positive class.
For example, asymmetric SVM (Wu et al. 2008) maximizes
the margin between negative samples and the core of positive samples, one-class SVM (Ben-Hur et al. 2001) ﬁnds the
smallest ball to enclose positive samples. However, they do
not incorporate the FPR tolerance into the learning procedure either.

Abstract
In many real-world applications, learning a classiﬁer with
false-positive rate under a speciﬁed tolerance is appealing.
Existing approaches either introduce prior knowledge dependent label cost or tune parameters based on traditional classiﬁers, which are of limitation in methodology since they do not
directly incorporate the false-positive rate tolerance. In this
paper, we propose a novel scoring-thresholding approach, τ False Positive Learning (τ -FPL) to address this problem. We
show that the scoring problem which takes the false-positive
rate tolerance into accounts can be efﬁciently solved in linear
time, also an out-of-bootstrap thresholding method can transform the learned ranking function into a low false-positive
classiﬁer. Both theoretical analysis and experimental results
show superior performance of the proposed τ -FPL over the
existing approaches.

Introduction
In real-world applications, such as spam ﬁltering (Drucker,
Wu, and Vapnik 1999) and medical diagnosing (Huang, Liu,
and Zhou 2010), the loss of misclassifying a positive instance and negative instance can be rather different. For instance, in medical diagnosing, misdiagnosing a patient as
healthy is more dangerous than misclassifying healthy person as sick. Meanwhile, in reality, it is often infeasible to
deﬁne an accurate cost for these two kinds of errors (Liu
and Zhou 2010; Zhou and Zhou 2016). In such situations, it
is often needed to keep the classiﬁer working under a small
tolerance of false-positive rate (FPR) τ , i.e., only allow the
classiﬁer to misclassify no larger than τ percent of negative instances. Traditional classiﬁers trained by maximizing
classiﬁcation accuracy or AUC are not suitable due to mismatched goal.
In the literature, classiﬁcation under constrained falsepositive rate is known as Neyman-Pearson (NP) Classiﬁcation problem (Scott and Nowak 2005; Lehmann and
Romano 2006; Rigollet and Tong 2011), and existing approaches can be roughly grouped into several categories.
One common approach is to use cost-sensitive learning,
which assigns different costs for different classes, and representatives include cost-sensitive SVM (Osuna, Freund, and
Girosi 1997; Davenport, Baraniuk, and Scott 2006; 2010),

In this paper, we address the tolerance constrained learning problem by proposing τ -False Positive Learning (τ FPL). Speciﬁcally, τ -FPL is a scoring-thresholding method.
In the scoring stage, we explicitly learn a ranking function
which optimizes the probability of ranking any positive instance above the centroid of the worst τ percent of negative
instances. Whereafter, it is shown that, with the help of our
newly proposed Euclidean projection algorithm, this ranking problem can be solved in linear time under the projected
gradient framework. It is worth noting that the Euclidean
projection problem is a generalization of a large family of
projection problems, and our proposed linear-time algorithm
based on bisection and divide-and-conquer is one to three
orders faster than existing state-of-the-art methods. In the
thresholding stage, we devise an out-of-bootstrap threshold-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4398

