The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Picasso, Matisse, or a Fake?
Automated Analysis of Drawings at the Stroke Level
for Attribution and Authentication
Ahmed Elgammal

Yan Kang

Milko Den Leeuw

Artrendex LLC., NJ, USA
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University, NJ, USA

Artrendex LLC., NJ, USA

Atelier for Restoration &
Research of Paintings (ARRS),
The Hague, The Netherlands

pigments used in making the different layers of the work and
how that relates to what materials, were available at the time
of the original artist or what the artist typically used. These
techniques are complementary and each of them has limitations to the scope of their applicability (Riederer 1986).
Analysis using computer vision and image processing
techniques has been very sparsely and cautiously investigated in the domains of attribution and forgery detection
(e.g. (Guo, Doermann, and Rosenﬁeld 2000; Johnson et al.
2008; Polatkan et al. 2009; Li et al. 2012)). Image processing has been used as a tool in conjunction with non-visual
spectrum imaging, such as analysis of x-ray imaging to determine canvas material and thread count (e.g. (Johnson et
al. 2008; Liedtke, Johnson Jr, and Johnson 2012)).
The question we address in this paper is what role Artiﬁcial Intelligence can play in this domain given the spectrum
of the other available technical analysis techniques, which
might seem more conclusive. We argue that developing this
technology would complement other technical analysis techniques for three reasons. First, computer vision can uniquely
provide a quantiﬁable scientiﬁc way to approach the traditional stylistic analysis, even at the visual spectrum level.
Second, it would provide alternative tools that lie out of the
scope of applicability for the other techniques. For example, this can be very useful for detecting forgery of modern
and contemporary art where the forger would have access
to pigments and materials similar to what original artist had
used). Third, computer vision has the potential to provide a
cost-effective solution compared to the cost of other technical analysis methods. For example, in particular related to
the topic of this paper, there are large volumes of drawings,
prints, and sketches for sale and are relatively cheap (in the
order of a few thousand dollars, or even few hundreds) compared to paintings. Performing sophisticated technical analysis in a laboratory would be more expensive than the price
of the work itself. This prohibitive cost makes it attractive
for forgers to extensively target this market.
Several papers have addressed art style classiﬁcation,
where style is an art movement (e.g. Impressionism), or the
style of a particular artist (e.g. the style of Van Gogh) (Sablatnig, Kammerer, and Zolda 1998; Fahad Shahbaz Khan
2010; Lombardi 2005; Arora and Elgammal 2012; Saleh et
al. 2014). Such analysis does not target authentication. Such
works use global features that mainly capture the composi-

Abstract
This paper proposes a computational approach for analysis
of strokes in line drawings by artists. We aim at developing
an AI methodology that facilitates attribution of drawings of
unknown authors in a way that is not easy to be deceived by
forged art. The methodology used is based on quantifying the
characteristics of individual strokes in drawings. We propose
a novel algorithm for segmenting individual strokes. We propose an approach that combines different hand-crafted and
learned features for the task of quantifying stroke characteristics. We experimented with a dataset of 300 digitized drawings with over 80 thousands strokes. The collection mainly
consisted of drawings of Pablo Picasso, Henry Matisse, and
Egon Schiele, besides a small number of representative works
of other artists. The experiments shows that the proposed
methodology can classify individual strokes with accuracy
70%-90%, and aggregate over drawings with accuracy above
80%, while being robust to be deceived by fakes.

Introduction
Attribution of art works is a very essential task for art experts. Traditionally, stylistic analysis by expert human eye
has been a main way to judge the authenticity of artworks.
This has been pioneered and made a methodology by Giovanni Morelli (1816-1891) who was a physician and art collector, in what is known as Morellian analysis. This connoisseurship methodology relies on ﬁnding consistent detailed
“invariant” stylistic characteristics in the artist’s work that
stay away from composition and subject matter. For example Morelli paid great attention to how certain body parts,
such as ears and hands are depicted in paintings by different
artists, not surprisingly given his medical background. This
methodology relies mainly on the human eye and expert
knowledge. The work of van Dantzig (van Dantzig 1973)
that we follow in this paper belongs to this methodology.
In contrast, technical analysis focuses on analyzing the
surface of the painting, the underpainting, and/or the canvas
material. There is a wide spectrum of imaging (e.g. infrared
spectroscopy and x-ray), chemical analysis (e.g. Chromatography), and radiometric (e.g. carbon dating) techniques that
have been developed for this purpose. Mostly, this analysis
aims to get insights on the composition of the materials and
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

42

