The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Non-Parametric Outliers Detection in Multiple Time Series
A Case Study: Power Grid Data Analysis
∗

Yuxun Zhou,∗ Han Zou,∗ Reza Arghandeh,† Weixi Gu,‡ Costas J. Spanos∗
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, USA
†
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Florida State University, USA
‡
Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University, China
Email: {yxzhou, hanzou, spanos}@berkeley.edu, arghandehr@gmail.com, guweixigavin@gmail.com
Physical model based methods. The underlying assumption is that the observed time series data is generated from
a known dynamic system. As such, the problem is reduced
to comparing the system behavior, estimated with measurements and dynamic equations, to the expected behavior when
the system is in a certain state (normal or abnormal)(Isermann 2005). Recently, model based approaches have also
been used in combination with time series analysis to establish semi-model based algorithms (Cavraro et al. 2015a;
2015b). This type of approaches rely heavily on correctness
of the dynamical model of the system, as well as some system
analytic tools such as real-time state estimators, parameter
estimation, parity equations, etc. Their limitations are obvious particularly as recent applications have to deal with high
dimensional and inherently uncertain processes, which signiﬁcantly deteriorates the reliability and accuracy of dynamic
models.
Signal processing based ﬁltering methods. Those approaches implicitly assume that the “normal” component
of the time series has a sparse representation in the frequency
or wavelet domain. Hence the outlier detection problem is reduced to a spectral analysis using low pass or band pass ﬁlters,
or is solved by denoising/signal reconstruction using spectral
or wavelet techniques (Mallat 2008). It is worth pointing out
that the signal-processing-based methods have close ties with
the regularized basis function expansion method in statistical
learning. For example, the adaptive wavelet denoising method
known as SURE shrinkage (Donoho and Johnstone 1995) is
essentially the L1 regularized wavelet basis expansion.
Statistical learning based method. The key is to model
the characteristics of the normal state, e.g., the support of
its distribution, its sparse representation, or its smooth component, with certain parametric or non-parametric learning
tools. As a large amount of data is made available by the
advancements in sensing and measurement technology, this
approach is receiving increasing attention in both application
and research domains. Ignoring the temporal dependence,
many classic machine learning tools, such as the Kernel Principle Component Analysis (kPCA), one class SVM, etc.,
have been widely applied to various ﬁelds for outlier detection. When the temporal dependece is informative (Zhou
and Spanos 2016), miscellaneous time series modeling and
analysis tools, ranging from simple linear regression to complicated multivariate AMRIA models and from parametric

Abstract
In this study we consider the problem of outlier detection
with multiple co-evolving time series data. To capture both
the temporal dependence and the inter-series relatedness, a
multi-task non-parametric model is proposed, which can be
extended to data with a broader exponential family distribution
by adopting the notion of Bregman divergence. Albeit convex,
the learning problem can be hard as the time series accumulate. In this regards, an efﬁcient randomized block coordinate
descent (RBCD) algorithm is proposed. The model and the
algorithm is tested with a real-world application, involving
outlier detection and event analysis in power distribution networks with high resolution multi-stream measurements. It is
shown that the incorporation of inter-series relatedness enables
the detection of system level events which would otherwise
be unobservable with traditional methods.

1

Introduction

Data sets collected from a wide variety of research disciplines, including computer science, economic, biology and
social science, are in the form of multiple co-evolving time
series. In this work, we consider the task of outlier (or novelty) detection given the aforementioned data type. The core
difﬁculty, however, is to integrate both the temporal dependence and the interactions among correlated time series for
overall modeling and learning.
General outlier detection is a broad topic that is usually
studied separately in the context of particular domain application. From a statistical learning perspective, however, outlier
detection techniques can be categorized according to their
input data types, including but not limited to independent and
identically distributed observations (Aggarwal and Yu 2008;
Zhou et al. 2016), high-dimensional data (Aggarwal and Yu
2001), time series (Gupta et al. 2014), structural data such
as graphs and network (Aggarwal, Zhao, and Philip 2011;
Gupta et al. 2012), etc. A detailed exposition of general
outlier detection techniques is beyond the scope of this paper. The readers are referred to (Aggarwal 2015) and the
references therein for an extensive overview. Depending on
different views of the data generating process, methods for
outlier detection in time series can be summarized into the
following categories:
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4605

