The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

S CI TAIL: A Textual Entailment Dataset
from Science Question Answering
Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Peter Clark
Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Seattle, WA, U.S.A.
{tushark,ashishs,peterc}@allenai.org

Abstract

Question:
Which of the following best explains how stems transport water to other parts of the plant?
(A) through a chemical called chlorophyll.
(B) by using photosynthesis.
(C) through a system of tubes. 
(D) by converting water to food.

We present a new dataset and model for textual entailment,
derived from treating multiple-choice question-answering as
an entailment problem. S CI TAIL is the ﬁrst entailment set
that is created solely from natural sentences that already exist
independently “in the wild” rather than sentences authored
speciﬁcally for the entailment task. Different from existing
entailment datasets, we create hypotheses from science questions and the corresponding answer candidates, and premises
from relevant web sentences retrieved from a large corpus.
These sentences are often linguistically challenging. This,
combined with the high lexical similarity of premise and
hypothesis for both entailed and non-entailed pairs, makes
this new entailment task particularly difﬁcult. The resulting
challenge is evidenced by state-of-the-art textual entailment
systems achieving mediocre performance on S CI TAIL, especially in comparison to a simple majority class baseline. As a
step forward, we demonstrate that one can improve accuracy
on S CI TAIL by 5% using a new neural model that exploits
linguistic structure.

Assertion from question + answer candidate (C):
Stems transport water to other parts of the plant through
a system of tubes.
Supporting sentence (entails):
Water and other materials necessary for biological activity in trees are transported throughout the stem and
branches in thin, hollow tubes in the xylem, or wood
tissue.
Non-supporting sentence (neutral):
Cut plant stems and insert stem into tubing while stem
is submerged in a pan of water.

Introduction

Figure 1: Example annotations for S CI TAIL

Recognizing textual entailment (RTE) involves assessing
whether a given textual premise entails or implies a given
hypothesis. It is a central problem in natural language understanding (Dagan et al. 2013) as it encapsulates the fundamental challenge of linguistic variability. The richness
and subtlety of natural language, however, makes RTE
highly challenging. To facilitate the development of strong
RTE systems, increasingly larger datasets have been proposed, ranging in size from 100s to over 500,000 annotated
premise-hypothesis pairs. Datasets such as RTE-n (Dagan,
Glickman, and Magnini 2005), SICK (Marelli et al. 2014),
and SNLI (Bowman et al. 2015) have played an important
role in advancing the ﬁeld.
A limitation of mainstream entailment datasets, however,
is that they have been constructed in isolation from any end
task.1 Moreover, in several cases, either the hypothesis or
the premise has been synthesized (e.g., rule-based in SICK
and crowd-sourced in SNLI) speciﬁcally for creating the entailment dataset. Consequently, while helpful in advancing

RTE research, these datasets do not always capture the kind
of entailment queries that naturally arise in an end task. We
present the largest entailment dataset that is directly derived
from an end task and consists of naturally occurring text as
both premise and hypothesis.
Our new dataset, S CI TAIL, is designed from the end
task of answering multiple-choice school-level science questions. Each question and the correct answer for it are converted into an assertive statement to form a hypothesis H;
see Figure 1 for an example. We use an information retrieval
(IR) method to obtain relevant text from a large text corpus of web sentences, and use each of these sentences as a
premise P . While each P , by construction, has a high lexical overlap with H, not every P entails or “supports” the
statement in H. We crowdsource the annotation of each such
premise-hypothesis pair as supports or not, in order to create
the S CI TAIL entailment dataset with 27K examples.
The entailment dataset focuses on the reasoning needed
for QA by factoring out the retrieval step. By the nature of its
construction, this dataset captures what a good textual QA

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
A few small-scale datasets have been derived from an end task,
such as RTE-6 for news summaries with fewer than 1000 examples.

5189

