The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Decentralised Learning in Systems
with Many, Many Strategic Agents
David Mguni,1 Joel Jennings,1 Enrique Munoz de Cote1,2
1

2

PROWLER.io, Cambridge, UK
Department of Computer Science, INAOE, Mexico

A stochastic (dynamic) game (SG) is a mathematical framework that analyses the behaviour of strategically interacting
entities in non-cooperative settings. Stochastic games enable
stable policy outcomes in which agents respond optimally to
one another (know as equilibria), to be fully described. In
SGs, it is assumed that agents have either ﬁxed knowledge
of their environment or can acquire knowledge of any missing data by simply observing other agents with which agents
can compute best-response actions. However, in many multiagent systems, agents do not have full information of the environment from the outset and direct computation of optimal
behaviour is often prohibitively complex.
Naturally, integrating stochastic game theory with reinforcement learning (RL) - a framework that enables agents
to learn optimal behaviour within an unknown environment
through direct interaction and exploration - suggests the potential to learn stable policies in multi-agent systems.
Although this approach has led to fruitful analysis in multiagent systems with few interacting agents (Leibo et al.
2017), current methods of computing multi-agent equilibria using RL (e.g. Nash Q-Learning (Hu and Wellman
2004), Friend-or-Foe Q-learning (Littman 2001), minimaxQ (Littman 1994)) have computational complexity that increases exponentially with the number of agents (Busoniu,
Babuska, and De Schutter 2008; Tuyls and Weiss 2012).
This renders the task of using RL to learn equilibrium policies intractable for many systems of interest.
In this paper, we introduce an approach that enables equilibrium policies of multi-agent systems to be computed even
when the size of the population is extremely large. Unlike
current multi-agent learning procedures, our method scales
independently of the number of interacting agents. In contrast to approaches that compute equilibria in large population games (Cardaliaguet and Hadikhanloo 2017), our
method is a model-free, fully decentralised learning procedure that only requires agents to observe local state information and their realised rewards.
Our main result demonstrates that the equilibria of N −
player SGs can be computed by solving an optimal control
problem (OCP) using a model-free learning procedure under very mild assumptions. To do this, we prove a series of
theoretical results: ﬁrst, we establish a novel link between reinforcement learning in MASs and a class of games known
as discrete-time mean ﬁeld games - N −player SGs in an

Abstract
Although multi-agent reinforcement learning can tackle systems of strategically interacting entities, it currently fails in
scalability and lacks rigorous convergence guarantees. Crucially, learning in multi-agent systems can become intractable
due to the explosion in the size of the state-action space as
the number of agents increases. In this paper, we propose a
method for computing closed-loop optimal policies in multiagent systems that scales independently of the number of
agents. This allows us to show, for the ﬁrst time, successful convergence to optimal behaviour in systems with an unbounded number of interacting adaptive learners. Studying
the asymptotic regime of N −player stochastic games, we
devise a learning protocol that is guaranteed to converge to
equilibrium policies even when the number of agents is extremely large. Our method is model-free and completely decentralised so that each agent need only observe its local state
information and its realised rewards. We validate these theoretical results by showing convergence to Nash-equilibrium
policies in applications from economics and control theory
with thousands of strategically interacting agents.

Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) provides the
potential to systematically analyse environments with strategically interacting agents. Despite the fundamental relevance of multi-agent systems (MASs) with appreciably large
populations, learning stable, best-response policies in MASs
with more than a few agents remains a signiﬁcant challenge
due to growth in complexity as the number of agents increases (Shoham and Leyton-Brown 2008). Consequently,
the task of understanding agent behaviour in many systems
of interest has been left unaddressed.
This paper seeks to address the problem of learning stable,
best-response policies within non-cooperative1 MASs when
the size of the population is large, therefore expanding the
range of applications of multi-agent technology.
In a non-cooperative MAS, selﬁsh agents compete to obtain a sequence of rewards within an unknown environment.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In game theory, the term non-cooperative implies that each
agent seeks to pursue its own objectives and agreements between
agents over their actions cannot be enforced.

4686

