The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Structured Representation for
Text Classiﬁcationxvia Reinforcement Learning
Tianyang Zhang, Minlie Huang,,† Li Zhao‡


Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology
Dept. of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, PR China
‡
Microsoft Research Asia
keavilzhangzty@gmail.com; aihuang@tsinghua.edu.cn; lizo@microsoft.com;
†
Corresponding Author: aihuang@tsinghua.edu.cn (Minlie Huang)
and recursive autoencoders (Socher et al. 2013; 2011; Qian
et al. 2015) use pre-speciﬁed parsing trees to build structured
representations. Attention-based methods (Yang et al. 2016;
Zhou, Wan, and Xiao 2016; Lin et al. 2017) use attention
mechanisms to build representations by scoring input words
or sentences differentially.
However, in existing structured representation models, the
structures are either provided as input or predicted using
supervision from explicit treebank annotations. There has
been few studies on learning representations with automatically optimized structures. Yogatama et al. (2017) proposed
to compose binary tree structure for sentence representation with only supervision from downstream tasks, but such
structure is very complex and overly deep, leading to unsatisfactory classiﬁcation performance. In (Chung, Ahn, and
Bengio 2017), a hierarchical representation model was proposed to capture latent structure in the sequences with latent
variables. Structure is discovered in a latent, implicit manner.
In this paper, we propose a reinforcement learning (RL)
method to build structured sentence representations by identifying task-relevant structures without explicit structure annotations. Structure discovery in this paper is formulated as
a sequential decision problem: current decision (or action)
of structure discovery affects following decisions, which can
be naturally addressed by policy gradient method (Sutton et
al. 2000). A delayed reward is used to guide the learning of
the policy for structure discovery. The reward is computed
from the text classiﬁer’s prediction based on the structured
representation. The representation is available only when all
sequential decisions are completed.
In our RL method, we design two structured representation models: Information Distilled LSTM (ID-LSTM) which
selects important, task-relevant words to build sentence representation, and Hierarchical Structured LSTM (HS-LSTM)
which discovers phrase structures and builds sentence representation with a two-level LSTM. The representation models are integrated seamlessly with a policy network and a
classiﬁcation network. The policy network deﬁnes a policy
for structure discovery, and the classiﬁcation network makes
prediction on top of structured sentence representation and
facilitates reward computation for the policy network.
To summarize, our contributions are as follows:

Abstract
Representation learning is a fundamental problem in natural
language processing. This paper studies how to learn a structured representation for text classiﬁcation. Unlike most existing representation models that either use no structure or
rely on pre-speciﬁed structures, we propose a reinforcement
learning (RL) method to learn sentence representation by discovering optimized structures automatically. We demonstrate
two attempts to build structured representation: Information
Distilled LSTM (ID-LSTM) and Hierarchically Structured
LSTM (HS-LSTM). ID-LSTM selects only important, taskrelevant words, and HS-LSTM discovers phrase structures
in a sentence. Structure discovery in the two representation
models is formulated as a sequential decision problem: current decision of structure discovery affects following decisions, which can be addressed by policy gradient RL. Results show that our method can learn task-friendly representations by identifying important words or task-relevant structures without explicit structure annotations, and thus yields
competitive performance.

Introduction
Representation learning is a fundamental problem in AI,
and particularly important for natural language processing (NLP) (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013; Le and
Mikolov 2014). As one of the most common tasks of NLP,
text classiﬁcation depends heavily on the learned representation, and is widely applied in sentiment analysis (Socher et
al. 2013), question classiﬁcation (Kim 2014), and language
inference (Bowman et al. 2015).
Mainstream representation models for text classiﬁcation
can be roughly classiﬁed into four types. Bag-of-words
representation models ignore the order of words, including deep average network (Iyyer et al. 2015; Joulin et al.
2017) and autoencoders (Liu et al. 2015). Sequence representation models such as convolutional neural network
(Kim 2014; Kalchbrenner, Grefenstette, and Blunsom 2014;
Lei, Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2015) and recurrent neural network (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997; Chung et al. 2014)
consider word order but do not use any structure. Structured
representation models such as tree-structured LSTM (Zhu,
Sobihani, and Guo 2015; Tai, Socher, and Manning 2015)
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We propose a reinforcement learning method which dis-

6053

