The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Nonlocal Patch Based t-SVD for Image
Inpainting: Algorithm and Error Analysis
Liangchen Song,12 Bo Du,1∗ Lefei Zhang,1∗ Liangpei Zhang,2 Jia Wu,3 Xuelong Li,4
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, P. R. China.
State Key Laboratory of Information Engineering in Surveying, Mapping, and Remote Sensing,
Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, P. R. China.
3
Department of Computing, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia.
4
Xi’an Institute of Optics and Precision Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xi’an 710119, P. R. China.
{liangchensong,remoteking,zhanglefei,zlp62}@whu.edu.cn, jia.wu@mq.edu.au, xuelong li@opt.ac.cn
2

patterns of global geometrical structure and local smoothness of color transforms. Guided by the assumption, the
ﬁlling-in process is carried out through employing particular mathematical models. Brieﬂy speaking, there are mainly
three categories of mature inpainting framework: partial differential equations (PDE) based schemes, exemplar-based
schemes and low-rank schemes.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel image inpainting framework
consisting of an interpolation step and a low-rank tensor completion step. More speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst initial the image with
triangulation-based linear interpolation, and then we ﬁnd similar patches for each missing-entry centered patch. Treating a
group of patch matrices as a tensor, we employ the recently
proposed effective t-SVD tensor completion algorithm with
a warm start strategy to inpaint it. We observe that the interpolation step is such a rough initialization that the similar
patch we found may not exactly match with the reference, so
we name the problem as Patch Mismatch and analyse the error caused by it thoroughly. Our theoretical analysis shows
that the error caused by Patch Mismatch can be decomposed
into two components, one of which can be bounded by a reasonable assumption named local patch similarity, and another
part is lower than that using matrix. Experiments on real images verify our method’s superiority to the state-of-the-art inpainting methods.

All of the three schemes have their own limitation, while
the design philosophies inside them are illuminating. PDEbased schemes (Bertalmio, Bertozzi, and Sapiro 2001) draw
an analogy between local smoothness of images and physical phenomenon like liquid diffusion. The simulated diffusion produces a piecewise smoothness but hard to preserve the texture and thus introduces the blur. Exemplarbased schemes (He and Sun 2012) copy the best matching
patch from known area to synthesize the background texture
and it is usually used to remove objects. Despite the fact that
exemplar-based schemes are not suitable for restoring random missing pixels due to the difﬁculty of ﬁnding a complete patch, the nonlocal manner inside the schemes are still
heuristic. Low-rank schemes (Liu et al. 2013) stem from matrix and tensor completion which are ﬁrst used in compressive sensing problems, thus low-rank based inpainting methods are theoretical convincing due to the well-developed
guaranteed matrix/tensor completion algorithms. However,
some existing low-rank based methods suppose the whole
image to be low-rank. And other approaches such as (Dong
et al. 2014) which imposes low-rank property on a group of
patches lost the theoretical guarantee of recovery results.

Introduction
Image inpainting (Bertalmio et al. 2000) aims to recover
missing values in images, and in general, the applications
can be classiﬁed into two groups by two motivations: the
ﬁrst tries to remove unwanted objects and uses known background of the image to ﬁll in a big missing hole (Criminisi,
Perez, and Toyama 2004), and the inpainting result is usually qualitatively evaluated by human visual judgments; the
second deals with small scratches or random missing pixels
mainly produced during the acquisition process (Liu et al.
2013), where the goal is trying to restore the original image, and quantitative rules such as PSNR are also adopted
to evaluate the inpainting result. In this paper, we focus on
the second goal that is recovering a degraded image with
random missing pixels.
Nearly all the inpainting methods are designed in the light
of a key observation that the missing area contains repeated

Drawing advantages from the schemes mentioned above,
we propose a novel inpainting framework consisting of two
steps. Since image patch extraction is unattainable when
the image contains random missing values, the ﬁrst step of
our framework is simply interpolating intensity values for
missing pixels, which is supposed to be faster than PDE
based methods, yet producing roughly the same results.
Then for each patch we ﬁnd a set of similar patches to form
a third-order tensor, which is inspired by the classic nonlocal denoising methods and exemplar-based inpainting methods. After that tensor is formed, we adopt a recently proposed tensor completion method namely t-SVD (Zhang et
al. 2014). It is noteworthy that the similar patches are not

∗

Corresponding authors. This work is supported by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 41431175,
61471274, 61771349, and 61711530239.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2419

