The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Information Acquisition Under
Resource Limitations in a Noisy Environment
Matvey Soloviev

Joseph Y. Halpern

Computer Science Department
Cornell University
msoloviev@cs.cornell.edu

Computer Science Department
Cornell University
halpern@cs.cornell.edu

heuristic that guarantees a positive expected payoff whenever
the optimal strategy gets a positive expected payoff. Our
analysis of this strategy also gives us the tools to examine
two other problems of interest.
The ﬁrst is rational inattention, the notion that in the face
of limited resources it is sometimes rational to ignore certain
sources of information completely. There has been a great
deal of interest recently in this topic in economics (Sims 2003;
Wiederholt 2010). Here we show that optimal testing strategies in our framework exhibit what can reasonably be called
rational inattention (which we typically denote RI from now
on). Speciﬁcally, our experiments show that for a substantial
fraction of formulae, an optimal strategy will hardly ever test
variables that are clearly relevant to the outcome. (Roughy
speaking, “hardly ever” means that as the total number of
tests goes to inﬁnity, the fraction of tests devoted to these
relevant variables goes to 0.) For example, consider the formula v1 ∨ v2 . Suppose that the tests for v1 and v2 are equally
noisy, so there is no reason to prefer one to the other for the
ﬁrst test. But for appropriate choices of payoffs, we show
that if we start by testing v2 , then all subsequent tests should
also test v2 as long as v2 is observed to be true (and similarly
for v1 ). Thus, with positive probability, the optimal strategy
either ignores v1 or ignores v2 . Our formal analysis allows
us to conclude that this is a widespread phenomenon.
The second problem we consider is what makes a concept
(which we can think of as being characterised by a formula)
hard. To address this, we use our framework to deﬁne a
notion of hardness. We show that, according to this deﬁnition,
XORs (i.e., formulae of the form v1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ vn , which are
true exactly if an odd number of the vi ’s are true) and their
negations are the hardest formulae. We compare this notion
to other notions of hardness of concepts considered in the
cognitive psychology literature (e.g., (Feldman 2006; Love,
Medin, and Gureckis 2004; Shepard, Hovland, and Jenkins
1961)).

Abstract
We introduce a theoretical model of information acquisition
under resource limitations in a noisy environment. An agent
must guess the truth value of a given Boolean formula ϕ after
performing a bounded number of noisy tests of the truth values
of variables in the formula. We observe that, in general, the
problem of ﬁnding an optimal testing strategy for ϕ is hard,
but we suggest a useful heuristic. The techniques we use also
give insight into two apparently unrelated, but well-studied
problems: (1) rational inattention (the optimal strategy may
involve hardly ever testing variables that are clearly relevant
to ϕ) and (2) what makes a formula hard to learn/remember.

1

Introduction

Decision-making is typically subject to resource constraints.
However, an agent may be able to choose how to allocate
his resources. We consider a simple decision-theoretic framework in which to examine this resource-allocation problem.
To motivate the framework, consider an animal that must
decide whether some food is safe to eat. We assume that
“safe” is characterised by a known Boolean formula ϕ, which
depends on pertinent variables such as presence of unusual
smells or signs of other animals consuming the same food.
The animal can perform a limited number of tests of the
variables in ϕ, but these tests are noisy; if a test says that
a variable v is true, that does not mean that v is true, but
only that it is true with some probability. After the agent has
exhausted his test budget, he must either guess the truth value
of ϕ or choose not to guess. Depending on his choice, he gets
a payoff. In this example, guessing that ϕ is true amounts to
guessing that the food is safe to eat. There will be a small
positive payoff for guessing “true” if the food is indeed safe,
but a large negative payoff for guessing “true” if the food is
not safe to eat. In this example we can assume a payoff of
0 if the agent guesses “false” or does not guess, since both
choices amount to not eating the food.
We are interested in optimal strategies for this decision;
that is, what tests should the agent perform and in what
order. Unfortunately (and perhaps not surprisingly), as we
show, ﬁnding an optimal strategy (i.e., one that obtains the
highest expected payoff) is infeasibly hard. We provide a

2

Information-acquisition games

We model the information-acquisition game as a singleplayer game against nature. The game is characterised by
ﬁve parameters:
• a Boolean formula ϕ that mentions variables v1 , . . . , vn
for some n > 0;

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6443

