The Twenty-Third AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium

Guaranteed Plans for Multi-Robot Systems
via Optimization Modulo Theories∗
Francesco Leofante
RWTH Aachen University and University of Genoa
leofante@cs.rwth-aachen.de

Introduction

Given the RCLL domain, we encode the state space using
an indexed set of real-valued variables x = {x1 , . . . , xn };
we also use the vector notation x = (x1 , . . . , xn ). A state
s=(v1 , . . . , vn ) ∈ Rn speciﬁes a real value vi ∈ R to each
state variable xi ∈ x. The transition system underlying the
RCLL domain is represented symbolically using Boolean
combinations of linear constraints deﬁning the initial states
I(x), the transition relation T (x, x ) and a set of ﬁnal states
F (x), where x ={x1 , . . . , xn } is an indexed set of next state
variables. As customary, the bounded symbolic reachability
problem is a tuple BSR=(I, T, F, p) and consists in ﬁnding
a path π of length p – i.e., a sequence of states (s0 , . . . , sp )
– such that the following holds:
⎛
⎞ ⎛
⎞


T (si , si+1 )⎠ ∧ ⎝
F (si )⎠ (1)
π  I(s0 ) ∧ ⎝

Industries are on the brink of widely accepting a new
paradigm for organizing production by having autonomous
robots manage in-factory processes. This transition from
static process chains towards more automation and autonomy poses new challenges in terms of, e.g., efﬁciency of
production processes.
The RoboCup Logistics League (RCLL) (Niemueller,
Lakemeyer, and Ferrein 2015) has been proposed as a realistic testbed to study the above mentioned problem at a
manageable scale. In RCLL, teams of robots manage and
optimize the material ﬂow according to dynamic orders in
a simpliﬁed factory environment. In particular, robots have
to transport workpieces among several machines scattered
around the factory shop ﬂoor. Each machine performs a speciﬁc processing step, orders that denote the products which
must be assembled with these operations are posted at runtime and require quick planning and scheduling. Orders also
come with a delivery time window, therefore introducing a
temporal component into the problem.
Though there exist successful heuristic approaches to
solve the underlying planning and scheduling problems, a
disadvantage of these methods is that they provide no guarantees about the quality of the solution, as observed in (Bensalem, Havelund, and Orlandini 2014). A promising solution
to this problem is offered by the recently emerging ﬁeld of
Optimization Modulo Theories (OMT), where Satisﬁability
Modulo Theories (SMT) solving is extended with optimization functionalities – see, e.g., (Sebastiani and Tomasi 2015).

0≤i<p

0≤i≤p

To extend bounded model-checking with optimization,
we need to specify an indexed set of reward variables
r={r1 , . . . , rp }, where ri is used to encode a reward for the
transition from si to si+1 . The total reward rtot associated to
a path π = (s0 , . . . , sp ) can be computed as:

ri
(2)
0≤i<p

An optimal bounded symbolic reachability problem can then
be deﬁned as a tuple OBSR=(I, T, F, rtot , p), whose solution
is a sequence of states minimizing rtot under the side condition that Eq. (1) holds.
Solvers such as Z3 (de Moura and Bjørner 2008) and
OptiMathSAT (Sebastiani and Trentin 2015) can be leveraged to reason on the model deﬁned by Eqs. (1) and (2) and
generate optimal plans that achieve desired high-level tasks.
However, when plans are executed on concrete systems,
several modeling assumptions may be challenged, and the
real applicability of computed solutions may be jeopardized.
To tackle this problem, I propose to integrate OMT-based
plan synthesis into an online execution and monitoring system based on CLIPS, a rule-based production system using
forward chaining inference (Wygant 1989).
My long-term goal is to devise a system that unites the
power of Optimization Modulo Theories with the ﬂexibility
of an on-line execution and monitoring system, to provide
optimal solutions for high-level task planning, and runtime
feedback on their feasibility.

Proposed Methodology
In my thesis, I propose to employ OMT solving to synthesize
plans with optimality guarantees for multi-robot systems,
using the RCLL as testbed. The approach I propose to use
is based on symbolic reachability techniques used to solve
the SMT-based bounded model-checking problem, which I
extend to OMT – see (Biere et al. 1999) for the original SATbased formulation.
∗
Joint work with E. Ábrahám, G. Lakemeyer, T. Niemueller and
A. Tacchella.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8020

