The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning to Interact with Learning Agents
Adish Singla

Hamed Hassani

Andreas Krause

MPI-SWS
Saarbrücken, Germany
adishs@mpi-sws.org

University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, USA
hassani@seas.upenn.edu

ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
krausea@ethz.ch

highlight the fundamental challenges in designing algorithms
that have to interact with learning agents, especially when
algorithm’s decisions directly affect the learning dynamics
of these agents.
Motivated by the application of learning to offer personalized deals to users, we focus on a well-studied framework of
“online learning using expert advice with bandit feedback"
(Littlestone and Warmuth 1994; Cesa-Bianchi et al. 1997;
Freund and Schapire 1995; Auer et al. 2002; Cesa-Bianchi
and Lugosi 2006; Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi 2012). This is
a generic framework for sequential decision making under
uncertainty and addresses the fundamental question of how a
learning algorithm should trade-off exploration (the cost of
acquiring new information) versus exploitation (acting greedily based on current information to minimize instantaneous
losses). In this paper, we investigate this framework with an
important practical consideration: How do we use the advice
of experts when they themselves are learning agents?

Abstract
AI and machine learning methods are increasingly interacting with and seeking information from people, robots, and
other learning agents. Consequently, the learning dynamics
of these agents creates fundamentally new challenges for existing methods. Motivated by the application of learning to
offer personalized deals to users, we highlight these challenges
by studying a variant of the framework of “online learning
using expert advice with bandit feedback". In our setting, we
consider each expert as a learning agent, seeking to more accurately reﬂect real-world applications. The bandit feedback
leads to additional challenges in this setting: at time t, only
the expert it that has been selected by the central algorithm
(forecaster) receives feedback from the environment and gets
to learn at this time. A natural question to ask is whether it
is possible to be competitive with the best expert j ∗ had it
seen all the feedback, i.e., competitive with the policy of always selecting expert j ∗ . We prove the following hardness
result—without any coordination between the forecaster and
the experts, it is impossible to design a forecaster achieving
no-regret guarantees. We then consider a practical assumption
allowing the forecaster to guide the learning process of the
experts by blocking some of the feedback observed by them
from the environment, i.e., restricting the selected expert it to
learn at time t for some time steps. With this additional coordination power, we design our forecaster LIL that achieves
no-regret guarantees, and we provide regret bounds dependent
on the learning dynamics of the best expert j ∗ .

Motivating Applications
Modeling experts as learning agents realistically captures
many practical scenarios of how one would deﬁne/encounter
these experts in real-world applications, such as seeking
advice from fellow players or friends, aggregating prediction recommendations from trading agents or different marketplaces, product testing with human participants who
might adapt over time, and information acquisition from
crowdsourcing participants who might learn over time. A
speciﬁc instance of this problem setting is that of metalearning whereby different learning algorithms (e.g., with
different hyperparameters or loss functions) are treated as
experts (Baram, El-Yaniv, and Luz 2004; Hsu and Lin 2015;
Maillard and Munos 2011; Agarwal et al. 2017).
As a concrete running example, we consider the problem
of learning to offer personalized deals / discount coupons
to users enabling new businesses to incentivize and attract more customers (Edelman, Jaffe, and Kominers 2011;
Singla, Tschiatschek, and Krause 2016; Hirnschall et al.
2018). An emerging trend is deal-aggregator sites like Yipit1
providing personalized coupon recommendation services to
their users by aggregating and selecting coupons from daily-

Introduction
Many real-world applications involve repeatedly making
decisions under uncertainty—for instance, choosing one
of the several products to recommend to a user in an online recommendation service, or dynamically allocating resources among available stock options in a ﬁnancial market.
AI methods and machine learning techniques driving these
applications are typically designed—or operate under the
assumption—to be interacting with static components, e.g.,
users’ preferences are ﬁxed, or domain experts / trading tools
providing stock recommendations are static. This assumption
is often violated in modern applications as these methods are
increasingly interacting with and seeking information from
people, robots, and other learning agents. In this paper, we

1
http://yipit.com/; http://www.groupon.com/; https://livingsocial.
com/

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4083

