The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Link Prediction via Subgraph
Embedding-Based Convex Matrix Completion
Zhu Cao,∗1 Linlin Wang,∗1 Gerard de Melo†
∗

IIIS, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA
{cao-z13, ll-wang13}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, gdm@demelo.org
†

bilistic graphical models (Wang, Satuluri, and Parthasarathy
2007) take the network structure into consideration, however at the expense of substantially increased computational
effort, with signiﬁcant limitations in terms of their applicability to larger networks. Path-based approaches (Lichtenwalter, Lussier, and Chawla 2010) capture additional network structure features such as clusters of nodes, the degree of the neighborhood etc., relying on human-engineered
features to improve the link prediction accuracy. However,
there are important features that are hard to be formalized
and human-engineered, such as the intertwining of paths.
Capturing such features efﬁciently has been one of the main
impediments to further improving the accuracy of link prediction on challenging real-world datasets.

Abstract
Link prediction is of fundamental importance in network
science and machine learning. Early methods consider only
simple topological features, while subsequent supervised approaches typically rely on human-labeled data and feature
engineering. In this work, we present a new representation
learning-based approach called SEMAC that jointly exploits
ﬁne-grained node features as well as the overall graph topology. In contrast to the SGNS or SVD methods espoused in
previous representation-based studies, our model represents
nodes in terms of subgraph embeddings acquired via a form
of convex matrix completion to iteratively reduce the rank,
and thereby, more effectively eliminate noise in the representation. Thus, subgraph embeddings and convex matrix completion are elegantly integrated into a novel link prediction
framework. Experimental results on several datasets show the
effectiveness of our method compared to previous work.

1

Introduction

Link prediction, which attempts to discover missing links
between nodes in a complex network, is of fundamental importance in numerous tasks in countless different domains.
For instance, link prediction can identify likely but not yet
established links in an evolving social network, thus enabling recommendations to be presented to users.
There are number of challenges that need to be addressed for accurate and efﬁcient link prediction. For one,
our knowledge of complex networks is often very partial,
i.e., only a small fraction of all true relationships and network structures may be known to us. Additionally, realworld networks are often very large, and hence it is computationally demanding to compute link probabilities using
algorithms that account for the global structure.
Previous work on this still suffers from several shortcomings, especially with respect to their ability to capture rich
characteristics of the graph both extensively and efﬁciently.
Early work focused on straightforward similarity measures
between pairs of nodes (Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg 2003).
While these are quick to compute, they only exploit a single topological feature, neglecting crucial additional information that is often needed for accurate prediction. Proba-

Figure 1: Schematic illustration of our SEMAC link prediction method.
To ﬁll this gap, our work advocates for automatically detecting these inherent but irregular features, using a novel
form of representation learning. By learning representations
of nodes, we endeavor to capture a larger range of pertinent
properties and signals about nodes in the network, drawing
on more subtle cues that human-engineered features may
overlook. Thus our model is advantageous in that we do
not need to heavily rely on expert knowledge and can ﬂexibly apply the same method across a range of heterogeneous
kinds of networks. Network representations have recently
shown promise for a number of tasks, including vertex clas-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
These authors contributed equally to this work.

2803

