The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multiagent Simple Temporal Problem:
The Arc-Consistency Approach
1

Shufeng Kong,1 Jae Hee Lee,1 Sanjiang Li1,2
Centre for Quantum Software and Information, FEIT, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
2
UTS-AMSS Joint Research Laboratory, AMSS, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
shufeng.kong@student.uts.edu.au, {jaehee.lee, sanjiang.li}@uts.edu.au

Abstract
The Simple Temporal Problem (STP) is a fundamental temporal reasoning problem and has recently been extended to
the Multiagent Simple Temporal Problem (MaSTP). In this
paper we present a novel approach that is based on enforcing
arc-consistency (AC) on the input (multiagent) simple temporal network. We show that the AC-based approach is sufﬁcient for solving both the STP and MaSTP and provide efﬁcient algorithms for them. As our AC-based approach does
not impose new constraints between agents, it does not violate the privacy of the agents and is superior to the state-ofthe-art approach to MaSTP. Empirical evaluations on diverse
benchmark datasets also show that our AC-based algorithms
for STP and MaSTP are signiﬁcantly more efﬁcient than existing approaches.

1

Alice

X

Y

Bob

Figure 1: An illustration of Example 1. Alice, Bob, company
X, company Y are four agents, each owning a local simple
temporal network. The circles represent variables and edges
constraints. Red edges represent constraints that are shared
by two different agents.

Introduction

The Simple Temporal Problem (STP) (Dechter, Meiri, and
Pearl 1991) is arguably the most well-known quantitative
temporal representation framework in AI. The STP considers time points as the variables and represents temporal information by a set of unary or binary constraints, each specifying an interval on the real line. Since its introduction in
1991, the STP has become an essential sub-problem in planning or scheduling problem (Barták, Morris, and Venable
2014).
While the STP is initially introduced for a single scheduling agent and is solved by centralized algorithms, many realworld applications involve multiple agents who interact with
each other to ﬁnd a solution like the following example:

a distributed algorithm, called DPPC, for computing the
complete joint solution space.
However, as DPPC is based on the P3 C algorithm (Planken, de Weerdt, and van der Krogt 2008), which
triangulates the input constraint graph, it has the drawback
of creating new constraints between agents that are possibly
not directly connected. In Figure 1, DPPC triangulates the
inner cycle by adding at least one new constraint either between X and Y or between Alice and Bob. Neither of these
new constraints are desirable, as they introduce constraints
between two previously not directly connected agents and
thus present a threat to the privacy of the relevant agents.
As the recent technological advancements have allowed
for solving larger problems that are highly interwoven and
dependent on each other, efﬁciency and privacy have become critical requirements. To address this challenge, we
propose a new approach to solve the MaSTP, which is based
on arc-consistency.
A constraint R between two variables x, y is called arcconsistent (AC), if for every value dx from the domain of x
there is a value dy in the domain of y such that (dx , dy ) ∈ R.
While AC is an important tool for solving ﬁnite (multiagent) constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs) (Montanari
1974; Baudot and Deville 1997; Nguyen and Deville 1998;

Example 1. When Alice is looking for a position at company X, she might need to arrange an interview appointment
with X. Suppose that her colleague Bob is also applying for
the position and Alice and Bob are both applying for another position at another company Y . To represent and solve
such an interview scheduling problem, we need a multiagent
framework (see Figure 1 for an illustration).
Recently, the extension of STP to multiagent STP
(MaSTP) has been provided in (Boerkoel and Durfee 2013),
which presents a formal deﬁnition of the MaSTP as well as
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6219

