The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Towards Building Large Scale Multimodal
Domain-Aware Conversation Systems
Amrita Saha

Mitesh M. Khapra

Karthik Sankaranarayanan

IBM Research AI and
Indian Institute of Technology
Madras, India
amrsaha4@in.ibm.com

Indian Institute of Technology
Madras, India
miteshk@cse.iitm.ac.in

IBM Research AI
kartsank@in.ibm.com

Though there has been recent work (Serban et al. 2016b;
Yao et al. 2016; Serban et al. 2016a) with different conversation datasets (Lowe et al. 2015; Vinyals and Le 2015;
Ritter, Cherry, and Dolan 2010), the mode of interaction
there is limited to text conversations only. While multimodal,
human-to-human conversation transcripts (e.g. between shoppers and salespersons) might be available in industry settings,
they are both limited in scale and proprietary, thus hindering
open research.

Abstract
While multimodal conversation agents are gaining importance
in several domains such as retail, travel etc., deep learning
research in this area has been limited primarily due to the
lack of availability of large-scale, open chatlogs. To overcome
this bottleneck, in this paper we introduce the task of multimodal, domain-aware conversations, and propose the MMD
benchmark dataset. This dataset was gathered by working in
close coordination with large number of domain experts in the
retail domain. These experts suggested various conversations
ﬂows and dialog states which are typically seen in multimodal
conversations in the fashion domain. Keeping these ﬂows and
states in mind, we created a dataset consisting of over 150K
conversation sessions between shoppers and sales agents, with
the help of in-house annotators using a semi-automated manually intense iterative process. With this dataset, we propose 5
new sub-tasks for multimodal conversations along with their
evaluation methodology. We also propose two multimodal neural models in the encode-attend-decode paradigm and demonstrate their performance on two of the sub-tasks, namely text
response generation and best image response selection. These
experiments serve to establish baseline performance and open
new research directions for each of these sub-tasks. Further,
for each of the sub-tasks, we present a ‘per-state evaluation’
of 9 most signiﬁcant dialog states, which would enable more
focused research into understanding the challenges and complexities involved in each of these states.

In this paper, we attempt to alleviate these challenges by
developing a large-scale multimodal conversational dataset in
the retail domain that embodies the required generic capabilities for such autonomous agents. Since the actual transcripts
are both limited and proprietary, we conducted a series of
interviews with a large number of retail salespersons from
the fashion domain and developed the dataset interactively
with them in the following semi-automatic manner. The domain experts described in detail, various phases of the sales
process which were materialized into 84 states for a conversational agent. Each such state had a speciﬁc intent (e.g. a
shopper wanting to see more items similar to a speciﬁc one
identiﬁed, or asking for a style tip or about the latest trends
being endorsed by celebrities, etc). Corresponding to each
such intent, a collection of representative utterance patterns
involving both text and images were designed. Each of these
states exhibited multimodality (i.e. involving text and images) in both the utterance/response as well as the dialog
context. The domain experts described various possible sales
ﬂows where the customer went from one state to another,
which were captured by transitions of an expert model automata between these states. The experts then inspected the
outputs of controlled runs of the automata, provided feedback, which was thereafter employed to further reﬁne the
automata. Proceeding in this manually-intensive and iterative
manner under the supervision of domain experts, we produced a large-scale dataset of over 150K multimodal dialogs
capturing a wide variety of conversational sessions exhibiting
the challenges described earlier. Note that such a data collection could not have been achieved with typical crowdsourcing
platforms such as Amazon Mechanical Turk using ordinary
crowd workers since it was necessary to be performed under
the supervision of fashion sales experts exhibiting domain-

Introduction
The recent progress with deep learning techniques for problems at the intersection of NLP and Computer Vision
such as image captioning (Xu et al. 2015), video description (Yu et al. 2016), image question answering (Antol
et al. 2015), video question answering (Zeng et al. 2016;
Maharaj et al. 2016), is owed largely due to the availability of large-scale open datasets for their respective tasks.
However, even though there is a growing demand for chatbots that can converse using multiple modalities with humans in several domains such as retail, travel, entertainment, etc. the primary hindrance for deep learning research
in this area has been the lack of large-scale open datasets.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

696

