The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Unsupervised Articulated Skeleton Extraction from Point Set
Sequences Captured by a Single Depth Camera
Xuequan Lu,1 Honghua Chen,2 Sai-Kit Yeung,3 Zhigang Deng,4 Wenzhi Chen5
1 Nanyang Technological University, 2 Nanjing Normal University,
3 Singapore University of Technology and Design, 4 University of Houston, 5 Zhejiang University

xuequanlu@ntu.edu.sg, chenhonghuacn@gmail.com, saikit@sutd.edu.sg, zdeng4@uh.edu, chenwz@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
How to robustly and accurately extract articulated skeletons
from point set sequences captured by a single consumergrade depth camera still remains to be an unresolved challenge to date. To address this issue, we propose a novel, unsupervised approach consisting of three contributions (steps):
(i) a non-rigid point set registration algorithm to ﬁrst build
one-to-one point correspondences among the frames of a sequence; (ii) a skeletal structure extraction algorithm to generate a skeleton with reasonable numbers of joints and bones;
(iii) a skeleton joints estimation algorithm to achieve accurate joints. At the end, our method can produce a quality articulated skeleton from a single 3D point sequence corrupted
with noise and outliers. The experimental results show that
our approach soundly outperforms state of the art techniques,
in terms of both visual quality and accuracy.

1

(a) (Kirk, O’Brien, (b) (Zhang et al.
and Forsyth 2005) 2013)

(c) Ours

Figure 1: An example of the extracted skeletons by state of
the art techniques and our method. Blue and black arrows
indicate inaccurate and missing joints, respectively.

Introduction

Automatic skeleton extraction from articulated objects is
a fundamental yet unresolved research problem, despite
its widely-documented applications in robotics, vision, and
graphics, including learning from demonstration (Chalodhorn et al. 2007), human-robot interaction (Chrungoo, Manimaran, and Ravindran 2014), action recognition (Song et
al. 2017), skeleton tracking (Zhou et al. 2016; Ye and Yang
2014), and computer animation (Le and Deng 2014). With
the increasing availability of consumer-grade depth cameras, 3D point motion sequences can be easily captured by
one single off-the-shelf depth sensor. However, the collected
motion data has the following characteristics: noisy, incomplete, and the lacking of one-to-one point correspondences
among frames. As a result, without any prior knowledge on
the captured objects, how to robustly and accurately extract
an articulated skeleton from such a point set sequence remains to be an unresolved research challenge to date.
Most of existing skeleton extraction approaches have been
focused on either images/video (Tresadern and Reid 2005;
Ramanan, Forsyth, and Barnard 2006; Yan and Pollefeys
2008; Ross, Tarlow, and Zemel 2010; Chang and Demiris
2015) or 3D motion (Chun, Jenkins, and Mataric 2003;
Cheung, Baker, and Kanade 2003; Kirk, O’Brien, and
Forsyth 2005; Schaefer and Yuksel 2007; Le and Deng

2014). By contrast, so far relatively few methods, except
(Kirk, O’Brien, and Forsyth 2005; Zhang et al. 2013), have
been proposed to extract skeletons directly from point set
sequences without any prior knowledge on the captured objects. However, the method (Zhang et al. 2013) has the following major caveats: (1) the matching accuracy is limited
due to several-to-one matching; and (2) a joint is simply selected from either of two neighboring body segments. The
approach (Kirk, O’Brien, and Forsyth 2005) can extract 3D
skeletons from motion capture data but it largely relies on
the high quality marker input. They both do not consider either joint constraints or mixed bone-point impacts (e.g., Linear Blend Skinning (Magnenat-Thalmann, Laperri‘ere, and
Thalmann 1988)) when solving joint locations between two
body parts. Also, they require nontrivial parameter tuning, in
particular the number of segment clusters, to achieve reasonable numbers of joints and bones. As the result, these state
of the art methods are limited in terms of both accuracy and
robustness. Fig. 1 shows a comparison example.
To tackle this challenge, we propose a novel unsupervised
approach that is robust and accurate. Building point correspondences is a necessary initial step for almost all related
methods since it makes motion-based part clustering feasible. Thus, as illustrated in Fig. 2, we ﬁrst build one-to-one

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7226

