The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multi-View Multi-Graph Embedding for Brain Network Clustering Analysis
1

Ye Liu,1 Lifang He,2∗ Bokai Cao,1 Philip S. Yu,1,3 Ann B. Ragin,4 Alex D. Leow5

Department of Computer Science, 5 Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Chicago, IL, USA
2
Department of Healthcare Policy and Research, Cornell University, NY, USA
3
Institute for Data Science, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
4
Department of Radiology, Northwestern University, IL, USA
{yliu279, caobokai, psyu}@uic.edu, {lifanghescut, alexfeuillet}@gmail.com, ann-ragin@northwestern.edu
for a given learning task, they can often provide complementary information to each other which can lead to improve performance on the learning task (Ma et al. 2017a;
Sun et al. 2017). As labeled data are difﬁcult to obtain,
it is critical to leverage the multi-view information to obtain an effective embedding for the clustering task. Therefore, in this study, we focus on investigating the multi-view
multi-graph embedding problem for brain network clustering analysis. Speciﬁcally, we aim to learn the latent embedding representation of multiple brain networks from multiple views. In recent years, there has been an increasing
interest in single-graph node embedding among researchers
(Mousazadeh and Cohen 2015; Ou et al. 2016), yet it is challenging to extend to the multi-graph embedding, where we
consider the embedding of multiple graph instances together
to obtain a discriminative representation for each graph.
By exploring the consistency and complementary properties of different views, multi-view learning (Liu et al. 2013a;
Cao et al. 2014) is rendered more effective, more promising,
and has better generalization ability than single-view learning. Although there have been numerous works on singlegraph embedding and multi-view learning, to the best of our
knowledge, there is no embedding method available which
enables preserving multi-graph structures on multiple views.
There are several major challenges in multi-view multigraph embedding problem. Initially, the complex graph
structure makes conventional methods difﬁcult to capture
the subtle local topological information (Jie et al. 2014). For
the subgraph based method (Cao et al. 2015), the number
of subgraphs is exponential to the size of the graphs. Thus
the subgraph enumeration process is both time and memory
consuming. Besides, simply preserving pairwise distances,
as with many spectral methods, is insufﬁcient for capturing
the structure of multiple graphs. Moreover, preserving both
local distances and graph topology is crucial for producing
effective low-dimensional representations of the brain network data. Furthermore, traditional normalization strategies
cannot generate meaningful clustering results.
To address the aforementioned issues, in this paper we
propose a novel one-step Multi-view Multi-graph Embedding (M2E) approach for brain network analysis. The goal
of M2E is to ﬁnd low-dimensional representations from
multi-view multi-graph data which reveal patterns and structures among the brain networks. The conceptual view of

Abstract
Network analysis of human brain connectivity is critically important for understanding brain function and disease states.
Embedding a brain network as a whole graph instance into
a meaningful low-dimensional representation can be used to
investigate disease mechanisms and inform therapeutic interventions. Moreover, by exploiting information from multiple
neuroimaging modalities or views, we are able to obtain an
embedding that is more useful than the embedding learned
from an individual view. Therefore, multi-view multi-graph
embedding becomes a crucial task. Currently only a few studies have been devoted to this topic, and most of them focus on vector-based strategy which will cause structural information contained in the original graphs lost. As a novel
attempt to tackle this problem, we propose Multi-view Multigraph Embedding (M2E) by stacking multi-graphs into multiple partially-symmetric tensors and using tensor techniques
to simultaneously leverage the dependencies and correlations
among multi-view and multi-graph brain networks. Extensive
experiments on real HIV and bipolar disorder brain network
datasets demonstrate the superior performance of M2E on
clustering brain networks by leveraging the multi-view multigraph interactions.

Index terms— Brain Network Embedding, Multi-graph
Embedding, Tensor Factorization, Multi-view Learning

Introduction
Beneﬁting from modern neuroimaging technology, there is
an increasing amount of graph data representing the human
brain, called brain networks, e.g., functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI).
These data have complex structure, which are inherently
represented as graphs with a set of nodes and links. Moreover, the linkage structure extracted from different modalities can often be treated as multi-view data. The connections in fMRI brain networks encode correlations among
brain regions in terms of functional activities, while in
DTI networks, the connections can capture the white matter ﬁber pathways that connect different brain regions. Even
if these individual views might be sufﬁcient on their own
∗

Corresponding Author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

117

