The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Exact MAP-Inference by Conﬁning
Combinatorial Search with LP Relaxation
Stefan Haller,† Paul Swoboda,‡ Bogdan Savchynskyy,†
†

University of Heidelberg, ‡ IST Austria
stefan.haller@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

2016) or off-the-shelf integer linear program (ILP) solvers
like CPLEX (CPLEX, IBM 2014) or Gurobi (Gurobi Optimization 2016). However, neither specialized nor off-theshelf solvers scale well, as the problem instances get larger.
Our method is able to use the fact that a linear program (LP)
relaxation of the problem is “almost” tight, i. e. the obtained
solution is close to the optimal one. It restricts application of
an exact solver to a small fraction of the problem, where the
LP relaxation is not tight and yet obtains a provably optimal
solution to the whole problem. This allows to solve problems
for which no efﬁcient solving technique was available.
Related work LP relaxations are an important building
block for a number of algorithms addressing the MAPinference problem (1). It was probably ﬁrst considered
in (Shlezinger 1976; see Werner 2007 for the recent review)
both in its primal and dual form. The notion of reparametrization (known also as equivalent transformations or equivalence preserving transformations) was introduced in the same
work as well. Although the bound provided by the LP relaxation is often good, the class of problems, where it is tight,
is limited (see Kolmogorov, Thapper, and Zivny 2015). Practically important problems from this class are mainly those
having acyclic structure or submodular costs. Therefore a
number of works were devoted to cutting plane techniques to
tighten the relaxation (e. g. Koster, Van Hoesel, and Kolen
1998; Sontag 2007; de Givry and Katsirelos 2017). Sometimes the tightening itself may lead to an exact solution, however, in general it is accomplished with branch-and-bound
or A∗ algorithms. The most prominent representative of the
ﬁrst class are the DAOOPT (Marinescu and Dechter 2005;
Otten and Dechter 2010) and Toulbar2 (Cooper et al. 2010)
solvers. The latter has recently shown impressive results on
a number of benchmarks (Hurley et al. 2016). In contrast,
the A∗ algorithm so far was mainly used in speciﬁc applications (e. g. Bergtholdt et al. 2010).
Recently developed LP-relaxation-based partial optimality methods (e. g. Shekhovtsov 2014; Shekhovtsov, Swoboda,
and Savchynskyy 2015; Swoboda et al. 2016) can ﬁnd optimal labels for a signiﬁcant part of variables without solving
the combinatorial problem (1). Afterwards, a combinatorial
solver can be applied to the rest of the variables to obtain
a complete solution. These methods work well if the pairwise costs θuv play the role of a “smoothing regularizer” by
slightly penalizing differences in values in neighboring vari-

Abstract
We consider the MAP-inference problem for graphical models,
which is a valued constraint satisfaction problem deﬁned on
real numbers with a natural summation operation. We propose
a family of relaxations (different from the famous SheraliAdams hierarchy), which naturally deﬁne lower bounds for its
optimum. This family always contains a tight relaxation and
we give an algorithm able to ﬁnd it and therefore, solve the
initial non-relaxed NP-hard problem.
The relaxations we consider decompose the original problem
into two non-overlapping parts: an easy LP-tight part and a
difﬁcult one. For the latter part a combinatorial solver must be
used. As we show in our experiments, in a number of applications the second, difﬁcult part constitutes only a small fraction
of the whole problem. This property allows to signiﬁcantly
reduce the computational time of the combinatorial solver and
therefore solve problems which were out of reach before.

Introduction
This paper focuses on energy minimization or maximum a
posteriori (MAP) inference for undirected graphical models. This problem is closely related to weighted and valued
constraint satisfaction. In the most common pairwise case it
amounts to minimizing a partially separable function EG taking real values on a discrete set of ﬁnite-valued vectors XV 1




min EG (θ, x) :=
θu (xu ) +
θuv (xu , xv ) . (1)
x∈XV

u∈V

uv∈E

The problem is known to be NP-hard (e. g. Li, Shekhovtsov,
and Huber 2016), and therefore a number of approximate algorithms were proposed to this end. In contrast, our goal
is an efﬁcient method able to solve large-scale, but mostly
simple problem instances exactly. Such instances typically
arise in computer vision, machine learning and other areas of
artiﬁcial intelligence. Although approximate methods often
provide reasonable solutions, having an exact solver can be
quite critical at the modeling stage, when one has to differentiate between modeling and optimization errors. In this
case one usually resorts to either specialized combinatorial
solvers (see references in Kappes et al. 2015; Hurley et al.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We rigorously deﬁne notation in Section “Preliminaries”.

6581

