The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

On the Relationship Between State-Dependent
Action Costs and Conditional Effects in Planning
Robert Mattmüller, Florian Geißer

Benedict Wright, Bernhard Nebel

University of Freiburg, Germany
BrainLinks-BrainTools, University of Freiburg, Germany
{mattmuel, geisserf}@informatik.uni-freiburg.de
{bwright, nebel}@informatik.uni-freiburg.de

x=0

Abstract

S

When planning for tasks that feature both state-dependent
action costs and conditional effects using relaxation heuristics, the following problem appears: handling costs and effects separately leads to worse-than-necessary heuristic values, since we may get the more useful effect at the lower cost
by choosing different values of a relaxed variable when determining relaxed costs and relaxed active effects. In this paper, we show how this issue can be avoided by representing
state-dependent costs and conditional effects uniformly, both
as edge-valued multi-valued decision diagrams (EVMDDs)
over different sets of edge values, and then working with
their product diagram. We develop a theory of EVMDDs
that is general enough to encompass state-dependent action costs, conditional effects, and even their combination.
We deﬁne relaxed effect semantics in the presence of statedependent action costs and conditional effects, and describe
how this semantics can be efﬁciently computed using product EVMDDs. This will form the foundation for informative
relaxation heuristics in the setting with state-dependent costs
and conditional effects combined.

x=1

x=2

x=3

x=4

x=5

G

Figure 1: Corridor example. Initial position left, goal position right. Darker shades indicate higher costs to move.

on the accumulation semantics (Hoffmann 2005), and if
there is an action whose cost and effect share dependencies
on common variables. If this is the case, and if SDAC and
CE are handled separately, one may obtain a useful but expensive effect at an unrealistically low cost by choosing different values of a relaxed variable when determining relaxed
costs and relaxed active effects. This can lead to unnecessarily low and thus uninformative heuristic values, which hurts
the search that uses this heuristic. Let us illustrate the problem with a concrete example (see Fig. 1). Assume that there
is a corridor in which we can only move one cell to the left
or to the right in each step. The position in the corridor is denoted by the state variable x with possible values 0, . . . , 5.
Initially, x = 0, and in the goal, x = 5. The move-right
action is always applicable, and it has the conditional effect x := x + 11 , which we read as an abbreviation for
(x = 0  x := 1) ∧ · · · ∧ (x = 4  x := 5). Moreover, the further to the right one gets, the more costly the
movements become, which is reﬂected by the cost function
cost(move-right) = x + 1. The move-left action works similarly, with the same cost function as move-right. An optimal
unrelaxed plan is to move to the right ﬁve times in a row, at
an overall cost of 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 = 15.
Assume that we want to obtain a relaxation heuristic value
for the initial state s0 , say h+ (s0 ), and assume that we ignore the interaction of SDAC and CE in the relaxation. This
means that in a relaxed state s+ with s+ (x) ⊆ {0, . . . , 5},
where x takes several values simultaneously, the cost of
move-right is the minimal cost the action has for any value of
x in s+ , and that the effect is the union of the effects it has for
any value of x in s+ . For example, for s+ (x) = {0, 1, 2},
we get cost(move-right)(s+ ) = 1 from 0 ∈ s+ (x), never-

Introduction
Both from the modeling and from the computational perspective, it makes sense to allow planning tasks with statedependent action costs, which can be more natural, elegant,
compact, and structured than tasks with state-independent
costs only. Recent work (Geißer, Keller, and Mattmüller
2015; 2016) has shown that state-dependent action costs
(SDAC) can be handled efﬁciently by representing cost
functions as edge-valued multi-valued decision diagrams
(EVMDDs) (Ciardo and Siminiceanu 2002; Lai, Pedram,
and Vrudhula 1996). Such decision diagrams exhibit additive structure in the cost functions. This structure can
then be exploited in various ways, such as in compilations
of SDAC to constant-cost tasks, or within the relaxed planning graph (RPG) when computing relaxation heuristics, or
to efﬁciently obtain abstraction heuristics (Geißer, Keller,
and Mattmüller 2015; 2016).
However, it turns out that one needs to be very careful
when dealing with SDAC and conditional effects (CE) simultaneously, in particular in a delete-relaxed setting based

Notice that we call the variable x after the update x . For clarity, we will follow this pattern of using primed copies of variables
to refer to their value after an update throughout the paper.
1

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6237

