The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

SenticNet 5: Discovering Conceptual Primitives
for Sentiment Analysis by Means of Context Embeddings
Erik Cambria,† Soujanya Poria,† Devamanyu Hazarika,‡ Kenneth Kwok
†

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
‡
School of Computing, National University of Singapore

Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR

They will have to develop an approach to NLP that is both
top-down and bottom-up: top-down for the fact that they
should leverage symbolic models (e.g., semantic networks)
to encode meaning; bottom-up because they should use subsymbolic methods (e.g., neural networks) to infer syntactic
patterns from data. Coupling symbolic and sub-symbolic AI
is key for stepping forward in the path from NLP to natural language understanding. Relying solely on machine
learning, in fact, is simply useful to make a ‘good guess’
based on past experience, because sub-symbolic methods
only encode correlation and their decision-making process is
merely probabilistic. Natural language understanding, however, requires much more than that. To use Noam Chomsky’s words, “you do not get discoveries in the sciences by
taking huge amounts of data, throwing them into a computer
and doing statistical analysis of them: that’s not the way you
understand things, you have to have theoretical insights”.
In this work, we propose an ensemble of symbolic and
sub-symbolic AI techniques to perform sentiment analysis,
a NLP problem that has raised growing interest within both
the scientiﬁc community, for the many exciting open challenges, as well as the business world, due to the remarkable beneﬁts to be had from marketing and ﬁnancial prediction (Cambria et al. 2017). In particular, we employ a
long short-term memory (LSTM) network (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997) to discover verb-noun primitives by lexical substitution, and, hence, build a new three-level knowledge representation for sentiment analysis, termed SenticNet 5. SenticNet 5 encodes the denotative and connotative
information commonly associated with real-world objects,
actions, events, and people. It steps away from blindly using
keywords and word co-occurrence counts, and instead relies
on the implicit meaning associated with commonsense concepts. Superior to purely syntactic techniques, SenticNet 5
can detect subtly expressed sentiments by enabling the analysis of multiword expressions that do not explicitly convey
emotion, but are instead related to concepts that do so.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: ﬁrstly, we
present related works in the ﬁeld of sentiment analysis and
explain the importance of conceptual primitives for this task;
secondly, we describe in detail how to discover primitives
and how to link them to concepts and entities; ﬁnally, we
propose experimental results on several benchmark datasets
and provide concluding remarks.

Abstract
With the recent development of deep learning, research in
AI has gained new vigor and prominence. While machine
learning has succeeded in revitalizing many research ﬁelds,
such as computer vision, speech recognition, and medical diagnosis, we are yet to witness impressive progress in natural
language understanding. One of the reasons behind this unmatched expectation is that, while a bottom-up approach is
feasible for pattern recognition, reasoning and understanding
often require a top-down approach. In this work, we couple
sub-symbolic and symbolic AI to automatically discover conceptual primitives from text and link them to commonsense
concepts and named entities in a new three-level knowledge
representation for sentiment analysis. In particular, we employ recurrent neural networks to infer primitives by lexical
substitution and use them for grounding common and commonsense knowledge by means of multi-dimensional scaling.

Introduction
Recently, AI has been the acronym on everyone’s lips. Although nobody knows when the so-called AI revolution will
actually take place, the AI gold rush has become increasingly intense in the past few years. Most of what is considered AI today is actually sub-symbolic AI, i.e., machine
learning: an extremely powerful tool for exploring large
amounts of data and, for instance, making predictions, suggestions, and categorizations based on them. Machine learning, however, suffers from three big issues, namely:
1. Dependency: it requires (a lot of) training data and is
domain-dependent;
2. Consistency: different training or tweaking leads to different results;
3. Transparency: the reasoning process is unintelligible
(black-box algorithms).
In the context of natural language processing (NLP), these
issues are particularly crucial because, unlike in other ﬁelds,
they prevent AI from achieving human-like performance. To
this end, AI researchers need to bridge the gap between statistical NLP and many other disciplines that are necessary
for understanding human language, such as linguistics, commonsense reasoning, and affective computing.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1795

