The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Variational BOLT: Approximate Learning in Factorial Hidden
Markov Models with Application to Energy Disaggregation
Henning Lange, Mario Bergés
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA

techniques have been proposed and employed in the past to
tackle this problem. Authors in (Kolter and Jaakkola 2012)
introduced the one-at-a-time constraint that postulates that
only a single appliance can change its state at any given
time. This constraint allows for posterior inference by either posing the problem as an integer programming problem (Kolter and Jaakkola 2012) or by truncating the Viterbi
algorithm (Lange and Bergés 2016b). However, these approaches were focused on the decoding rather than the learning problem. On the other hand, (Jia, Gao, and Spanos
2015) proposed a solution to the learning problem based on
MCMC sampling but this approach seems to struggle with
slow mixing of the posterior.
The model introduced in this paper makes use of a highly
tractable auxiliary distribution that approximates the true ﬁltering distribution. This tractable distribution is parameterized by a deep recurrent neural network, speciﬁcally stacked
LSTMs (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997). We build on
recent results showing how neural networks in conjunction
with Variational Inference can be used as a powerful tool for
statistical inference (Kingma and Welling 2013). This combination is favorable because Variational Inference allows
one to pose statistical inference as a (non-linear) optimization problem and neural networks have become a dominant
approach for non-linear optimization.
Because we assume the latent variables to be binary (i.e. a
Bernoulli auxiliary distribution) we face the additional difﬁculty of dealing with non-conjugate discrete distributions,
which pose signiﬁcant challenges in the context of neural
networks and variational inference (Kingma and Welling
2013). As we will show later, this problem is circumvented
by directly approximating the expectation of the true ﬁltering distribution and introducing a loss function that directly
penalizes the neural network outputs for deviating from that
approximation. By making use of a tractable auxiliary distribution and making minimal independence assumptions
(i.e. only posterior independence of the latent variables at
a single time point) computations required for the ﬁltering
distribution that are typically quadratic in the number of
hidden states can be reduced to quasilinear time. This ultimately allows modeling rich temporal dependencies between latent variables whilst keeping computational costs
low. Although we focus on the application of energy disaggregation in this paper, our proposed method could ﬁnd

Abstract
The learning problem for Factorial Hidden Markov Models with discrete and multi-variate latent variables remains a
challenge. Inference of the latent variables required for the Estep of Expectation Minimization algorithms is usually computationally intractable. In this paper we propose a variational learning approach mimicking the Baum-Welch algorithm. By approximating the ﬁltering distribution with a variational distribution parameterized by a recurrent neural network, the computational complexity of the learning problem
as a function of the number of hidden states can be reduced
to quasilinear instead of quadratic time as required by traditional algorithms such as Baum-Welch whilst making minimal independence assumptions. We evaluate the performance
of the resulting algorithm, which we call Variational BOLT,
in the context of unsupervised end-to-end energy disaggregation. Speciﬁcally, we conduct experiments on the publicly
available REDD dataset and show competitive results when
compared with a supervised inference approach and state-ofthe-art results in an unsupervised setting.

Introduction
Because of its potential to discover and unlock energy saving opportunities in buildings, the problem of energy disaggregation (Hart 1992) has received increased interest from
various academic communities. The objective of this singlechannel source separation problem, also known as nonintrusive load monitoring (NILM), is to infer appliance-level
power consumption information given data from only a single sensing point at the main electrical panel of a building.
The observed aggregate power measured at the main panel
constitutes the sum of the power of the individual appliances. Since, appliance states (e.g., on, off) can be assumed
to evolve independently and the aggregate observation is dependent on the joint state of all appliances, Factorial Hidden
Markov Models (FHMM) (Ghahramani and Jordan 1997)
have emerged as a prominent model for the generative process of the aggregate observations. However, because latent
states become conditionally dependent given the observations, exact inference of the posterior, i.e. the distribution
of appliance states given the aggregate observation, is assumed to be intractable. Numerous approximate inference
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

792

