The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Generalized Value Iteration Networks:
Life Beyond Lattices
Sufeng Niu,∗† Siheng Chen,∗§ Hanyu Guo,∗†
Colin Targonski,† Melissa C. Smith,† Jelena Kovačević‡
†

Clemson University, 433 Calhoun Dr., Clemson, SC 29634, USA
Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
§
Uber Advanced Technologies Group, 100 32nd St, Pittsburgh, PA 15201, USA
‡

2013). Model-based approaches, on the other hand, allow
for an agent to explicitly learn the mechanisms of an environment, which can lead to strong generalization abilities. A
recent work, the value iteration networks (VIN) (Tamar et al.
2016) combines recurrent convolutional neural networks and
max-pooling to emulate the process of value iteration (Bellman 1957; Bertsekas et al. 1995). As VIN learns an environment, it can plan shortest paths for unseen mazes.
The input data fed into deep learning systems is usually associated with regular structures. For example, speech
signals and natural language have an underlying 1D sequential structure; images have an underlying 2D lattice
structure. To take advantage of this regularly structured
data, deep learning uses a series of basic operations deﬁned for the regular domain, such as convolution and uniform pooling. However, not all data is contained in regular structures. In urban science, trafﬁc information is associated with road networks; in neuroscience, brain activity
is associated with brain connectivity networks; in social
sciences, users’ proﬁle information is associated with social networks. To learn from data with irregular structure,
some recent works have extended the lattice structure to general graphs (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016;
Kipf and Welling 2016) and redeﬁned convolution and pooling operations on graphs; however, most works only evaluate
data that has both a ﬁxed and given graph. In addition, most
lack the ability to generalize to new, unseen environments.
In this paper, we aim to enable an agent to self-learn and
plan the optimal path in new, unseen spatial graphs by using model-based DRL and graph-based techniques. This task
is relevant to many real-world applications, such as route
planning of self-driving cars and web crawling/navigation.
The proposed method is more general than classical DRL,
extending for irregular structures. Furthermore, the proposed
method is scalable (computational complexity is proportional
to the number of edges in the testing graph), handles various
edge weight settings and adaptively learns the environment
model. Note that the optimal path can be self-deﬁned, and is
not necessarily the shortest one. Additionally, the proposed
work differs from conventional planning algorithms; for example, Dijkstra’s algorithm requires a known model, while
GVIN aims to learn a general model via trial and error, then

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a generalized value iteration network (GVIN), which is an end-to-end neural network planning
module. GVIN emulates the value iteration algorithm by using
a novel graph convolution operator, which enables GVIN to
learn and plan on irregular spatial graphs. We propose three
novel differentiable kernels as graph convolution operators
and show that the embedding-based kernel achieves the best
performance. Furthermore, we present episodic Q-learning,
an improvement upon traditional n-step Q-learning that stabilizes training for VIN and GVIN. Lastly, we evaluate GVIN
on planning problems in 2D mazes, irregular graphs, and realworld street networks, showing that GVIN generalizes well
for both arbitrary graphs and unseen graphs of larger scale
and outperforms a naive generalization of VIN (discretizing a
spatial graph into a 2D image).

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a technique that solves
sequential decision making problems that lacks explicit rules
and labels (Sutton and Barto 1998). Recent developments
in Deep Reinforcement Learning(DRL) have lead to enormous progress in autonomous driving (Bojarski et al. 2016),
innovation in robot control (Levine et al. 2015), and humanlevel performance in both Atari games (Mnih et al. 2013;
Guo et al. 2014) and the board game Go (Silver et al. 2016a).
Given a reinforcement learning task, the agent explores the
underlying Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Bellman 1957;
Bertsekas et al. 1995) and attempts to learn a mapping
of high-dimensional state space data to an optimal policy
that maximizes the expected return. Reinforcement learning can be categorized as model-free (Lillicrap et al. 2015;
Mnih et al. 2016; 2013) and model-based approaches (Sutton and Barto 1998; Deisenroth and Rasmussen 2011;
Schmidhuber 1990). Model-free approaches learn the policy
directly by trial-and-error and attempt to avoid bias caused
by a suboptimal environment model (Sutton and Barto 1998);
the majority of recent architectures for DRL follow the
model-free approach (Lillicrap et al. 2015; Mnih et al. 2016;
∗

Equal contribution.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6246

