The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Neural Response Generation with Dynamic Vocabularies
†

Yu Wu,†♦ Wei Wu,‡ Dejian Yang,† Can Xu,‡ Zhoujun Li,†♦∗
State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
‡
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
♦
Authors are supported by AdeptMind Scholarship
{wuyu,dejianyang,lizj}@buaa.edu.cn {wuwei,can.xu}@microsoft.com

reply” problem (Xing et al. 2016; Li et al. 2015); to take
conversation history into consideration (Sordoni et al. 2015;
Serban et al. 2016; 2017); and to bias responses to some speciﬁc persona or emotions (Li et al. 2016a; Zhou et al. 2017).
Although existing work has made great progress on generating proper responses, they all assume a static vocabulary
in decoding, that is they use the same large set of words
to generate responses regardless of inputs. The assumption,
however, is a simpliﬁcation of the real scenario, as proper
responses to a speciﬁc input (either a message or a conversation context) could only relate to a small speciﬁc set of
words, and the sets of words could be different from input to input. As a result, the assumption may cause some
problems in practice: (1) words that are semantically far
from the current conversation also take part in decoding.
These words may bias the process of generation and increase
the probability of irrelevant responses and generic responses
when some of them appear very frequently in the entire data
set; (2) the decoding process becomes unnecessarily slow,
because one has to estimate a probability distribution for
the entire static vocabulary in decoding of each word of
a response. More seriously, to suppress the irrelevant responses and the generic responses, state-of-the-art methods
have to either complicate their decoders (Xing et al. 2016;
Mou et al. 2016) or append a heavy post-processing procedure after decoding (Li et al. 2015), which further deteriorates efﬁciency. These problems widely exist in the existing
methods, but have not drawn enough attention yet.
In this paper, we aim to achieve high quality response
generation and fast decoding at the same time. Our idea
is that we dynamically allocate a vocabulary for each input at the decoding stage. The vocabulary is small as it
only covers words that are useful in forming relevant and
informative responses for the input and ﬁlters most irrelevant words out. Because response decoding of each input
only focuses on their own relevant words, the process can
be conducted efﬁciently without loss of response quality.
We formulate the idea as a dynamic vocabulary sequenceto-sequence (DVS2S) model. The model deﬁnes a dynamic
vocabulary in decoding through a multivariate Bernoulli distribution (Dai et al. 2013) on the entire vocabulary and factorizes the generation probability as the product of a vocabulary generation probability conditioned on the input and a
response generation probability conditioned on both the in-

Abstract
We study response generation for open domain conversation
in chatbots. Existing methods assume that words in responses
are generated from an identical vocabulary regardless of their
inputs, which not only makes them vulnerable to generic
patterns and irrelevant noise, but also causes a high cost in
decoding. We propose a dynamic vocabulary sequence-tosequence (DVS2S) model which allows each input to possess
their own vocabulary in decoding. In training, vocabulary
construction and response generation are jointly learned by
maximizing a lower bound of the true objective with a Monte
Carlo sampling method. In inference, the model dynamically
allocates a small vocabulary for an input with the word prediction model, and conducts decoding only with the small
vocabulary. Because of the dynamic vocabulary mechanism,
DVS2S eludes many generic patterns and irrelevant words in
generation, and enjoys efﬁcient decoding at the same time.
Experimental results on both automatic metrics and human
annotations show that DVS2S can signiﬁcantly outperform
state-of-the-art methods in terms of response quality, but only
requires 60% decoding time compared to the most efﬁcient
baseline.

Introduction
Together with the rapid growth of social conversation data
on Internet, there has been a surge of interest on building chatbots for open domain conversation with data driven
approaches. Existing methods are either retrieval based
(Yan, Song, and Wu 2016; Wu et al. 2017) or generation
based (Vinyals and Le 2015; Ritter, Cherry, and Dolan 2011;
Shang, Lu, and Li 2015). Recently, generation based approaches are becoming popular in both academia and industry, and a common practice is to learn a response generation model within an encoder-decoder framework (a.k.a.,
a sequence-to-sequence model) from the large scale conversation data. The mainstream of implementation of the
encoder-decoder framework is using neural networks, because they are powerful on capturing complicated semantic
and syntactic relations between messages and responses and
are end-to-end learnable. On top of the architecture, various models have been proposed to tackle the notorious “safe
∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5594

