The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Cooperative Training of Deep Aggregation
Networks for RGB-D Action Recognition
Pichao Wang,1,2 Wanqing Li,1 Jun Wan,3∗ Philip Ogunbona,1 Xinwang Liu,4
1

Advanced Multimedia Research Lab, University of Wollongong, Australia
2
Motovis Inc
3
Center for Biometrics and Security Research & National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Computer Science, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China
{pw212,wanqing,philipo}@uow.edu.au,jun.wan@nlpr.ia.ac.cn,xinwangliu@nudt.edu.cn
However, most of these methods are based on shallow handcrafted features and tend to be dataset-dependent. The advent
of deep learning has led to the development of methods (Ji et
al. 2013; Tran et al. 2015; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014a;
Wang et al. 2015; 2016; Jayaraman and Grauman 2016;
Donahue et al. 2015) based on Convolutional Neural Network (ConvNet) or Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). These
methods take as input either RGB or depth or both of them
as independent channels and fuse the recognition scores of
individual modalities. It is noteworthy that none of these
methods address the problem of using heterogeneous inputs
(such as RGB and depth) in a cooperative manner to train a
single network for action recognition. This cooperative training paradigm allows the powerful representation capability
of deep neural network to be fully leveraged and to explore
the complementary information in the two modalities using
one single network architecture. The need for independent
processing channels is thus obviated. Motivated by this observation, in this paper, we propose to adopt deep cooperative
neural networks for recognition from the RGB and depth
modalities.

Abstract
A novel deep neural network training paradigm that exploits
the conjoint information in multiple heterogeneous sources is
proposed. Speciﬁcally, in a RGB-D based action recognition
task, it cooperatively trains a single convolutional neural network (named c-ConvNet) on both RGB visual features and
depth features, and deeply aggregates the two kinds of features
for action recognition. Differently from the conventional ConvNet that learns the deep separable features for homogeneous
modality-based classiﬁcation with only one softmax loss function, the c-ConvNet enhances the discriminative power of the
deeply learned features and weakens the undesired modality
discrepancy by jointly optimizing a ranking loss and a softmax loss for both homogeneous and heterogeneous modalities.
The ranking loss consists of intra-modality and cross-modality
triplet losses, and it reduces both the intra-modality and crossmodality feature variations. Furthermore, the correlations between RGB and depth data are embedded in the c-ConvNet,
and can be retrieved by either of the modalities and contribute
to the recognition in the case even only one of the modalities
is available. The proposed method was extensively evaluated
on two large RGB-D action recognition datasets, ChaLearn
LAP IsoGD and NTU RGB+D datasets, and one small dataset,
SYSU 3D HOI, and achieved state-of-the-art results.

One typical challenge in deep learning based action recognition is how a RGB-D sequence could be effectively represented and fed to deep neural networks for recognition. For
example, one can conventionally consider it as a sequence of
still images (RGB and depth) with some form of temporal
smoothness, or as a subspace of images or image features,
or as the output of a neural network encoder. Which one
among these and other possibilities would result in the best
representation in the context of action recognition is not well
understood. In addition, it is not clear either how the two heterogeneous RGB and depth channels can be represented and
fed into a single deep neural network for the cooperative training. Inspired by the promising performance of the recently
introduced rank pooling machine (Fernando et al. 2015;
Bilen et al. 2016) on RGB videos, the rank pooling method
is adopted to encode both RGB and depth sequences into
compatible dynamic images. A dynamic image contains the
temporal information of a video sequence and keeps the
spatio-temporal structured relationships of the video; this has
been demonstrated to be an effective video descriptor (Bilen
et al. 2016). Based on this pair of dynamic images, namely,

Introduction
RGB-D based action recognition has attracted much attention in recent years due to the advantages that depth information brings to the combined data modality. For example,
depth is insensitive to illumination changes and has rich 3D
structural information of the scene. However, depth alone
is often insufﬁcient for recognizing some actions. In the
task of recognizing human-object interactions where texture
is vital for successful recognition, depth does not capture
the necessary texture context. To exploit the complementary nature of the two modalities, methods (Jia et al. 2014a;
Nie, Wang, and Ji 2015; Kong and Fu 2015; Hu et al. 2015;
Wu et al. 2015; Kong and Fu 2017) have been proposed
to combine the two modalities for RGB-D action recognition and demonstrated the effectiveness of modality fusion.
∗

Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7404

