The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Novel Embedding Method for News Diffusion Prediction
Ruoran Liu,12 Qiudan Li,1 Can Wang,12 Lei Wang,1 Daniel Dajun Zeng 123
1Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences Beijing 100190, China
2University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, USA
{liuruoran2016, qiudan.li, wangcan2015, l.wang, dajun.zeng}@ia.ac.cn

diffusion processes in the training dataset directly. Moreover, the attributes of news being propagated are integrated
as the offset of source site’s location in the latent space. Finally, the news quoting sequence is obtained based on the
distances to the source site of news in the latent space. To
the best of our knowledge, this work is a first step towards
utilizing an embedding method to analyze news diffusion
processes among news sites.

Abstract
News diffusion prediction aims to predict a sequence of news
sites which will quote a particular piece of news. Most of previous propagation models make efforts to estimate propagation probabilities along observed links and ignore the characteristics of news diffusion processes, and they fail to capture
the implicit relationships between news sites. In this paper,
we propose an algorithm to model the news diffusion processes in a continuous space and take the attributes of news
into account. Experiments performed on a real-world news
dataset show that our model can take advantage of news’ attributes and predict news diffusion accurately.

Proposed News Diffusion Model
Given news’s attributes and its source site, news diffusion
model aims to predict a sequence of news sites which will
quote this news. Suppose that there are N news sites and W
pieces of news. For news ni , tij is used to describe the time
when ni was quoted by news site uj . Specifically, tij =∞
means that uj didn’t quote ni . Moreover, a feature vector fi
ęRM is used to characterize attributes of news ni , where M
is the size of the feature space. To model the news diffusion
processes in the continuous space, we first define
Z={Z1 ,Z2 , ‫ڮ‬,ZN }, where Zj ęRd denotes the location of
news site ‫ݑ‬௝ in the continuous space and d is the size of the
space. Then a constraint is introduced to learn news sites’
embedding such that sites quoting the news earlier are closer
to the source site in the space. Given news ni and its source
site usi , for any pair of users (ux , uy ), if tix <tiy , ux should be
closer to usi in the continuous space. This goal is formally
expressed as the objective function (1).

Introduction
News media is increasingly becoming an important platform
for information diffusion. Understanding news diffusion
mechanism can help management department maximize the
news influence such that more people are informed of the
hot topics. Most of the existing propagation models are
graph-based and focus on estimating the propagation probabilities along observed links (Guille et al. 2012; Li et al.
2014). Since these probabilistic models assume that information only diffuses along observed links, their ability to
predict future diffusions is limited. Recently, instead of
modeling information diffusion processes on discrete preexisting graph structure, Bourigault et al. (2014) and Gao et
al. (2017) proposed to model diffusion processes in a latent
continuous space by learning nodes’ embedding from observed diffusion processes directly.
During the processes of news diffusion, news’s semantic
category and the location category of its source site are key
factors that determine which news sites will quote this news.
For example, financial news is more likely to be quoted by
professional financial news sites than sports news sites, and
news about local events is usually spread among local medias. Thus, we propose a news diffusion model which maps
news sites into a continuous space based on the observed

W

෍ ෍ max ቀ0, 1-disti ൫uy ൯+disti ሺux ሻቁ

(1)

i=1 tix <tiy

In our model, the Euclidean distance is adopted to measure the distance between news site uj and news ni ’s source
site usi . Meanwhile, the feature vector fi is integrated as an
offset of source site usi such that the location of usi moves

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8111

