The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

BBQ-Networks: Efﬁcient Exploration in Deep
Reinforcement Learning for Task-Oriented Dialogue Systems
Zachary Lipton, Xiujun Li,† Jianfeng Gao,† Lihong Li,‡∗ Faisal Ahmed,† Li Deng§∗


Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
†
Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA
‡
§
Google Inc., Kirkland, WA, USA
Citadel, Seattle, WA, USA

†
zlipton@cmu.edu, {xiul,jfgao,ﬁahmed}@microsoft.com
‡
lihongli.cs@gmail.com, § l.deng@ieee.org
regions in which the agent is relatively uncertain in action
selection. Our algorithm, the Bayes-by-Backprop Q-network
(BBQN), explores via Thompson sampling, drawing Monte
Carlo samples from a Bayesian neural network (Blundell et
al. 2015). In order to produce the temporal difference targets
for Q-learning, we must generate predictions from a frozen
target network (Mnih et al. 2015). We show that using the
maximum a posteriori (MAP) assignments to generate targets
results in better performance (in addition to being computationally efﬁcient). We also demonstrate the effectiveness of
replay buffer spiking (RBS), a simple technique in which we
pre-ﬁll the experience replay buffer with a small set of transitions harvested from a naı̈ve, but occasionally successful,
rule-based agent. This technique proves essential for both
BBQNs and standard DQNs.
We evaluate our dialogue agents on two variants of a
movie-booking task. Our agent interacts with a user to book
a movie. Success is determined at the end of the dialogue if a
movie has been booked that satisﬁes the user. We benchmark
our algorithm and baselines using an agenda-based user simulator similar to Schatzmann, Thomson, and Young (2007). To
make the task plausibly challenging, our simulator introduces
random mistakes to account for the effects of speech recognition and language understanding errors. In the ﬁrst variant,
our environment remains ﬁxed for all rounds of training. In
the second variant, we consider a non-stationary, domainextension environment. In this setting, new attributes of ﬁlms
become available over time, increasing the diversity of dialogue actions available to both the user and the agent. Our
experiments on both the stationary and domain-extension
environments demonstrate that BBQNs outperform DQNs
using either -greedy exploration, Boltzmann exploration, or
the bootstrap approach introduced by Osband et al. (2016).
Furthermore, the real user evaluation results consolidate the
effectiveness of our approach that BBQNs are more effective
than DQNs in exploration. Besides, we also show that all
agents only work given replay buffer spiking, although the
number of pre-ﬁlled dialogues can be small.

Abstract
We present a new algorithm that signiﬁcantly improves the
efﬁciency of exploration for deep Q-learning agents in dialogue systems. Our agents explore via Thompson sampling,
drawing Monte Carlo samples from a Bayes-by-Backprop neural network. Our algorithm learns much faster than common
exploration strategies such as -greedy, Boltzmann, bootstrapping, and intrinsic-reward-based ones. Additionally, we show
that spiking the replay buffer with experiences from just a
few successful episodes can make Q-learning feasible when it
might otherwise fail.

Introduction
Increasingly, we interact with computers via natural-language
dialogue interfaces. Simple question answering (QA) bots
already serve millions of users through Amazon’s Alexa, Apple’s Siri, Google’s Now, and Microsoft’s Cortana. These bots
typically carry out single-exchange conversations, but we aspire to develop more general dialogue agents, approaching
the breadth of capabilities exhibited by human interlocutors.
In this work, we consider task-oriented bots (Williams and
Young 2004), agents charged with conducting a multi-turn
dialogue to achieve some task-speciﬁc goal. In our case, we
attempt to assist a user to book movie tickets.
For complex dialogue systems, it is often impossible to
specify a good policy a priori and the dynamics of an environment may change over time. Thus, learning policies
online and interactively via reinforcement learning (RL)
has emerged as a popular approach (Singh et al. 2000;
Gašić et al. 2010; Fatemi et al. 2016). Inspired by RL
breakthroughs on Atari and board games (Mnih et al. 2015;
Silver et al. 2016), we employ deep reinforcement learning (DRL) to learn policies for dialogue systems. Deep Qnetwork (DQN) agents typically explore via the -greedy
heuristic, but when rewards are sparse and action spaces
are large (as in dialogue systems), this strategy tends to fail.
In our experiments, a randomly exploring Q-learner never
experiences success in thousands of episodes.
We offer a new, efﬁcient solution to improve the exploration of Q-learners. We propose a Bayesian exploration strategy that encourages a dialogue agent to explore state-action

Task-Oriented dialogue systems
In this paper, we consider goal-oriented dialogue agents,
speciﬁcally one that aims to help users to book movie tickets. Over the course of several exchanges, the agent gathers
information such as movie name, theater and number of tick-

∗

This work was done while LL & DL were with Microsoft.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5237

