The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

How Images Inspire Poems: Generating Classical
Chinese Poetry from Images with Memory Networks
Linli Xu,† Liang Jiang,† Chuan Qin,† Zhe Wang,‡ Dongfang Du†

†
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application,
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
‡
AI Department, Ant Financial Services Group
linlixu@ustc.edu.cn, jal@mail.ustc.edu.cn, chuanqin0426@gmail.com
wz143459@antﬁn.com, dfdu@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
With the recent advances of neural models and natural language processing, automatic generation of classical Chinese
poetry has drawn signiﬁcant attention due to its artistic and
cultural value. Previous works mainly focus on generating
poetry given keywords or other text information, while visual
inspirations for poetry have been rarely explored. Generating
poetry from images is much more challenging than generating poetry from text, since images contain very rich visual
information which cannot be described completely using several keywords, and a good poem should convey the image
accurately. In this paper, we propose a memory based neural model which exploits images to generate poems. Specifically, an Encoder-Decoder model with a topic memory network is proposed to generate classical Chinese poetry from
images. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work
attempting to generate classical Chinese poetry from images
with neural networks. A comprehensive experimental investigation with both human evaluation and quantitative analysis demonstrates that the proposed model can generate poems
which convey images accurately.

Table 1: An example of a 7-char quatrain. The tone of each
character is shown at the end of each line, where “P” represents Ping (the level tone), “Z” represents Ze (the downward
tone), and “*” indicates the tone can be either. Rhyming
characters are underlined.

a quatrain written by a very famous classical Chinese poet
Li Bai is shown in Table 1.
The stringent rhyme and tone regulations of classical Chinese poetry pose a major challenge for generating Chinese poems automatically. In recent years, various attempts
have been made on automatic generation of classical Chinese poems from text information such as keywords. Among
them, rule-based approaches (Tosa, Obara, and Minoh 2008;
Wu, Tosa, and Nakatsu 2009; Netzer et al. 2009; Oliveira
2009; 2012), genetic algorithms (Manurung 2004; Zhou,
You, and Ding 2010; Manurung, Ritchie, and Thompson
2012) and statistical machine translation methods (Jiang and
Zhou 2008; He, Zhou, and Jiang 2012) have been developed.
More recently, with the signiﬁcant advances in deep neural
networks, a number of poetry generation algorithms based
on neural networks have been proposed with the paradigm of
sequence-to-sequence learning, where poems are generated
line by line and each line is generated by taking the previous
lines as input (Zhang and Lapata 2014; Yi, Li, and Sun 2016;
Wang et al. 2016a; 2016b; Zhang et al. 2017). However, restrictions exist in previous works, including topic drift and
semantic inconsistency which are caused by only considering the writing intent of a user in the ﬁrst line. In addition,
a limited number of keywords with a proper order is usually
required (Wang et al. 2016b), which limits the ﬂexibility of

Introduction
Classical Chinese poetry is a priceless and important heritage in Chinese culture. During the history of more than
2000 years in China, millions of classical Chinese poems have been written to praise heroic characters, beautiful
scenery, love, etc. Classical Chinese poetry is still fascinating us today with its concise structure, rhythmic beauty and
rich emotions. There are distinct genres of classical Chinese
poetry, including Tang poetry, Song iambics and Qing poetry, etc., each of which has different structures and rules.
Among them, quatrain is the most popular one, which consists of four lines, with ﬁve or seven characters in each line.
The lines of a quatrain follow speciﬁc rules including the
regulated rhythmical pattern, where the last characters in the
ﬁrst (optional), second and fourth line must belong to the
same rhythm category. In addition, each Chinese character is
associated with one tone which is either Ping (the level tone)
or Ze (the downward tone), and quatrains are required to follow a pre-deﬁned tonal pattern which regulates the tones of
characters at various positions (Wang 2002). An example of
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5618

