The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

OptionGAN: Learning Joint Reward-Policy Options Using
Generative Adversarial Inverse Reinforcement Learning
Peter Henderson,1 Wei-Di Chang,2 Pierre-Luc Bacon,1
David Meger,1 Joelle Pineau,1 Doina Precup 1
2

1
School of Computer Science, McGill University, Montreal, Canada
Department of Electrical, Computer, and Software Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, Canada
{peter.henderson,wei-di.chang}@mail.mcgill.ca
pbacon@cs.mcgill.ca, dmeger@cim.mcgill.ca, {jpineau,dprecup}@cs.mcgill.ca

experts. Hence, it excels at one-shot transfer learning where
single-approximator methods waver.
To accomplish this, we make use of the Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL) framework (Ho and Ermon
2016) and formulate a method for learning joint rewardpolicy options with adversarial methods in IRL. As such,
we call our method OptionGAN. This method can implicitly
learn divisions in the demonstration state space and accordingly learn policy and reward options. Leveraging a correspondence between Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) and one-step
options, we learn a decomposition of rewards and the policyover-options in an end-to-end fashion. This decomposition is
able to capture simple problems and learn any of the underlying rewards in one shot. This gives ﬂexibility and beneﬁts
for a variety of future applications (both in reinforcement
learning and standard machine learning).
We evaluate OptionGAN in the context of continuous
control locomotion tasks, considering both simulated MuJoCo locomotion OpenAI Gym environments (Brockman et
al. 2016), modiﬁcations of these environments for task transfer (Henderson et al. 2017), and a more complex Roboschool
task (Schulman et al. 2017). We show that the ﬁnal policies
learned using joint reward-policy options outperform a single reward approximator and policy network in most cases,
and particularly excel at one-shot transfer learning.

Abstract
Reinforcement learning has shown promise in learning policies that can solve complex problems. However, manually
specifying a good reward function can be difﬁcult, especially
for intricate tasks. Inverse reinforcement learning offers a
useful paradigm to learn the underlying reward function directly from expert demonstrations. Yet in reality, the corpus
of demonstrations may contain trajectories arising from a diverse set of underlying reward functions rather than a single
one. Thus, in inverse reinforcement learning, it is useful to
consider such a decomposition. The options framework in reinforcement learning is speciﬁcally designed to decompose
policies in a similar light. We therefore extend the options
framework and propose a method to simultaneously recover
reward options in addition to policy options. We leverage
adversarial methods to learn joint reward-policy options using only observed expert states. We show that this approach
works well in both simple and complex continuous control
tasks and shows signiﬁcant performance increases in one-shot
transfer learning.

Introduction
A long term goal of Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL)
is to be able to learn underlying reward functions and policies solely from human video demonstrations. We call such
a case, where the demonstrations come from different contexts and the task must be performed in a novel environment,
one-shot transfer learning. For example, given only demonstrations of a human walking on earth, can an agent learn to
walk on the moon?
However, such demonstrations would undoubtedly come
from a wide range of settings and environments and may
not conform to a single reward function. This proves detrimental to current methods which might over-generalize and
cause poor performance. In forward RL, decomposing a policy into smaller specialized policy options has been shown
to improve results for exactly such cases (Sutton, Precup,
and Singh 1999; Bacon, Harb, and Precup 2017). Thus, we
extend the options framework to IRL and decompose both
the reward function and policy. Our method is able to learn
deep policies which can specialize to the set of best-ﬁtting

Related Work
One goal in robotics research is to create a system which
learns how to accomplish complex tasks simply from observing an expert’s actions (such as videos of humans performing actions). While IRL has been instrumental in working towards this goal, it has become clear that ﬁtting a single
reward function which generalizes across many domains is
difﬁcult. To this end, several works investigate decomposing
the underlying reward functions of expert demonstrations
and environments in both IRL and RL (Krishnan et al. 2016;
Sermanet, Xu, and Levine 2016; Choi and eung Kim 2012;
Babes et al. 2011; van Seijen et al. 2017). For example,
in (Krishnan et al. 2016), reward functions are decomposed
into a set of subtasks based on segmenting expert demonstration transitions (known state-action pairs) by analyzing the
changes in “local linearity with respect to a kernel function”.
Similarly, in (Sermanet, Xu, and Levine 2016), techniques in
video editing based on information-similarity are adopted to

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3199

