The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Knowledge, Fairness, and Social Constraints
Haris Aziz

Sylvain Bouveret

Ioannis Caragiannis

Data61, CSIRO and UNSW
Sydney, Australia
haris.aziz@data61.csiro.com.au

Univ. Grenoble-Alpes, France
sylvain.bouveret@imag.fr

University of Patras, Greece
caragian@ceid.upatras.gr

Ira Giagkousi

Jérôme Lang

University of Patras, Greece
giagkousi@ceid.upatras.gr

CNRS, U. Paris-Dauphine, PSL, France
lang@lamsade.dauphine.fr
and Bob both value each of these papers as 10, 6, 6 and 1, respectively. Chloe values them 1, 6, 6, and 10. All three have
additive preferences. Each paper must be reviewed by exactly one reviewer. Ideally, one would like to assign papers
to reviewers so that none of them would prefer the share of
someone else to her own share; this is known as an envyfree allocation. It is easy to see that no such allocation exists
here: since Ann and Bob have identical preferences, they are
non-envious of each other only if they draw the same value
from their assignments: the only ways to achieve this is to
assign p2 to one of them and p3 to the other, or no paper to
any of them; in any case, they will both envy Chloe.
However, this line of reasoning implicitly assumes that
each agent knows how the items are allocated. This is not
necessarily the case in such a context. If each of the three
agents ignores to whom the papers that they do not get are
assigned, we can assign the papers in such a way that everyone considers it possible that they do not envy anyone else:
assign p1 to Ann, p2 and p3 to Bob and p4 to Chloe. Ann,
who does not know how p2 , p3 , and p4 are assigned, considers it possible that one of Bob and Chloe gets p2 and the
other one gets both p3 and p4 , in which case she does not
envy anyone; such a line of reasoning also applies to Bob
and to Chloe. Although this allocation is not envy-free, it is
epistemically envy-free.1
While classical envy-freeness is based on the assumption
that the knowledge of the allocation among the agents is
maximal (everyone knows which items every other agent
gets), epistemic envy-freeness implicitly assumes that this
knowledge is minimal and each agent knows only which of
the items have been allocated to her. We introduce intermediate notions where an agent knows the bundles of items that
a speciﬁc subset of agents get. For instance, an agent may
have knowledge only of the bundles of items allocated to
her and her acquaintances (or neighbors) in a social network.
Still, she may reason about the possible allocations of the remaining items to the agents she is not connected to. We will
consider such notions of epistemic fairness which involve
social graphs (to model social acquaintances); clearly, the
denser the graph, the stronger the notion.

Abstract
In the context of fair allocation of indivisible items, fairness
concepts often compare the satisfaction of an agent to the satisfaction she would have from items that are not allocated to
her: in particular, envy-freeness requires that no agent prefers
the share of someone else to her own share. We argue that
these notions could also be deﬁned relative to the knowledge that an agent has on how the items that she does not
receive are distributed among other agents. We deﬁne a family of epistemic notions of envy-freeness, parameterized by a
social graph, where an agent observes the share of her neighbours but not of her non-neighbours. We also deﬁne an intermediate notion between envy-freeness and proportionality,
also parameterized by a social graph. These weaker notions of
envy-freeness are useful when seeking a fair allocation, since
envy-freeness is often too strong. We position these notions
with respect to known ones, thus revealing new rich hierarchies of fairness concepts. Finally, we present a very general
framework that covers all the existing and many new fairness
concepts.

1

Introduction

Envy-freeness is one of the most important fairness requirements in the classical resource allocation problem of distributing indivisible items among agents who have cardinal valuations over these items (Bouveret, Chevaleyre, and
Maudet 2016; Chevaleyre et al. 2006). However, it is quite
strong and not achievable in many resource allocation instances. Hence, several authors have studied a series of
weaker notions, such as proportionality (which dates back
to Steinhaus (1948)), maxmin (Budish 2011) and minmax
fair share (Bouveret and Lemaı̂tre 2016). Which fairness
notion is the most appropriate for resource allocation? A
compelling objective would be to ﬁnd an allocation for the
strongest fairness concept possible. An “optimal” solution
to this problem would then require to have relaxations of
envy-freeness of varying strength available. In this paper we
deﬁne and study several such families of relaxations. We introduce the ﬁrst one by an example.
Ann, Bob and Chloe are PC members in the International
Conference on Everything and are about to “bid” for papers
to review. Four papers p1 , . . . , p4 have been submitted. Ann

1

This does not mean that every agent considers it possible that
the allocation is envy-free. For this, each agent should have additional knowledge of the others’ preference.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4638

