The Eighth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence 2018 (EAAI-18)

Gesturing and Embodiment in Teaching: Investigating the Nonverbal
Behavior of Teachers in a Virtual Rehearsal Environment
Roghayeh Barmaki

Charles Hughes

Laboratory for Computational Sensing and Robotics
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
rl@jhu.edu

Department of Computer Science
University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA
ceh@cs.ucf.edu

(Dieker et al. 2014). Its primary use is to provide teachers
the opportunity to improve their classroom management,
pedagogical and content delivery skills in an environment
that neither harms real children nor causes the teacher to be
seen as weak or insecure by an actual classroom full of
students. We chose this virtual classroom as our basic research environment, and developed assessment and feedback methods on top of it because of the pressing need for
training novice and pre-service teachers with the required
skills, prior to their entering a real classroom. The
TeachLivE virtual classroom is based on a multi-clientserver structure provided by its underlying digital puppetry
architecture (Nagendran et al. 2014). The system uses a
Kinect sensor facing the participant and a TV screen showing the virtual students. A human-in-the-loop (called an
interactor) orchestrates the behavior of the virtual students
in real-time based on each character’s personality and
backstory, a teaching plan, various genres of behaviors and
the participant’s input. The system also supports reflective
learning following an experience in the virtual classroom.
In this research, aligned with the reflective learning and
assessment horizon of the project, we explore the gestures
and embodiment of the teacher candidates with the analysis
of their recorded teaching sessions.
In the teaching effectiveness content, one might observe
different categories to investigate for teaching competency:
purely objective ones that require no actual understanding
of intent of the behavior, for example, proximity and talk
time; those with shallow semantics associated with intent,
for example, open versus closed posture or use of open
versus closed words, (such as why versus what) that can be
part of a deeper semantic analysis, for instance, showing
respect/disrespect or asking open versus closed questions;
and yet others that require deep analysis to acquire any
semantic meaning, for example, providing encouragement
versus closing off a conversation. Even in the latter, deep
semantic situations, cues can be observed through embodiment that may indicate a desire to continue a dialogue
versus a desire to close off all further communication. This

Abstract
Interactive training environments typically include feedback
mechanisms designed to help trainees improve their performance through either guided or self-reflection. In this context, trainees are candidate teachers who need to hone their
social skills as well as other pedagogical skills for their future classroom. We chose an avatar-mediated interactive
virtual training system–TeachLivE–as the basic research
environment to investigate the motions and embodiment of
the trainees. Using tracking sensors, and customized improvements for existing gesture recognition utilities, we created a gesture database and employed it for the implementation of our real-time gesture recognition and feedback application. We also investigated multiple methods of feedback
provision, including visual and haptics. The results from the
conducted user studies and user evaluation surveys indicate
the positive impact of the proposed feedback applications
and informed body language. In this paper, we describe the
context in which the utilities have been developed, the importance of recognizing nonverbal communication in the
teaching context, the means of providing automated feedback associated with nonverbal messaging, and the preliminary studies developed to inform the research.

Introduction
Interpersonal communication involves a variety of modes
and components in communication. We might think that
actual words are the primary part of communication; however, there are other nonverbal components that are also
integral (Albert 1971). These nonverbal elements include
both non-vocal (e.g. body language) and vocal components
(e.g. voice pitch and intonation). Body language by itself
includes several aspects: facial expressions, eye contact,
posture or stance, gestures, touch and appearance (Richmond, McCroskey, and Payne 1991).
The interactive Teaching and Learning Environment (TLE
TeachLivE) is a virtual classroom setting used to prepare
teachers for the challenges of working in K-12 classrooms
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7893

