The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Location-Sensitive User Proﬁling Using Crowdsourced Labels
Wei Niu, James Caverlee, Haokai Lu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77840, USA
{wei,caverlee,hlu}@cse.tamu.edu

labeling knowledge. However, the vast majority of users
have no crowd labels; their expertise are essentially hidden from important applications such as personalized recommendation, community detection, and expert mining.
In this paper, we aim to extend the reach of these crowdsourced methods, so as to construct robust user proﬁles for
the long-tail of users for whom we have incomplete labels.
A natural approach to extend the reach of these crowdgenerated labels is to apply existing tag recommendation
methods (?; ?; ?; ?; ?). However, many of these approaches
have viewed tag relationships without regard for the local
variations that are inherent in real-world crowdsourced labels of users. For example, we ﬁnd in a sample of Twitter
Lists that the label energy in San Francisco is more associated with the green movement, whereas in Houston it
is more associated with oil and gas. These spatial variations are a critical component of crowdsourced labels and
require careful consideration. Beyond just the presence of
different relationships across locations, there is often a variation in the strength of this relationship from location to location. For example, stock and finance are more closely
related in New York City than in Portland. Further, there is
even a potential for varying location-speciﬁc senses of a tag
(polysemy). For example, the tag rockets in the Houston
area may be associated with the local NBA team instead of
other senses of the word.
Hence, we explore the impact of spatial variation on the
construction of location-sensitive user proﬁles. Our main intuition is that spatial variation over crowdsourced labels can
be modeled in a location-sensitive folksonomy to provide a
comprehensive and up-to-date picture of location-aware topics, topic relations, and a ﬁne-grained topic level view of the
social media corpus, which may mitigate the sparsity inherent in the raw labels. Recent studies (?; ?) have shown how
hierarchical topic structures can improve ranking and recommendation, indicating the importance of folksonomies.
Thus, we aim to study the impact of location-sensitive hierarchical structures of crowdsourced tags on user proﬁling.
Concretely, we propose an approach for location-sensitive
user proﬁling as illustrated in Figure ??. First, we construct
a crowdsourced label similarity graph induced from crowdsourced labels, where each labeler and labelee are annotated
with a geographic coordinate; this similarity graph varies by
location to capture spatial variations of the kind identiﬁed

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate the impact of spatial variation on the construction of location-sensitive user proﬁles. We demonstrate evidence of spatial variation over a
collection of Twitter Lists, wherein we ﬁnd that crowdsourced labels are constrained by distance. For example,
that energy in San Francisco is more associated with the
green movement, whereas in Houston it is more associated with oil and gas. We propose a three-step framework for location-sensitive user proﬁling: ﬁrst, it constructs a
crowdsourced label similarity graph, where each labeler and
labelee are annotated with a geographic coordinate; second, it
transforms this similarity graph into a directed weighted tree
that imposes a hierarchical structure over these labels; third,
it embeds this location-sensitive folksonomy into a user proﬁle ranking algorithm that outputs a ranked list of candidate
labels for a partially observed user proﬁle. Through extensive
experiments over a Twitter list dataset, we demonstrate the
effectiveness of this location-sensitive user proﬁling.

Introduction
User proﬁles are a valuable component of many applications, including recommender systems, search engines,
question-answering systems, and online social networks.
These proﬁles provide insight into the interests and expertise of each user, and can lead to improved personalization
of the underlying system (?; ?; ?). Many systems rely on
an explicit deﬁnition of a user proﬁle – for example, by ﬁlling in an “About” section in a social media proﬁle or by
directly selecting topics of interest on a question-answer
system. Alternatively, implicit user proﬁles can be uncovered through methods like query log mining, running Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) over a user’s posts, or by
applying matrix factorization approaches to identify hidden (or latent) topics of interest (?; ?; ?; ?). In a complementary direction, recent years have seen the development of crowdsourced user proﬁles construction, e.g., (?; ?;
?). In this scenario, crowds of users apply descriptive labels
on other users, so that in the aggregate these labels provide
a crowdsourced user proﬁle of the target user. For example,
Twitter Lists and LinkedIn’s Skill tags provide partial perspective on what users are known for by aggregating crowd
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

386

