The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Recognizing and Justifying Text Entailment through
Distributional Navigation on Deﬁnition Graphs
Vivian S. Silva,1 André Freitas,2 Siegfried Handschuh1
1

Department of Computer Science and Mathematics, University of Passau, Innstraße 43, 94032, Passau, Germany
2
School of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Kilburn Building, Oxford Road, M13 9PL, UK
vivian.santossilva@uni-passau.de, andre.freitas@manchester.ac.uk, siegfried.handschuh@uni-passau.de

but systems usually exploit only the links between terms,
such as synonym, hypernym or derivational form relationships (Clark, Fellbaum, and Hobbs 2008; Herrera, Penas,
and Verdejo 2006). The term’s deﬁnition (i.e. the gloss),
which contains the largest bulk of relevant information about
it, is left aside.
In this work, we propose an approach for recognizing text
entailments that uses knowledge extracted from natural language lexical deﬁnitions, structuring them into a semantic
representation model that allows the identiﬁcation of semantic relationships between terms. We focus on text entailments that require reasoning over world knowledge, and use
a navigation algorithm based on distributional semantics to
scope the exploration of a knowledge graph built from dictionary deﬁnitions, looking for paths between the text and
hypothesis, conﬁrming or rejecting the entailment.
The main contribution of our approach is to provide an interpretable reasoning model for text entailment by automatically building commonsense knowledge bases out of natural language deﬁnitions. This model was designed to meet
Explainable AI requirements: besides giving a yes or no answer, the resulting path provides a justiﬁcation about the entailment decision, that is, a human-readable explanation exposing the reasoning steps that led to the answer is offered to
support it, allowing users to be aware of, evaluate and judge
the inference model employed in the task.

Abstract
Text entailment, the task of determining whether a piece of
text logically follows from another piece of text, has become
an important component for many natural language processing tasks, such as question answering and information retrieval. For entailments requiring world knowledge, most systems still work as a “black box”, providing a yes/no answer
that doesn’t explain the reasoning behind it. We propose an
interpretable text entailment approach that, given a structured
deﬁnition graph, uses a navigation algorithm based on distributional semantic models to ﬁnd a path in the graph which
links text and hypothesis. If such path is found, it is used
to provide a human-readable justiﬁcation explaining why the
entailment holds. Experiments show that the proposed approach present results comparable to some well-established
entailment algorithms, while also meeting Explainable AI requirements, supplying clear explanations which allow the inference model interpretation.

Introduction
Natural Language Processing tasks such as question answering, text summarization and information retrieval often rely
on text entailment as a means of identifying and interpreting semantic relationships between pieces of text. Text entailment is deﬁned as a directional relationship between a
pair of text expressions, denoted by T – the entailing text,
and H – the entailed hypothesis. We say that T entails H
if, typically, a human reading T would infer that H is most
likely true (Dagan, Glickman, and Magnini 2006). Although
a human could easily explain why they consider an entailment true, most text entailment systems still can’t provide
a comprehensible justiﬁcation for their decisions, because
this usually depends on knowledge that goes beyond what
is stated in the text and hypothesis. Given the growing importance of Explainable AI (Gunning 2017), systems can no
longer omit the reasons why decisions are reached, making
justiﬁcations a fundamental feature for intelligent systems.
Recent text entailment approaches, especially those relying on more complex semantic interpretation, use knowledge bases and linguistic resources to track down semantic
relationships between text and hypothesis. WordNet (Fellbaum 1998) is notably the most commonly used resource,

Text Entailment
Stimulated by the RTE (Recognizing Text Entailments)
Challenges1 , a large number of text entailment frameworks
have been developed in the last years. Starting in 2005, the
RTE Challenges encouraged the creation of systems capable of capturing semantic inferences, and, given the low accuracy achieved by the ﬁrst participants, showed that much
improvement was still required in the area (Ghuge and Bhattacharya 2014).
Over the last editions, the RTE Challenges have moved
from shallow methods, based on lexical features, to more
sophisticated approaches, called deep methods, which rely
on semantic, syntactic and/or logical features. Some RTE-1
participants presented systems based purely on word overlap
and statistical lexical relations (Glickman and Dagan 2005;

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

4913

https://goo.gl/R9zVqp

