The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multi-Facet Network Embedding:
Beyond the General Solution of Detection and Representation
Liang Yang,1,2 Yuanfang Guo,2 Xiaochun Cao 2,∗

2

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Hebei University of Technology
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{yangliang, guoyuanfang, caoxiaochun}@iie.ac.cn
∗
Corresponding author.

(such as regression, classiﬁcation, clustering, etc.), community detection algorithms are usually End-to-End without explicitly seeking the node representations. Hence, it requires
specially designed algorithms rather than directly adopting
the existing techniques in other ﬁelds. To alleviate the abovementioned issue, network embedding, which learns the node
representations regardless of the speciﬁc network analysis
tasks, becomes popular (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014;
Tang et al. 2015; Cao, Lu, and Xu 2015; Wang, Cui, and Zhu
2016; Ou et al. 2016).
In general, community detection and network embedding
possess different objectives. Community detection usually
obtains the most noticeable cluster or one speciﬁc cluster
with labels and node attributes. Network embedding, on the
other hand, aims to represent nodes by vectors which encodes as many diverse properties as possible, because the
subsequent task is unknown and may focuses on any properties. For example, embedding methods need to exploit different properties of user in the social network, such as hobbies (political views) to recommend entertainment products
(predict the result of presidential election).
However, we observe that the current community detection and network embedding problems are being resolved
by a general solution. On one hand, stochastic community
detection and graph cuts tend to reconstruct the (normalized) adjacency matrix with the node membership matrix. It
is equivalent to maximizing the membership consistency of
each pair of the directly connected nodes while maximizing
the membership distance of each pair of the un-connected
nodes. On the other hand, inspired by the Skip-gram model
and negative sampling, network embedding maximizes the
embedding similarity of neighbouring nodes in the random
walk, while maximizes the embedding distance for each randomly sampled pair of nodes, which are highly unlikely to
be similar. Therefore, a general solution, “maximizing the
consistency between similar nodes while maximizing the distance between the dissimilar nodes”, can be summarized for
the existing community detection and network embedding
problems. This general solution, which exploits the most
noticeable structure (facet) of the network, can explicitly
achieves the objective of community detection.
Hence, a key issue, “Do network embedding algorithms
really achieve their goal?”, has been seldomly considered.
Similar to community detection, network embedding algo-

Abstract
In network analysis, community detection and network embedding are two important topics. Community detection tends
to obtain the most noticeable partition, while network embedding aims at seeking node representations which contains as
many diverse properties as possible. We observe that the current community detection and network embedding problems
are being resolved by a general solution, i.e., “maximizing
the consistency between similar nodes while maximizing the
distance between the dissimilar nodes”. This general solution
only exploits the most noticeable structure (facet) of the network, which effectively satisﬁes the demands of the community detection. Unfortunately, most of the speciﬁc embedding
algorithms, which are developed from the general solution,
cannot achieve the goal of network embedding by exploring
only one facet of the network. To improve the general solution
for better modeling the real network, we propose a novel network embedding method, Multi-facet Network Embedding
(MNE), to capture the multiple facets of the network. MNE
learns multiple embeddings simultaneously, with the Hilbert
Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) being the a diversity constraint. To efﬁciently solve the optimization problem,
we propose a Binary HSIC with linear complexity and solve
the MNE objective function by adopting the Augmented Lagrange Multiplier (ALM) method. The overall complexity is
linear with the scale of the network. Extensive results demonstrate that MNE gives efﬁcient performances and outperforms
the state-of-the-art network embedding methods.

Introduction
In real world, many complex systems, such as the gene regulatory network and human relations, can be described by
a network model. A common property of these networks
is the presence of community (modular/cluster) structures
(Girvan and Newman 2002), in which the nodes are densely
connected within each of the communities and seldomly
connected across the communities. In the past decades, numerous algorithms, which usually classify nodes into clusters (communities) directly, have been proposed for community detection (Fortunato 2010; Malliaros and Vazirgiannis 2013). Compared to the techniques in computer vision
and natural language processing ﬁeld, which usually perform feature extraction and then a machine learning step
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

499

