The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Imitation Learning via
Kernel Mean Embedding
Kee-Eung Kim

Hyun Soo Park

School of Computer Science
KAIST
kekim@cs.kaist.ac.kr

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Minnesota
hspark@umn.edu

in high-dimensional control tasks. In this line of thought, Ho
and Ermon (2016) presented generative adversarial imitation learning (GAIL), which casts the objective of imitation
learning as the training objective of generative adversarial
networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014). The key insight
behind GAIL is that imitation learning reduces to matching
the state-action visitation distributions (i.e. occupancy measure) of the learned policy to that of the expert policy, under
a suitable choice of the penalty on the cost function. However, GAIL often exhibits unstable training in practice due to
the alternating optimizations of the generator and discriminator networks to address the minimax objective function, a
well-known challenge in training GANs.
In this work, we show that extending the class of cost
functions to the reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS)
alternatively reduces the imitation learning to the distribution learning problem under the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD), a metric on probability distributions deﬁned
in the RKHS. However, our derivation is much simpler and
more natural. Although the derivation is almost immediate,
our work is the ﬁrst to present the kernelization of a classical AL algorithm (Abbeel and Ng 2004), and establish
analogies with the state of the art imitation learning algorithm, i.e. GAIL. The advantage of our work is that the training becomes simpler yet robust to local optima since the
hard minimax optimization is avoided. As an end result, our
work becomes closely related to generative moment matching networks (GMMNs) (Li, Swersky, and Zemel 2015) and
MMD nets (Dziugaite, Roy, and Ghahramani 2015), two
approaches to training deep generative neural networks using the MMD. Our experiments on the same set of highdimensional control imitation tasks with the identical settings as in the GAIL paper, with the largest task involving 376 observation and 17 action dimensions, demonstrate
that the proposed approach performs better than or on a par
with GAIL, and signiﬁcantly outperforms GAIL particularly
when the expert demonstration is scarce, with performance
gain up to 41%.

Abstract
Imitation learning refers to the problem where an agent learns
a policy that mimics the demonstration provided by the expert, without any information on the cost function of the environment. Classical approaches to imitation learning usually
rely on a restrictive class of cost functions that best explains
the expert’s demonstration, exempliﬁed by linear functions of
pre-deﬁned features on states and actions. We show that the
kernelization of a classical algorithm naturally reduces the
imitation learning to a distribution learning problem, where
the imitation policy tries to match the state-action visitation
distribution of the expert. Closely related to our approach is
the recent work on leveraging generative adversarial networks
(GANs) for imitation learning, but our reduction to distribution learning is much simpler, robust to scarce expert demonstration, and sample efﬁcient. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on a wide range of high-dimensional
control tasks.

In imitation learning, an agent learns to behave by mimicking the demonstration provided by the expert, situated
in an environment with an unknown cost function. A classical approach to imitation learning is behavioral cloning,
where the policy is directly learned to map from states to actions by supervised learning (Sammut 2010). Unfortunately,
this straightforward approach does not generalize well to
unseen states, often requiring a large amount of training
data. A more principled approach is apprenticeship learning (AL), where the policy is sought that is guaranteed
to perform at least as well as the expert (Russell 1998;
Ng, Russell, and others 2000; Abbeel and Ng 2004). However, to formally meet the guarantee, AL algorithms typically assume a restrictive class of cost functions and a planner that yields a sufﬁciently accurate optimal policy for a
cost function. This does not reﬂect the complex nature of
high-dimensional dynamics in real-world problems.
On the other hand, deep neural networks have been shown
strong predictive power to model complex functions: the
parametric function via networks is highly ﬂexible and expressive, which can be efﬁciently trained by stochastic gradient descent. Representing the cost function and the agent
policy using neural networks shall yield a plausible policy
that faithfully imitates the expert’s demonstrated behaviors

Background
MDPs and Imitation Learning We deﬁne basic notation
for our problem setting and brieﬂy review relevant work in
the literature. We assume learning in an environment that
can be modeled as a Markov decision process (MDP), with

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3415

