The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Neural Attention Model for Urban Air Quality Inference:
Learning the Weights of Monitoring Stations
Weiyu Cheng, Yanyan Shen,∗ Yanmin Zhu, Linpeng Huang
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Email: {weiyu cheng, shenyy, yzhu, lphuang}@sjtu.edu.cn

necessary data such as the distribution of all kinds of pollution sources, accurate weather conditions (Godish, Davis,
and Fu 2014) and speciﬁc street conﬁgurations (Kim, Park,
and Kim 2012), are always difﬁcult to obtain in practice.
Furthermore, some empirical assumptions may not reﬂect
real scenarios accurately, which degrades the model performance. For example, the concentration of air pollutants may
not follow the Gaussian distribution as assumed in Gaussian
Plume models (Arystanbekova 2004).
Data-driven approaches exploit the effects of the available
spatio-temporal urban data on air quality inference (Hasenfratz et al. 2014; Chen et al. 2016a; Zheng, Liu, and Hsieh
2013). Intuitively, various factors from external data sources
such as POIs, land-use, trafﬁc and meteorology in a particular location, can be partially or fully acknowledged to its air
quality. By augmenting the limited statistics from monitoring stations with plentiful spatio-temporal data, data-driven
approaches are generally more effective at capturing local
information that relates closely to a location’s air quality,
thus achieving better inference results than those physical
methods.
Typically, data-driven approaches have to address two
challenging issues. The ﬁrst challenge is: how to incorporate auxiliary multi-source data with monitoring data? The
recent work (Zheng, Liu, and Hsieh 2013) propose to train
multiple prediction models with different feature sets and
then conduct co-training to retrain each model iteratively.
However, developing models separately can hardly capture
complex interactions between different features, and hence
fails to make accurate inference. The second challenge to be
addressed is: how to differentiate the importance degrees of
air quality data from different monitoring stations? Since not
all the monitoring data contribute equally to predicting the
air quality in a particular location, existing methods adopt a
random scheme (Zheng, Liu, and Hsieh 2013) or k-nearest
neighbor strategy (Chen et al. 2016a) to select a subset of
monitoring stations and only model the effects of the selected monitoring station data for inference. Unfortunately,
the random selection scheme may cause the inconsistency
problem (Chen et al. 2016a), while the features from k nearest stations are unnecessarily the most effective and the signiﬁcance of the same stations may rather vary with time (see
details in the Experiments Section).
In this paper, we address the aforementioned problems

Abstract
Urban air pollution has attracted much attention these years
for its adverse impacts on human health. While monitoring
stations have been established to collect pollutant statistics,
the number of stations is very limited due to the high cost.
Thus, inferring ﬁne-grained urban air quality information is
becoming an essential issue for both government and people.
In this paper, we propose a generic neural approach, named
ADAIN, for urban air quality inference. We leverage both
the information from monitoring stations and urban data that
are closely related to air quality, including POIs, road networks and meteorology. ADAIN combines feedforward and
recurrent neural networks for modeling static and sequential
features as well as capturing deep feature interactions effectively. A novel attempt of ADAIN is an attention-based pooling layer that automatically learns the weights of features
from different monitoring stations, to boost the performance.
We conduct experiments on a real-world air quality dataset
and our approach achieves the highest performance compared
with various state-of-the-art solutions.

Introduction
Urban air pollution is undoubtedly a severe problem in the
world, responsible for a growing number of health effects.
The acquisition of spatially ﬁne-grained urban air quality information is of great importance for both government and urban people to understand the problem and take necessary actions in time. Recent effort has been devoted to establishing
monitoring stations to collect air quality statistics. However,
due to the high monetary cost (about $200,000 per station),
the number of available monitoring stations is very limited,
e.g., Beijing has only 36 monitoring stations in a total area
of 16, 410 km2 (Center 2017). As a result, it is becoming
crucial to infer a large amount of air quality information in
areas without monitoring stations.
Existing approaches to inferring spatially ﬁne-grained air
quality information mainly fall into two categories: physical
methods and data-driven approaches. Physical methods estimate air quality in unmonitored locations by simulating the
complex physical dispersion process of air pollutants based
on observed data and several empirical assumptions (Arystanbekova 2004; Kim, Park, and Kim 2012). However, the
∗

Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2151

