The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Classiﬁcation of Malware by Using
Structural Entropy on Convolutional Neural Networks
Daniel Gibert

Carles Mateu

Jordi Planes

Ramon Vicens

Blueliv, Leap in Value
Barcelona, Spain

University of Lleida
Lleida, Spain

University of Lleida
Lleida, Spain

Blueliv, Leap in Value
Barcelona, Spain

However, the use of simple entropy statistics may not be
enough to detect sophisticated malware. Authors sometimes
try to conceal encrypted or compressed code in a way that
they pass through high entropy ﬁlters. For instance, they may
add additional padding to reduce the mean ﬁle entropy. Anyway, native, encrypted or compressed segments and padding
tend to differ markedly having distinct entropy levels. Thus,
researchers (Sorokin 2011) started analyzing what is deﬁned
as the structural entropy of a ﬁle. In other words, each executable ﬁle is represented as a stream of entropy values,
where each value describes the amount of entropy over a
small chunk of code in a speciﬁc location of the ﬁle. Figure 1 displays the structural entropy of various malware executables belonging to two different families. It can be observed that the entropy streams extracted from malware samples belonging to the same family appear to be similar while
distinct from those belonging to different families.

Abstract
The number of malicious programs has grown both in number and in sophistication. Analyzing the malicious intent of
vast amounts of data requires huge resources and thus, effective categorization of malware is required. In this paper,
the content of a malicious program is represented as an entropy stream, where each value describes the amount of entropy of a small chunk of code in a speciﬁc location of the ﬁle.
Wavelet transforms are then applied to this entropy signal to
describe the variation in the entropic energy. Motivated by
the visual similarity between streams of entropy of malicious
software belonging to the same family, we propose a ﬁle agnostic deep learning approach for categorization of malware.
Our method exploits the fact that most variants are generated by using common obfuscation techniques and that compression and encryption algorithms retain some properties
present in the original code. This allows us to ﬁnd discriminative patterns that almost all variants in a family share. Our
method has been evaluated using the data provided by Microsoft for the BigData Innovators Gathering Anti-Malware
Prediction Challenge, and achieved promising results in comparison with the State of the Art.

Introduction
To evade detection, malware authors employ a variety of
obfuscation techniques to hide malicious code inside executables. The most common are encryption and compression which are employed in most of the malware samples.
In the information security industry, a common practice to
detect the presence of encrypted or compressed segments
hidden beneath portable executables is entropy analysis. In
general, segments of code that have been compressed or encrypted tend to have higher entropy than native code (Lyda
and Hamrock 2007).
In information theory, entropy (more speciﬁcally, Shannon’s entropy) is the expected value of the information contained in each message. Generally speaking, the entropy of a
bytes sequence refers to the amount of disorder(uncertainty)
or its statistical variation. If occurrences of all values are the
same, the entropy will be largest. On the contrary, if certain
byte values occur with high probabilities, the entropy value
will be smaller.

Figure 1: Entropy time series from malicious software. Samples from the ﬁrst row belong to the Ramnit family, whereas
samples from the second row belong to the Gatak family.
Note the variation of the stream of entropy values between
families.
By representing executable ﬁles as a stream of entropy
values, the task of malware classiﬁcation can be described
as a time series classiﬁcation problem (Fu 2011; Xing, Pei,

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7759

