The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Generating Triples with Adversarial Networks for Scene Graph Construction
Matthew Klawonn

Eric Heim

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Dept. of Computer Science
Troy, NY 12180
klawom@rpi.edu

Air Force Research Laboratory
Information Directorate
Rome, NY 13441
eric.heim.1@us.af.mil

Abstract
Driven by successes in deep learning, computer vision research has begun to move beyond object detection and image
classiﬁcation to more sophisticated tasks like image captioning or visual question answering. Motivating such endeavors
is the desire for models to capture not only objects present
in an image, but more ﬁne-grained aspects of a scene such
as relationships between objects and their attributes. Scene
graphs provide a formal construct for capturing these aspects
of an image. Despite this, there have been only a few recent
efforts to generate scene graphs from imagery. Previous works
limit themselves to settings where bounding box information
is available at train time and do not attempt to generate scene
graphs with attributes. In this paper we propose a method,
based on recent advancements in Generative Adversarial Networks, to overcome these deﬁciencies. We take the approach
of ﬁrst generating small subgraphs, each describing a single
statement about a scene from a speciﬁc region of the input
image chosen using an attention mechanism. By doing so,
our method is able to produce portions of the scene graphs
with attribute information without the need for bounding box
labels. Then, the complete scene graph is constructed from
these subgraphs. We show that our model improves upon prior
work in scene graph generation on state-of-the-art data sets
and accepted metrics. Further, we demonstrate that our model
is capable of handling a larger vocabulary size than prior work
has attempted.

Figure 1: Depiction of our model. Given an image of a scene
(top), our model (middle-left) generates triples (bottom-left)
that express statements about objects in the image. Then,
duplicate entities in the triples with the same lexeme are
determined by examining if they are from similar regions of
the image (middle-right). These duplicates are merged into
single nodes to form a scene graph (bottom-right).

Learning representations of visual scenes remains an important task that underlies many computer vision problems
ranging from visual question answering (Malinowski and
Fritz 2014) to image retrieval (Johnson et al. 2017). In order
to be successful in these tasks, images must be represented
in a form that captures details of the objects contained in
a scene, including what objects are present, what attributes
each object possesses, and how objects relate to one another.
Much of the recent work on learning how to visually perceive
images has focused largely on object detection and classiﬁcation (He et al. 2016; Szegedy et al. 2017). These tasks focus
on identifying one or more concepts or objects depicted in an
image, but cannot produce representations that capture more
complex characteristics or relationships of objects within
scene. Such information may provide insight necessary to
understand a scene.

In this work, we focus on the task of learning to produce
structured representations of images that express rich scene
information. More speciﬁcally, our goal is to learn a model
that is able to generate a scene graph (Johnson et al. 2017)
given an image. A scene graph describes the content of a
scene by representing objects within an image as nodes and
relationships between objects as edges. By including nodes
that correspond to visual properties, an object can be represented as having an attribute if an edge is drawn between said
object and attribute. As such, scene graphs are naturally able
to model not only what objects are in a scene, but how they
relate to each other and what attributes they possess.

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6992

