The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Dual Attention Network for Product Compatibility
and Function Satisﬁability Analysis
Hu Xu

Sihong Xie

Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL, USA
hxu48@uic.edu

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Lehigh University
Bethlehem, PA, USA
sxie@cse.lehigh.edu

Lei Shu

Philip S. Yu

Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL, USA
lshu3@uic.edu

Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL, USA
Institute for Data Science
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
psyu@uic.edu
Microsoft Surface Pro 4 (128 GB, 4 GB RAM, Intel Core i5)
Q: Can the M processor handle photoshop?
A: It does run Photoshop very well on our internal test unit.
Q: Does the surface pro 4 support the Google Play app store?
A: No, it does not support Google Play.
Q: can this run fallout 4
A: It struggles graphically with Fallout 4 on
low graphics settings.
Q: Does this connect to a 5G home wireless network?
A: We connect to a Comcast high speed wireless router for
Internet access and it seems to work well.
I can not speak to the speciﬁc network
in the question.
Q: Can you use this for sketching?
A: To some extent .
It depends upon the degree to which you intend to create .

Abstract
Product compatibility and functionality are of utmost importance to customers when they purchase products, and to sellers and manufacturers when they sell products. Due to the
huge number of products available online 1 , it is infeasible
to enumerate and test the compatibility and functionality of
every product. In this paper, we address two closely related
problems: product compatibility analysis and function satisﬁability analysis, where the second problem is a generalization
of the ﬁrst problem (e.g., whether a product works with another product can be considered as a special function). We
ﬁrst identify a novel question and answering corpus that is
up-to-date regarding product compatibility and functionality
information 2 . To allow automatic discovery product compatibility and functionality, we then propose a deep learning model called Dual Attention Network (DAN). Given a
QA pair for a to-be-purchased product, DAN learns to 1) discover complementary products (or functions), and 2) accurately predict the actual compatibility (or satisﬁability) of the
discovered products (or functions). The challenges addressed
by the model include the briefness of QAs, linguistic patterns
indicating compatibility, and the appropriate fusion of questions and answers. We conduct experiments to quantitatively
and qualitatively show that the identiﬁed products and functions have both high coverage and accuracy, compared with a
wide spectrum of baselines.

Table 1: An example of QA pairs for a tablet PC: function
targets (the ﬁrst 4 are complementary entities) are underlined in questions; function words are bolded; keywords that
indicating compatibility or satisﬁability are italicized.

purchase a product (e.g., a mouse), it is natural for them to
ask whether the to-be-purchased one can work properly with
the intended complementary product (e.g., a laptop). Such a
query is driven by customers’ needs on product functionality, where compatibility can be viewed as a special group
of functions. In fact, a function need is the very ﬁrst step
of purchase decision process. Whether a product can satisfy
some function needs or not (a.k.a. satisﬁability of a function
need) even leads to the deﬁnition of product. In marketing,
product is deﬁned as “anything that can be offered to a market for attention, acquisition, use or consumption that might
satisfy a want or need” (Kotler and Armstrong 2010). For
sellers or manufacturers, satisﬁability on function needs are
equally important as being fully-aware of existing and missing functions is crucial in increasing sales and improve prod-

Introduction
Learning about the compatibility of a product that is functionally complementary to a to-be-purchased product is an
important task in e-commerce. For customers, before they
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
over a billion products in the categories of cell phones, accessories, and electronics according to (Ina 2016).
2
The annotated corpus can be found at https://www.cs.uic.edu/
∼hxu/.

6013

