The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Personalized Human Activity Recognition
Using Convolutional Neural Networks
Seyed Ali Rokni, Marjan Nourollahi, Hassan Ghasemzadeh
Washington State University
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Pullman, Washington 99164–2752
{alirokni,mnourol,hassan}@eecs.wsu.edu
In this study, we develop a neural network architecture
which enables us to build a personalized HAR model with
minimal human supervision.

Abstract
A major barrier to the personalized Human Activity Recognition using wearable sensors is that the performance of the
recognition model drops signiﬁcantly upon adoption of the
system by new users or changes in physical/ behavioral status of users. Therefore, the model needs to be retrained by
collecting new labeled data in the new context. In this study,
we develop a transfer learning framework using convolutional
neural networks to build a personalized activity recognition
model with minimal user supervision.

Representation Learning for Sensory Data
A 3D accelerometer sensor captures a sample of body acceleration is the form of
vt = [vtx ; vty ; vtz ]

(1)

where vtx , vty and vtz denote x, y and z-acceleration, respec-

tively.
Because the sensor captures human accelerations continuously while the subject performs different activities in freeliving situations, ‘start’ and ‘end’ of activities are unknown
a priori. A typical segmentation with a window of size w
on 3-axis accelerometer data forms 3 channels of input data,
Ct = [Cxt Cyt Czt ], where

Introduction
Inertial wearable sensors have been vastly utilized for Human Activity Recognition (HAR). A major challenge with
the trained HAR models is that the performance of the classiﬁer is highly sensitive to the context of the sensor and engineered features (Rokni and Ghasemzadeh 2017). Upon any
changes in the task or distribution of the data (e.g., a new
user utilizing the system, or changes in activities of interest),
we will need to obtain additional inputs from a human expert by redoing the costly process of collecting labeled data
and handcrafting features. This problem becomes more challenging considering that wearables are deployed in highly
dynamic and uncontrolled environments, mainly due to their
direct and continuous exposure to end-users and their living
environments.
To avoid handcrafting features, the growing trend of representation learning from raw sensor data with Convolution
Neural Networks (ConvNets) has demonstrated a great performance in activity recognition in different domains (Zeng
et al. 2014; Yang et al. 2015; Ronao and Cho 2016).
To expand the pattern recognition capabilities from a single setting algorithm with a predeﬁned conﬁguration to a
dynamic setting, successful knowledge transfer is needed
to improve the learning performance by avoiding expensive data collection, labeling and training efforts. Authors
of (Bengio et al. 2011) showed that deep learners are more
powerful in utilizing data points that are not from the same
distribution as the training distribution of a shallow learner.
Particularly, (Yosinski et al. 2014) demonstrated that features learned in the ﬁrst layers are not speciﬁc to a particular
task and could be useful for other related tasks.

x
Cxt = [vtx , . . . , vt+w−1
]

(2)

y
Cyt = [vty , . . . , vt+w−1
]

(3)

z
]
Czt = [vtz , . . . , vt+w−1

(4)
Assuming M activities of interest A={a1 , a2 , . . ., aM },
the activity recognition task assigns label aj ∈ A to an observed segment Ct .
The input layer of our neural network structure consists
of 3 channels of the smoothed signal segment. First, these
segments are passed through discretization layer. The discretization helps to reduce sensitivity of the model to small
changes and therefore makes the model more robust in transferring into other domains. Typically, a small portion of the
signal range is used by an activity segment and this range
varies from one activity to another. Therefore, we feed the
discretized sequence to an embedding layer to generate a
compact representation of the input data. In addition to dimensionality reduction, this embedding layer could be useful to reduce the effect of different instrumental calibration. Therefore, similar activities captured by different accelerometer sensors or performed by different users could
have close representation in this space. The next layer is a
stack of 1D convolutional layers. Each convolutional layer
captures local dependencies and scales invariant characteristics of the input. The sparse connectivity and parameter sharing features of ConvNets not only help in extracting useful

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8143

