The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Cellular Network Trafﬁc Scheduling
with Deep Reinforcement Learning
Sandeep Chinchali,1 Pan Hu,2 Tianshu Chu,3 Manu Sharma,3
Manu Bansal,3 Rakesh Misra,3 Marco Pavone,4 Sachin Katti 1,2

1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University
3
Uhana, Inc.
4
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Stanford University
{csandeep, panhu, pavone, skatti}@stanford.edu, {tchu, manusharma, manub, rakesh}@uhana.io
2

Abstract

50

Modern mobile networks are facing unprecedented growth in
demand due to a new class of trafﬁc from Internet of Things
(IoT) devices such as smart wearables and autonomous cars.
Future networks must schedule delay-tolerant software updates, data backup, and other transfers from IoT devices while
maintaining strict service guarantees for conventional realtime applications such as voice-calling and video. This problem is extremely challenging because conventional trafﬁc is
highly dynamic across space and time, so its performance is
signiﬁcantly impacted if all IoT trafﬁc is scheduled immediately when it originates. In this paper, we present a reinforcement learning (RL) based scheduler that can dynamically
adapt to trafﬁc variation, and to various reward functions set
by network operators, to optimally schedule IoT trafﬁc. Using 4 weeks of real network data from downtown Melbourne,
Australia spanning diverse trafﬁc patterns, we demonstrate
that our RL scheduler can enable mobile networks to carry
14.7% more data with minimal impact on existing trafﬁc,
and outperforms heuristic schedulers by more than 2×. Our
work is a valuable step towards designing autonomous, “selfdriving” networks that learn to manage themselves from past
data.

Congestion C

40

Melbourne Central Business District, Rolling Average = 1 min
Shopping center
Oﬃce building
Southern cross station
Melbourne central station

30

20

10

0
09:00

11:00

13:00

15:00

17:00

19:00

21:00

Local time

Figure 1: Time-variant congestion patterns in Melbourne.
• Software and data updates to mobile IoT devices, e.g., updating maps for self-driving cars (Gerla et al. 2014) or
delivery drones (Sundqvist and others 2015).
• Large transfer of IoT sensor data to the cloud, such as energy usage measurements from a smart grid (Parikh, Kanabar, and Sidhu 2010).
• Pre-fetched ultra-high quality and bitrate video (McDonagh et al. 2011).
A common property of HVFT applications is that the mobile network operator must serve a large volume of trafﬁc
during the day but has signiﬁcant ﬂexibility in scheduling
this trafﬁc, i.e., these applications can tolerate delays on the
order of a few hours up-to a day. The mobile network operator ideally would like to take advantage of this delay tolerance to schedule HVFT trafﬁc during periods where the
network is being lightly used by other delay sensitive trafﬁc.
Intuitively, this scheduling problem can be thought of as a
control problem where the control variable is the time when
HVFT data is transferred and its share of network capacity and the reward function trades off the total HVFT trafﬁc
volume delivered with throughput degradation to other delay
sensitive trafﬁc. A simple solution, which has precedence in
the networking community, is to have static priority classes
per trafﬁc type, i.e, real-time trafﬁc has higher importance

Introduction
Can learning algorithms help with optimally scheduling
trafﬁc in future computer networks? A central problem in
computer networks, ranging from internet data centers to
wireless cellular deployments, is how to best deliver trafﬁc with widely different data demands, sensitivities to delay, and scheduling priorities. While today’s networks are
typically used for real-time, delay sensitive trafﬁc such as
video-streaming or web-browsing, the advent of Internet of
Things (IoT ) devices such as smart homes will require dataintensive sensor updates that are more tolerant to delay.
In this paper, we focus on a speciﬁc, practically-motivated
scheduling problem. We focus on mobile networks, which
are increasingly required to deliver a new class of applications, driven by IoT , that we call High Volume Flexible
Time (HVFT) applications. This new class of HVFT trafﬁc
includes:
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

766

