The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Feature-Induced Labeling Information
Enrichment for Multi-Label Learning
†,

Qian-Wen Zhang,† Yun Zhong, Min-Ling Zhang§,∗

Tencent Smart Platform & Products Department, Chengdu 610041, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
§
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
§
Collaborative Innovation Center of Wireless Communications Technology, China
{cowenzhang,zeuzhong}@tencent.com, zhangqw@seu.edu.cn, zhangml@seu.edu.cn* (corresponding author)
†,§

multi-label training examples by exploiting their labeling information in a crisp manner, e.g. decomposing multi-label
examples into multiple binary examples, considering the cooccurring patterns of pairwise labels, enforcing ranking between relevant and irrelevant labels, among others (Zhang
and Zhou 2014).
Nonetheless, recent studies show that categorical labeling
information is actually a simpliﬁcation of the rich semantics
encoded by multi-label training examples (Li, Zhang, and
Geng 2015; Zhang and Wu 2015; Hou, Geng, and Zhang
2016). For instance, a multi-scenery image may exhibit different region size for each scenery, a multi-category document may have different topical importance for each category, and a multi-functionality gene may have different expression level for each functionality, etc. Therefore, it is a
natural choice to enrich the labeling information of multilabel training examples so as to induce multi-label predictive
model with strong generalization performance.
In light of the above observation, a novel multi-label
learning approach named M LFE, i.e. Multi-label Learning
with Feature-induced labeling information Enrichment, is
proposed. The basic strategy of M LFE is to enrich the labeling information of multi-label examples by leveraging
the structural information in the feature space. Speciﬁcally,
the underlying structure of feature space is characterized by
the sparse reconstruction relationships among training examples. After that, the reconstruction information is utilized
to guide the enrichment process of turning categorical labeling information into numerical labeling information. Then,
the desired multi-label predictive model is learned from
training examples with enriched labeling information based
on tailored multivariate regression techniques. Experimental studies across a wide range of benchmark data sets show
that M LFE achieves highly competitive performance against
other state-of-the-art multi-label learning approaches.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Firstly,
technical details of the proposed approach are introduced.
Secondly, related work on multi-label learning is brieﬂy discussed. Thirdly, experimental results of comparative studies
are reported. Finally, we conclude this paper.

Abstract
In multi-label learning, each training example is represented
by a single instance (feature vector) while associated with
multiple class labels simultaneously. The task is to learn a
predictive model from the training examples which can assign a set of proper labels for the unseen instance. Most existing approaches make use of multi-label training examples
by exploiting their labeling information in a crisp manner, i.e.
one class label is either fully relevant or irrelevant to the instance. In this paper, a novel multi-label learning approach is
proposed which aims to enrich the labeling information by
leveraging the structural information in feature space. Firstly,
the underlying structure of feature space is characterized by
conducting sparse reconstruction among the training examples. Secondly, the reconstruction information is conveyed
from feature space to label space so as to enrich the original categorical labels into numerical ones. Thirdly, the multilabel predictive model is induced by learning from training
examples with enriched labeling information. Extensive experiments on ﬁfteen benchmark data sets clearly validate the
effectiveness of the proposed feature-induced strategy for enhancing labeling information of multi-label examples.

Introduction
Multi-label learning is one of the major learning frameworks
to deal with real-world objects with rich semantics, where
each example is represented by a single instance (feature
vector) while associated with multiple class labels simultaneously (Zhang and Zhou 2014; Gibaja and Ventura 2015;
Zhou and Zhang 2017). Formally speaking, let X = Rd be
the d-dimensional feature space and Y = {y1 , y2 , . . . , yq }
be the label space with q class labels. Given the multi-label
training set D = {(xi , Yi ) | 1 ≤ i ≤ p}, where xi ∈ X
is the d-dimensional feature vector (xi1 , xi2 , . . . , xid ) and
Yi ⊆ Y is the set of relevant labels associated with xi , the
task of multi-label learning is to learn a predictive model
h : X → 2Y from D which can assign a set of proper labels
for the unseen instance.
The accessible labeling information of multi-label training example is categorical, i.e. each class label y is either
/ Yi ) for inregarded to be relevant (y ∈ Yi ) or irrelevant (y ∈
stance xi . Accordingly, most existing approaches learn from

The M LFE Approach
The learning procedure of M LFE consists of three steps, including structural information discovery, labeling informa-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4446

