The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Dynamic User Proﬁling for
Streams of Short Texts
Shangsong Liang
Department of Computer Science,
University College London, United Kingdom
shangsong.liang@ucl.ac.uk

users’ expertise for user proﬁling in the context of short text
streams is more challenging than in the context of long document streams, as documents are short and thus sparse information for inferring users’ expertise distributions.
To tackle the problem of dynamic user proﬁling for
streams of short texts, we propose a Streaming Proﬁling
Algorithm, abbreviated as SPA. SPA algorithm ﬁrst utilizes
our proposed User Expertise Tracking topic model (UET) to
track the changes of users’ dynamic expertise. It then utilizes
our proposed Streaming Keyword Diversiﬁcation Algorithm
(SKDA) to produce top-k diversiﬁed keywords as the proﬁles of users’ expertise at a speciﬁc point in time.
Our proposed UET is able to capture the evolution of latent topics for users in streams of short texts. Most previous
topic models make the assumption that the content of documents is rich enough to infer per-document multinomial distribution of topics. This assumption is not held in the context
of streams of short documents where the length of each document is no more than a predeﬁned number, e.g., 140 characters in Twitter platform. In our UET model, to effectively
tackle sparsity challenge and infer each user’s latent topic
distribution as their expertise at a speciﬁc point in time, we
propose a collapsed Gibbs sampling algorithm where we assign a single topic to all the words of a short document.
In addition, most previous work on user proﬁling just
simply retrieves a list of top-k keywords as their proﬁles
that may be semantically similar to each other and thus
redundant. However, users’ expertise may be broad and
the top-k keywords retrieved by the models should be diversiﬁed and cover as many aspects of their expertise as
possible. To achieve this goal, our proposed SKDA algorithm, a streaming version of the PM-2 diversiﬁcation algorithm (Proportionality-based diversiﬁcation Method–2nd
version (Dang and Croft 2012)), works with the output of
UET to diversify and return top-k keywords as users’ proﬁles at time t.
The contributions of the paper are fourfold: (i) We propose a user expertise tracking topic model, UET, that can
track the changes of users’ expertise distributions over time
in the context of streams of short texts. (ii) We propose a collapsed Gibbs sampling algorithm to effectively infer users’
dynamic expertise distributions in the context of streams of
short texts. (iii) We propose a streaming keyword diversiﬁcation algorithm, SKDA, to diversify the top-k keywords

Abstract
In this paper, we aim at tackling the problem of dynamic user
proﬁling in the context of streams of short texts. Proﬁling
users’ expertise in such context is more challenging than in
the case of long documents in static collection as it is difﬁcult
to track users’ dynamic expertise in streaming sparse data. To
obtain better proﬁling performance, we propose a streaming
proﬁling algorithm (SPA). SPA ﬁrst utilizes the proposed user
expertise tracking topic model (UET) to track the changes
of users’ dynamic expertise and then utilizes the proposed
streaming keyword diversiﬁcation algorithm (SKDA) to produce top-k diversiﬁed keywords for proﬁling users’ dynamic
expertise at a speciﬁc point in time. Experimental results validate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithms.

Introduction
Microblogging platforms such as Twitter provide a lightweight, easy form of communication that enables users to
broadcast and share information about their recent activities, opinions and status via short texts (Kwak et al. 2010).
To effectively capture how users’ expertise underlying their
posts evolves over time is critical to the success of further
design of applications such as identifying a list of users who
are knowledgeable about a given topic (Balog et al. 2012).
In this paper, we study the problem of identifying the skills
and knowledge of a user and tracking how they change over
time in the context of streams of short texts. Our goal is to
infer users’ topic distributions over time and dynamically
proﬁle their expertise with a set of keywords in the context
of streams of short texts.
After the launch of expert ﬁnding task at TREC 2005 enterprise track (Craswell, de Vries, and Soboroff 2005), the
study of user proﬁling, also called expert proﬁling, has generated a lot of interests in expertise retrieval. Most previous
work on user proﬁling uses collection of static, long documents, and hence makes the assumption that users’ expertise does not change over time. The task of temporal expertise proﬁling was ﬁrst introduced recently in (Rybak, Balog, and Nørvåg 2014), where users’ expertise is assumed
to be changed over time, and was further studied in (Fang
and Godavarthy 2014). However, both of these recent work
still work with a set of long documents. To identify and track
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5860

