The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Exploring the Terrain of Metaphor Novelty: A
Regression-Based Approach for Automatically Scoring Metaphors
Natalie Parde, Rodney D. Nielsen
Human Intelligence and Language Technologies (HiLT) Laboratory
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of North Texas

The dearth of research on identifying metaphor novelty
has at least partially been due to a lack of publicly available data with which to train and evaluate such systems
(Haagsma and Bjerva 2016). In this work, our contributions
are as follows: we (1) contribute a large (18,000+ instances)
dataset annotated for metaphor novelty and make it publicly available to stimulate research in this area.2 We also
(2) conduct an analysis of a wide range of features, both
novel and drawn from existing work on standard metaphor
detection, to determine what linguistic and conceptual characteristics are most indicative of metaphor novelty. Finally,
we (3) contribute a regression-based metaphor novelty scoring approach3 that outperforms baseline metaphor novelty
scoring and standard metaphor detection approaches and establishes a benchmark on this dataset for future work.

Abstract
Automatically scoring metaphor novelty has been largely unexplored, but could be of beneﬁt to a wide variety of NLP applications. We introduce a large, publicly available metaphor
novelty dataset to stimulate research in this area, and propose
a regression-based approach to automatically score the novelty of potential metaphors that are expressed as word pairs.
We additionally investigate which types of features are most
useful for this task, and show that our approach outperforms
baseline metaphor novelty scoring and standard metaphor detection approaches on this task.

Introduction
The vast majority of computational work on ﬁgurative language to date has framed metaphor detection as a binary
(metaphor/non-metaphor) classiﬁcation task. However, in
reality language lies along a graded continuum, with ﬁgurative expressions ranging from highly conventional (or even
fossilized) to highly novel1 or creative (Gibbs 1984). While
most conventional metaphors could in theory be handled by
word sense disambiguation, novel metaphors are potentially
more problematic for NLP applications (Shutova 2015;
Haagsma and Bjerva 2016). Automatically scoring the novelty of potential metaphors could allow for conventional
and novel metaphors to be processed differently, enabling
better-performing language understanding systems. Novel
metaphors are also more difﬁcult for humans to process (Lai,
Curran, and Menn 2009), and therefore automatic metaphor
novelty scoring could additionally be useful for applications such as automatic essay scoring, automatic assessment of cognitive health, and automatic generation of cognitively stimulating discussion topics. Cognitive health applications offer a particularly intriguing downstream use case
for metaphor novelty scoring; probable Alzheimer’s disease
patients, for example, often struggle with comprehending
novel metaphors but not conventional metaphors (Amanzio
et al. 2008).

Related Work
Detecting Metaphor Novelty
Work that has speciﬁcally set out to capture metaphor novelty includes a machine learning approach that made use of
selectional preference features (Haagsma and Bjerva 2016)
and a rule-based approach based on bigram counts and
WordNet hyponymy relations (Krishnakumaran and Zhu
2007). The former group was ultimately unable to pursue their original goals due to a lack of adequate training
data and instead applied their approach to general, binary
metaphor detection.
The latter distinguished between sentences containing
novel and conventional metaphors (a binary classiﬁcation
task). To evaluate their work, they expanded the metaphors
in the Berkeley Master Metaphor List (Lakoff 1994) into approximately 1728 simple sentences, and then labeled those
sentences as containing either “dead” or “live” metaphors.
This differs from our approach in that our system learns from
and assigns instances with a continuous value ranging between 0 (“not a metaphor”) and 3 (“highly novel metaphor”).
Krishnakumaran and Zhu also base their rules strictly on
having one of three speciﬁc constructions available (subject
IS-A object, verb-noun, or adjective-noun), and require that
the words in a pair exist in WordNet (words not in a WordNet hyponymy relation would always result in the sentence

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We deﬁne novelty herein as the frequency with which one may
be expected to encounter a metaphor. Thus, if a metaphor is quite
common (e.g., “Two hours passed.”) it has low novelty, whereas if
it is surprising or unique (e.g., “Her laughter waltzed through the
courtyard.”) it has high novelty.

2
3

5366

http://hilt.cse.unt.edu/resources.html
https://github.com/natalieparde/metaphor-novelty-scoring

