The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Deep Neural Network Compression
with Single and Multiple Level Quantization
Yuhui Xu,1∗ Yongzhuang Wang,1 Aojun Zhou,2 Weiyao Lin,1 Hongkai Xiong1

1

School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China

Abstract
Network quantization is an effective solution to compress
deep neural networks for practical usage. Existing network
quantization methods cannot sufﬁciently exploit the depth information to generate low-bit compressed network. In this paper, we propose two novel network quantization approaches,
single-level network quantization (SLQ) for high-bit quantization and multi-level network quantization (MLQ) for extremely low-bit quantization (ternary). We are the ﬁrst to consider the network quantization from both width and depth
level. In the width level, parameters are divided into two
parts: one for quantization and the other for re-training to
eliminate the quantization loss. SLQ leverages the distribution of the parameters to improve the width level. In the
depth level, we introduce incremental layer compensation to
quantize layers iteratively which decreases the quantization
loss in each iteration. The proposed approaches are validated
with extensive experiments based on the state-of-the-art neural networks including AlexNet, VGG-16, GoogleNet and
ResNet-18. Both SLQ and MLQ achieve impressive results.

(a) Single-level

(b) Multi-level

Figure 1: Comparison of single-level quantization and multilevel quantization. The blue parts indicate the full-precision
weights and layers of the network. The orange parts are
quantized weights and layers.

One major challenge for network compression is the
tradeoff between complexity and accuracy. However, most
of the recent network compression methods degrade the accuracy of the network more or less (Han et al. 2015; Guo,
Yao, and Chen 2016; Gong et al. 2014; Rastegari et al. 2016;
Li, Zhang, and Liu 2016; Zhou et al. 2016). Recently, (Zhou
et al. 2017) propose incremental network quantization which
re-trains the un-quantized parameters to compensate for the
quantization loss can achieve high compression rate while
maintaining performance. However, they pay no attention to
the distribution of parameters and treat all layers equally (as
shown in Figure 1a).
In this paper, we argue that both of the width level (partitioning parameters) and the depth level (partitioning layers)
are important in network quantization (shown in Figure 1b).
In the width level, quantization should ﬁt the distribution of
the weights which directly affects the accuracy of the network. Vector quantization is a quantization method that fully
considers the distribution and makes quantization loss easy
to be controlled. Furthermore, weights with special type may
have special use (e.g. weights with type powers of two may
accelerate computations in FPGA devices). We extend our
approach by using L1 norm to constrain the clustering process. In the depth level, layers are important elements of networks. They are interacted and make joint contributions to
the networks. Thus, the quantization loss of one layer can
be eliminated by re-training other layers. For ternary quantization, the huge quantization loss can not be compensated
by re-training if only considering the width level. Thus, we

Introduction
Recent years, deep convolutional neural networks (DNNs)
are playing an important role in a variety of computer vision
tasks including image classiﬁcation (Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2012), object detection (Girshick 2015; Ren
et al. 2015), semantic segmentation (Chen et al. 2014;
Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015) and face recognition
(Taigman et al. 2014; Sun, Wang, and Tang 2014). The
promising results of DNNs are contributed by many factors.
Regardless of more training resources and powerful computational hardware, the large number of learnable parameters is the most important one. To achieve high accuracy,
deeper and wider networks are designed which in turn poses
heavy burden on storage and computational resources. It becomes more difﬁcult to deploy a typical DNN model on resource constrained mobile devices such as mobile phones
and drones. Thus, network compression is critical and has
become an effective solution to reduce the storage and computation costs for DNN models.
∗
Corresponding authors are Weiyao Lin and Hongkai Xiong:
{wylin, xionghongkai}@sjtu.edu.cn.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4335

