The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Neural Cross-Lingual Entity Linking
Avirup Sil, Gourab Kundu, Radu Florian, Wael Hamza
IBM Research AI
1101 Kitchawan Road
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
{avi, gkundu, raduf, whamza}@us.ibm.com

e3 : Alexander Smith was a Scottish-American professional
golfer who played in the late 19th and early 20th century.
q: Last year, while not one of the NFL’s very best quarterbacks, Alex Smith did lead the team to a strong 12-4 season.
Here, e1 , e2 and e3 refer to the Wikipedia pages of
three sportsmen (only ﬁrst sentence is shown), known as
“Alex Smith”; q refers to the sentence for the query mention “Alex Smith”. Since words in e3 belong to a different domain (golf) than q (American football), simple similarity based methods e.g. TF-IDF based cosine similarity
will have no difﬁculty in discarding e3 as disambiguation
for q. But words in e1 and e2 contain signiﬁcant overlap (both are American football players) even in key terms
like NFL. Since “Alex Smith” in q is a quarterback, correct disambiguation for q is e1 . This requires ﬁne-grained
similarity computation between q and the title page of e1 .
In this paper, we propose training state-of-the-art (SOTA)
similarity models between the context of the query mention and the page of the disambiguation candidate from
Wikipedia such that the similarity models can learn to correctly resolve such ambiguous cases. We investigate several ways of representing both the similarity and coherence between the query document and candidate Wikipedia
pages. For this purpose, we extract contextual information
at different levels of granularity using the entity coreference chain, as well as surrounding mentions in the query
document, then use a combination of convolutional neural networks (CNN), LSTMs (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber
1997), Lexical Composition and Decomposition (Wang, Mi,
and Ittycheriah 2016), Multi-Perspective Context Matching
(MPCM) (Wang et al. 2016), and Neural Tensor Networks
(Socher et al. 2013a; 2013c) to encode this information and
ultimately perform EL.
The TAC community is also interested in cross-lingual EL
(Tsai and Roth 2016; Sil and Florian 2016): given a mention in a foreign language document e.g. Spanish or Chinese, one has to ﬁnd its corresponding link in the English
Wikipedia. The main motivation of the task is to do Information Extraction (IE) from a foreign language for which
we have extremely limited (or possibly even no) linguistic resources and no machine translation technology. The
TAC 2017 pilot evaluation 1 targets really low-resource lan-

Abstract
A major challenge in Entity Linking (EL) is making effective use of contextual information to disambiguate mentions
to Wikipedia that might refer to different entities in different contexts. The problem exacerbates with cross-lingual
EL which involves linking mentions written in non-English
documents to entries in the English Wikipedia: to compare
textual clues across languages we need to compute similarity between textual fragments across languages. In this paper, we propose a neural EL model that trains ﬁne-grained
similarities and dissimilarities between the query and candidate document from multiple perspectives, combined with
convolution and tensor networks. Further, we show that this
English-trained system can be applied, in zero-shot learning,
to other languages by making surprisingly effective use of
multi-lingual embeddings. The proposed system has strong
empirical evidence yielding state-of-the-art results in English
as well as cross-lingual: Spanish and Chinese TAC 2015
datasets.

Introduction
Entity Linking (EL) is the task of associating a speciﬁc
textual mention of an entity (henceforth query entity) in a
given document (henceforth query document) with an entry
in a large target catalog of entities, often called a knowledge base or KB, and is one of the major tasks in the
Knowledge-Base Population (KBP) track at the Text Analysis Conference (TAC) (Ji et al. 2014; 2015). Most of the
previous EL research (Cucerzan 2007; Ratinov et al. 2011;
Sil and Yates 2013) have used Wikipedia as the target catalog of entities, because of its coverage and frequent updates
made by the community of users.
Some ambiguous cases for entity linking require computing ﬁne-grained similarity between the context of the query
mention and the title page of the disambiguation candidate.
Consider the following examples:
e1 : Alexander Douglas Smith is an American football quarterback for the Kansas City Chiefs of the National Football
League (NFL).
e2 : Edwin Alexander “Alex” Smith is an American football
tight end who was drafted by the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in
the third round of the 2005 NFL Draft.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

5464

http://nlp.cs.rpi.edu/kbp/2017/taskspec pilot.pdf

