The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Robust Search Strategies
Using a Bandit-Based Approach
Wei Xia, Roland H. C. Yap
School of Computing,
National University of Singapore, Singapore
{xiawei,ryap}@comp.nus.edu.sg

e.g. some heuristic may only perform well at a certain search
depth, but not for the whole solving process.
To address this challenge, we propose automatic and
adaptive CSP search heuristics. Our approach is motivated
by the multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem (Gittins 1989)
in reinforcement learning. We consider the search heuristic choice as selecting dynamically from several candidate
variable ordering heuristics during search. Each choice of
search heuristic is akin to selecting an action (arm) in the
MAB. Failures from a search node are turned into rewards
for the choice made which affect subsequent choices. The
idea is that learning from the rewards of choosing a particular heuristic will reduce making poor choices and in turn
lead to a search heuristic which is more robust.
We adapt two MAB algorithms, Thompson Sampling (Thompson 1933) and UCB1 (upper conﬁdence
bound) (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002) with reward functions to select the “best arm”, i.e. “variable ordering heuristic”. Our variable heuristics learn from information collected during the solving of the particular problem.
Thus, learning is online and differs from supervised learning approaches which require training examples and an ofﬂine training solving phase. We study the performance of the
original heuristics and our MAB-based heuristics on a variety of benchmark families. We also compare with a purely
stochastic baseline method that randomly selects a candidate heuristic at each node during search. Preliminary experiments show that our proposed adaptive learning techniques
are more robust than the original heuristics with less variance for different classes of problems and instances. Our online adaptive heuristics also outperforms the original heuristics on many problem instances.
Making CP solvers black box and robust is highly desirable. This paper is a step in this direction as the solver can
determine the search strategy rather than being speciﬁed in
the constraint model while still giving good performance.

Abstract
Effective solving of constraint problems often requires choosing good or speciﬁc search heuristics. However, choosing
or designing a good search heuristic is non-trivial and is
often a manual process. In this paper, rather than manually choosing/designing search heuristics, we propose the use
of bandit-based learning techniques to automatically select
search heuristics. Our approach is online where the solver
learns and selects from a set of heuristics during search. The
goal is to obtain automatic search heuristics which give robust
performance. Preliminary experiments show that our adaptive
technique is more robust than the original search heuristics. It
can also outperform the original heuristics.

Introduction
Constraint programming (CP) is successfully used in solving combinatorial problems. In CP, problems are modeled as
constraint satisfaction problems (CSP), often NP hard. Due
to their intractability, CP solvers combine constraint solving with a search strategy to instantiate variables. A good
search strategy can signiﬁcantly reduce the size of the search
space giving faster problem solving. Many variable search
heuristics, e.g. ddeg/dom (Bessiere and Regin 1996; Smith
and Grant 1998), wdeg/dom (Boussemart et al. 2004), impact (Refalo 2004), activity (Michel and Hentenryck 2012)
and corr (Wang, Xia, and Yap 2017), have been proposed.
However, choosing a heuristic from the many existing
variable ordering heuristics which works well for a particular problem instance or family is not simple. It may require
expertise or experience. A wrong (choice of) heuristic may
mean that the solving time is slower by several orders of
magnitude, e.g., the activity heuristic can be more than 100X
faster than wdeg/dom for some nurse-rostering problem instances, but can be slower for other benchmarks like radiation therapy (Michel and Hentenryck 2012). By the nature of
heuristics, no heuristic always outperforms another. In order
to provide an efﬁcient solution to a problem, speciﬁc search
heuristics may need to be used, requiring considerable effort
in choosing/designing the heuristics for good performance.
A drawback of an individual heuristic is that it may only
make a good decision at a certain solving state of a problem,

Related work
Adaptive CSP search strategies using machine learning techniques have been studied in CP. One distinguishing factor is whether an ofﬂine training phase is used. Portfolio
methods employ ofﬂine training, using the learned training
to select a solving strategy, which could be a search algorithm or a heuristic, when solving a particular problem in-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6657

