The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

A Water Demand Prediction Model for Central Indiana
Setu Shah, Mahmood Hosseini, Zina Ben Miled

Rebecca Shafer, Steve Berube

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Indiana University Purdue University - Indianapolis.
Email: setshah@iupui.edu, hosseima@iupui.edu,
zmiled@iupui.edu

Citizens Energy Group,
Indianapolis.
Email: rschaefer@citizensenergygroup.com,
sberube@citizensenergygroup.com

1997-2016. The number of customers in the service region
grows to over 324,000 in 2016.

Abstract
Due to the limited natural water resources and the increase
in population, managing water consumption is becoming an
increasingly important subject worldwide. In this paper, we
present and compare different machine learning models that
are able to predict water demand for Central Indiana. The
models are developed for two different time scales: daily and
monthly. The input features for the proposed model include
weather conditions (temperature, rainfall, snow), social features (holiday, median income), date (day of the year, month),
and operational features (number of customers, previous water demand levels). The importance of these input features
as accurate predictors is investigated. The results show that
daily and monthly models based on recurrent neural networks
produced the best results with an average error in prediction
of 1.69% and 2.29%, respectively for 2016. These models
achieve a high accuracy with a limited set of input features.

1

2

Related Work

Water demand forecasting is an active area of research
as water consumption keeps increasing, especially in urban areas. In (House-Peters and Chang 2011), the beneﬁts
of both short-term and long-term predictions are reviewed.
Short-term prediction is deﬁned as the prediction of daily
or monthly water consumption that is necessary to support
operational decisions. Long-term prediction spans several
years and depends on the forecasted growth of geographical
regions. The authors of (House-Peters and Chang 2011) suggest that economic factors such as water price and household
income are key features in water demand prediction. Similarly, (Arumugam et al. 2017) analyzed the spatio-temporal
patterns of water consumption across the US and concluded
that the efﬁciency of water-usage is higher in urban areas.
Regression models have traditionally been used in the
prediction of water consumption levels. Some of the early
research in the ﬁeld (Morgan and Smolen 1976), (Hansen
and Narayanan 1981) used temperature and rainfall as
weather features for these regression models. In (Morgan
and Smolen 1976), regression models based on climatic indicators such as temperature and precipitation and potential
evapotranspiration (sum of evaporation and plant transpiration) minus precipitation were developed. In (Hansen and
Narayanan 1981), a multivariate regression model that includes the daily water demand of Salt Lake City, average
temperature, total precipitation, and percentage of daylight
hours as input features was proposed.
The importance of weather features for water demand
forecasting was discussed in (Bakker et al. 2014). The authors tested three models with and without the inclusion of
weather features. The results show that the models which
take into consideration weather features outperformed the
models without weather features.
While several models have been proposed as predictors
for water consumption, the importance of each input feature in the model is not well documented. In this paper, we
use an extended feature set that includes temperature, customer count, median income, holidays, precipitation in both
forms (rainfall and snow), and the previous day’s water consumption. Moreover, we analyze the importance of each of

Introduction

An accurate water consumption prediction model can help
planners meet user demands. Previous research indicated
that water consumption is strongly correlated with weather
conditions such as temperature and precipitation (Morgan
and Smolen 1976), (Hansen and Narayanan 1981), (Bakker
et al. 2014). The focus of this paper is on developing
an accurate prediction model that can support operational
decision-making. Two types of prediction models are developed: a feed-forward back-propagation neural network and
a recurrent neural network. The prediction accuracy of these
models is compared to previously used water demand prediction models based on linear regression. In addition, the
impact of each input feature on the accuracy of the models
is discussed.
Two time scales are considered for each model: daily
and monthly. The monthly prediction models are more suitable for planning. The daily models are needed to support
daily operational decisions. Comparing the models at different time scales will highlight the robustness of the model in
tracking changes in demand trends.
The data used to design and validate the proposed models
was obtained from the Central Indiana region for the period
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7819

