The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Integrated Cooperation and Competition
in Multi-Agent Decision-Making
Kyle Hollins Wray, 1 Akshat Kumar, 2 Shlomo Zilberstein 1
1

College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA
2
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore

The overarching goal of this work is to formalize the notion of a cooperative-competitive process (CCP) by generalizing Dec-POMDPs and POSGs and viewing them as extreme points of a broad spectrum.
Work on integrated cooperative and competitive processes
has been sparse. While single-agent multi-objective models have enjoyed recent interest (Roijers et al. 2013), multiagent models have primarily focused either on a single objective for all agents (Bernstein et al. 2002; Kumar, Zilberstein, and Toussaint 2011; Nair et al. 2003) or a single objective for each agent (Monderer and Shapley 1996; EmeryMontemerlo et al. 2004; Gmytrasiewicz and Doshi 2005).
TAEMS (Decker 1996) and evolutionary-based multi-agent
systems (Cardon, Galinho, and Vacher 2000; Coello, Lamont, and Van Veldhuizen 2007) support multiple objectives, but they do not address sequential decision-making
and partial observability. Semi-autonomous systems allow
control to be transferred back and forth between an agent
and a human (Wray, Pineda, and Zilberstein 2016), but
do not include slack or competition. Vector-valued Dec(PO)MDPs consider solving individual objectives, which
encapsulate both the agent and group objectives, and then
apply techniques to fuse policies to satisfy overall social
welfare (Mouaddib, Boussard, and Bouzid 2007; Matignon,
Jeanpierre, and Mouaddib 2012). This online approach does
not consider a characterization of slack or game theory.
Multi-objective distributed constraint optimization (MODCOP) and other subclasses extend DCOP problems to
multiple objectives, but focus primarily on methods for
scalarization into a single objective (Delle Fave et al. 2011;
Roijers, Whiteson, and Oliehoek 2015).
Our primary contributions are: (1) the CCP model that
seamlessly blends the established cooperative and competitive multi-agent models, allowing for a tunable “slack” parameter to control the amount of cooperation versus competition; (2) a novel approximate algorithm for the model
using stochastic ﬁnite-state controllers (FSCs) that builds
upon nonlinear programming (NLP) techniques for DecPOMDPs (Amato, Bernstein, and Zilberstein 2010) and
best-response dynamics for POSGs (Nair et al. 2003); (3)
a formal analysis of CCP’s generality and the correctness of
the proposed algorithm; and (4) experimental evidence using
robots in real world experiments to demonstrate the range of
multi-agent interactions that the model captures.

Abstract
Observing that many real-world sequential decision problems
are not purely cooperative or purely competitive, we propose
a new model—cooperative-competitive process (CCP)—that
can simultaneously encapsulate both cooperation and competition. First, we discuss how the CCP model bridges the gap
between cooperative and competitive models. Next, we investigate a speciﬁc class of group-dominant CCPs, in which
agents cooperate to achieve a common goal as their primary
objective, while also pursuing individual goals as a secondary
objective. We provide an approximate solution for this class
of problems that leverages stochastic ﬁnite-state controllers.
The model is grounded in two multi-robot meeting and boxpushing domains that are implemented in simulation and
demonstrated on two real robots.

Introduction
Multi-agent models for sequential decision making under uncertainty often fall into one of two distinct categories. They are either considered cooperative—when all
the agents have a shared objective, or competitive—when
each agent has a distinct private objective. Rich computational models and algorithms have been developed for each
category, particularly the decentralized partially observable
Markov decision process (Dec-POMDP) (Bernstein et al.
2002) for the cooperative case and the partially observable
stochastic game (POSG) (Hansen, Bernstein, and Zilberstein 2004) for the competitive case. These models have
proved useful for various applications such as cooperative
Mars rovers (Becker et al. 2004) or competitive robotic
tag (Emery-Montemerlo et al. 2004).
Real-world situations, however, tend to require a delicate balance between cooperation, focusing on societal interests, and competition, focusing on self-interest. For example, autonomous vehicles (Wray, Witwicki, and Zilberstein 2017) must cooperate with other vehicles while optimizing the resources needed to reach their own destination.
Similarly, a personal assistant must be able to cooperatively
schedule meetings that respect group preferences while optimizing the objectives of the user they represent (Varakantham, Maheswaran, and Tambe 2005). In fact, pure cooperation and pure competition are rare in real-world settings.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4751

