The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Change-Detection Based Framework for
Piecewise-Stationary Multi-Armed Bandit Problem
Fang Liu, Joohyun Lee, Ness Shroff
The Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio 43210
{liu.3977, lee.7119, shroff.11}@osu.edu

to ﬁnd the most proﬁtable arms and exploiting the current empirically best arm as often as possible. A problemdependent regret lower bound, Ω(log T ), of any algorithm
for the classical bandit problem has been shown in Lai
and Robbins (1985). Several algorithms have been proposed
and proven to achieve O(log T ) regret, such as Thompson
Sampling (Agrawal and Goyal 2012), n -greedy and Upper Conﬁdence Bound (UCB) (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002). Variants of these bandit policies can be found
in Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi (2012).
Although the stationary (classical) multi-armed bandit
problem is well-studied, it is unclear whether it can achieve
O(log T ) regret in a non-stationary environment, where the
distributions of rewards change over time. This setting often occurs in practical problems. For example, consider the
dynamic spectrum access problem (Alaya-Feki, Moulines,
and LeCornec 2008) in communication systems. Here, the
decision maker wants to exploit the empty channel, thus improving the spectrum usage. The availability of a channel
is dependent on the number of users in the coverage area.
The number of users, however can change dramatically with
time of day and, therefore, is itself a non-stationary stochastic process. Hence, the availability of the channel also follows a distribution that is not only unknown, but varies
over time. To address the changing environment challenge,
a non-stationary multi-armed bandit problem has been proposed in the literature. There are two main approaches to
deal with the non-stationary environment: passively adaptive policies (Garivier and Moulines 2008; Besbes, Gur, and
Zeevi 2014; Wei, Hong, and Lu 2016) and actively adaptive policies (Hartland et al. 2007; Mellor and Shapiro 2013;
Allesiardo and Féraud 2015).
First, passively adaptive policies are unaware of when
changes happen but update their decisions based on the most
recent observations in order to keep track of the current
best arm. Discounted UCB (D-UCB), introduced by Kocsis and Szepesvári (2006), where geometric moving average over the samples is applied to the UCB index of each
arm, has
√ been shown to achieve the regret upper-bounded
by O( γT T log T ), where γT is the number of change
points up to time T (Garivier and Moulines 2008). Based
on the analysis of D-UCB, they also proposed and analyzed
Sliding-Window UCB (SW-UCB), where the algorithm updates the UCB index based on the observations within a

Abstract
The multi-armed bandit problem has been extensively studied under the stationary assumption. However in reality, this
assumption often does not hold because the distributions of
rewards themselves may change over time. In this paper, we
propose a change-detection (CD) based framework for multiarmed bandit problems under the piecewise-stationary setting, and study a class of change-detection based UCB (Upper
Conﬁdence Bound) policies, CD-UCB, that actively detects
change points and restarts the UCB indices. We then develop
CUSUM-UCB and PHT-UCB, that belong to the CD-UCB
class and use cumulative sum (CUSUM) and Page-Hinkley
Test (PHT) to detect changes. We show that CUSUM-UCB
obtains the best known regret upper bound under mild assumptions. We also demonstrate the regret reduction of the
CD-UCB policies over arbitrary Bernoulli rewards and Yahoo! datasets of webpage click-through rates.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit problem, introduced by Thompson (1933), models sequential allocation in the presence of
uncertainty and partial feedback on rewards. It has been
extensively studied and has turned out to be fundamental
to many problems in artiﬁcial intelligence, such as reinforcement learning (Sutton and Barto 1998), online recommendation systems (Li, Karatzoglou, and Gentile 2016) and
computational advertisement (Buccapatnam et al. 2017). In
the classical multi-armed bandit problem (Lai and Robbins
1985), a decision maker needs to choose one of K independent arms and obtains the associated reward in a sequence
of time slots (rounds). Each arm is characterized by an unknown reward distribution and the rewards are independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.).
The goal of a bandit algorithm, implemented by the decision maker, is to minimize the regret over T time slots,
which is deﬁned as the expectation of the difference between the total rewards collected by playing the arm with
the highest expected reward and the total rewards obtained
by the algorithm. To achieve this goal, the decision maker
is faced with an exploration versus exploitation dilemma,
which is the trade-off between exploring the environment
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3651

