The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Adversarial Learning for Chinese NER from Crowd Annotations∗
Yaosheng Yang,1 Meishan Zhang,4 Wenliang Chen,1
Wei Zhang,2 Haofen Wang,3 Min Zhang1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, China
2
Alibaba Group and 3 Shenzhen Gowild Robotics Co. Ltd
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Heilongjiang University, China
1
ysyang@stu.suda.edu.cn, {wlchen, minzhang}@suda.edu.cn
4
mason.zms@gmail.com, 2 lantu.zw@alibaba-inc.com, 3 wang haofen@gowild.cn
majority work directly build models on crowd annotations,
trying to model the differences among annotators, for example, some of the annotators may be more trustful (Rodrigues,
Pereira, and Ribeiro 2014; Nguyen et al. 2017).
Here we focus mainly on the Chinese NER, which is more
difﬁcult than NER for other languages such as English for
the lack of morphological variations such as capitalization
and in particular the uncertainty in word segmentation. The
Chinese NE taggers trained on news domain often perform
poor in other domains. Although we can alleviate the problem by using character-level tagging to resolve the problem
of poor word segmentation performances (Peng and Dredze
2015), still there exists a large gap when the target domain
changes, especially for the texts of social media. Thus, in
order to get a good tagger for new domains and also for the
conditions of new entity types, we require large amounts of
labeled data. Therefore, crowdsourcing is a reasonable solution for these situations.
In this paper, we propose an approach to training a Chinese NER system on the crowd-annotated data. Our goal is
to extract additional annotator independent features by adversarial training, alleviating the annotation noises of nonexperts. The idea of adversarial training in neural networks
has been used successfully in several NLP tasks, such as
cross-lingual POS tagging (Kim et al. 2017) and crossdomain POS tagging (Gui et al. 2017). They use it to reduce
the negative inﬂuences of the input divergences among different domains or languages, while we use adversarial training to reduce the negative inﬂuences brought by different
crowd annotators. To our best knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to
apply adversarial training for crowd annotation learning.
In the learning framework, we perform adversarial training between the basic NER and an additional worker discriminator. We have a common Bi-LSTM for representing
annotator-generic information and a private Bi-LSTM for
representing annotator-speciﬁc information. We build another label Bi-LSTM by the crowd-annotated NE label sequence which reﬂects the mind of the crowd annotators who
learn entity deﬁnitions by reading the annotation guidebook.
The common and private Bi-LSTMs are used for NER,
while the common and label Bi-LSTMs are used as inputs
for the worker discriminator. The parameters of the common Bi-LSTM are learned by adversarial training, maximizing the worker discriminator loss and meanwhile minimiz-

Abstract
To quickly obtain new labeled data, we can choose crowdsourcing as an alternative way at lower cost in a short time.
But as an exchange, crowd annotations from non-experts may
be of lower quality than those from experts. In this paper, we
propose an approach to performing crowd annotation learning
for Chinese Named Entity Recognition (NER) to make full
use of the noisy sequence labels from multiple annotators. Inspired by adversarial learning, our approach uses a common
Bi-LSTM and a private Bi-LSTM for representing annotatorgeneric and -speciﬁc information. The annotator-generic information is the common knowledge for entities easily mastered by the crowd. Finally, we build our Chinese NE tagger
based on the LSTM-CRF model. In our experiments, we create two data sets for Chinese NER tasks from two domains.
The experimental results show that our system achieves better
scores than strong baseline systems.

Introduction
There has been signiﬁcant progress on Named Entity Recognition (NER) in recent years using models based on machine
learning algorithms (Zhao and Kit 2008; Collobert et al.
2011; Lample et al. 2016). As with other Natural Language
Processing (NLP) tasks, building NER systems typically requires a massive amount of labeled training data which are
annotated by experts. In real applications, we often need to
consider new types of entities in new domains where we do
not have existing annotated data. For such new types of entities, however, it is very hard to ﬁnd experts to annotate the
data within short time limits and hiring experts is costly and
non-scalable, both in terms of time and money.
In order to quickly obtain new training data, we can use
crowdsourcing as one alternative way at lower cost in a
short time. But as an exchange, crowd annotations from nonexperts may be of lower quality than those from experts. It
is one biggest challenge to build a powerful NER system on
such a low quality annotated data. Although we can obtain
high quality annotations for each input sentence by majority
voting, it can be a waste of human labors to achieve such
a goal, especially for some ambiguous sentences which may
require a number of annotations to reach an agreement. Thus
∗

The corresponding author is Wenliang Chen.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1627

