The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

DeepRebirth: Accelerating Deep
Neural Network Execution on Mobile Devices
Dawei Li,1 Xiaolong Wang,1 Deguang Kong

1
Samsung Research America, Mountain View, CA
{xiaolong.w, dawei.l}@samsung.com, {doogkong}@gmail.com

Abstract
Deploying deep neural networks on mobile devices is a challenging task. Current model compression methods such as
matrix decomposition effectively reduce the deployed model
size, but still cannot satisfy real-time processing requirement.
This paper ﬁrst discovers that the major obstacle is the excessive execution time of non-tensor layers such as pooling
and normalization without tensor-like trainable parameters.
This motivates us to design a novel acceleration framework:
DeepRebirth through “slimming” existing consecutive and
parallel non-tensor and tensor layers. The layer slimming is
executed at different substructures: (a) streamline slimming
by merging the consecutive non-tensor and tensor layer vertically; (b) branch slimming by merging non-tensor and tensor
branches horizontally. The proposed optimization operations
signiﬁcantly accelerate the model execution and also greatly
reduce the run-time memory cost since the slimmed model
architecture contains less hidden layers. To maximally avoid
accuracy loss, the parameters in new generated layers are
learned with layer-wise ﬁne-tuning based on both theoretical
analysis and empirical veriﬁcation. As observed in the experiment, DeepRebirth achieves more than 3x speed-up and 2.5x
run-time memory saving on GoogLeNet with only 0.4% drop
on top-5 accuracy in ImageNet. Furthermore, by combining
with other model compression techniques, DeepRebirth offers an average of 106.3ms inference time on the CPU of
Samsung Galaxy S5 with 86.5% top-5 accuracy, 14% faster
than SqueezeNet which only has a top-5 accuracy of 80.5%.

Figure 1: An illustration of proposed DeepRebirth model acceleration pipeline. DeepRebirth optimizes a trained deep
learning model (left) to an accelerated “slim” model (right).
Such optimization is achieved with two operations: Streamline Slimming which absorbs non-tensor layers (i.e., pooling and normalization) to their bottom convolutional layer
(in light blue background) and Branch Slimming which absorbs non-tensor branches and convolutional branches with
small convolution ﬁlters (e.g., 1x1) to a convolutional branch
with large convolution ﬁlter (e.g., 5x5) (in light yellow background). We name new generated layers as slim layers.

Introduction

on mobile devices becomes a bottleneck for deployment of
many applications due to limited computing resources.
In this paper, we focus on improving the execution efﬁciency of deep learning models on mobile devices, which is a
highly intriguing feature. Here we deﬁne the execution efﬁciency as the model inference speed, the energy cost and the
run-time memory consumption. In reality, it takes more than
651ms to recognize an image using GoogleNet on Samsung
S5 (Table 4) with 33.2 MB run-time memory and 984mJ energy costs (Table 5). The effective solution is expected to
provide minimum accuracy loss by leveraging widely used
deep neural network architectures (such as GoogLeNet and
ResNet) with support of deep model acceleration on different types of layers.
Excessive execution time in Non-tensor layers

Recent years have witnessed the breakthrough of deep learning techniques for many computer vision tasks, e.g., image classiﬁcation (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
Szegedy et al. 2014), object detection and tracking (Ren et
al. 2015; Yu et al. 2016; Du et al. 2017), video understanding (Donahue et al. 2015; Li et al. 2017), content generation (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Zhang, Song, and Qi 2017),
disease diagnosis (Shen, Wu, and Suk ; Zhang et al. 2017)
and privacy image analytics (Tran, Kong, and Liu 2016).
More and more mobile applications adopt deep learning
techniques to provide accurate, intelligent and effective services. However, the execution speed of deep learning models
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2322

