The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

On Controlling the Size
of Clusters in Probabilistic Clustering
Aditya Jitta, Arto Klami
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT,
Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki

explicitly encodes preferences on the size distribution. See
Miller and Harrison (2013) for good explanation of how
Dirichlet process encourages the so-called rich-get-richerproperty: it provides solutions consisting of a few large clusters and a large set of small clusters.
The lack of control for the size stems from a seemingly
innocent modeling assumption behind partitional clustering
algorithms: the objects are assumed independent and identically distributed (i.i.d). Each object independently chooses
its cluster allocation, which enables computationally efﬁcient algorithms but prevents explicit control for cluster
sizes. A natural remedy, suggested by Klami and Jitta (2016)
in the context of microclustering, is to consider models with
i.i.d. clusters instead: The data collection is generated as
a set of K independent clusters that each independently
choose how many objects to generate, instead of directly
generating N independent objects that map to the K clusters. Making this transition for, e.g. mixtures of Gaussians,
is easy at the level of the model speciﬁcation, but unfortunately results in computational challenges since the cluster
allocations for the N samples now need to be carried out
jointly by some form of constrained optimization. We will
address these challenges in this work.
Various speciﬁc clustering models addressing the size distribution have been proposed before. Bennett, Bradley, and
Demiriz (2000) avoided empty clusters by setting a minimum size for each cluster, Banerjee and Ghosh (2006) studied a variant of k-means that enforces equal size for all clusters, and Zhu, Wang, and Li (2010) consider algorithms that
take arbitrary pre-determined cluster sizes as inputs for example to attempt solving classiﬁcation problems with clustering algorithms. Perhaps the most closely related concept, however, is that of microclustering (Miller et al. 2015;
Klami and Jitta 2016) that searches for clustering solutions
where the number of clusters K grows sub-linearly with
the number of objects N ; intuitively this corresponds to
clustering solutions guaranteed to return small clusters. Our
formulation generalizes theirs by allowing arbitrary priors
on cluster sizes, and we provide considerably more efﬁcient algorithms by focusing on maximum a posteriori solutions instead of attempting fully Bayesian analysis that requires either inefﬁcient sample-by-sample allocation (Miller
et al. 2015) or solving weighted discrete sampling problems
(Klami and Jitta 2016) – while Bayesian inference is in gen-

Abstract
Classical model-based partitional clustering algorithms, such
as k-means or mixture of Gaussians, provide only loose and
indirect control over the size of the resulting clusters. In this
work, we present a family of probabilistic clustering models
that can be steered towards clusters of desired size by providing a prior distribution over the possible sizes, allowing
the analyst to ﬁne-tune exploratory analysis or to produce
clusters of suitable size for future down-stream processing.
Our formulation supports arbitrary multimodal prior distributions, generalizing the previous work on clustering algorithms searching for clusters of equal size or algorithms designed for the microclustering task of ﬁnding small clusters.
We provide practical methods for solving the problem, using
integer programming for making the cluster assignments, and
demonstrate that we can also automatically infer the number
of clusters.

Introduction
Clustering is a canonical data analysis and machine learning
tool for discovering group structure underlying the data. In
this work, we study partitional clustering algorithms (methods that partition the data space into disjoint regions) from
the perspective of the cardinality of the clusters, presenting
algorithms that allow the user to provide prior information
on the desired number of objects in typical clusters.
Standard model-based partitional clustering algorithms,
such as the classical k-means algorithm and probabilistic
mixtures (McLachlan and Peel 2004) (e.g. Gaussian mixture
model), are agnostic to the size of the clusters. The user can
(and often has to) specify the desired number of clusters, but
has very limited control over the size distribution of the clusters. Instead, it is determined implicitly via the model and
the learning algorithm. For example, k-means prefers clusters of equal size whereas mixture models allow expressing
preference on the relative sizes, but neither method enforces
these preferences and the practical result may deviate signiﬁcantly from the expected one. Non-parametric clustering
models proposed for automatizing the choice of the number of clusters, such as the Dirichlet process mixture (Teh
2010), do this at the cost of losing even more of the control since the process underlying the choice of complexity
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3350

