The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multi-Channel Pyramid Person Matching
Network for Person Re-Identiﬁcation
1

Chaojie Mao,1 Yingming Li,∗1 Yaqing Zhang1 Zhongfei Zhang,1 Xi Li2,3
College of Information Science & Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies, Hangzhou, China
{mcj, yingming, zhongfei, yaqing, xilizju}@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

In this work, we present a Multi-Channel deep convolutional
Pyramid Person Matching Network (MC-PPMN) based on
the combination of the semantic-components and the colortexture distributions to address the problem of person reidentiﬁcation. In particular, we learn separate deep representations for semantic-components and color-texture distributions from two person images and then employ pyramid
person matching network (PPMN) to obtain correspondence
representations. These correspondence representations are
fused to perform the re-identiﬁcation task. Further, the proposed framework is optimized via a uniﬁed end-to-end deep
learning scheme. Extensive experiments on several benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach
against the state-of-the-art literature, especially on the rank-1
recognition rate.

Introduction
The task of person Re-Identiﬁcation (Re-ID) is to judge
whether two person images indicate the same target or not
and has widespread applications in video surveillance for
public security. From the perspective of human perception,
two persons can be distinguished according to the color or
texture features of the persons’ attributes (e.g. clothes, hairs)
and the latent semantic parts (e.g., head, front and back
upper body, belongings). Consequently, the person Re-ID
task can be addressed from two aspects matching: the colortexture distributions and the latent semantic-components.
In the previous efforts, two common strategies are employed for the person Re-ID task. One strategy focuses
on learning the correspondence among color-texture distributions from different person images, but ignoring correspondence among the semantic-components (Mignon and
Jurie 2012) (Pedagadi et al. 2013) (Weinberger and Saul
2009) (Koestinger et al. 2012). The other relies on learning
the correspondence among semantic-components, while ignoring the color-texture correspondence (Ahmed, Jones, and
Marks 2015) (Li et al. 2014) (Varior et al. 2016) (Zhang et
al. 2016a) (Cheng et al. 2016a) (Ding et al. 2015) (Wang et
al. 2016). Figure 1 gives two examples to show respective
advantages of the two strategies, where images in the ﬁrst

Figure 1: Example pairs of images from the CUHK03
dataset. Given the probe image of a person in view A marked
by a blue window, the task is to ﬁnd the same person in the
gallery set of view B. The groundtruth images are marked by
the green bounding boxes. The ﬁrst row and the second row
are re-identiﬁcation results by semantic components (SC)based and color-texture maps (CTM)-based strategies, respectively. Failures exist in both cases. The third row are
the results by the combination of the two strategies which
obtain success on both examples.
row are re-identiﬁed results by the semantic correspondence
and images in the second row are re-identiﬁed results by the
color-texture correspondence..
In this work, we assume that the semantic-components
and color-texture distributions are complementary to each
other and present a novel multi-channel deep convolutional
person matching network based on the combination of the
semantic-components and the color-texture distributions.
In particular, we learn separate deep representations for
semantic-components and color-texture distributions from
two person images and then employ the matching network
to obtain the correspondence representations. These correspondence representations are fused to address the Re-ID
task.

∗

Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7243

