The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Is a Picture Worth a Thousand Words? A Deep Multi-Modal
Architecture for Product Classiﬁcation in E-Commerce
Tom Zahavy,1 Abhinandan Krishnan,2 Alessandro Magnani,2 Shie Mannor1
1

The Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
2
Walmart Labs, Sunnyvale, California

Abstract
Classifying products precisely and efﬁciently is a major challenge in modern e-commerce. The high trafﬁc of new products uploaded daily and the dynamic nature of the categories
raise the need for machine learning models that can reduce
the cost and time of human editors. In this paper, we propose a
decision level fusion approach for multi-modal product classiﬁcation based on text and image neural network classiﬁers.
We train input speciﬁc state-of-the-art deep neural networks
for each input source, show the potential of forging them together into a multi-modal architecture and train a novel policy network that learns to choose between them. Finally, we
demonstrate that our multi-modal network improves classiﬁcation accuracy over both networks on a real-world largescale product classiﬁcation dataset that we collected from
Walmart.com. While we focus on image-text fusion that characterizes e-commerce businesses, our algorithms can be easily applied to other modalities such as audio, video, physical
sensors, etc.

Introduction
Product classiﬁcation is a key issue in e-commerce businesses. A product is typically represented by metadata such
as its title, image, color, weight and so on, and most of
them are assigned manually by the seller. Once a product
is uploaded to an e-commerce website, it is typically
placed in multiple categories. Categorizing products helps
e-commerce websites to provide costumers with a better
shopping experience, for example by efﬁciently searching
the products catalog or by developing recommendation systems. A few examples of categories are internal taxonomies
(for business needs), public taxonomies (such as groceries
and ofﬁce equipment) and the product’s shelf (a group of
products that are presented together on an e-commerce web
page). These categories vary with time to optimize search
efﬁciency and to account for special events such as holidays
and sports events. To address these needs, e-commerce
websites typically hire editors and use crowdsourcing
platforms to classify products. However, due to the high
amount of new products uploaded daily and the dynamic
nature of the categories, machine learning solutions for
product classiﬁcation are appealing as means to reduce

Figure 1: The printers & supplies shelf from Walmart.com.
Speciﬁc products (printers in this case) are presented using
meta data such as image, title, and price.

the time needed to classify products as well as cost. Thus,
precisely categorizing items emerge as a signiﬁcant issue in
e-commerce domains.
In this paper, we refer to a shelf as a group of products
presented together on an e-commerce website page and usually contain products with a given category (see Figure 1 for
an example of the printers&supplies shelf on Walmart.com).
Product to shelf classiﬁcation is a challenging problem
due to data size, category skewness, and noisy metadata
and labels. In particular, it presents three fundamental
challenges for machine learning algorithms. First, it is
typically a multi-class problem with thousands of classes.
Second, a product may belong to multiple shelves making
it a multi-label problem. And last, a product has both an
image and a text input making it a multi-modal problem.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7873

