The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Community Detection in Attributed Graphs: An Embedding Approach
Ye Li,1,2 Chaofeng Sha,1,* Xin Huang,3,4 Yanchun Zhang1,2,5
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligence Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
3
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
4
HKBU Shenzhen Institute of Research and Continuing Education
5
Centre for Applied Informatics, College of Engineering and Science, Victoria University
{yeli15, cfsha}@fudan.edu.cn, xinhuang@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, Yanchun.Zhang@vu.edu.au
*
Corresponding author
Abstract

Community detection is a fundamental and widely-studied
problem that ﬁnds all densely-connected groups of nodes and
well separates them from others in graphs. With the proliferation of rich information available for entities in real-world
networks, it is useful to discover communities in attributed
graphs where nodes tend to have attributes. However, most
existing attributed community detection methods directly utilize the original network topology leading to poor results due
to ignoring inherent community structures. In this paper, we
propose a novel embedding based model to discover communities in attributed graphs. Speciﬁcally, based on the observation of densely-connected structures in communities, we develop a novel community structure embedding method to encode inherent community structures via underlying community memberships. Based on node attributes and community
structure embedding, we formulate the attributed community
detection as a nonnegative matrix factorization optimization
problem. Moreover, we carefully design iterative updating
rules to make sure of ﬁnding a converging solution. Extensive
experiments conducted on 19 attributed graph datasets with
overlapping and non-overlapping ground-truth communities
show that our proposed model CDE can accurately identify
attributed communities and signiﬁcantly outperform 7 stateof-the-art methods.

(a) Using adjacency matrix A (b) Using community structure embedding matrix M

Figure 1: A comparison of the inherent community structures encoding performances of the adjacency matrix A and
community structure embedding matrix M
of communities. E.g., papers in citation networks have areas
of keywords. Such networks with node attributes are named
as attributed graphs (Yang, McAuley, and Leskovec 2013;
Huang, Cheng, and Yu 2015).
Due to two different kinds of information as network
structure and node attributes, it brings challenges to discover meaningful communities in attributed graphs. Several
approaches that combine structural and attributed information have been proposed in (Atzmueller, Doerfel, and Mitzlaff 2016; Wang et al. 2016; Yang, McAuley, and Leskovec
2013; Huang, Cheng, and Yu 2016; Yang et al. 2009). However, in terms of unweighted networks, all of those methods directly utilize original network topology, which ignores inherent community structures by assigning each edge
with the same value. Since nodes within a community are
densely connected, there exist numerous densely-connected
subgraphs in attributed graphs. Intuitively, edges that form
those densely-connected subgraphs are much more likely
to construct a corresponding community than edges that
connect separate subgraphs. Consider the example illustrated in Fig.1(a), there are two linked node pairs (v1 , v3 )
and (v1 , v2 ), where v1 and v3 belong to the same community while v1 and v2 do not. The original network topology doesn’t reﬂect the discrepancy of those two pairs,
because both pairs are assigned with the same value, 1.
However, (v1 , v3 ) is more important than (v1 , v2 ) in constructing a community obviously. So utilizing original network topology directly causes indiscriminately penalizing
node pairs whether in densely-connected structures or not
(Zhang, King, and Lyu 2015). While nodes in a commu-

Introduction
Communities are widely and naturally existed as functional
modules in real-world networks, such as social networks,
collaboration networks, and web graphs (Girvan and Newman 2002). Community detection (graph clustering) algorithms sever as the fundamental analysis tool for analyzing
and understanding large-scale networks. In the literature, numerous studies are proposed to identify communities using
network structure, including metric-based algorithms (Newman and Girvan 2004; Girvan and Newman 2002; Blondel et al. 2008; Shi and Malik 2000; Yang and Leskovec
2015) and generative models (Yang and Leskovec 2013;
Wang et al. 2011; Yang et al. 2009). Besides the network
topology, the entities modeled by the network nodes usually
have attribute information that is important for making sense
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

338

