The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

VoC-DL: Revisiting Voice of Customer Using Deep Learning
Susheel Suresh

Guru Rajan T S

Vipin Gopinath

Adobe Systems, Bangalore
susuresh@adobe.com

Adobe Systems, Bangalore
gts@adobe.com

Adobe Systems, Bangalore
vgopinat@adobe.com

with other data in a centralized data hub, analysis, reporting, and closed-loop action management. Yet according to a
2017 Forrester 2 evaluation only 42% of the top 1000 companies have a VoC Program in place. Only 19% of them have
some kind of automated analysis of customer’s voice. We
believe the reason for this is because advanced text analytics
is not integrated into current VoC pipelines.
Gartner 3 estimates that structured data constitutes only
20% of the complete enterprise data. A major portion
of the enterprise information is unstructured data, which
among others include communications from the customers.
Industry-leading CX (Customer Experience) experts say
87% of the time they ﬁnd high value in unstructured and
text data 4 .
With the rising volumes of textual customer voice content, having an automated analytics framework that can understand the true meaning or intent of the text is necessary.
We need a system that goes beyond sentiment analysis to understand the intentions of the customer who wrote that text.
Our work is in line with the above thought. We build a supervised multi-label text classiﬁcation system that can handle a wider range of expressions and signals like product enquiry, buying intent, feedback, seeking help etc. Our belief
is that when this model is integrated within VoC pipelines, it
will become effective in channelizing text properly thereby
increasing business efﬁciency.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows - We review
related work and the current state of the art text classiﬁcation architectures. Then we introduce our case study. We go
on to explain our data collection and annotation process, the
proposed architecture and later provide results of our experiments. Finally, we conclude with some discussions and state
possible future work.

Abstract
In the ﬁeld of digital marketing, understanding the voice of
the customer is paramount. Mining textual content written by
visitors on websites or social media can offer new dimensions
to marketers and CX executives. Traditional tasks in NLP
like sentiment analysis, topic modeling etc. can solve only
certain speciﬁc problems but don’t provide a generic solution to identifying/understanding the intention behind a text.
In this paper we consider higher dimensional extensions to
the sentiment concept by incorporating labels like product enquiry, buying intent, seeking help, feedback and pricing query
which give us a deeper understanding of the text. We show
how our model performs in a real-world enterprise use case.
Word2Vec embeddings are used for word representations and
later we compare three algorithms for classiﬁcation. SVM’s
provide us with a strong baseline. Two deep learning models
viz. vanilla CNN and RNN’s with LSTM are compared. With
no use of hard-coded or hand engineered features, our generic
model can be used in a variety of use cases where text mining
is involved with ease.

Introduction
Voice of Customer is a process used to capture the requirements/feedback from the customer (internal or external) to
provide the customers with the best in class experience. This
process is all about being proactive and constantly innovative to capture the changing requirements of the customers
with time.
With the millennials change in mentality towards business’s marketing efforts compared to their forebears, companies have to make the best efforts to sell them an experience
rather than just products/services. Reciprocal relationships
appeal the most to new-age customers rather than marketed
products. 1
By having robust VoC programs in place, businesses can
greatly beneﬁt from the insight it provides. They can monitor customer expectations over time, get feedback on new
products and services and departments viz. marketing, customer care and operations can make informed decisions.
There are a number of customer management platforms
which serve enterprises with solutions that offer VoC capabilities like feedback collection, integration of feedback

Related Work
There have been few works in the ﬁeld of intention analysis of free text (Goldberg et al. 2009; Ramanand, Bhavsar,
and Pedanekar 2010). Both use linguistic rules to classify
but they cant be extended easily. Sentiment analysis which
is also a similar problem, focuses on identifying positive and
2

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Source Gartner: https://www.gartner.com/doc/3069817

https://go.forrester.com/
http://www.gartner.com
4
Forresters Q4 2016 Customer Experience Programs Survey
3

7843

