The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Indirect Reciprocity and Costly Assessment in Multiagent Systems
Fernando P. Santos,1,2 Jorge M. Pacheco,3 Francisco C. Santos1
1

INESC-ID and Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, IST-Taguspark, 2744-016 Porto Salvo, Portugal
2
Email: fernando.pedro@tecnico.ulisboa.pt, Phone Number: (+351) 210 407 091
URL: http://web.ist.utl.pt/fernando.pedro/
3
CBMA and Departamento de Matemática e Aplicações, Universidade do Minho, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal

exceptions (Sasaki, Okada, and Nakai 2016), previous models typically assume that observability is an exogenous factor. In reality, however, accessing the information about a
private interaction depends on the decision of the involved
agents that may share (or not) its outcome. As an example, in
e-commerce or p2p platforms, private interactions take place
and the individuals need to be incentivized to rate their opponents, that is, to provide information about their actions.
This naturally involves time and effort. When the process
of information sharing is costly, reporting is hardly fulﬁlled
by rational agents, such that the system of IR – and ensuing
cooperation – may collapse. Here we address the problem
of costly reputation building in multiagent systems and the
sustainability of cooperation. We show that, even with costly
reporting, cooperation can emerge, provided that agents are
able to anticipate the reporting intentions of their opponents.

Abstract
Social norms can help solving cooperation dilemmas, constituting a key ingredient in systems of indirect reciprocity
(IR). Under IR, agents are associated with different reputations, whose attribution depends on socially adopted norms
that judge behaviors as good or bad. While the pros and cons
of having a certain public image depend on how agents learn
to discriminate between reputations, the mechanisms incentivizing agents to report the outcome of their interactions
remain unclear, especially when reporting involves a cost
(costly reputation building). Here we develop a new model
– inspired in evolutionary game theory – and show that two
social norms can sustain high levels of cooperation, even if
reputation building is costly. For that, agents must be able to
anticipate the reporting intentions of their opponents. Cooperation depends sensitively on both the cost of reporting and
the accuracy level of reporting anticipation.

Model Summary
Introduction

We consider a population of Z agents that play (in pairs, selected uniformly at random) a donation game in which they
must Cooperate (C) or Defect (D) with each other. Cooperation involves paying a cost (c) in order to provide a beneﬁt
(b) to the opponent (b > c > 0), whereas Defection does
not imply any cost/beneﬁt. The social optimum is achieved
when both agents cooperate; yet, for each agent, the fact that
cooperation is costly conﬁgures defection as a preferred option. This originates a social dilemma (Prisoner’s Dilemma).
On top of that, agents have a reputation (Good, G or Bad,
B). After each interaction, the reputation of an agent X, who
decided C or D against another agent Y, will change given a
social norm, that is, a rule used to attribute a new reputation
to X, given the actions and characteristics of X and Y. The
reputation update will only occur provided that Y shared the
outcome of the interaction (at a cost of reporting cR > 0).
Additionally, we provide agents the possibility to anticipate
the intention of their opponents in sharing information about
the interaction. While anticipative decision-making often requires complex anticipation architectures that allow predicting future outcomes based on the past, in the present domain
(e.g., e-commerce platforms and, in general, any artiﬁcial
agent society with reputation systems) this can be achieved
by making publicly available the previous reports of agents.
Strategies (i.e., rules that dictate whether to C or D against
a G or B opponent) evolve following a process of social

Social norms are a cornerstone of human societies, being a
fundamental mechanism to solve coordination, cooperation
and collective action problems. In general, social norms are
public and establish an expected pattern of behavior. When
violated, they may lead to responses that range from gossip
to open censure, ostracism, or dishonor for the transgressor (Bicchieri 2005). Often, norms that prevail in a society
only enforce behaviors indirectly, functioning as a top-down
mechanism that inﬂuences the bottom-up adherence (or not)
to certain behaviors. This is particularly evident when systems of reputations are used to enforce social norms (Castelfranchi, Conte, and Paolucci 1998): acting in a certain way
may provide a reputation uplift/downgrade whose tangible
effect emerges in the future, as a form of reciprocation.
In fact, enforcing behaviors indirectly, through norms and
reputations, underlies Indirect Reciprocity (IR), known as
a fundamental mechanism for the evolution of cooperation
among humans (Nowak and Sigmund 2005).
IR shares a fundamental challenge with other reputation systems working as enforcement mechanisms of social
norms: they require observability (Haynes et al. 2017), i.e.,
agents able to observe the behaviors of their peers. With rare
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8149

