The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Using k-Way Co-Occurrences for Learning Word Embeddings
Danushka Bollegala,1 Yuichi Yoshida,2 Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi2,3

University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L693BX, United Kingdom1
National Institute of Informatics, 2-1-2, Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 101-8430, Japan2
Japan Science and Technology Agency, ERATO, Kawarabayashi Large Graph Project3

occurrence matrix, whereas co-occurrences involving more
than two words would require a higher-order tensor (Socher
et al. 2013). Moreover, co-occurrences involving more than
three words tend to be sparse even in large corpora, requiring compositional approaches for representing their semantics (Van de Cruys, Poibeau, and Korhonen 2013). It remains unknown – what statistical properties about words
we can learn from k-way co-occurrences among words. In
this paper, we deﬁne the term k-way co-occurrence to denote
the co-occurrence between k distinct words in some context
such as a token-window, sentence, paragraph or a document.
Words do not necessarily appear as pairs in sentences.
By splitting the contexts into pairs of words, we loose
the rich contextual information about the nature of the cooccurrences. For example, consider the following sentences.
(a) John and Anne are friends.
(b) John and David are friends.
(c) Anne and Mary are friends.
Sentence (a) describes a three-way co-occurrence among
(John, Anne, friend), which if split would result in three
two-way co-occurrences: (John, Anne), (John, friends), and
(Anne, friends). On the other hand, Sentences (b) and
(c) would collectively produce the same two two-way cooccurrences (John, friend) and (Anne, friend), despite not
mentioning any friendship between John and Anne. Therefore, by looking at the three two-way co-occurrences produced by Sentence (a) we cannot unambiguously determine
whether John and Anne are friends. Therefore, we must retain the three-way co-occurrence (John, Anne, friend) to preserve this information.
Although considering k-way co-occurrences is useful for
retaining the contextual information, there are several challenges one must overcome. First, the number of k-way cooccurrences tend to be sparse for larger k values. Such sparse
co-occurrence counts might be inadequate for learning reliable and accurate semantic representations. Second, the
unique number of k-way co-occurrences grows exponentially with k. This becomes problematic in terms of memory requirements when storing all k-way co-occurrences. A
word embedding learning method that considers k-way cooccurrences must overcome those two challenges.
In this paper, we make several contributions towards the
understanding of k-way co-occurrences.

Abstract
Co-occurrences between two words provide useful insights
into the semantics of those words. Consequently, numerous prior work on word embedding learning has used cooccurrences between two words as the training signal for
learning word embeddings. However, in natural language
texts it is common for multiple words to be related and cooccurring in the same context. We extend the notion of cooccurrences to cover k(≥2)-way co-occurrences among a set
of k-words. Speciﬁcally, we prove a theoretical relationship
between the joint probability of k(≥2) words, and the sum
of 2 norms of their embeddings. Next, we propose a learning objective motivated by our theoretical result that utilises
k-way co-occurrences for learning word embeddings. Our experimental results show that the derived theoretical relationship does indeed hold empirically, and despite data sparsity,
for some smaller k(≤5) values, k-way embeddings perform
comparably or better than 2-way embeddings in a range of
tasks.

1

Introduction

Word co-occurrence statistics are used extensively in a widerange of NLP tasks for semantic modelling (Church and
Hanks 1990). As the popular quote from Firth—you shall
know a word by the company it keeps (Firth 1957), the
words that co-occur with a particular word provide useful
clues about the semantics of the latter word. Co-occurrences
of a target word with other (context) words in some context such as a ﬁxed-sized window, phrase, or a sentence
have been used for creating word representations (Mikolov,
tau Yih, and Zweig 2013; Mikolov, Chen, and Dean 2013;
Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014). For example, skipgram with negative sampling (SGNS) (Mikolov, Chen, and
Dean 2013) considers the co-occurrences of two words
within some local context, whereas global vector prediction
(GloVe) (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014) learns
word embeddings that can predict the total number of cooccurrences in a corpus.
Unfortunately, much prior work in NLP is limited to
the consideration of co-occurrences between two words
due to the ease of modelling and data sparseness. Pairwise co-occurrences can be easily represented using a coc 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5037

