The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Joint Dictionaries for Zero-Shot Learning
Soheil Kolouri ∗

Mohammad Rostami ∗

Yuri Owechko

Kyungnam Kim

HRL Laboratories, LLC
skolouri@hrl.com

University of Pennsylvania
mrostami@seas.upenn.edu

HRL Laboratories, LLC
yowechko@hrl.com

HRL Laboratories, LLC
kkim@hrl.com

of semantic attributes) is exploited, which allows for knowledge transfer from labeled classes to the unlabeled classes.
The overarching idea in ZSL is that the source and the target classes share common attributes. The semantic attributes
(e.g., can ﬂy, is green) are often provided as accessible
side information (e.g. verbal description of a class), which
uniquely describe classes of data. To achieve ZSL the relationship between seen data and its corresponding attributes
are ﬁrst learned in the training phase. In testing stage, this
allows for parsing a target image from an unseen class into
its semantic attributes to predict corresponding label.
To clarify the ZSL core idea and the required steps to
perform ZSL, consider the following sentence: ‘Tardigrades
(also known as water bears or moss piglets) are waterdwelling, eight-legged, segmented micro animals’1 . Given
this textual description, one can easily identify the creature in Figure 1, Left as a Tardigrade even though she may
have never seen one before. Performing this task requires
three capabilities: 1) parsing the textual information into semantic features, so we can describe the class Tardigrade
as ‘bear-like’, ‘piglet-like’, ‘water-dwelling’, ‘eight-legged’,
‘segmented’, and ‘microscopic animal’, 2) parsing the image into its visual attributes (See Figure 1), and 3) matching the parsed visual features to the parsed textual information which often requires extensive prior knowledge. Recent
textual features extracted from large unlabeled text corpora;
including word2vec (Mikolov et al. 2013) and glove (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014) enable a learner to efﬁciently parse textual information. Deep convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; He et al. 2016; Huang et al.
2017) have revolutionized the ﬁeld of computer vision and
they enable a learner to extract rich visual features from images. An extensive body of work in the ﬁeld of ZSL is concentrated on modeling the relationship between visual features and semantic attributes (Palatucci et al. 2009; Akata et
al. 2013; Socher et al. 2013; Norouzi et al. 2014; Lampert,
Nickisch, and Harmeling 2009; Zhang and Saligrama 2015;
Ding, Shao, and Fu 2017).
In this paper, we provide a novel approach to model the
relationship between the visual features and the textual information. Our speciﬁc contributions are:

Abstract
A classic approach toward zero-shot learning (ZSL) is to
map the input domain to a set of semantically meaningful attributes that could be used later on to classify unseen classes
of data (e.g. visual data). In this paper, we propose to learn
a visual feature dictionary that has semantically meaningful
atoms. Such a dictionary is learned via joint dictionary learning for the visual domain and the attribute domain, while
enforcing the same sparse coding for both dictionaries. Our
novel attribute aware formulation provides an algorithmic solution to the domain shift/hubness problem in ZSL. Upon
learning the joint dictionaries, images from unseen classes
can be mapped into the attribute space by ﬁnding the attribute
aware joint sparse representation using solely the visual data.
We demonstrate that our approach provides superior or comparable performance to that of the state of the art on benchmark datasets.

Introduction
Most classiﬁcation algorithms require a large pool of manually labeled data to learn the optimal parameters of a classiﬁer. The recent exponential growth of visual data, growing need for ﬁne-grained multi-label annotations, and consistent emergence of new classes (e.g. new products), however, has rendered manual labeling of data practically infeasible. Transfer learning has been proposed as a remedy
to deal with this issue (Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling
2014). The idea is to learn on a limited number of classes
and then through knowledge transfer, learn how to classify
images from the new classes either using only few labeled
data points, i.e. few- or one-shot learning (Fei-Fei, Fergus,
and Perona 2006), or in the extreme case without any labeled data, i.e. zero-shot learning (ZSL) (Lampert, Nickisch,
and Harmeling 2014). These transfer learning approaches
address the challenge of annotated data unavailability and
open the door towards lifelong learning machines.
To learn target classes with no labeled data, one needs
to be able to generalize the relationship between the source
data and its labels to the target classes. To address this challenge in ZSL, an intermediate shared space (i.e. the space
∗

Equal contribution
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

3431

Source: Wikipedia

