The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Expressive Real-Time Intersection Scheduling
Rick Goldstein

Stephen F. Smith

The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
rgoldste@cs.cmu.edu

The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
sfs@cs.cmu.edu

Inspired by many automakers’ (including Ford, Audi, and
Tesla) decisions to integrate connected devices into vehicles,
our real-time scheduling work adopts a connected vehicle
framework as a solution to the ﬁrst proposed challenge of
noisy sensors. In the connected vehicle framework, we assume all vehicles are equipped with a cellphone or dedicated short-range communication (DSRC) radio which continuously transmits real-time location, heading, and speed.
Receivers connected to a computer at each intersection can
collate this data into a real-time estimate of local trafﬁc conditions.
In response to the second challenge of modelling trafﬁc,
we adopt a lane-based framework; we maintain separate estimates of the vehicles present in every lane approaching an
intersection. Given the above information and learned vehicle dynamics, we estimate when a vehicle will reach the
intersection stop line, the probability of changing lanes, and
when it will pass through the intersection.
This lane-based framework is more expressive than prior
work in schedule-driven intersection control which combines compatible movements (e.g. east and west) into a single movement (as in Xie et al. (2012)). The increased size
of our trafﬁc state representation ultimately makes the third
challenge of calculating an optimal schedule of signal timings more difﬁcult. We propose a heuristic function that
exploits problem structure to quickly calculate meaningful
lower bounds on the delay associated with potential signal patterns. This heuristic is employed by an A* search
to efﬁciently calculate optimal schedules in real-time (every second). We show that Expressive Real-time Intersection Scheduling (ERIS) can reduce delay by up to 20% when
compared to other real-time intersection control strategies.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We
begin by explaining the real-time intersection control problem and provide an overview of intersection control research. Next, we present ERIS, our strategy for the real-time
intersection control problem, and discuss our application of
A* search to solve single instances of the problem. We then
present several experiments demonstrating that ERIS outperforms other real-time approaches in a fully connected vehicle framework. We conclude with a discussion of future
work.

Abstract
We present Expressive Real-time Intersection Scheduling
(ERIS), a schedule-driven control strategy for adaptive intersection control to reduce trafﬁc congestion. ERIS maintains separate estimates for each lane approaching a trafﬁc
intersection allowing it to more accurately estimate the effects of scheduling decisions than previous schedule-driven
approaches. We present a detailed description of the search
space and A* search heuristic employed by ERIS to make
scheduling decisions in real-time (every second). As a result
of its increased expressiveness, ERIS outperforms a less expressive schedule-driven approach and a fully-actuated control method in a variety of simulated trafﬁc environments.

Introduction
Trafﬁc congestion is a widespread annoyance throughout
global metropolitan areas. It causes increases in travel time,
increases in emissions, inefﬁcient usage of gasoline, and
driver frustration. It is estimated that in 2014, congestion
in urban America caused an additional 6.9 billion hours of
travel time and that an additional 3.1 billion gallons of fuel
were used as a result of congestion, costing roughly $160
billion (Schrank et al. 2015). Inefﬁcient signal patterns at
intersections are one major cause of such congestion. Trafﬁc signals are inefﬁciently timed and often fail to react to
real-time trafﬁc conditions.
Intersection scheduling strategies that make real-time decisions to extend or end a green signal based on real-time
trafﬁc data offer one opportunity reduce congestion and its
negative impacts. However, three factors make real-time intersection scheduling difﬁcult. Firstly, current data about
trafﬁc is incomplete and noisy; point sensors such as induction loop detectors and cameras miss vehicles, double
count vehicles, and only provide an inexact estimate of arrival times. Secondly, even with perfect data, modelling the
dynamics of a multi-agent system of heterogeneous vehicles
and pedestrians is challenging. Thirdly, given perfect data
and perfect agent modelling, the problem of comparing all
possible signal timing strategies is exponentially large in the
length of the scheduling horizon. The second and third challenges are linked by a trade-off between model expressiveness and the requirement of real-time solvability.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6177

