The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Ranking Wily People Who Rank Each Other
Anson Kahng
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University

Yasmine Kotturi

Chinmay Kulkarni

Human-Computer Interaction Institute Human-Computer Interaction Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Carnegie Mellon University

David Kurokawa

Ariel D. Procaccia

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
position in the output ranking by manipulating his reported
ranking. For example, he might weaken a strong contender
for the top position by ranking him last. Our goal, therefore,
is to design rank aggregation rules that are impartial, in the
sense that the position of a player in the output ranking is
completely independent of the report of that player.

Abstract
We study rank aggregation algorithms that take as input the
opinions of players over their peers, represented as rankings,
and output a social ordering of the players (which reﬂects,
e.g., relative contribution to a project or ﬁt for a job). To prevent strategic behavior, these algorithms must be impartial,
i.e., players should not be able to inﬂuence their own position in the output ranking. We design several randomized
algorithms that are impartial and closely emulate given (nonimpartial) rank aggregation rules in a rigorous sense. Experimental results further support the efﬁcacy and practicability
of our algorithms.

1

1.1

Our Approach and Results

On a high level, our approach is to design randomized rank
aggregation rules that are impartial and closely emulate standard rank aggregation rules that are not impartial. Speciﬁcally, we focus on providing impartial approximations to the
important class of pairwise rules, which, as input, only require information about the fraction of players ranking any
one player above another. Our theoretical results crucially
depend on the notion of approximation — or measure of error — in question.
In Section 4, we introduce the k- PARTITE algorithm,
which, in a nutshell, randomly partitions the players into
subsets, builds a probability distribution over the positions
of members of one subset based on the aggregate opinion of
members of other subsets, and then generates a distribution
over rankings that is consistent with these distributions over
positions. We prove that k- PARTITE is impartial, and, when
used in conjunction with any pairwise rule, it provides small
backward error with respect to that rule: With high probability, k- PARTITE places each player in the same position that
the given pairwise rule would have placed him had the input
rankings been slightly perturbed.
In Section 5, we present the C OMMITTEE algorithm. It
randomly chooses a subset of players, who serve as the
eponymous committee. Each committee member is positioned based on the opinions of other committee members,
and then all other players are ordered by the committee. The
key idea is that, to avoid conﬂicts and achieve impartiality,
each committee member has slots that are reserved for him,
and he is inserted into the reserved slot that most closely
matches the aggregate opinion of other committee members.
We prove that C OMMITTEE provides mixed error guarantees
with respect to any given pairwise rule, that is, with high
probability, C OMMITTEE places each player in a position
that is close to where the given pairwise rule would have
placed him had the input rankings been slightly perturbed.
Taking on some forward error — a mismatch between the

Introduction

Our work is primarily motivated by two applications. The
ﬁrst is ordering authors on a scientiﬁc paper based on contribution. In medical research, for example, author lists tend
to be long, and the difference between being listed second or
third on an important paper can make or break a career. We
would like to employ an algorithm that receives from each
author a ranking, which reﬂects his own opinion regarding
the relative contribution of different authors, and outputs an
aggregate ranking.
The second application is online labor markets, such as
Upwork or Freelancer. In the bigger markets, employers typically receive dozens of applications for a job, but there is an
embarrassment of riches, because employers do not have the
knowledge required to accurately evaluate applicants. For
the past year we have been building a prototype of a new
online labor market, where applicants for a job — who are
well-suited to evaluate applications for that same job — rank
each other.1 We would like to implement a mechanism that
aggregates these rankings into a single ranking that is then
shown to the employer.
As the reader has no doubt realized by now, the foregoing applications share a common problem, which gets in the
way of applying standard rank aggregation rules: strategic
behavior. Speciﬁcally, in these relatively high-stakes scenarios, it is likely that a player would try to improve his own
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
To be more accurate, they submit pairwise comparisons of
other applicants, but, as we discuss in Section 7, that is essentially
the same setting.

1087

