The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Lexicographic Preference
Trees from Positive Examples
Hélène Fargier, Pierre-François Gimenez, Jérôme Mengin
IRIT, CNRS, University of Toulouse, 31000 Toulouse, France
{fargier, pgimenez, mengin}@irit.fr

tions. However, e-commerce companies in general keep a
history of past sales. Sold items have been chosen by users,
so they must be ranked high in their preferences, but not necessarily in the very top; indeed a user may be led to eventually choose an item which is not the optimal one in her preference order: for instance because of the difﬁculty to grasp
all possible options, a phenomenon called “mass confusion”
(Huffman and Kahn 1998), because of the inﬂuence of an
advertisement, or because her preferred item is unavailable.
Yet, this list of highly ranked items does provide information
about the users’ preferences.
Our aim in this paper is to study how the users’ preferences can be learnt from this sales history. Note that this
is different from a classiﬁcation problem where one would
want to separate alternatives between, say, acceptable ones
and not acceptable ones. In our problem, we want to rank the
alternatives. If, for instance, the colour red appears more often in the sales history than the colour yellow, then we want
to induce a model that ranks alternatives with the colour red
higher than alternatives with the colour yellow – maybe in
association with some other criteria.
Research on the representation and learning of preferences has brought forward several types of models. Numerical models, like linear ranking functions or additive utilities (Joachims 2002; Freund et al. 2003; Schiex, Fargier,
and Verfaillie 1995; Gonzales and Perny 2004; Braziunas
2005), are rich families of models, especially if one allows
high-dimensional feature spaces. Research in Artiﬁcial Intelligence has also brought forward ordinal models, like CPnets (Boutilier et al. 2004) and several extensions or variants. Lexicographic preferences are another family of ordinal models. This kind of preference is based on the importance of the attributes: when comparing two outcomes, their
values for the most important attribute are compared; if the
two outcomes have different values for that attribute, then
the one with the preferred value is deemed preferable to the
other; otherwise one looks at the next most important attribute, and so on. This model can be extended by allowing
the preferences on the values of an issue to depend on the
values of more important ones. The relative importance of
issues is no longer a linear order, but a “lexicographic preference” tree (Fraser 1993; 1994; Brewka and others 2006;
Wallace and Wilson 2009; Booth et al. 2010).
Lexicographic preference trees are the model that we

Abstract
This paper considers the task of learning the preferences of
users on a combinatorial set of alternatives, as it can be the
case for example with online conﬁgurators. In many settings,
what is available to the learner is a set of positive examples of
alternatives that have been selected during past interactions.
We propose to learn a model of the users’ preferences that
ranks previously chosen alternatives as high as possible. In
this paper, we study the particular task of learning conditional
lexicographic preferences. We present an algorithm to learn
several classes of lexicographic preference trees, prove convergence properties of the algorithm, and experiment on both
synthetic data and on a real-world bench in the domain of
recommendation in interactive conﬁguration.

1

Introduction

Modern, interactive decision support systems like recommender systems or conﬁgurators often handle a very large
set of possible decisions/alternatives. The task of ﬁnding the
alternatives that best suit their preferences can be challenging for users, but the system can guide them towards their
optimal decision if it has some knowledge of their preferences. In many settings, the users’ preferences are not
known in advance. This is especially the case of systems
that enable anonymous users to browse the catalogues: such
systems must be able to acquire users’ preferences.
That is why preference learning has emerged in the last
decade as an important ﬁeld; many interesting results are reported in e.g. the book edited by (Fürnkranz and Hüllermeier
2011), or the proceedings of recent Preference Learning or
DA2PL (Decision Aid to Preference Learning) workshops.
A general problem is: given a set of observed preferences,
induce a model of preferences that best explains these observations, within a certain class of models. As input, it is
often assumed that the observed preferences are given as a
set of pairwise comparisons or partial rankings of alternatives (Joachims 2002); or can be elicitated online by asking
the user to choose between two alternatives (Viappiani, Faltings, and Pu 2006; Koriche and Zanuttini 2009).
But in some circumstances, such input is not available.
This is especially the case of some anonymous on-line conﬁgurators, where little information is stored about interacc 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2959

