The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

On the Distortion of Voting with Multiple Representative Candidates∗
Yu Cheng

Shaddin Dughmi

David Kempe

Duke University

University of Southern California

University of Southern California

In light of the classic impossibility results for axiomatic approaches to social choice (Arrow 1951) and voting (Gibbard 1973; Satterthwaite 1975), a fruitful approach has been
to treat voting as an implicit optimization problem of ﬁnding the “best” candidate for the population in aggregate
(Boutilier et al. 2015; Caragiannis and Procaccia 2011;
Procaccia 2010; Procaccia and Rosenschein 2006). Using
this approach, voting systems can be compared based on
how much they distort the outcome, in the sense of leading
to the election of suboptimal candidates. A particularly natural optimization objective is the sum of distances between

voters and the chosen candidate in a suitable metric space
(Anshelevich 2016; Anshelevich, Bhardwaj, and Postl 2015;
Anshelevich and Postl 2016; Goel, Krishnaswamy, and Munagala 2017). The underlying assumption is that the closer
a candidate is to a voter, the more similar their positions on
key questions are. Because proximity implies that the voter
would beneﬁt from the candidate’s election, voters will rank
candidates by increasing distance, a model known as singlepeaked preferences (Black 1948; Downs 1957; Black 1958;
Moulin 1980; Merrill and Grofman 1999; Barberà, Gul,
and Stacchetti 1993; Richards, Richards, and McKay 1998;
Barberà 2001).
Even in the absence of strategic voting, voting systems
can lead to high distortion in this setting, because they
typically allow only for communication of ordinal preferences1 , i.e., rankings of candidates (Boutilier and Rosenschein 2016). In a beautiful piece of recent work, (Anshelevich, Bhardwaj, and Postl 2015) showed that this approach can draw very clear distinctions between voting systems: some voting systems (in particular, Copeland and related systems) have distortion bounded by a small constant,
while most others (including Plurality, Veto, k-approval, and
Borda Count) have unbounded distortion, growing linearly
in the number of voters or candidates.
The examples giving bad distortion typically have the
property that the candidates are not “representative” of the
voters. (Anshelevich, Bhardwaj, and Postl 2015) showed
more positive results when there are no near-ties for ﬁrst
place in any voter’s ranking. (Cheng, Dughmi, and Kempe
2017) proposed instead a model of representativeness in
which the candidates are drawn randomly from the population of voters; under this model, they showed smaller constant distortion bounds than the worst-case bounds for majority voting with n = 2 candidates. (Cheng, Dughmi, and
Kempe 2017) left as an open question the analysis of the
distortion of voting systems for n ≥ 3 representative candidates.
In the present work, we study the distortion of positional
voting systems with n ≥ 3 representative candidates. Informally (formal deﬁnitions of all concepts are given in Sec-

∗
Due to space constraints, this version omits several important
proofs. The full version of this paper can be found on arXiv.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Of course, it is also highly questionable that voters would be
able to quantify distances in a metric space sufﬁciently accurately,
in particular given that the metric space is primarily a modeling
tool rather than an actual concrete object.

Abstract
We study positional voting rules when candidates and voters
are embedded in a common metric space, and cardinal preferences are naturally given by distances in the metric space.
In a positional voting rule, each candidate receives a score
from each ballot based on the ballot’s rank order; the candidate with the highest total score wins the election. The cost
of a candidate is his sum of distances to all voters, and the
distortion of an election is the ratio between the cost of the
elected candidate and the cost of the optimum candidate. We
consider the case when candidates are representative of the
population, in the sense that they are drawn i.i.d. from the
population of the voters, and analyze the expected distortion
of positional voting rules.
Our main result is a clean and tight characterization of positional voting rules that have constant expected distortion (independent of the number of candidates and the metric space).
Our characterization result immediately implies constant expected distortion for Borda Count and elections in which each
voter approves a constant fraction of all candidates. On the
other hand, we obtain super-constant expected distortion for
Plurality, Veto, and approving a constant number of candidates. These results contrast with previous results on voting
with metric preferences: When the candidates are chosen adversarially, all of the preceding voting rules have distortion
linear in the number of candidates or voters. Thus, the model
of representative candidates allows us to distinguish voting
rules which seem equally bad in the worst case.

1

Introduction

973

