The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Predictive State Representations
from Non-Uniform Sampling
Yuri Grinberg,1 Hossein Aboutalebi,2
Melanie Lyman-Abramovitch,2 Borja Balle,3∗ Doina Precup2
1

National Research Council of Canada
2
McGill University, Canada
3
Amazon Research Cambridge, UK
states of the system, also incorporating action/input variables in the case of POMDPs. Historically, expectation maximization (EM) has been used to learn such models, with
mixed success. In the last decade, spectral learning methods have emerged as an alternative to EM with competitive performance and stronger theoretical guarantees, such
as consistency (Boots, Siddiqi, and Gordon 2011) and ﬁnite sample bounds (Hsu, Kakade, and Zhang 2012). Such
methods can in fact be applied to learn about other classes
of models with latent variables, such as weighted ﬁnite automata, HMM mixtures, latent junction trees, etc. (Parikh et
al. 2012), (Balle et al. 2014),(Subakan, Traa, and Smaragdis
2014). In this paper, we focus on using spectral learning for
an alternative representation called (linear) predictive state
representations (PSR) (Littman et al. 2002), (Singh, James,
and Rudary 2004), which is used to describe the evolution
of system observations possibly conditioned on actions of
an agent. The development of consistent learning algorithms
for PSRs has made it possible to use them for sequential data
modelling in large and realistic problems (Boots, Siddiqi,
and Gordon 2011), (Boots and Gordon 2011), (Ong, Grinberg, and Pineau 2013); (Grinberg, Precup, and Gendreau
2014), (Hamilton, Fard, and Pineau 2013).

Abstract
Predictive state representations (PSR) have emerged as a
powerful method for modelling partially observable environments. PSR learning algorithms can build models for predicting all observable variables, or predicting only some of
them conditioned on others (e.g., actions or exogenous variables). In the latter case, which we call conditional modelling,
the accuracy of different estimates of the conditional probabilities for a ﬁxed dataset can vary signiﬁcantly, due to the
limited sampling of certain conditions. This can have negative consequences on the PSR parameter estimation process,
which are not taken into account by the current state-of-theart PSR spectral learning algorithms. In this paper, we examine closely conditional modelling within the PSR framework.
We ﬁrst establish a new positive but surprisingly non-trivial
result: a conditional model can never be larger than the complete model. Then, we address the core shortcoming of existing PSR spectral learning methods for conditional models
by incorporating an additional step in the process, which can
be seen as a type of matrix denoising. We further reﬁne this
objective by adding penalty terms for violations of the system dynamics matrix structure, which improves the PSR predictive performance. Empirical evaluations on both synthetic
and real datasets highlight the advantages of the proposed approach.

While learning PSR models has been applied to both
problems without actions (HMM-like) and with actions
(POMDP-like), the latter case deserves a more careful investigation. We focus on the problem of conditional modelling
of a subset of variables within the PSR framework, while
other variables are treated as exogenous or actions. We call
such a model a conditional PSR as opposed to a complete
PSR, which models all the variables jointly. We ﬁrst derive
a new result showing that the conditional PSR will never
have a larger dimension than the complete PSR, regardless
of the dependency between variables. Then, we examine the
current state-of-the-art PSR learning method and show that
its parameter estimation procedure suffers when the conditioned variable (action or exogenous variable) is not sampled
uniformly at random. It is crucial to address this problem, as
in conditional models some conditions may never be achievable or occur very rarely, thus crippling existing techniques.
We introduce a new, theoretically justiﬁed, optimization objective which addresses this problem. This optimization is
then incorporated as an intermediate step in existing PSR
spectral learning. We evaluate the proposed approach on a

Introduction
Modelling stochastic sequential data is of signiﬁcant interest
in many scientiﬁc disciplines, and many approaches have
been proposed in machine learning to deal with this problem. In this paper, we are concerned mainly with models
which are capable of making predictions about future observations, given a stream of data seen so far. This is an important problem in many domains, including reinforcement
learning (where one wants to predict future returns), medical
classiﬁcation (where one may want to predict the future risk
of a patient becoming critically ill), etc.
Hidden Markov models (HMM) (Rabiner 1989) and their
extensions such as partially observable Markov decision
processes (POMDP) are popular models for this task. They
represent conditional models of observations given latent
∗

B. Balle completed this work while at McGill University.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3061

