The Eighth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence 2018 (EAAI-18)

Data Analysis Competition Platform for Educational Purposes:
Lessons Learned and Future Challenges
Yukino Baba

Tomoumi Takase, Kyohei Atarashi

Kyoto University; RIKEN Center for AIP
baba@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Hokkaido University
{takase t, atarashi k}@complex.ist.hokudai.ac.jp

Satoshi Oyama

Hisashi Kashima

Hokkaido University; RIKEN Center for AIP
oyama@ist.hokudai.ac.jp

Kyoto University; RIKEN Center for AIP
kashima@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

data mining and machine learning conferences, data analysis competitions such as the KDD Cup (Kohavi et al. 2000)
have been held recently. Netﬂix, Inc. organized the Netﬂix
Prize from 2006 to 2010 to develop the best movie recommendation algorithm by utilizing the power of the crowds
of data scientists (Töscher, Jahrer, and Bell 2009).1 Data
analysis competition platforms, such as Kaggle2 or CrowdANALYTIX,3 have been launched as well. These platforms
generalize the Netﬂix approach and enable companies and
organizations to conduct open competitions for seeking the
best predictive model for their own data and problems by
leveraging data scientists from all over the world (Baba et
al. 2014).
Data analysis competitions have been considered an efﬁcient platform for learning such skills by addressing real
data analysis problems. For example, Kaggle offers a tool
for running data science competitions in class, called Kaggle in Class.4 This tool enables lectures to use the features of
Kaggle, such as its evaluation system, leaderboard, or forum.
Kaggle in Class has been used for data analysis education in
hundreds of universities around the world. This fact indicates that data analysis competitions have been recognized
as an efﬁcient tool for training practical data analysis skills;
a competition system wherein a real dataset is provided for
participants and their outcomes are evaluated right after submission would be beneﬁcial for encouraging self-study, and
competing against others may improve the motivation for
learning.
Although the educational efﬁciency of data analysis competitions has been noticed, current data analysis competitions are not designed for the educational purpose, and it
is not well studied how data analysis competition platforms
should be designed for enhancing educational effectiveness.
The suitable design of a data analysis competition for learn-

Abstract
Data analysis education plays an important role in accelerating the efﬁcient use of data analysis technologies in various
domains. Not only the knowledge of statistics and machine
learning, but also practical skills of deploying machine learning and data analysis techniques, are required for conducting
data analysis projects in the real world. Data analysis competitions, such as Kaggle, have been considered as an efﬁcient
system for learning such skills by addressing real data analysis problems. However, current data analysis competitions
are not designed for educational purposes and it is not well
studied how data analysis competition platforms should be
designed for enhancing educational effectiveness. To answer
this research question, we built, and subsequently operated
an educational data analysis competition platform called University of Big Data for several years. In this paper, we present
our approaches for supporting and motivating learners and
the results of our case studies. We found that providing a tutorial article is beneﬁcial for encouraging active participation
of learners, and a leaderboard system allowing an unlimited
number of submissions can motivate the efforts of learners.
We further discuss future directions of educational data analysis competitions.

1

Introduction

Data analysis education plays an important role in accelerating the efﬁcient use of data analysis technologies in various domains. Not only knowledge of statistics and machine learning, but also practical skills of deploying machine
learning and data analysis techniques, are required for conducting data analysis projects in the real world. In addition to
classroom lectures, hands-on training with a variety of real
datasets is necessary for learning such skills.
Data analysis competitions provide opportunities for data
scientists to try and promote their practical data analysis
skills. In each data analysis competition, participants apply
machine learning algorithms to the given dataset, and compete to build the best predictive models. In conjunction with

1

http://www.netﬂixprize.com/
https://www.kaggle.com
3
https://www.crowdanalytix.com
4
https://inclass.kaggle.com
2

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7887

