The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multi-Step Time Series Generator for Molecular Dynamics
Katsuhiro Endo, Katsufumi Tomobe, Kenji Yasuoka
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Keio University
3-14-1 Hiyoshi, Kohoku-ku, Yokohama
Kanagawa, Japan 223-8522

respectively; thus, a novel solution to overcome the bottleneck is desired.
Recently, deep neural networks have achieved signiﬁcant results in many ﬁelds. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Elman 1990), long short-term memory
(LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), and other
derivative models (Mogren 2016; Fabius and van Amersfoort 2014) have led to remarkable advances in both discriminative and generative sequence data tasks. However, when
the generative models are used repeatedly, the generations
are affected by previous ones, leading to an accumulation of
bias, called the exposure bias. In a naive generator, this bias
causes the probability of error to grow quadratically with
the iteration number (Ross and Bagnell 2010). Various studies have attempted to mitigate the exposure bias. In the natural language processing ﬁeld, many studies use the beam
search to mitigate effects of the exposure bias (Sutskever,
Vinyals, and Le 2014). Some studies have mitigated the bias
by using the speciﬁc loss functions that directly evaluate the
correlations with the training sequence (Shen et al. 2015). A
recent study by Yu et al. used extended generative adversarial nets (GANs) (Yu et al. 2017). Although the above studies
achieved some success, our task of generating the MD data
suffers from more serious exposure bias. The computational
costs of the MD simulations mean that we would like to obtain long-term dynamical statistics from short-time-length
MD data. To fulﬁll this requirement, we have to generate
the short-time-length MD data repeatedly and concatenate
them to make a long-time-length MD data; therefore, a novel
framework for mitigating the exposure bias is needed.
To develop a new deep neural generative model, we introduce a multi-step time series generator (MD-GAN) that
efﬁciently samples time series of the MD simulations (see
Fig. 1A). Our model has the following advantages:

Abstract
Molecular dynamics (MD) is a powerful computational
method for simulating molecular behavior. Deep neural networks provide a novel method of generating MD data efﬁciently, but there is no architecture that mitigates the wellknown exposure bias accumulated by multi-step generations.
In this paper, we propose a multi-step time series generator
using a deep neural network based on Wasserstein generative adversarial nets. Instead of sparse real data, our model
evolves a latent variable z that is densely distributed in a lowdimensional space. This novel framework successfully mitigates the exposure bias. Moreover, our model can evolve part
of the system (Feature extraction) with any time step (Step
skip), which accelerates the efﬁcient generation of MD data.
The applicability of this model is evaluated through three different systems: harmonic oscillator, bulk water, and polymer
melts. The experimental results demonstrate that our model
can generate time series of the MD data with sufﬁcient accuracy to calculate the physical and important dynamical statistics.

1. Introduction
Molecular dynamics (MD) is a standard and powerful tool
for investigating molecular behavior, and has been used
in various ﬁelds, e.g., polymers (Gee, Lacevic, and Fried
2006), proteins (Lindorff-Larsen et al. 2011), methane hydrates (Walsh et al. 2009), nucleation (Matsumoto, Saito,
and Ohmine 2002), carbon nanotube (Legoas et al. 2003),
and metals (Yamakov et al. 2004). The method solves the
Newton’s equation of motion and provides the coordinates,
velocities, and forces of all the atoms in a system at each
time step. Although the applicability of the MD simulations is well known, the high computational costs of largescale, long-time MD simulations limit the expansion of the
method. If we directly calculate two-body forces between all
atom pairs, the computational complexity per step is proportional to the square of the number of atoms, which presents a
serious bottleneck when the MD simulations are conducted
with large number of atoms. Recently, the number of atoms
N and time length of the simulation T have reached scales
of 109 (Shibuta et al. 2017) and 1010 (Needham et al. 2016),

2. Feature extraction (contributing to the efﬁcient sampling): our model can simulate the time evolution of a
part of the whole system.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3. Step skip (contributing to the efﬁcient sampling): it can
operate with any time step; thus, users can set a suitable

1. Mitigation of the exposure bias: as we consider
time series generation not as p(Xt |Xt−1 ) but as
p(Xt−1 |zt−1 ), p(Xt |zt ), and p(zt |zt−1 ), our model successfully mitigates the exposure bias.

2192

