The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Variational Reasoning for Question Answering with Knowledge Graph
Yuyu Zhang∗

Hanjun Dai∗

Zornitsa Kozareva

Georgia Institute of Technology
yuyu.zhang@cc.gatech.edu

Georgia Institute of Technology
hanjun.dai@cc.gatech.edu

Amazon Web Services
kozareva@amazon.com

Alexander J. Smola

Le Song

Amazon Web Services
smola@amazon.com

Georgia Institute of Technology
lsong@cc.gatech.edu
such as Memory Networks (Weston, Chopra, and Bordes
2014), Key-Value Memory Networks (Miller, Fisch, and et.
al. 2016) and Gated Graph Sequence Neural Networks (Li
et al. 2015). However, these neural approaches treat the KG
as a ﬂattened big table of itemized knowledge records, making it hard to exploit the structure information in the graph
and thus weak on logic reasoning. When the answer is not
a direct neighbor of the topic entity in question (i.e. there
are multiple hops between question and answer entities in
the KG), which requires logic reasoning over the KG, the
neural approaches usually perform poorly. For instance, it
is easy to handle single-hop questions like “Who wrote the
paper titled ...?” by querying itemized knowledge records
in triples (paper_title, authored_by, author_name). However, logic reasoning on the KG is required for multi-hop
questions such as “Who have co-authored papers with ...?”.
With the KG, we start from the mentioned author, and folauthored_by
authored
low author −−−−−−→ paper −−−−−−−−→ author to ﬁnd
answers. A common remedy is the so-called knowledge
graph completion: create new relations for non-neighbor entity pairs in the KG (Socher et al. 2013a; Dong et al. 2014;
Guu, Miller, and Liang 2015). However, multi-hop reasoning is combinatorial in nature, i.e. the number of multi-hop
relations grow explosively with the increase of hops. For example, if we create new relation types like friend-of-friend
and friend-of-friend-of-friend, the number of edges in the
KG will explode, which is intractable for both storage and
computation.
Another key challenge is how to locate topic entities in
the KG. Most existing works assume that the topic entity in
question can be located by simple string matching (Miller,
Fisch, and et. al. 2016; Dodge et al. 2015; Li et al. 2015;
Berant et al. 2013), which is often not true. When people
ask questions, either in text or speech, various noise can be
introduced in the expressions. For example, people are likely
to make typos or name ambiguity in question. In even harder
case, audio questions, people may pronounce the same entity
differently in different questions, even for the same person.
Due to these noises, it is hard to do exact matching to locate
topic entities. For text questions, broad matching techniques
(e.g. hand-craft rules, regular expressions, edit distance, etc.)
are.g.e widely used for entity recognition (Rao, McNamee,
and Dredze 2013). However, they require domain experts and
lots of human effort. For speech questions, it is even harder

Abstract
Knowledge graph (KG) is known to be helpful for the task
of question answering (QA), since it provides well-structured
relational information between entities, and allows one to further infer indirect facts. However, it is challenging to build
QA systems which can learn to reason over knowledge graphs
based on question-answer pairs alone. First, when people ask
questions, their expressions are noisy (for example, typos in
texts, or variations in pronunciations), which is non-trivial for
the QA system to match those mentioned entities to the knowledge graph. Second, many questions require multi-hop logic
reasoning over the knowledge graph to retrieve the answers.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel and uniﬁed
deep learning architecture, and an end-to-end variational learning algorithm which can handle noise in questions, and learn
multi-hop reasoning simultaneously. Our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance on a recent benchmark dataset
in the literature. We also derive a series of new benchmark
datasets, including questions for multi-hop reasoning, questions paraphrased by neural translation model, and questions
in human voice. Our method yields very promising results on
all these challenging datasets.

1

Introduction

Question answering (QA) has been a long-standing research
problem in Machine Learning and Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Thanks to the creation of large-scale knowledge graphs such
as DBPedia (Auer et al. 2007) and Freebase (Bollacker et
al. 2008), QA systems can be armed with well-structured
knowledge on speciﬁc and open domains. Many traditional
approaches for KG-powered QA are based on semantic
parsers (Clarke et al. 2010; Liang, Jordan, and Klein 2011;
Berant et al. 2013; Yih et al. 2015), which ﬁrst map a question
to formal meaning representation (e.g. logical form) and then
translate it to a KG query. The answer to the question can be
retrieved by executing the query. One of the disadvantages of
these approaches is that the model is not trained end-to-end
and errors may be cascaded.
With the recent success of deep learning, some end-to-end
solutions based on neural networks have been proposed and
show very promising performance on benchmark datasets,
∗

Both authors contributed equally to the paper.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6069

