The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Unsupervised Generative
Adversarial Cross-Modal Hashing
Jian Zhang, Yuxin Peng,∗ Mingkuan Yuan
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University
Beijing 100871, China
pengyuxin@pku.edu.cn

Zhang and Peng 2017) proposed to accomplish efﬁcient retrieval. The goal of hashing methods is to map high dimensional representations in the original space to short binary
codes in the Hamming space. By using these binary hash
codes, faster Hamming distance computation can be applied
based on bit operations that can be implemented efﬁciently.
Moreover, binary codes take much less storage compared
with original high dimensional representations.
There are large numbers of hashing methods applied to
single modality retrieval (Wang et al. 2016), by which users
can only retrieve data by a query with the same modality,
such as text retrieval (Baeza-Yates and Ribeiro-Neto 1999)
and image retrieval (Wang et al. 2016). Nevertheless, single
modality retrieval can not meet users’ increasing demands,
due to the different modalities of multimedia data. For example, by single modality retrieval, it is impracticable to
search an image by using a textual sentence that describes
the semantic content of the image. Therefore, cross-modal
hashing has been proposed to meet this kind of retrieval demands in large scale cross-modal databases. Owing to the effectiveness and ﬂexibility of cross-modal hashing, users can
submit whatever they have to retrieve whatever they want
(Peng, Huang, and Zhao 2017; Peng et al. 2017).
“Heterogeneous gap” is the key challenge of cross-modal
hashing, which means the similarity of between different
modalities cannot be measured directly. Consequently, some
cross-modal hashing methods (Kumar and Udupa 2011;
Rastegari et al. 2013; Ding et al. 2016; Zhang and Li 2014;
Zhuang et al. 2014) have been proposed to bridge this gap.
Existing cross-modal hashing methods can be categorized
into traditional methods and Deep Neural Networks (DNN)
based methods. Moreover, traditional methods can be divided into unsupervised methods and supervised methods
by whether semantic information is leveraged.
Unsupervised cross-modal hashing methods usually
project data from different modalities into a common
Hamming space to maximize their correlations, which
hold the similar idea with Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) (Hardoon, Szedmak, and Shawe-Taylor 2004).
Song et al. propose Inter-Media Hashing (IMH) (Song et al.
2013) to establish a common Hamming space by preserving
inter-media and intra-media consistency. Cross-view Hashing (CVH) (Kumar and Udupa 2011) is proposed to consider
both intra-view and inter-view similarities, which is an ex-

Abstract
Cross-modal hashing aims to map heterogeneous multimedia data into a common Hamming space, which can realize fast and ﬂexible retrieval across different modalities. Unsupervised cross-modal hashing is more ﬂexible and applicable than supervised methods, since no intensive labeling
work is involved. However, existing unsupervised methods
learn hashing functions by preserving inter and intra correlations, while ignoring the underlying manifold structure
across different modalities, which is extremely helpful to capture meaningful nearest neighbors of different modalities for
cross-modal retrieval. To address the above problem, in this
paper we propose an Unsupervised Generative Adversarial
Cross-modal Hashing approach (UGACH), which makes full
use of GAN’s ability for unsupervised representation learning
to exploit the underlying manifold structure of cross-modal
data. The main contributions can be summarized as follows:
(1) We propose a generative adversarial network to model
cross-modal hashing in an unsupervised fashion. In the proposed UGACH, given a data of one modality, the generative
model tries to ﬁt the distribution over the manifold structure,
and select informative data of another modality to challenge
the discriminative model. The discriminative model learns to
distinguish the generated data and the true positive data sampled from correlation graph to achieve better retrieval accuracy. These two models are trained in an adversarial way to
improve each other and promote hashing function learning.
(2) We propose a correlation graph based approach to capture the underlying manifold structure across different modalities, so that data of different modalities but within the same
manifold can have smaller Hamming distance and promote
retrieval accuracy. Extensive experiments compared with 6
state-of-the-art methods on 2 widely-used datasets verify the
effectiveness of our proposed approach.

Introduction
Multimedia retrieval has become an important application
over the past decades, which can retrieve multimedia contents that users have interests in. However, it is a big challenge to retrieve multimedia data efﬁciently from large scale
databases, due to the explosive growth of multimedia information. To address this issue, there are many hashing methods (Wang et al. 2016; Gionis, Indyk, and Motwani 1999;
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

539

