The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Forgetting and Unfolding for Existential Rules
Zhe Wang, Kewen Wang

Xiaowang Zhang

School of Information and Communication Technology
Grifﬁth University, Australia

School of Computer Science and Technology
Tianjin University, China

Wang, and Topor 2015). However, due to its technical challenge, a theory of forgetting for existential rules is still missing in the literature, while researchers are aware of this problem and its importance.
Most of approaches in description logics deﬁne forgetting
to preserve concept inclusions, i.e., Π entails the same concept inclusions outside Σ as Π does (Lutz and Wolter 2011;
Lutz, Seylan, and Wolter 2012; Wang et al. 2014; Nikitina
and Rudolph 2014; Ludwig and Konev 2014; Koopmann
and Schmidt 2014), which we refer to as inclusion-based forgetting. Inclusion-based forgetting is useful for ontological
schema reasoning, but is not suitable for query answering.
Others deﬁne forgetting to preserve models, i.e., the models
of Π and Π have the same interpretation on symbols outside Σ (Wang et al. 2008; Zhao and Schmidt 2016), which
we call model-based forgetting. Model-based forgetting is
the strongest form of forgetting in that it requires Π to preserve all second-order entailment of Π (outside Σ) (Romero
et al. 2016), which is too strong for ontology-based query
answering and often renders the results of forgetting inexpressible in ﬁrst-order logic. It seems a deﬁnition of forgetting that preserves query answering (Konev, Walther, and
Wolter 2009; Wang et al. 2010), called query-based forgetting, is more suitable for existential rules.
To develop a theory of forgetting, one also has to deal
with two important issues—expressibility and computation of forgetting. The expressibility concerns whether a
result of forgetting can be expressed as a ﬁnite theory
in the same language of the initial ontology, and inexpressibility was discovered even for rather simple ontologies. For instance, it is shown that model- and querybased forgetting about a role (i.e., binary predicate) are in
general inexpressible for DL-Lite ontologies (Wang et al.
2010), and all the three notions of forgetting are generally inexpressible for EL ontologies (Konev, Walther, and
Wolter 2009). Regarding the computation of forgetting, several algorithms have been proposed for various description
logics. Algorithms to inclusion-based forgetting are proposed based on automata theory (Lutz and Wolter 2011;
Lutz, Seylan, and Wolter 2012) and regular tree language
(Nikitina and Rudolph 2014) mostly for deriving theoretical bounds. More practical algorithms are developed based
on resolution (Wang et al. 2010; Ludwig and Konev 2014;
Koopmann and Schmidt 2014) and the Ackermann approach

Abstract
Existential rules, a family of expressive ontology languages,
inherit desired expressive and reasoning properties from both
description logics and logic programming. On the other hand,
forgetting is a well studied operation for ontology reuse, obfuscation and analysis. Yet it is challenging to establish a theory of forgetting for existential rules. In this paper, we lay the
foundation for a theory of forgetting for existential rules by
developing a novel notion of unfolding. In particular, we introduce a deﬁnition of forgetting for existential rules in terms
of query answering and provide a characterisation of forgetting by the unfolding. A result of forgetting may not be expressible in existential rules, and we then capture the expressibility of forgetting by a variant of boundedness. While the
expressibility is undecidable in general, we identify a decidable fragment. Finally, we provide an algorithm for forgetting
in this fragment.

Introduction
Existential rules (a.k.a. Datalog± rules and tuple-generating
dependencies in Databases) (Baget et al. 2011; Calı̀, Gottlob, and Lukasiewicz 2012), have recently been rediscovered as a promising family of ontology languages for
ontology-based query answering and attracted a great deal
of interest. Existential rules are sufﬁciently expressive to
describe ontologies in datalog, EL and the DL-Lite family (Calı̀, Gottlob, and Lukasiewicz 2012), which underpin
the three proﬁles of OWL 2 web ontology language; and
reasoning for existential rules beneﬁts from the rich legacy
of rule-based systems. However, issues of ontology maintenance, including module extraction, ontology reuse and ontology change, are much less studied for existential rules.
Forgetting (Lin and Reiter 1994) is an operation of eliminating or hiding a certain set Σ of non-logical symbols
(deemed to be irrelevant or private) from a knowledge base
Π to obtain a new knowledge base Π that contains no
occurrence of the symbols from Σ and preserves all relevant logical consequences of Π over the remaining symbols. It has found its application in ontology maintenance,
such as ontology comparison, version control, reuse, obfuscation, and revision (Konev, Walther, and Wolter 2009;
Lutz and Wolter 2011; Ludwig and Konev 2014; Wang,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2013

