The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Dynamic Network Embedding by
Modeling Triadic Closure Process
Lekui Zhou,1 Yang Yang,1∗ Xiang Ren,2 Fei Wu,1 Yueting Zhuang1
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California
{luckiezhou, yangya, wufei, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn, xiangren@usc.edu
2

Qi, Aggarwal, and Huang 2013; Zhu et al. 2014), to deep
learning (Wang, Cui, and Zhu 2016; Grover and Leskovec
2016), were focusing on static networks, where the structure
of vertices are ﬁxed.
However, in real world, network is dynamic and evolving over time. Users develop their connections to each other
in social networks, while interactions between proteins vary
over time in biological networks. Representation learning algorithms that ignore the dynamics of a given network can
hardly capture sufﬁcient information.
Figure 1 illustrates the dynamic structure of a network at
different time steps. We take social network as an example, where each vertex indicates a user, each edge denotes
a friendship between two users, and the weight associated
with each edge indicates tie strength, or the energy that users
spend to keep their relationship (e.g., number of calls between two users in a mobile network). At time step t, user
A and user B have similar structures: they both have three
friends, who do not know each other. In addition, both of
them spend most energy on a particular friend (i.e., spending
0.8 energy on a particular friend while spending 0.2 energy
on others in total). Therefore, traditional network embedding methods, like DeepWalk (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena
2014) and node2vec (Grover and Leskovec 2016), will construct similar representation vectors for A and B. However,
their evolution patterns are different. For example, at time
step t + 1, two pairs of A’s friends connect to each other,
while there is still no links among B’s friends. In addition,
user B distracts her energy to other friends at time step t+1,
while user A keeps focusing on developing her relationship
with the same friend as at time step t. Different evolution
patterns of users reﬂects the differences between their own
characters and social strategies, which are used to meet their
social needs like developing connections to others. For instance, user A tends to introduce her friends to each other,
while user B prefers to let her friends stay tight in their
own communities. Therefore, whether the learned representations can well reﬂect the evolution patterns of vertices is a
critical requirement for network embedding methods.
In this paper, our goal is to learn the embedding vectors
for vertices by capturing the evolutionary structure properties of a network. That is, given a sequence of network snapshots G1 , · · · , GT from time steps 1 to T , we aim to design
an objective that learn the embedding vector uti for vertex i

Abstract
Network embedding, which aims to learn the lowdimensional representations of vertices, is an important task
and has attracted considerable research efforts recently. In
real world, networks, like social network and biological networks, are dynamic and evolving over time. However, almost
all the existing network embedding methods focus on static
networks while ignore network dynamics.
In this paper, we present a novel representation learning approach, DynamicTriad, to preserve both structural information and evolution patterns of a given network. The general
idea of our approach is to impose triad, which is a group
of three vertices and is one of the basic units of networks.
In particular, we model how a closed triad, which consists
of three vertices connected with each other, develops from
an open triad that has two of three vertices not connected
with each other. This triadic closure process is a fundamental mechanism in the formation and evolution of networks,
thereby makes our model being able to capture the network
dynamics and to learn representation vectors for each vertex
at different time steps.
Experimental results on three real-world networks demonstrate that, compared with several state-of-the-art techniques,
DynamicTriad achieves substantial gains in several application scenarios. For example, our approach can effectively be
applied and help to identify telephone frauds in a mobile network, and to predict whether a user will repay her loans or
not in a loan network.

Introduction
There is nothing permanent except change.
— Heraclitus
The goal of network embedding, also known as network representation learning, is to project a network to
a low-dimensional space, where each vertex can be presented as a single point in the learned latent space. Network embedding has attracted considerable research efforts
recently by beneﬁting social and biological network research. Most existing work, varying from Bayesian inference (Ho, Yin, and Xing 2016; Hoff, Raftery, and Handcock 2012) , multidimensional scaling (Sarkar and Moore
2005), matrix factorization (Erds, Gemulla, and Terzi 2014;
∗

Corresponding author: Yang Yang, yangya@zju.edu.cn
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

571

