The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

End-to-End Quantum-Like Language
Models with Application to Question Answering
Peng Zhang,1,∗ Jiabin Niu,1 Zhan Su,1 Benyou Wang,2 Liqun Ma,3 Dawei Song1,4,∗
1. School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2. Department of Social Network Operation, Social Network Group, Tencent, Shenzhen, China
3. School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
4. Computing and Communications Department, The Open University,United Kingdom
* Corrrespondence: {pzhang, dwsong}@tju.edu.cn
representation for each term is a one-hot vector, which only
encodes the local occurrence, yet without taking into account the global semantic information. Second, QLM represents a sequence of terms (e.g., a query or a document) by a
density matrix, which is estimated via an ite-Lrative process,
rather than an analytical procedure. Thus it is difﬁcult to integrate such a matrix in an end-to-end design. Third, QLM
deals with the representation, estimation and ranking processes sequentially and separately. As a consequence, these
three steps cannot be jointly optimized, thus limiting QLM’s
applicability and impact in the related research areas.
In this paper, we aim to broaden the theoretical and practical basis of QLM, by addressing the above problems. Specifically, we adopt the word embeddings to represent each word
since such a distributed representation can encode more semantic information than one-hot vectors. By treating each
embedding vector as an observed state for each word, a sentence (e.g., a question or an answer) can correspond to a
mixed state represented by a density matrix. Then, we can
derive such a density matrix without an iterative estimation
step. This makes the density matrix representation feasible
to be integrated into a neural network architecture and automatically updated by a back propagation algorithm. After
getting the word level and sentence level representations, we
can have a joint representation for two sentences (e.g., question and answer sentences in the answer selection task).
Based on the above ideas, we propose an end-to-end
model, namely Neural Network based Quantum-like Language Model (NNQLM). Two different architectures are designed. The ﬁrst is just adding a single softmax layer to the
diagonal values and its trace value of the joint representation. The second is built upon a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), which can automatically extract more useful
patterns from the joint representation of density matrices.
We clarify that our motivation of using quantum theory is
to inspire new perspectives and formulations for the natural
language applications, instead of developing quantum computation algorithms. Indeed, one can build the analogy between quantum theory (e.g., quantum probability) and some
macro-world problems (Bruza, Wang, and Busemeyer 2015;
Wang et al. 2016). For sake of applicability, our model does
not fully comply with the theory of quantum probability, so
that we will use “quantum-like” instead of “quantum” when
referring to the language model we propose in this paper. To

Abstract
Language Modeling (LM) is a fundamental research topic in a
range of areas. Recently, inspired by quantum theory, a novel
Quantum Language Model (QLM) has been proposed for Information Retrieval (IR). In this paper, we aim to broaden the
theoretical and practical basis of QLM. We develop a Neural
Network based Quantum-like Language Model (NNQLM)
and apply it to Question Answering. Speciﬁcally, based on
word embeddings, we design a new density matrix, which
represents a sentence (e.g., a question or an answer) and encodes a mixture of semantic subspaces. Such a density matrix,
together with a joint representation of the question and the
answer, can be integrated into neural network architectures
(e.g., 2-dimensional convolutional neural networks). Experiments on the TREC-QA and WIKIQA datasets have veriﬁed
the effectiveness of our proposed models.

Introduction
Language Models (LM) play a fundamental role in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AI) related areas, e.g., natural language processing, information retrieval, machine translation, speech
recognition and other applications. The commonly used language models include statistical language models and neural
language models. Generally speaking, statistical language
models compute a joint probability distribution over a sequence of words (Manning, Raghavan, and Schütze 2008;
Zhai 2008), while neural language models can obtain a distributed representation for each word (Bengio et al. 2003;
Mikolov et al. 2013).
Recently, by using the mathematical formulations of
quantum theory, a Quantum Language Model (QLM), has
been proposed in Information Retrieval (IR). QLM encodes
the probability uncertainties of both single and compound
terms in a density matrix, without resorting to extend the
vocabulary artiﬁcially (Sordoni, Nie, and Bengio 2013). The
ranking of documents against a query is based on the vonNeumann divergence between the density matrices of the
query and each document. QLM shows an effective performance on the ad-hoc retrieval task.
QLM is theoretically signiﬁcant, as for the ﬁrst time it
generalizes LM via the formulations of Quantum theory.
However, it has the following limitations. First, in QLM, the
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5666

