The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multi-Layer Multi-View Classiﬁcation
for Alzheimer’s Disease Diagnosis
a

Changqing Zhang,a,b Ehsan Adeli,c Tao Zhou,a Xiaobo Chen,a Dinggang Shena∗

Department of Radiology and BRIC, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA
b
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
c
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences & Stanford AI Lab (SAIL), Stanford University, California, USA

each individual modality alone cannot characterize the categories comprehensively, as each of them encodes different
but interrelated properties of the data (Chaudhuri et al. 2009;
Xu et al. 2013; Gong et al. 2016; Luo et al. 2013a;
2013b). Considering each modality (or type of features) as
one view of the data, we propose to model the problem as
a multi-view learning framework. Speciﬁcally, in this paper,
we introduce a novel model for multi-view learning applied
to the vital task of AD diagnosis.
Owing to the usefulness of exploiting the complementarity among multiple modalities or multiple types of features, multi-view learning has been the focus of intense
investigation. Earlier methods usually tried to minimize
the disagreement between two views based on co-training
(Kumar and Daumé 2011). There are various theoretical
analyses (Blum and Mitchell 1998; Chaudhuri et al. 2009;
Wang and Zhou 2007) supporting the success and appropriateness of such approaches. Besides, multiple kernel learning
(MKL) (Zien and Ong 2007; Liu et al. 2017) is another way
of handling multiple views, which uses a predeﬁned set of
kernels for multiple views and learns an optimal combination
of kernels to integrate these views. Recently, some methods
are proposed to advocate for the learning of a latent common subspace across different views, typically, based on
canonical correlation analysis (CCA) (Chaudhuri et al. 2009;
Kakade and Foster 2007). For AD diagnosis, the recent works
(Zhu et al. 2014; 2016) propose to transform the original
features from different modalities to a common space by
canonical correlation analysis. Although great progress has
been achieved, some main limitations still exist: (1) Most
existing methods usually explore linear correlation between
multi-view input data and class labels, thus, they are not applicable to uncover complex correlations, compared to nonlinear
methods; (2) MKL based methods map the features into a kernel space to explore the nonlinearity among the features and
labels, however, simply weighting different views will not be
enough for exploiting the complex correlation within each
view and among different views, e.g., high-order correlations.
In this paper, we propose a novel multi-view learning approach termed as Multi-Layer Multi-View Classiﬁcation (MLMVC), which focuses on addressing the above limitations in
a uniﬁed framework. As shown in Fig .1, given the data with
multiple views (taking multiple modalities as example), our
method aims to simultaneously explore the complex correla-

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel multi-view learning method
for Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) diagnosis, using neuroimaging
and genetics data. Generally, there are several major challenges associated with traditional classiﬁcation methods on
multi-source imaging and genetics data. First, the correlation
between the extracted imaging features and class labels is
generally complex, which often makes the traditional linear
models ineffective. Second, medical data may be collected
from different sources (i.e., multiple modalities of neuroimaging data, clinical scores or genetics measurements), therefore,
how to effectively exploit the complementarity among multiple views is of great importance. In this paper, we propose a
Multi-Layer Multi-View Classiﬁcation (ML-MVC) approach,
which regards the multi-view input as the ﬁrst layer, and constructs a latent representation to explore the complex correlation between the features and class labels. This captures
the high-order complementarity among different views, as we
exploit the underlying information with a low-rank tensor regularization. Intrinsically, our formulation elegantly explores the
nonlinear correlation together with complementarity among
different views, and thus improves the accuracy of classiﬁcation. Finally, the minimization problem is solved by the
Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM). Experimental results on Alzheimers Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
(ADNI) data sets validate the effectiveness of our proposed
method.

Introduction
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is a severe irreversible neurodegenerative disease, devastating lives of millions in the world
(Cuingnet et al. 2011). Its early diagnosis, and treatment can
improve the quality of life dramatically for both patients and
their caregivers. There have been several studies (Weiner et
al. 2017) in the recent years exploiting different aspects of the
disease, and hence there are multiple modalities of data (e.g.,
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and Positron Emission
Tomography (PET)) or multiple types of features available
for this task (May et al. 1999). Generally, an important aspect
of such works is that these features are often complementary, since they are from different measurements representing
the same subject(s). On the other hand, it is evident that
∗

Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4406

