The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Perception Coordination Network: A Framework
for Online Multi-Modal Concept Acquisition and Binding
You-Lu Xing,1 Fu-Rao Shen,2 Jin-Xi Zhao,2 Jing-Xin Pan,3 Ah-Hwee Tan4
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, 230601, China
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210046, China
3
Medical School, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210046, China
4
School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 639798, Singapore.
youluxing@sina.com, {frshen, jxzhao}@nju.edu.cn, jackiejackpan@126.com, asahtan@ntu.edu.sg
2

complicated through its pathway. Different sensations interact with each other through the areas where different sensory pathways converge. Obviously, such brain structure is

Abstract
A biologically plausible neural network model named Perception Coordination Network (PCN) is proposed for online
multi-modal concept acquisition and binding. It is a hierarchical structure inspired by the structure of the brain, and
functionally divided into the primary sensory area (PSA), the
primary sensory association area (SAA), and the higher order association area (HAA). The PSA processes many elementary features, e.g., colors, shapes, syllables, and basic ﬂavors, etc. The SAA combines these elementary features to
represent the unimodal concept of an object, e.g., the image,
name and taste of an apple, etc. The HAA connects several
primary sensory association areas like a function of synaesthesia, which means associating the image, name and taste
of an object. PCN is able to continuously acquire and bind
multi-modal concepts in an online way. Experimental results
suggest that PCN can handle the multi-modal concept acquisition and binding problem effectively.

Figure 1: Hierarchical and modularized perception pathway
in the brain.

Introduction
The brain is a hierarchical structure with many function
speciﬁc modules. For example, neurons which are tuned
to a particular color (Livingstone and Hubel 1988), shape
(Hegdé and Essen 2000), basic ﬂavor (de Araujo and Simon 2009), and phoneme (Mesgarani et al. 2014) are widely
found. These low-level feature neurons can correspond to
the bottom layer of the brain hierarchy of perception. Then,
neurons that respond selectively to particular visual object
(Kobatake and Tanaka 1994) and word (Chan et al. 2014) are
also discovered. We call them concept neurons here, which
can be corresponded to the middle layer of the brain hierarchy of perception. Neurons that respond selectively to representations of the same individual across different sensory
modalities including vision and audition are detected in the
human medial temporal lobe (Quiroga 2012). It is a kind of
multi-modal response neuron, which corresponds to the top
layer of the brain hierarchy of perception. We name these
neurons associated neurons. Fig. 1 gives the visual, auditory, gustatory, and olfactory pathways in the brain. The perception in the back of the pathway synthesizes the perception in the front of the pathway, i.e., the sensation becomes

efﬁcient and convenient for multi-modal concept acquisition
and binding. In (Fuster 1997), an example of concept acquisition and association between vision and touch at the cellular level is given. The explanation is based on the Hebbian
theory, which is summarized as “cells that ﬁre together, wire
together”. As shown in Fig. 2, when a visual and a tactile
signal stimulate the network synchronously, a cell-assembly
will be formed quickly by the facilitated synapses to associate the visual and tactile sense.
Inspired by the brain’s hierarchical structure and the coordination between different functional modules in the structure, a Perception Coordination Network (PCN) is proposed
to handle multi-modal concept acquisition and binding between different sensory modules. Brieﬂy, the main contributions are as follows,
(1) Different types of neurons with particular computational models are deﬁned, which makes the hierarchical
structure of PCN have a good interpretability.
(2) Through creating of connections between neurons,
PCN learns new concepts and bindings without forgetting
of already learned concepts and bindings.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4318

