The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

RUBER: An Unsupervised Method for Automatic
Evaluation of Open-Domain Dialog Systems
Chongyang Tao,1 Lili Mou,2 Dongyan Zhao,1,3 Rui Yan1,3∗
1

Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, China
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo
3
Beijing Institute of Big Data Research, China
{chongyangtao,zhaody,ruiyan}@pku.edu.cn doublepower.mou@gmail.com
2

racy” and “completion,” for example, make little sense in
open-domain conversation.
Previous studies in several language generation tasks have
developed successful automatic evaluation metrics, e.g.,
B LEU (Papineni et al. 2002) and M ETEOR (Banerjee and
Lavie 2005) for machine translation, and ROUGE (Lin 2004)
for summarization. For dialog systems, researchers occasionally adopt these metrics for evaluation (Ritter, Cherry,
and Dolan 2011; Li et al. 2015). However, Liu et al. (2016)
conduct extensive empirical experiments and show weak
correlation between existing metrics and human annotation.
Very recently, Lowe et al. (2017) propose a neural
network-based metric for dialog systems; it learns to predict
a score of a reply given its query (previous user-issued utterance) and a groundtruth reply. But such approach requires
human-annotated scores to train the network, and thus is less
ﬂexible and extensible.
In this paper, we propose RUBER, a Referenced metric
and Unreferenced metric Blended Evaluation Routine for
open-domain dialog systems. RUBER has the following distinct features:
• An embedding-based scorer measures the similarity between a generated reply and the groundtruth. We call this a
referenced metric, because it uses the groundtruth as a reference, akin to existing evaluation metrics. Instead of using
word-overlapping information (e.g., in B LEU and ROUGE),
we measure the similarity by pooling of word embeddings;
it is more suited to dialog systems due to casual expressions
in open-domain conversation.
• A neural network-based scorer measures the relatedness
between the generated reply and its query. We observe that
the query-reply relation is informative itself. This scorer is
unreferenced because it does not refer to groundtruth. We
apply negative sampling to train the network. Our approach
requires no manual annotation label, and hence is more extensible than Lowe et al. (2017).
• We propose to combine the referenced and unreferenced
metrics to better make use of both worlds. On the one hand,
closeness to groundtruth implies high quality. On the other
hand, the groundtruth does not cover all possible ways of replying the query; the relatedness between a generated reply
and its query then provides additional information. Combining these two aspects with heuristic strategies (e.g., averaging) further improves the performance.

Abstract
Open-domain human-computer conversation has been attracting increasing attention over the past few years. However, there does not exist a standard automatic evaluation metric for open-domain dialog systems; researchers usually resort to human annotation for model evaluation, which is timeand labor-intensive. In this paper, we propose RUBER, a Referenced metric and Unreferenced metric Blended Evaluation
Routine, which evaluates a reply by taking into consideration
both a groundtruth reply and a query (previous user-issued
utterance). Our metric is learnable, but its training does not
require labels of human satisfaction. Hence, RUBER is ﬂexible and extensible to different datasets and languages. Experiments on both retrieval and generative dialog systems
show that RUBER has a high correlation with human annotation, and that RUBER has fair transferability over different
datasets.

Introduction
Open-domain human-computer conversation is attracting increasing attention as an established scientiﬁc problem (Bickmore and Picard 2005; Bessho, Harada, and Kuniyoshi
2012; Shang, Lu, and Li 2015; Yan et al. 2016; Yao et
al. 2017); it also has wide industrial applications like XiaoIce from Microsoft and DuMi from Baidu. Even in a taskoriented dialog (e.g., hotel booking), an open-domain conversational system could be useful in handling unforeseen
user utterances.
In existing studies of open-domain conversational systems, however, researchers typically resort to manual annotation to evaluate their models, which is expensive and timeconsuming. Hence, automatic evaluation metrics are particularly in need, so as to ease the burden of model comparison
and to promote further research on this topic.
In early years, traditional vertical-domain dialog systems
use metrics like slot-ﬁlling accuracy and goal-completion
rate (Walker et al. 1997; Walker, Passonneau, and Boland
2001; Schatzmann, Georgila, and Young 2005). Unfortunately, such evaluation hardly applies to the open domain
due to the diversity and uncertainty of utterances: “accu∗

Corresponding author: Rui Yan (ruiyan@pku.edu.cn)
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

722

