The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Video-Based Sign Language
Recognition without Temporal Segmentation
1,2,4,5

Jie Huang,1 Wengang Zhou,2 Qilin Zhang,3 Houqiang Li,4 Weiping Li5
Department of Electronic Engineering and Information Science, University of Science and Technology of China
3
HERE Technologies, Chicago, Illinois, USA
1
hagjie@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {2 zhwg,4 lihq,5 wpli}@ustc.edu.cn, 3 samqzhang@gmail.com

step, inaccurate segmentation could incur errors in the subsequent steps. In addition, it is highly time consuming to
label each isolated fragments.
Motivated by video caption with Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM), we circumvent the temporal segmentation with
Hierarchical Attention Network (HAN), an extension to
LSTM by considering structure information and attention
mechanism. The scheme is to feed HAN with the entire
video and output complete sentence word-by-word. However, HAN locally optimizes the probability of generating
the next word given the input video and previous word, ignoring the relationship between video and sentences (Pan et
al. 2015). As a result, it could suffer from robustness issues.
To remedy this, we incorporate a Latent Space model to explicitly exploit the relationship between visual video and text
sentence.
In summary, the major contributions of the paper are:
• A new two-stream 3D CNN for the generation of globallocal video feature representations;
• A new LS-HAN framework for continuous SLR without
requiring temporal segmentation;
• Joint optimization of relevance and recognition loss in the
proposed LS-HAN framework;
• Compilation of the largest (as of September 2017) opensource Modern Chinese Sign Language (CSL) dataset for
continuous SLR with sentence-level annotations.

Abstract
Millions of hearing impaired people around the world routinely use some variants of sign languages to communicate,
thus the automatic translation of a sign language is meaningful and important. Currently, there are two sub-problems
in Sign Language Recognition (SLR), i.e., isolated SLR that
recognizes word by word and continuous SLR that translates
entire sentences. Existing continuous SLR methods typically
utilize isolated SLRs as building blocks, with an extra layer of
preprocessing (temporal segmentation) and another layer of
post-processing (sentence synthesis). Unfortunately, temporal segmentation itself is non-trivial and inevitably propagates
errors into subsequent steps. Worse still, isolated SLR methods typically require strenuous labeling of each word separately in a sentence, severely limiting the amount of attainable
training data. To address these challenges, we propose a novel
continuous sign recognition framework, the Hierarchical Attention Network with Latent Space (LS-HAN), which eliminates the preprocessing of temporal segmentation. The proposed LS-HAN consists of three components: a two-stream
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) for video feature representation generation, a Latent Space (LS) for semantic gap
bridging, and a Hierarchical Attention Network (HAN) for
latent space based recognition. Experiments are carried out
on two large scale datasets. Experimental results demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed framework.

Introduction
A key challenge in Sign Language Recognition (SLR) is the
design of visual descriptors that reliably captures body motions, gestures, and facial expressions. There are primarily
two categories: the hand-crafted features (Sun et al. 2013;
Koller, Forster, and Ney 2015) and Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) based features (Tang et al. 2015; Huang et
al. 2015; Pu, Zhou, and Li 2016). Inspired by the recent success in CNN (Ran et al. 2017a; 2017b), we design a twostream 3D-CNN for video feature extraction.
Temporal segmentation is also a difﬁculty in continuous
Sign Language Recognition (SLR). The common scheme to
continuous SLR is to decompose it to isolated word recognition problem, which involves temporal segmentation. Temporal segmentation is non-trivial since the transitional movements are diverse and hard to detect, and as a preprocessing

Related Work
In this section, a brief review of continuous SLR, video subtitle generation, and latent space model is given.

Continuous SLR
Most existing SLR researches (Huang et al. 2015; Guo et al.
2016; Dan Guo and Wang 2017; Liu, Zhou, and Li 2016)
fall into the category of isolated SLR, i.e., recognition of
words or expressions, similar to action recognition (Cai et
al. 2016). A more challenging problem is the continuous
SLR, which involves the reconstruction of sentence structures. Most existing continuous SLR methods divide the
sentence-to-sentence recognition problem into three stages,
temporal segmentation of videos, isolated word/expression
recognition (i.e., isolated SLR), and sentence synthesis with
a language model. For example, DTW-HMM (Zhang, Zhou,

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2257

