The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Neural Networks Incorporating Dictionaries
for Chinese Word Segmentation
Qi Zhang, Xiaoyu Liu, Jinlan Fu
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
825 Zhangheng Road, Shanghai, P.R. China
{qz, liuxiaoyu16, fujl16}@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract
In recent years, deep neural networks have achieved signiﬁcant success in Chinese word segmentation and many other
natural language processing tasks. Most of these algorithms
are end-to-end trainable systems and can effectively process and learn from large scale labeled datasets. However,
these methods typically lack the capability of processing rare
words and data whose domains are different from training
data. Previous statistical methods have demonstrated that human knowledge can provide valuable information for handling rare cases and domain shifting problems. In this paper, we seek to address the problem of incorporating dictionaries into neural networks for the Chinese word segmentation task. Two different methods that extend the bi-directional
long short-term memory neural network are proposed to perform the task. To evaluate the performance of the proposed
methods, state-of-the-art supervised models based methods
and domain adaptation approaches are compared with our
methods on nine datasets from different domains. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed methods can
achieve better performance than other state-of-the-art neural
network methods and domain adaptation approaches in most
cases.

Figure 1: Examples of rare words and domain-speciﬁc
words in dictionaries.
Chen, and Xu 2013; Chen et al. 2015b; Zhang, Zhang, and
Fu 2016). Zheng et al. (2013) adopted the method proposed
by Collobert et al. (2011) to perform Chinese word segmentation and POS tagging. Chen et al. (2015b) extended
LSTM to explicitly model previously important information in memory cells to perform the task. Experimental results have demonstrated that the performance of these methods can compete with previous state-of-the-art systems. A
word-based neural model for Chinese word segmentation
has also been proposed to exploit not only character embeddings but also word embeddings pre-trained from large scale
corpus (Zhang, Zhang, and Fu 2016).
Despite the great success achieved by neural network
based methods, some issues still have not been well solved.
One signiﬁcant drawback is that such methods rarely take
the integration of knowledge into consideration. These networks usually employ an end-to-end approach and try to directly learn information from large scale labeled data. However there are also a huge number of cases that rarely occur, and neural networks usually cannot handle such cases
well. Out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words are one of the most
common errors of supervised CWS methods (Peng, Feng,
and McCallum 2004). While, dictionaries contain both commonly used words and rare words. Figure 1 illustrates dictionary examples. Since these words are rarely used, they are
normally not included in the labeled data. Hence, if we can
incorporate a dictionary into a neural network, rare words
and domain-speciﬁc words can be better processed.
Previous methods have shown that incorporating dictionaries can bring signiﬁcant improvement to the Chinese

Introduction
Chinese word segmentation (CWS) is an important and essential pre-processing step for Chinese language processing
tasks. In recent years, most methods have treated the task
as a sequential labelling problem (Xue 2003; Zhang et al.
2003). For a given piece of text, labels are assigned to all
of the characters in that text, indicating the position of a
character in the word (Xue 2003) or representing the intervals between characters (Huang et al. 2007). Various supervised learning approaches have also been carefully studied to achieve the task, including maximum entropy (ME)
(Berger, Pietra, and Pietra 1996), support vector machines
(SVM) (Boser, Guyon, and Vapnik 1992), hidden Markov
models (HMMs) (Eddy 1996), conditional random ﬁelds
(CRFs) (Lafferty, McCallum, and Pereira 2001), and others.
Recently, along with the development of deep learning
methods, some neural network models have also been successfully used for Chinese word segmentation tasks (Zheng,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5682

