The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Weakly Supervised Salient
Object Detection Using Image Labels
1

Guanbin Li,1 Yuan Xie,1 Liang Lin1,2∗
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
SenseTime Group Limited

Abstract
Deep learning based salient object detection has recently
achieved great success with its performance greatly outperforms any other unsupervised methods. However, annotating
per-pixel saliency masks is a tedious and inefﬁcient procedure. In this paper, we note that superior salient object detection can be obtained by iteratively mining and correcting the labeling ambiguity on saliency maps from traditional
unsupervised methods. We propose to use the combination
of a coarse salient object activation map from the classiﬁcation network and saliency maps generated from unsupervised methods as pixel-level annotation, and develop a simple
yet very effective algorithm to train fully convolutional networks for salient object detection supervised by these noisy
annotations. Our algorithm is based on alternately exploiting a graphical model and training a fully convolutional network for model updating. The graphical model corrects the
internal labeling ambiguity through spatial consistency and
structure preserving while the fully convolutional network
helps to correct the cross-image semantic ambiguity and simultaneously update the coarse activation map for next iteration. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed
method greatly outperforms all state-of-the-art unsupervised
saliency detection methods and can be comparable to the
current best strongly-supervised methods training with thousands of pixel-level saliency map annotations on all public
benchmarks.

Source

MB+

MST

CAM

Ours

GT

Figure 1: Two kinds of defects in state-of-the-art unsupervised salient object detection methods vs. the results of our
proposed weakly supervised optimization framework.
and Shamir 2007), visual tracking (Mahadevan and Vasconcelos 2009) and video summarization (Ma et al. 2002).
Recently, the deployment of deep convolutional neural
networks has resulted in signiﬁcant progress in salient object detection (Li and Yu 2016b; 2016a; Liu and Han 2016;
Wang et al. 2016). The performance of these CNN based
methods, however, comes at the cost of requiring pixel-wise
annotations to generate training data. For salient object detection, it is painstaking to annotate mask-level label and
takes several minutes for an experienced annotator to label
one image. Moreover, as the deﬁnition of an object being
salient is very subjective, there often exists multiple diverse
annotations for a same image between different annotators.
To ensure the quality of training data sets, these images with
ambiguous annotations should be removed, which makes
the labeling task more laborious and time-consuming. This
time-consuming task is bound to limit the total amount of
pixel-wise training samples and thus become the bottleneck
of further development of fully-supervised learning based
methods.
As a low level vision problem, there exists an ocean of unsupervised salient object detection methods (Wei et al. 2012;
Cheng et al. 2015; Tu et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2015;
Yang et al. 2013). These methods are usually based on lowlevel features such as color, gradient or contrast and some
saliency priors, such as the center prior (Liu et al. 2011) and
the background prior (Wei et al. 2012). As it is impracti-

Introduction
Salient object detection is designed to accurately detect distinctive regions in an image that attract human attention. Recently, this topic has attracted widespread interest in the research community of computer vision and cognitive science
as it can be applied to beneﬁt a wide range of artiﬁcial intelligence and vision applications, such as robot intelligent control (Shon et al. 2005), content-aware image editing (Avidan
∗
Corresponding author is Liang Lin (Email: linliang@ieee.org).
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 61702565, in part by the Special Program of the NSFC-Guangdong Joint Fund for Applied Research on Super Computation (the second phase), in part by Guangdong Natural Science Foundation Project for Research Teams under Grant 2017A030312006. This work was also sponsored by
CCF-Tencent Open Research Fund.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7024

