The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

In Praise of Belief Bases:
Doing Epistemic Logic without Possible Worlds
Emiliano Lorini
CNRS-IRIT, Toulouse University, France

their belief bases. The multi-agent aspect of the logic lies in
the fact that it supports reasoning about agents’ high-order
beliefs, i.e., an agent’s explicit (or implicit) belief about the
explicit (or implicit) belief of another agent.
Differently from existing Kripke-style semantics for epistemic logic in which the notions of possible world and doxastic/epistemic alternative are primitive, in the semantics of
our logic the notion of doxastic alternative is deﬁned from
— and more generally grounded on — the concept of belief
base.
We believe that an explicit representation of agents’ belief
bases is crucial in order to facilitate the task of designing
intelligent systems such as robotic agents or conversational
agents. The problem of extensional semantics for epistemic
logic, whose most representative example is the Kripkean
semantics, is their being too abstract and too far from the
agent speciﬁcation. More generally, the main limitation of
the Kripkean semantics is that it does not say from where
doxastic alternatives come from thereby being ungrounded.1
The paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst present the
language of our logic of explicit and implicit beliefs. Then,
we introduce a semantics for this language based on the notion of multi-agent belief base. We also consider two additional Kripke-style semantics in which the notion of doxastic alternative is primitive. These additional semantics
will be useful for proving completeness and decidability of
our logic. We show that the three semantics are all equivalent with respect to the formal language under consideration.
Then, we provide an axiomatization for our logic of explicit
and implicit belief and prove that its satisﬁability problem
is decidable. After having discussed related work, we conclude.

Abstract
We introduce a new semantics for a logic of explicit and
implicit beliefs based on the concept of multi-agent belief
base. Differently from existing Kripke-style semantics for
epistemic logic in which the notions of possible world and
doxastic/epistemic alternative are primitive, in our semantics
they are non-primitive but are deﬁned from the concept of
belief base. We provide a complete axiomatization and a decidability result for our logic.

Introduction
Epistemic logic and, more generally, formal epistemology
are the areas at the intersection between philosophy (Hintikka 1962), artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) (Fagin et al. 1995;
Meyer and van der Hoek 1995) and economics (Lismont
and Mongin 1994) devoted to the formal representation of
epistemic attitudes of agents including belief and knowledge. An important distinction in epistemic logic is between
explicit belief and implicit belief. According to (Levesque
1984), “...a sentence is explicitly believed when it is actively
held to be true by an agent and implicitly believed when it
follows from what is believed” (p. 198). This distinction
is particularly relevant for the design of resource-bounded
agents who spend time to make inferences and do not believe all facts that are deducible from their actual beliefs.
The concept of explicit belief is tightly connected with
the concept of belief base (Nebel 1992; Makinson 1985;
Hansson 1993; Rott 1998). In particular, an agent’s belief base, which is not necessarily closed under deduction,
includes all facts that are explicitly believed by the agent.
Nonetheless, existing logical formalizations of explicit and
implicit beliefs (Levesque 1984; Fagin and Halpern 1987)
do not clearly account for this connection.
The aim of this paper is to ﬁll this gap by providing a
multi-agent logic that precisely articulates the distinction between explicit belief, as a fact in an agent’s belief base, and
implicit belief, as a fact that is deducible from the agent’s
explicit beliefs, given the agents’ common ground. The concept of common ground (Stalnaker 2002) corresponds to the
body of information that the agents commonly believe to be
the case and that has has to be in the deductive closure of

A Language for Explicit and
Implicit Beliefs
LDA (Logic of Doxastic Attitudes) is a logic for reasoning about explicit beliefs and implicit beliefs of multiple
agents. Assume a countably inﬁnite set of atomic propositions Atm = {p, q, . . .} and a ﬁnite set of agents Agt =
{1, . . . , n}.
1

The need for a grounded semantics for doxastic/epistemic logics has been pointed out by other authors including (Lomuscio, Qu,
and Raimondi 2015).

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1915

