The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Mesh-Based Autoencoders for Localized Deformation Component Analysis
Qingyang Tan,1,2 Lin Gao,1∗ Yu-Kun Lai,3 Jie Yang,1,2 Shihong Xia1
1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Mobile Computing and Pervasive Device,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Computer and Control Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Computer Science & Informatics, Cardiff University
tanqingyang14@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {gaolin, yangjie01, xsh}@ict.ac.cn, LaiY4@cardiff.ac.uk
skeleton structure in the mesh to provide such a parametrization. However, the rigging operation is restrictive and does
not generalize to other deformable shapes (e.g. faces). Parameterizing general mesh datasets which allows intuitive
control in generating new shapes becomes an important and
urgent research problem.
Early work extracted principal deformation components
by using Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to reduce
the dimensionality of the data set. However, such deformation components are global which do not lead to intuitive control. For example, when a user intends to deform
the shape locally by specifying locally changed vertex positions as boundary conditions, the deformed shape tends
to have unrelated areas deformed as well, due to the global
nature of the basis. To address this, sparse localized deformation component (SPLOCS) extraction methods were recently proposed (Neumann et al. 2013; Huang et al. 2014;
Wang et al. 2016). In these works the sparsity term is involved to localize deformation components within local support regions. However, these previous works suffer from different limitations: as we will show later, (Neumann et al.
2013; Huang et al. 2014) cannot handle large-scale deformations, and (Wang et al. 2016) is sensitive to noise which
cannot extract the main deformation components robustly.
We propose a novel mesh-based autoencoder architecture to
extract meaningful local deformation components. We represent deformations of shapes in the dataset based on a recent effective representation (Gao et al. 2017) which is able
to cope with large deformations. We then build a CNN-based
autoencoder to transform the deformation representation to
encoding in a latent space. Each convolutional layer involves
convolutional operations deﬁned on the mesh with arbitrary
topology in the form of applying the same local ﬁlter to
each vertex and its 1-ring neighbors, similar to (Duvenaud
et al. 2015). We then introduce sparsity regularization to the
weights in the fully-connected layers to promote identifying sparse localized deformations. The autoencoder structure ensures that the extracted deformation components are
suitable for reconstructing high quality shape deformations.
Our main contributions are: 1) This is the ﬁrst work that
exploits CNN-based autoencoders for processing meshes
with irregular connectivity. 2) Beneﬁting from sparse regularization and the nonlinear representation capability of autoencoders, our method is able to extract intuitive localized

Abstract
Spatially localized deformation components are very useful
for shape analysis and synthesis in 3D geometry processing.
Several methods have recently been developed, with an aim to
extract intuitive and interpretable deformation components.
However, these techniques suffer from fundamental limitations especially for meshes with noise or large-scale deformations, and may not always be able to identify important
deformation components. In this paper we propose a novel
mesh-based autoencoder architecture that is able to cope with
meshes with irregular topology. We introduce sparse regularization in this framework, which along with convolutional operations, helps localize deformations. Our framework is capable of extracting localized deformation components from
mesh data sets with large-scale deformations and is robust to
noise. It also provides a nonlinear approach to reconstruction
of meshes using the extracted basis, which is more effective
than the current linear combination approach. Extensive experiments show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art
methods in both qualitative and quantitative evaluations.

1

Introduction

With the development of 3D scanning and modeling technology, mesh data sets are becoming more and more popular. By analyzing these data sets with machine learning techniques, the latent knowledge can be exploited to advance
geometry processing algorithms. In recent years, many research areas in geometry processing have beneﬁted from
this methodology, such as 3D shape deformation (Gao et
al. 2016), 3D facial and human body reconstruction (Cao et
al. 2015; Bogo et al. 2016), shape segmentation (Guo, Zou,
and Chen 2015), etc. For shape deformation and human reconstruction, mesh sequences with different geometry and
the same connectivity play a central role. Different geometric positions describe the appearance of the 3D mesh model
while sharing the same vertex connectivity makes processing much more convenient. In such works, a key procedure
is to build a low-dimensional control parametrization for the
mesh data set, which provides a small set of intuitive parameters to control the generation of new shapes. For articulated
models such as human bodies, the rigging method embeds a
∗

Corresponding Author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2452

