The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Weighted Voting Via No-Regret Learning
Nika Haghtalab

Ritesh Noothigattu

Ariel D. Procaccia

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
nhaghtal@cs.cmu.edu

Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
riteshn@cmu.edu

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
arielpro@cs.cmu.edu

This high-level scheme is, arguably, most applicable to repeated aggregation of objective opinions. For example, consider a group of engineers trying to decide which prototype
to develop, based on an objective measure of success such
as projected market share. If an engineer supported a certain prototype and it turned out to be a success, she should
be given higher weight compared to her peers in future decisions; if it is a failure, her weight should lower. Similar
examples include a group of investors selecting companies
to invest in; and a group of decision makers in a movie studio choosing movie scripts to produce. Importantly, the recently launched, not-for-proﬁt website RoboVote.org already provides public access to voting tools for precisely
these situations, albeit using methods that always treat all
voters equally (Procaccia, Shah, and Zick 2016).
Our goal in this paper, therefore, is to augment existing
voting methods with weights, in a way that keeps track of
voters’ past performance, and guarantees good choices over
time. The main conceptual problem we face is the development of a formal framework in which one can reason about
desirable weighting schemes.1 To address this problem, we
build on the no-regret learning literature, but depart from the
classic setting in several ways — some superﬁcial, and some
fundamental.
Speciﬁcally, instead of experts, we have a set of n voters.
In each round, each voter reveals a ranking over a set of
alternatives, and the loss of each alternative is determined. In
addition, we are given a (possibly randomized) voting rule,
which receives weighted rankings as input, and outputs the
winning alternative. The voting rule is not part of our design
space; it is exogenous and ﬁxed throughout the process. The
loss of a voter in round t is given by assigning his ranking all
the weight (equivalently, imagining that all voters have that
ranking), applying the voting rule, and measuring the loss
of the winning alternative (or the expected loss, if the rule
is randomized). As in the classic setting, our benchmark is
the best voter in hindsight (but we also discuss the stronger
benchmark of best voter weights in hindsight in Section 6).

Abstract
Voting systems typically treat all voters equally. We argue
that perhaps they should not: Voters who have supported good
choices in the past should be given higher weight than voters
who have supported bad ones. To develop a formal framework for desirable weighting schemes, we draw on no-regret
learning. Speciﬁcally, given a voting rule, we wish to design
a weighting scheme such that applying the voting rule, with
voters weighted by the scheme, leads to choices that are almost as good as those endorsed by the best voter in hindsight.
We derive possibility and impossibility results for the existence of such weighting schemes, depending on whether the
voting rule and the weighting scheme are deterministic or randomized, as well as on the social choice axioms satisﬁed by
the voting rule.

1

Introduction

In most elections, voters are entitled to equal voting power.
This principle underlies the one person, one vote doctrine,
and is enshrined in the United States Supreme Court ruling
in the Reynolds v. Sims (1964) case.
But there are numerous voting systems in which voters do,
in fact, have different weights. Standard examples include
the European Council, where (for certain decisions) the
weight of each member country is proportional to its population; and corporate voting procedures where stockholders
have one vote per share. Some historical voting systems are
even more pertinent: Sweden’s 1866 system weighted voters
by wealth, giving especially wealthy voters as many as 5000
votes; and a Belgian system, used for a decade at the end
of the 19th Century, gave (at least) one vote to each man,
(at least) two votes to each educated man, and three votes to
men who were both educated and wealthy (Congleton 2011).
The last two examples can be seen as (silly, from a modern
viewpoint) attempts to weight voters by merit, using wealth
and education as measurable proxies thereof. We believe that
the basic idea of weighting voters by merit does itself have
merit. But we propose to measure a voter’s merit by the
quality of his past votes. That is, a voter who has supported
good choices in the past should be given higher weight than
a voter who has supported bad ones.

1
In that sense, our work is related to papers in computational social choice (Brandt et al. 2016) that study weighted voting, in the context of manipulation, control, and bribery in elections (Conitzer, Sandholm, and Lang 2007; Zuckerman, Procaccia,
and Rosenschein 2009; Faliszewski, Hemaspaandra, and Hemaspaandra 2009; 2015).

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1055

