The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Generalizing and Improving Bilingual Word Embedding
Mappings with a Multi-Step Framework of Linear Transformations
Mikel Artetxe, Gorka Labaka, Eneko Agirre
IXA NLP Group
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU)
{mikel.artetxe,gorka.labaka,e.agirre}@ehu.eus

and propose a multi-step framework that generalizes previous work. The core step of the framework, which maps both
languages to a shared space using an orthogonal transformation, is shared by all variants, and the differences between
previous methods are exclusively explained in terms of their
normalization, whitening, re-weighting and dimensionality
reduction behavior. We analyze the effect of each of these
steps with experimental support, which allows us to gain
new insights into the behavior of existing methods. Based
on these insights, we design a novel variant that improves
the state-of-the-art in bilingual lexicon extraction.
Our framework is highly related to the zero-shot learning
paradigm, where a multi-class classiﬁer trained over a subset of the labels learns to predict unseen labels by exploiting
a common representation for them (Palatucci et al. 2009).
In our scenario, these labels correspond to the target language words and their common representation is provided
by their corresponding embeddings. This is a prototypical
zero-shot learning problem, and similar mapping techniques
have also been used in other zero-shot tasks like image labeling (Shigeto et al. 2015; Lazaridou, Dinu, and Baroni 2015)
and drug discovery (Larochelle, Erhan, and Bengio 2008).
The remaining of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses related work. Section 3 explains the proposed multi-step framework and shows the equivalence with
previous methods. Section 4 then presents the experimental settings, while Section 5 discusses the obtained results.
Section 6 concludes the paper.

Abstract
Using a dictionary to map independently trained word embeddings to a shared space has shown to be an effective approach to learn bilingual word embeddings. In this work, we
propose a multi-step framework of linear transformations that
generalizes a substantial body of previous work. The core
step of the framework is an orthogonal transformation, and
existing methods can be explained in terms of the additional
normalization, whitening, re-weighting, de-whitening and dimensionality reduction steps. This allows us to gain new insights into the behavior of existing methods, including the
effectiveness of inverse regression, and design a novel variant
that obtains the best published results in zero-shot bilingual
lexicon extraction. The corresponding software is released as
an open source project.

1

Introduction

Bilingual word embeddings have attracted a lot of attention in recent times. Most methods to learn them use some
sort of bilingual signal at the document level, either in
the form of document-aligned or label-aligned comparable corpora (Søgaard et al. 2015; Vulić and Moens 2016;
Mogadala and Rettinger 2016) or, more commonly, in the
form of parallel corpora (Gouws, Bengio, and Corrado 2015;
Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015).
An alternative approach that we address in this paper is
to independently train the embeddings for each language
on monolingual corpora, and then map them to a shared
space based on a bilingual dictionary (Mikolov, Le, and
Sutskever 2013; Lazaridou, Dinu, and Baroni 2015). This
requires minimal bilingual supervision compared to other
approaches, while allowing to leverage large amounts of
monolingual corpora with competitive results (Vulić and
Korhonen 2016; Artetxe, Labaka, and Agirre 2017). Moreover, the learned mappings can also be applied to words
that were missing in the training dictionary, and thus induce
their translations, with improvements in machine translation
(Zhao, Hassan, and Auli 2015).
Authors have proposed different methods to learn such
word embedding mappings, but their approach and motivations are often divergent, making it difﬁcult to get a general
understanding of the topic. In this work, we tackle this issue

2

Related work

For the sake of space, we will focus on related work directly relevant to embedding mappings and bilingual lexicon extraction. Bilingual embedding mapping methods work
by independently training the word embeddings in two languages, and then mapping them to a shared space based on
a bilingual dictionary. Even if the literature in the topic is
quite broad, existing methods can be classiﬁed in the following four groups:
1. Regression methods map the embeddings in one language to maximize their similarity with the other language. For that purpose, methods in this group use a leastsquares objective function that learns the linear transformation minimizing the sum of squared Euclidean distances for the dictionary entries. This approach was ﬁrst

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5012

