The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Integrating Both Visual and Audio
Cues for Enhanced Video Caption
Wangli Hao,1,4 Zhaoxiang Zhang,1,2,3,4,∗ He Guan 1,4
1

Research Center for Brain-inspired Intelligence, CASIA
2
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{haowangli2015,zhaoxiang.zhang,guanhe2015}@ia.ac.cn
such as pooling over frames (Venugopalan et al. 2014),
holistic video representations (Gua ; Rohrbach et al. 2015;
2013), sub-sampling on a ﬁxed number of input frames (Yao
et al. 2015) and extracting the last hidden state of recurrent
visual feature encoder (Venugopalan et al. 2015).
Those feature encoding methods mentioned above are
only based on visual cues. However, videos contain the visual modality and the audio modality. The resonance information underlying them is essential for video caption generation. We believe that the lack of arbitrary modality will
result in the loss of information. For example, when a person is lying on the bed and singing a song, traditional video
caption methods may generate an incomplete sentence, like
”a person is lying on the bed”, which may due to the loss
of resonance information underling audio modality. If audio features can be integrated into video caption framework,
precise sentence ”a person is lying on the bed and singing”
will be expected to generate.
To thoroughly utilize both visual and audio information,
we propose and analyze three multimodal deep fusion strategies to maximize the beneﬁts of visual-audio resonance
information. The ﬁrst one explores the impact on crossmodalities feature fusion from low to high order. The second
establishes the visual-audio short-term dependency by sharing weights of corresponding front-end networks. The third
extends the temporal dependency to long-term through sharing multimodal memory across visual and audio modalities.
Furthermore, a dynamic multimodal feature fusion framework is also proposed to deal with audio modality absent
problem during video caption generation.
The contributions of our paper include:

Abstract
Video caption refers to generating a descriptive sentence for
a speciﬁc short video clip automatically, which has achieved
remarkable success recently. However, most of the existing
methods focus more on visual information while ignoring the
synchronized audio cues. We propose three multimodal deep
fusion strategies to maximize the beneﬁts of visual-audio resonance information. The ﬁrst one explores the impact on
cross-modalities feature fusion from low to high order. The
second establishes the visual-audio short-term dependency
by sharing weights of corresponding front-end networks. The
third extends the temporal dependency to long-term through
sharing multimodal memory across visual and audio modalities. Extensive experiments have validated the effectiveness
of our three cross-modalities fusion strategies on two benchmark datasets, including Microsoft Research Video to Text
(MSRVTT) and Microsoft Video Description (MSVD). It is
worth mentioning that sharing weight can coordinate visualaudio feature fusion effectively and achieve the state-of-art
performance on both BELU and METEOR metrics. Furthermore, we ﬁrst propose a dynamic multimodal feature fusion
framework to deal with the part modalities missing case. Experimental results demonstrate that even in the audio absence
mode, we can still obtain comparable results with the aid of
the additional audio modality inference module.

Introduction
Automatically describing video with natural sentences has
potential applications in many ﬁelds, such as humanrobot interaction, video retrieval. Recently, beneﬁting from
extraordinary abilities of convolutional neural networks
(CNN) (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Szegedy et al.
2015; 2016), recurrent neural networks (RNN) (Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber 1997) and large paired video language
description datasets (Xu et al. 2016), video caption has
achieved promising successes.
Most video caption frameworks can be simply splitted into a encoder stage and a decoder stage respectively.
Conditioned on a ﬁxed length of visual feature representation offered by encoder, decoder can generate a corresponding video description recurrently. To generate a ﬁxed
length video representation, several methods are proposed,

a. We present three multimodal feature fusion strategies, to
efﬁciently integrate audio cues into video caption.
b. We propose an audio modality inference module to handle
audio modality absent problem, through generating audio
feature based on the corresponding visual feature of the
video.
c. Our experimental results based on Microsoft ResearchVideo to Text (MSR-VTT) and Microsoft Video Description (MSVD) datasets show that our multimodal feature
fusion frameworks lead to the improved results in video
caption.

∗

Corresponding author. (zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn)
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6894

