The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Novel Exploration Techniques (NETs) for Malaria Policy Interventions
Oliver Bent,1,2 Sekou L. Remy,2 Stephen Roberts,1 Aisha Walcott-Bryant2
1

University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom
{oetbent,sjrob}@robots.ox.ac.uk

2

IBM Research Africa
Nairobi, Kenya
{sekou, awalcott}@ke.ibm.com

(ITNs), indoor residual spraying (IRS), vector larvicide in
bodies of water, and malaria vaccinations. The space of possible policies for malaria interventions is daunting and inefﬁcient for human decision makers to explore without adequate decision support tools.
In this work we describe a novel formulation for the systematic exploration of malaria intervention actions. This formulation is well-suited for applying Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AI) agents to learn the most effective intervention strategies
for a speciﬁc environment. To date, the applications of AI in
healthcare have focused around prediction of disease spread,
diagnosis, and personalized care planning tools (e.g., (Piette
et al. 2016) and (Dimitrov and Morton 2009)). Building
on these applications, our work leverages the OpenMalaria
Platform (Smith et al. 2008), which provides a simulation
environment for an agent to learn optimal policies for the
control of the disease. The OpenMalaria codebase gives access to stochastic transmission models of malaria and can
be used by researchers to evaluate the impact of various
malaria control interventions. OpenMalaria therefore provides a platform to create a simulation environment from
which an agent may explore optimal policies for the control of malaria transmission. Speciﬁcally, the work presented
will make use of a parameterisation of OpenMalaria models which describes the Rachuonyo South district in Western
Kenya (Stuckey et al. 2012).
Our approach is to apply multiple agents to determine the
optimal malaria policy based on any combination of coverage of ITN and IRS for the target population. The reward function is determined by an application of the cost
of disability adjusted life years. A key beneﬁt of this work
is analytical search space exploration to converge on an optimal policy. We demonstrate how agent-based exploration
techniques and advances in compute infrastructure can be
leveraged to determine the optimal policy of malaria interventions for a particular environment, without expert human
guidance. Moreover, our work shows the potential for a systematic agent based decision support system for human decision makers exploring cost-effective intervention strategies.

Abstract
The task of decision-making under uncertainty is daunting, especially for problems which have signiﬁcant
complexity. Healthcare policy makers across the globe
are facing problems under challenging constraints, with
limited tools to help them make data driven decisions.
In this work we frame the process of ﬁnding an optimal malaria policy as a stochastic multi-armed bandit
problem, and implement three agent based strategies to
explore the policy space. We apply a Gaussian Process
regression to the ﬁndings of each agent, both for comparison and to account for stochastic results from simulating the spread of malaria in a ﬁxed population. The
generated policy spaces are compared with published
results to give a direct reference with human expert decisions for the same simulated population. Our novel
approach provides a powerful resource for policy makers, and a platform which can be readily extended to
capture future more nuanced policy spaces.

Introduction
Malaria is a mosquito-borne disease which is endemic in
sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). There has been a signiﬁcant
progress in the prevention and control of the disease resulting in a reduction of the mortality rate of malaria and the
number of new cases. Many countries in SSA rely heavily on external funding for malaria prevention and control
which, in recent years, investments have started to level-off
(Winskill et al. 2011). This means that policy makers will
have more difﬁcult decisions to ensure continued successes
in the management of the disease and of their populations
given the available resources. Moreover, it is projected that
up to $450M in research and development (R&D) is required
each year for malaria up to 2018, with slower growth needed
thereafter (Moran 2007). It is critical for SSA countries to
have access to tools to develop policies that maximize the
cost-effectiveness of malaria interventions.
Individual distributed decision makers (e.g., NGOs, governments and charities) must be able to explore the possible
set of actions for appropriate malaria interventions within
their populations. Such policies include a mix of actions
like the distribution of long-lasting insecticide-treated nets

Stochastic Multi-Armed Bandit
Finding an optimal malaria policy from OpenMalaria simulations can be posed as a stochastic multi-armed bandit
problem. For example this formulation has been used as

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7735

