The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Hierarchical Policy Search via
Return-Weighted Density Estimation
Takayuki Osa

Masashi Sugiyama

University of Tokyo
277-0882, Chiba, Japan
RIKEN Center for AIP
103-0027, Tokyo, Japan

RIKEN Center for AIP
103-0027, Tokyo, Japan
University of Tokyo
277-0882, Chiba, Japan
However, RL of a hierarchical policy is not a trivial problem. As indicated by Daniel et al. (2016), each option policy in a hierarchical policy needs to focus on a single mode
of the return function, otherwise a learned policy will try
to average multiple modes and fall into a local optimum
with poor performance. Therefore, it is necessary to properly assign option policies to individual modes of the return
function, and the challenge of this problem is how to identify the number and locations of modes of the return function. Although regularizers (Bacon, Harb, and Precup 2017;
Florensa, Duan, and Abbeel 2017) can be used to drive the
option policies to various solutions, they cannot prevent an
option policy from averaging over multiple modes of the
return function. Additionally, in existing methods, the performance often depends on initialization or pre-training of
the policy (Daniel et al. 2016; Florensa, Duan, and Abbeel
2017), and a user often needs to specify the number of the
option policies in advance, which signiﬁcantly affects the
performance (Bacon, Harb, and Precup 2017).
To address such issues in existing hierarchical RL, we
propose model-free hierarchical policy search via returnweighted density estimation (HPSDE). Our approach reduces the problem of identifying the modes of the return
function to estimating the return-weighted sample density.
Unlike previous methods, the number and the location of the
option policies is automatically determined without explicitly estimating the option policy parameters, and an option
policy learned by HPSDE focuses on a single mode of the
return function. We discuss the connection between the expected return maximization and the density estimation with
return-weighted importance. The experimental results show
that HPSDE outperforms a state-of-the-art hierarchical RL
method and that HPSDE ﬁnds multiple solutions in motion
planning for a robotic redundant manipulator.

Abstract
Learning an optimal policy from a multi-modal reward function is a challenging problem in reinforcement learning (RL).
Hierarchical RL (HRL) tackles this problem by learning a hierarchical policy, where multiple option policies are in charge
of different strategies corresponding to modes of a reward
function and a gating policy selects the best option for a given
context. Although HRL has been demonstrated to be promising, current state-of-the-art methods cannot still perform well
in complex real-world problems due to the difﬁculty of identifying modes of the reward function. In this paper, we propose a novel method called hierarchical policy search via
return-weighted density estimation (HPSDE), which can efﬁciently identify the modes through density estimation with
return-weighted importance sampling. Our proposed method
ﬁnds option policies corresponding to the modes of the return function and automatically determines the number and
the location of option policies, which signiﬁcantly reduces
the burden of hyper-parameters tuning. Through experiments,
we demonstrate that the proposed HPSDE successfully learns
option policies corresponding to modes of the return function
and that it can be successfully applied to a motion planning
problem of a redundant robotic manipulator.

Introduction
Recent work on reinforcement learning (RL) has been successful in various tasks, including robotic manipulation (Gu
et al. 2017; Levine et al. 2016b; 2016a) and playing a board
game (Silver et al. 2016). However, many RL methods cannot leverage a hierarchical task structure, whereas many
tasks in the real world are highly structured. Grasping is a
good example of such structured tasks. When grasping an
object, humans know multiple grasp types from their experience and adaptively decide how to grasp the given object (Cutkosky and Howe 1990; Napier 1956). This strategy
can be interpreted as a hierarchical policy where the gating policy ﬁrst selects the grasp type and the option policy
that represents the selected grasp type subsequently plans
the grasping motion (Osa, Peters, and Neumann 2016). Prior
work on hierarchical RL suggests that learning various option policies increases the versatility (Daniel et al. 2016)
and that exploiting a hierarchical task structure can exponentially reduce the search space (Dietterich 2000).

Problem Formulation
We consider a reinforcement learning problem in the
Markov decision process (MDP) framework, where an agent
is in a state x ∈ X and takes an action u ∈ U. In this paper, we concentrate on the episodic case of hierarchical RL,
where a policy π(τ |x0 ) generates a trajectory τ for a given
initial state x0 and only one selected policy is executed until
the end of the episode. After every episode, the agent reT
ceives a return of a trajectory R(τ , x0 ) = t=0 rt , which

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3860

