The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Brute-Force Facial Landmark
Analysis with a 140,000-Way Classiﬁer
Mengtian Li, Laszlo Jeni, Deva Ramanan
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
{mtli, laszlojeni, deva}@cmu.edu

Abstract

1

(x68, y68)

(x1, y1), (x2, y2)

We propose a simple approach to visual alignment, focusing
on the illustrative task of facial landmark estimation. While
most prior work treats this as a regression problem, we instead formulate it as a discrete K-way classiﬁcation task,
where a classiﬁer is trained to return one of K discrete alignments. One crucial beneﬁt of a classiﬁer is the ability to report
back a (softmax) distribution over putative alignments. We
demonstrate that this distribution is a rich representation that
can be marginalized (to generate uncertainty estimates over
groups of landmarks) and conditioned on (to incorporate topdown context, provided by temporal constraints in a video
stream or an interactive human user). Such capabilities are
difﬁcult to integrate into classic regression-based approaches.
We study performance as a function of the number of classes
K, including the extreme “exemplar class” setting where K
is equal to the number of training examples (140K in our
setting). Perhaps surprisingly, we show that classiﬁers can
still be learned in this setting. When compared to prior work
in classiﬁcation, our K is unprecedentedly large, including
many “ﬁne-grained” classes that are very similar. We address these issues by using a multi-label loss function that allows for training examples to be non-uniformly shared across
discrete classes. We perform a comprehensive experimental
analysis of our method on standard benchmarks, demonstrating state-of-the-art results for facial alignment in videos.

Regression

vs
Input

Output

140,000-way Classification
Yaw

Large Pose

Severe Occlusion

Roll

Global Uncertainty

Conditional
Prediction

Figure 1: Face alignment is a regression problem, yet we
solve it via large-scale classiﬁcation. As shown in the bottom row, our model is able to handle severe occlusions and
large pose variation and provide a global uncertainty estimate. Moreover, such uncertainty representation can used to
produce conditional prediction in an interactive setup.

case, facial landmarks). Such inverse estimation problems
are notoriously difﬁcult, but are currently enjoying a period
of transformative success due to data-driven architectures
such as deep networks. While enormously powerful, such
networks reduce the problem to one of nonlinear regression.
Such an approach may suffer when the inverse problem is
inherently ill-conditioned, implying that multiple interpretations/solutions may be equally valid. In this case, it may be
more natural to predict a distribution over interpretations.
For example, when applying such networks to predict the
location of landmarks in a heavily occluded face, it likely
helps to report back multiple possibilities.
Approach: Given the above motivation, we propose a
simple but somewhat radical approach to alignment: discretize all possible predictions into K discrete classes, and
treat the problem as one of large-scale K-way classiﬁcation. Since networks are readily trained to report back (softmax) distributions over classes, this approach produces uncertainty estimates over possible interpretations of an im-

Introduction

Accurately localizing facial landmarks is a core competency
for many applications such as face recognition, facial expression analysis and human-computer interaction. Performance of existing methods is quite impressive on datasets
captured in constrained scenarios. As such, attention in the
community has shifted towards “in the wild” (Sagonas et
al. 2016) settings, for which large pose variation and severe
occlusions pose signiﬁcant challenges. While numerous attempts have been made to address them, our evaluation suggests that these harder problems are far from being solved.
Motivation: To address these remaining challenges, let’s
take a step back. Computer vision can be thought of as an
inverse estimation problem, where given an image, one has
to estimate a high-dimensional set of parameters specifying
the true underlying geometric properties of the scene (in our
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7032

