The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Conversational Model Adaptation
via KL Divergence Regularization
1

Juncen Li,1 Ping Luo,2,3 Fen Lin,1 Bo Chen1

WeChat Search Application Department, Tencent, China. {juncenli}@tencent.com, {felicialin,jennychen}@tencent.com
2
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China. {luop}@ics.ict.ac.cn
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
dialogue text from the corresponding vertical domain for
end-to-end training. However, when a new chatbot is online
for only a short time the data accumulated for training are
very limited. Thus, we need a solution to address this cold
start problem for new chatbots in a chatbot platform.
To address this data sparsity issue, we formulate the problem of conversational model adaptation. Speciﬁcally, for
the building of a new chatbot, it leverages not only a limited amount of training data from this target domain, but
also some existing conversational models. Here, the existing
models we consider are trained by the data from open social
platforms (Wang et al. 2013) (considered as the source domain), thus they may contain enough language patterns for
the free-chat support.
However, even though the source domain contains enough
data for training a conversational model, its data distribution
might be dissimilar from that in the target domain, as shown
in our quantitative study on the data distributions of source
and target domains (detailed later). Thus, adding the source
domain data directly into the target domain may lead to a
huge drift of data distribution, and result in a conversational
model, which loses the domain-dependent characteristics for
the target domain.
In this paper, we propose a KL divergence (KLD) regularization method for conversational model adaptation. Specifically, we ﬁrst build a model based on the huge amount of
dialog data from a social platform. Then, the small amount
of target domain data is used to adapt the pre-trained model
to the target domain via KLD regularization. This joint regularization framework prevents the dialog system from overﬁtting to the target domain, and simultaneously makes use of
the information from the source domain. To evaluate the effectiveness of our method, we use both objective and subjective measures. Results of experiments show that our method
visibly improves the performance of the existing models
without model adaptation. In summation, our contributions
are three-folds:

Abstract
In this study we formulate the problem of conversational
model adaptation, where we aim to build a generative conversational model for a target domain based on a limited amount
of dialogue data from this target domain and some existing
dialogue models from related source domains. This model facilitates the fast building of a chatbot platform, where a new
vertical chatbot with only a small number of conversation
data can be supported by other related mature chatbots. Previous studies on model adaptation and transfer learning mostly
focus on classiﬁcation and recommendation problems, however, how these models work for conversation generation are
still un-explored.
To this end, we leverage a KL divergence (KLD) regularization to adapt the existing conversational models. Speciﬁcally,
it employs the KLD to measure the distance between source
and target domain. Adding KLD as a regularization to the
objective function allows the proposed method to utilize the
information from source domains effectively. We also evaluate the performance of this adaptation model for the online
chatbots in Wechat platform of public accounts using both the
BLEU metric and human judgement. The experiments empirically show that the proposed method visibly improves these
evaluation metrics.

Introduction
Recently, end-to-end neural systems have made great
progress in various natural language tasks, such as machine
translation (Cho et al. 2014b; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le
2014), question answering (Yin et al. 2016), and dialog systems (Gu et al. 2016; Serban et al. 2016; Sordoni et al. 2015).
In general, most of these systems consist of multi-layer RNN
networks with a large number of parameters, thus, they need
a large amount of text data for training. In previous studies
for conversation modeling, plenty of dialogue data is usually
collected from social platforms (such as Weibo (Wang et al.
2013)) or transformed from some public data (Banchs and
Li 2012), which usually covers various vertical domains.
The background of this study is about the building of a
chatbot platform, which contains various chatbots for diverse vertical domains, such as entertainment, sports, religion, etc. To build a vertical chatbot we usually need enough

• To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to propose
the problem of conversational model adaptation, where
the building of a new vertical domain dialogue system is
supported by both the small amount of target domain data
and large number of source domain data.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We develop a KLD regularization method to adapt conver-

5213

