The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Dispatch Guided Allocation Optimization for Effective Emergency Response
Supriyo Ghosh

Pradeep Varakantham

School of Information Systems
Singapore Management University
supriyog.2013@phdis.smu.edu.sg

School of Information Systems
Singapore Management University
pradeepv@smu.edu.sg

using metrics that are based on response time (i.e., the time
taken by an ERV to reach the incident location after the request arrived into the system). One such widely adopted key
performance metric is bounded time response (the percentage of requests served within a threshold response time), and
will be the main focus in this paper.
Performance of an EMS can be improved either by optimizing allocations of ERVs to base stations or by improving strategies to dispatch ERVs to incidents. In this paper, we speciﬁcally focus on the optimization of ERV allocation. There are two types of data-driven approaches researchers have recently employed to improve ERV allocation: (a) Yue, Marla, and Krishnan (2012) proposed a greedy
approach to incrementally allocate one ERV at a time using
an event-driven simulator that follows the nearest available
ERV dispatch strategy. They employ the bounded time objective where the goal is to maximize the number of incidents served within a ﬁxed time. However, the solution of
this greedy approach can be far away from the optimal due to
its myopic nature (one request at a time) and as the bounded
time response metric is not sub-modular; (b) On the other
hand, Saisubramanian, Varakantham, and Chuin (2015) generated an allocation that minimizes response time with a
bounded risk (i.e., percentage of incidents that can have response times higher than the objective) using a linear optimization model that follows an omniscient dispatch policy.
They then evaluate the obtained solution using a simulator
with the actual dispatch strategy to get the actual objective
value. While the optimization approach with omniscient dispatch provides promising results, the use of omniscient dispatch is not realistic since the optimization occurs over a different evolution of emergency response dynamics than the
one that happens on the ground.
Therefore, in order to reduce the response times for emergency requests, we need to consider both these operational
(day-to-day) inefﬁciencies simultaneously: (a) allocation of
all ERVs (and not one by one) to base stations; and (b) dispatch of the ”right” ERVs to the emergency requests. To
tackle the above mentioned issues and to bridge the gap between the optimization model and the real-world scenarios,
we provide a dispatch guided optimization approach for allocating all ERVs to base stations. We speciﬁcally consider
the widely used bounded time objective employed by Yue et
al. (Yue, Marla, and Krishnan 2012). To that end, our key

Abstract
Effective emergency (medical, ﬁre or criminal) response is
crucial for improving safety and security in urban environments. Recent research in improving effectiveness of emergency management systems (EMSs) has utilized data-driven
optimization models for efﬁcient allocation of emergency response vehicles (ERVs) to base locations. However, these
data-driven optimization models either ignore the dispatch
strategy of ERVs (typically the nearest available ERV is dispatched to serve an incident) or employ myopic approaches
(e.g., greedy approach based on marginal gain). This results
in allocations that are not synchronised with the real evolution dynamics on the ground or can be improved signiﬁcantly.
To bridge this gap, we make the following contributions: (1)
We ﬁrst provide a novel exact optimization model for allocation of ERVs that incorporates the non-linear real-world
dispatch strategy as linear constraints and ensures that optimization exactly imitates the real-world dynamics of EMS;
(2) In order to improve scalability, we then provide two novel
heuristic approaches to solve problems with large number of
emergency incidents; and (3) Finally, using two real-world
EMS data sets, we empirically demonstrate that our heuristic approaches provide signiﬁcant improvement over the best
known benchmark approach.

Introduction
Emergency Management Systems (EMSs) are an essential
component of public safety and health-care services. The application domains for EMS range from emergency medical
support to ﬁre evacuation to crime management. In an EMS,
a set of base stations are strategically placed throughout
the city and a set of Emergency Response Vehicles, ERVs
(e.g., ambulances, ﬁre trucks, police vehicles) are stationed
in each of those base stations. Upon arrival of an emergency
request, the operators typically dispatch the nearest available
ERV to assist the victim. The personnel on board the ERV
provide initial treatment and move the victim to a neighbouring hospital. After transferring the patient over to hospital,
ERV returns back to the base from where it was dispatched.
EMS is an extremely sensitive and critical domain, as arriving at an incident location a few seconds early can save a
human life. Therefore, EMS operators measure performance
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

775

