The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Incomplete Label Multi-Task Ordinal
Regression for Spatial Event Scale Forecasting
Yuyang Gao

Liang Zhao

George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030

George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030

  

Abstract


 

Event scales are commonly used by practitioners to gauge
subjective feelings on the magnitude and signiﬁcance of social events. For example, the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) utilizes a 10-level scale to distinguish the
severity of ﬂu outbreaks and governments typically categorize violent outbreaks based on their intensity as reﬂected in
multiple aspects. Effective forecasting of future event scales
can be used qualitatively to determine reasonable resource allocations and facilitate accurate proactive actions by practitioners. Existing spatial event forecasting methods typically
focus on the occurrence of events rather than their ordinal
event scales as this is very challenging in several respects, including 1) the ordinal nature of the event scale, 2) the spatial
heterogeneity of event scaling in different geo-locations, 3)
the incompleteness of scale label data for some spatial locations, and 4) the spatial correlation of event scale patterns. In
order to address all these challenges concurrently, a MultITask Ordinal Regression (MITOR) framework is proposed
to effectively forecast the scale of future events. Our model
enforces similar feature sparsity patterns for different tasks
while preserving the heterogeneity in their scale patterns. In
addition, based on the ﬁrst law of geography, we proposed to
enforce spatially-closed tasks to share similar scale patterns
with theoretical guarantees. Optimizing the proposed model
amounts to a new non-convex and non-smooth problem with
an isotonicity constraint, which is then solved by our new algorithm based on ADMM and dynamic programming. Extensive experiments on ten real-world datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the proposed model.



    

Figure 1: ILI data for one week of the 2016-17 inﬂuenza
season (CDC)

not enough. Knowledge regarding the scale or level of a future event is vital if decision makers are to achieve optimal
resource allocation. For example, as shown in Figure 1, the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) rank the
severity of ongoing disease outbreaks using ﬁve scale points.
The successful prediction of the scale of future disease outbreaks enables practitioners to allocate appropriate levels of
resources for vaccination and isolation. For organized crime
event forecasting, the signiﬁcance of the future crime events
is a valuable reference for government agencies seeking to
set realistic alert levels and allocate sufﬁcient resources for
local and national law enforcement. However, as yet little research has focused speciﬁcally on spatial social event scale
forecasting.
Traditional event forecasting methods typically predict a
binary output (i.e., the event either occurs or it doesn’t), and
hence cannot be directly applied to forecast event scales,
which are ordinal variables. Spatial event scale forecasting
is a new problem that poses several unique and interesting
challenges that are yet to be addressed. 1) Spatial heterogeneity of event scales: Different locations have different
characteristics, such as population, weather and administrative structures. These factors often lead to population discrepancies in the social media users at different locations.
For example, for inﬂuenza outbreak forecasting, the same
number of mentions of the keyword ‘ﬂu’ in tweets can lead
to quite different actual scales in California and Nebraska;
since California has a far larger population than Nebraska,
the same number of mentions of ‘ﬂu’ in tweets will signify
a far lower inﬂuenza activity level in California than in Nebraska. 2) Incomplete labels in spatial event scales: For
any given location, there will often be some missing scale
levels within the training data as some event scales were

Introduction
Societal events that are spatially based, such as disease outbreaks and organized crime, have a signiﬁcant impact on
society. The ability to successfully forecast future spatial
events of this nature would thus be extremely beneﬁcial for
decision makers seeking to avoid, control, or alleviate the associated social upheaval and risks. Spatial social event forecasting is a fast-growing research area that typically forecasts the occurrence of future spatial events, namely whether
or not the spatial events will happen. However, in many applications simply forecasting the occurrence of an event is
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2999

