The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Better Name Translation
for Cross-Lingual Wikiﬁcation
Chen-Tse Tsai

Dan Roth

Bloomberg LP∗
New York, NY
ctsai54@bloomberg.net

University of Pennsylvania∗
Philadelphia, PA
danroth@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract

El ministro de Relaciones Exteriores de Ucrania dice que
permitió la entrada del convoy ruso para evitar provocaciones.

A notable challenge in cross-lingual wikiﬁcation is the problem of retrieving English Wikipedia title candidates given a
non-English mention, a step that requires translating names1
written in a foreign language into English. Creating training
data for name translation requires signiﬁcant amount of human efforts. In order to cover as many languages as possible,
we propose a probabilistic model that leverages indirect supervision signals in a knowledge base. More speciﬁcally, the
model learns name translation from title pairs obtained from
the inter-language links in Wikipedia. The model jointly considers word alignment and word transliteration. Comparing to
6 other approaches on 9 languages, we show that the proposed
model outperforms others not only on the transliteration metric, but also on the ability to generate target English titles for a
cross-lingual wikiﬁer. Consequently, as we show, it improves
the end-to-end performance of a cross-lingual wikiﬁer on the
TAC 2016 EDL dataset.

Ministry_of_Foreign_Affairs_(Ukraine)

Russia

Figure 1: An example of cross-lingual wikiﬁcation.
The Spanish mention “ruso” is grounded to the English Wikipedia title “Russia”, and “Relaciones Exteriores de Ucrania” is grounded to the title “Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Ukraine)”.

Spanish
Bengali
Tagalog

Current upper bound

Proposed method

40.44%
20.82%
16.23%

64.62%
65.18%
73.23%

Table 1: Paper Impact: Improved title candidate generation
coverage. The left column gives the fraction of Wikipedia
titles that are covered by the inter-language links. This is the
upper bound for current cross-lingual wikiﬁcation methods.
The right column gives the fraction of these mentions that
have the correct English title in the candidate set using the
method developed in this paper.

Introduction
Cross-lingual wikiﬁcation is the problem of grounding entity mentions written in a foreign language to the English
Wikipedia. That is, given a mention from a document written in language L, different than English, the goal is to ﬁnd
its corresponding title in the English Wikipedia. Figure 1
shows an example. This task is driven by the will of English
readers to partly understand documents in low resource languages and, in particular, in those languages with no English
translation technology. Instead of translating the whole document to English, grounding the important entity mentions
in the English Wikipedia may provide a good partial solution
that could at least capture the key message of the text.
One of the key challenges for wikiﬁcation is the candidate generation step – generating title candidates given a
mention. Since there are millions of entries in the English
Wikipedia, this step aims at quickly producing a manageable number of title candidates, so that a more sophisticated

algorithm can be applied to rank them. The candidate generation step is typically done by indexing titles in Wikipedia
using strings that could be used to refer to the titles.
In the cross-lingual setting, this problem becomes more
challenging. There are two intuitive ways to retrieve English title candidates given a foreign mention: 1) Querying
the English titles’ index directly using a foreign mention. 2)
Querying the foreign language titles’ index using the foreign mention, and then converting the foreign titles to English using the inter-language links in Wikipedia. The ﬁrst
approach only works if the target language is very close to
English, so that names in the two languages are expressed
almost identically. The second approach depends heavily
on the size of the foreign language Wikipedia. That is, this
approach only works if the target entity exists in the foreign language Wikipedia, and there is a link pointing to the
corresponding English page. In Figure 1, the ﬁrst approach
does not work for any of the two mentions since they are

∗

Most of this work was done while the authors were at University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We use the term name translation to refer to the process of
converting names from one language to another, which includes
the transliteration problem for some type of names.

5528

