The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Strategic Coalitions with Perfect Recall
Pavel Naumov

Jia Tao

Department of Computer Science
Vassar College
Poughkeepsie, New York 12604
pnaumov@vassar.edu

Department of Computer Science
Lafayette College
Easton, Pennsylvania 18042
taoj@lafayette.edu

the system starts in state w2 . Since agent a cannot distinguish state w2 from state w2 where statement p is not satisﬁed, the agent does not know if p is true or not. We write
this as (w2 )  Ka p. Next, suppose that the system started
in state w1 and the agent used instruction 0 to transition
the system into state w2 . In this paper we assume that all
agents have perfect recall, so in state w2 the agent remembers history (w1 , 0, w2 ). However, such a history is indistinguishable from history (w1 , 0, w2 ) because the agent cannot distinguish state w1 from state w1 and state w2 from
state w2 . Thus, the agent does not know that proposition
p is true in the state w2 even with history (w1 , 0, w2 ). We
denote this by (w1 , 0, w2 )  Ka p. Finally, assume that the
system started in state w0 and the agent ﬁrst used instruction 1 to transition it into state w1 and later instruction 0
to transition it to state w2 . Thus, the history of the system
is (w0 , 1, w1 , 0, w2 ). The only history that the agent cannot
distinguish from this one is history (w0 , 1, w1 , 0, w2 ). Since
both of these histories end in a state where proposition p
is satisﬁed, agent a does know that proposition p is true in
state w2 , given history (w0 , 1, w1 , 0, w2 ). We write this as
(w0 , 1, w1 , 0, w2 )  Ka p.
The other modality that we consider is the strategic power.
In system T1 , the agent can transition the system from state
w1 to state w2 by using instruction 0. Similarly, the agent
can transition the system from state w1 to state w2 by using
instruction 1. In other words, given either history (w1 ) or
history (w1 ) the agent can transition the system to a state in
which atomic proposition p is satisﬁed. We say that, given
either history, agent a has a strategy to achieve p. Histories (w1 ) and (w1 ) are the only histories indistinguishable
by agent a from history (w1 ). Since she has a strategy to
achieve p under all histories indistinguishable from history
(w1 ), we say that given history (w1 ) the agent knows that
she has a strategy. Similarly, given history (w1 ), she also
knows that she has a strategy. However, since indistinguishable histories (w1 ) and (w1 ) require different strategies to
achieve p, given history (w1 ) she does not know what the
strategy is. We say that she does not have a know-how strategy. We denote this by (w1 )  Ha p, where H stands for
know-How. Of course, it is also true that (w1 )  Ha p.
The situation changes if the transition system starts in
state w0 instead of state w1 and transitions to state w1 under
instruction 1. Now the history is (w0 , 1, w1 ) and the histo-

Abstract
The paper proposes a bimodal logic that describes an interplay between distributed knowledge modality and coalition
know-how modality. Unlike other similar systems, the one
proposed here assumes perfect recall by all agents. Perfect
recall is captured in the system by a single axiom. The main
technical results are the soundness and the completeness theorems for the proposed logical system.

Introduction
Autonomous agents such as self-driving cars and robotic
vacuum cleaners are facing the challenge of navigating without having complete information about the current situation.
Such a setting could be formally captured by an epistemic
transition system where an agent uses instructions to transition the system between states without being able to distinguish some of these states. In this paper we study properties
of strategies in such systems. An example of such a system
is the epistemic transition system T1 , depicted in Figure 1.
It has six states named w0 , w0 , w1 , w1 , w2 , w2 and two instructions 0 and 1 that an agent a can use to transition the
system from one state to another. For instance, if an instruction 0 is given in state w0 , then the system transitions into
state w1 . The system is called epistemic because the agent
cannot distinguish state wi from state wi for each i = 0, 1, 2.
The indistinguishability relation is shown in the ﬁgure using
dashed lines. Atomic proposition p is true only in state w2 .
w0

1

w1

0

w2

p

1

a

a

a
1

1
w0'

0

0

w1'

0

w2'

Figure 1: Epistemic Transition System T1 .
The logical system that we propose consists of two modalities. The ﬁrst is the knowledge modality K. Imagine that
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4702

