The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

FEEL: Featured Event Embedding Learning
I-Ta Lee, Dan Goldwasser
Purdue University
{lee2226, dgoldwas}@purdue.edu

the importance of evaluating inferences over chains of future events. We look into two variants of this task, the ﬁrst
predicts future events, and the second predicts an explanation, connecting the beginning and ending of a longer narrative chain. The following example is a simpliﬁed version of
these tasks.

Abstract
Statistical script learning is an effective way to acquire world
knowledge which can be used for commonsense reasoning.
Statistical script learning induces this knowledge by observing event sequences generated from texts. The learned model
thus can predict subsequent events, given earlier events. Recent approaches rely on learning event embeddings which
capture script knowledge. In this work, we suggest a general learning model–Featured Event Embedding Learning
(FEEL)–for injecting event embeddings with ﬁne grained information. In addition to capturing the dependencies between
subsequent events, our model can take into account higher
level abstractions of the input event which help the model
generalize better and account for the global context in which
the event appears. We evaluated our model over three narrative cloze tasks, and showed that our model is competitive
with the most recent state-of-the-art. We also show that our
resulting embedding can be used as a strong representation
for advanced semantic tasks such as discourse parsing and
sentence semantic relatedness.

Narrative Cloze
Jenny went to a restaurant and ordered a lasagna plate.
Jenny liked the food and felt satisﬁed.
Which of the following events could happen next?
a) She scolded the server.
b) She fell asleep.
c) She left a big tip.
d) She ran out of battery.
Narrative Explanation
Jenny went to a restaurant and left a big tip.

Introduction
Many natural language understanding tasks rely on world
knowledge. Such knowledge can help support common
sense reasoning and provide the context needed for disambiguating text. Scripts, introduced by Schank and Abelson (1977), are structured knowledge representations capturing the relationships between prototypical event sequences
and their participants. Scripts model our expectations about
the relevant causal relationships between events, and as a result can be used to infer how events will unfold in a given
scenario. For example, given the event John shot Jim with
a gun, we can infer that he was arrested by the police is
more probable than he fell asleep. Scripts provide the foundation for automatically making such inferences, supporting semantic tasks such as coreference resolution, discourse
parsing and question answering.
As the example above suggests, predicting “what happens
next?”, also known as the Narrative Cloze (NC) task (Chambers and Jurafsky 2008; Granroth-Wilding and Clark 2016),
is the preferred way of evaluating such models. In this paper, we propose a generalization of this task highlighting

Which of the following event chains explain what
happened?
a) She ordered her food and liked it.
b) She hated the food and left angry.
c) She walked to a bus station and got on a bus.
Humans can easily identify that c) and a) are the correct
answers. However, automating this process requires understanding the events, their properties and their implications.
While early works focused on manual construction of
script knowledge, the difﬁculty of scaling these methods to
realistic domains has ignited considerable interest in statistical script learning methods (Chambers and Jurafsky 2008;
Modi and Titov 2014; Rudinger et al. 2015; Pichotta and
Mooney 2016b; Peng and Roth 2016; Granroth-Wilding and
Clark 2016; Modi et al. 2017).
We build on the previous work (Chambers and Jurafsky 2008) which used pairs of event predicates and dependency information (corresponding to the subject/object dependency links) to represent events and formed event chains

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4840

