The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Conditional Generative Models for Temporal Point Processes
Shuai Xiao,† Honteng Xu,‡ Junchi Yan,†§∗ Mehrdad Farajtabar,
Xiaokang Yang,† Le Song, Hongyuan Zha


†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
‡
Duke University, § IBM Research – China
{benjaminforever,yanjunchi,xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn
hongteng.xu@duke.edu, mehrdad@gatech.edu
{lsong,zha}@cc.gatech.edu

However, this task is very challenging mainly for two reasons: First, we have little knowledge on what model the
whole process actually follows. For real-world events, the
underlying generating process is often unknown. If a misspeciﬁed model is used to ﬁt the observed data, its outof-sample generality would degrade. Therefore, a ﬂexible
model with enough capacity to handle such a complexity is
necessary. Second, long-term prediction suffers from the socalled bias exposure problem (Bengio et al. 2015) where the
error accumulates and propagates to latter prediction. Most
work relies on the one-step maximum likelihood estimation.
As a result, the high-order dependency over events for likelihood function has not been fully explored.
In this paper, we propose a new neural network-based sequential model and design a novel learning algorithm to address the above two challenges, respectively. In particular,
our model is a kind of neural point process models (Du et al.
2016; Xiao et al. 2017c), which is very robust to the problem of model misspeciﬁcation and has large capacity. In the
learning phase of our model, we design a new algorithmic
framework combining traditional maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) with Wasserstein distance-based learning.
Our learning method is based on the following two facts:
On one hand, MLE loss or KL divergence requires strict
matching between two probability distributions and is nonbiased estimation of parameters, which is sensitive to sample noise and outliers; on the other hand, unlike MLE loss,
which does not consider how close two samples are but only
their relatively probability, Wasserstein distance is sensitive
to the underlying geometry structure of samples but has biased gradients(Bellemare et al. 2017). To take advantage of
the strengths of these two methods and mitigate the bias
exposure in long-term prediction, our method incorporate
Wasserstein distance besides MLE — both the KL divergence and the Wasserstein distance between generated and
real samples are minimized jointly.
In a nut shell, the main contributions of the paper are:

Abstract
Estimating the future event sequence conditioned on current
observations is a long-standing and challenging task in temporal analysis. On one hand for many real-world problems
the underlying dynamics can be very complex and often unknown. This renders the traditional parametric point process
models often fail to ﬁt the data for their limited capacity. On
the other hand, long-term prediction suffers from the problem of bias exposure where the error accumulates and propagates to future prediction. Our new model builds upon the sequence to sequence (seq2seq) prediction network. Compared
with parametric point process models, its modeling capacity is higher and has better ﬂexibility for ﬁtting real-world
data. The main novelty of the paper is to mitigate the second
challenge by introducing the likelihood-free loss based on
Wasserstein distance between point processes, besides negative maximum likelihood loss used in the traditional seq2seq
model. Wasserstein distance, unlike KL divergence i.e. MLE
loss, is sensitive to the underlying geometry between samples
and can robustly enforce close geometry structure between
them. This technique is proven able to improve the vanilla
seq2seq model by a notable margin on various tasks.

Introduction
The ability of looking into the future is a challenging but luring task. People are willing to estimate the occurrence probability for their interested events so that they can take preemptive action. For example, after reviewing the admission
history of patients, the doctors may give kind warning for the
patients who are at high risk of certain diseases. When having access to working experience of job seekers, headhunters
can evaluate one’s future career path and recommend a suitable position at proper time. In these cases, the historical observations always provide us with important guidance to predict future events — not only the order of events but also the
time span between them contain useful information about
the underlying dynamics of the process. Therefore, we need
to predict the distribution of future events conditioned on the
partial historical observations and the estimated dynamics of
the process.

1. We develop a novel long-term time dependent event sequence prediction model by exploring the Wasserstein
loss besides the traditional MLE loss. Differing from
the very recent adversarial learning based point process
model (Xiao et al. 2017a), which can only estimate the

∗

Corresponding Author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6302

