The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Mixtures of Random Utility Models
Zhibing Zhao, Tristan Villamil, Lirong Xia
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
110 8th Street, Troy, NY, USA
{zhaoz6, villat2}@rpi.edu, xial@cs.rpi.edu

Parkes, and Xia 2012). Unfortunately, unlike the PlacketLuce model, general RUMs are hard to learn due to the
lack of closed-form formula of the likelihood function. One
prominent example is Thurstone’s case V model (Thurstone
1927), where the utility distributions are Gaussian and can
be seen as an extension of multinomial probit regression to
rank data. See Related Work for more discussions.
A mixture of k RUM models, denoted by k-RUM, combines k RUM components via the mixing coefﬁcients 
α =
[α1 , α2 , . . . , αk ]. Given a k-RUM, a ranking can be generated as follows: (i) the rth component is selected with probability αr ; (ii) a ranking is generated from the rth RUM component. Like other mixture models, k-RUMs can potentially
provide better ﬁtness and can be used for clustering.
We are not aware of previous work on learning mixtures
of general RUMs. There are some recent works on mixtures of Plackett-Luce models (Gormley and Murphy 2008;
Mollica and Tardella 2016; Tkachenko and Lauw 2016;
Zhao, Piech, and Xia 2016), which are special k-RUMs.
The motivation of our work on learning mixtures of general RUMs is that general k-RUMs outperforms a single
RUM, the Plackett-Luce model, and mixtures of PlackettLuce models w.r.t. various commonly-used model ﬁtting criteria, as we will show later in the paper based on experiments
on real-world data. This means that general k-RUMs often
improve predictions and decisions compared to the state-ofthe-art models.
In this paper, we address the following two fundamental questions on learning mixtures of RUMs. Is a k-RUM
learnable? Can we design efﬁcient algorithms for learning
k-RUMs in general?

Abstract
We tackle the problem of identiﬁability and efﬁcient learning of mixtures of Random Utility Models (RUMs). We show
that when the PDFs of utility distributions are symmetric,
the mixture of k RUMs (denoted by k-RUM) is not identiﬁable when the number of alternatives m is no more than
2k − 1. On the other hand, when m ≥ max{4k − 2, 6}, any
k-RUM is generically identiﬁable. We then propose three algorithms for learning mixtures of RUMs: an EM-based algorithm, which we call E-GMM, a direct generalized-methodof-moments (GMM) algorithm, and a sandwich (GMM-EGMM) algorithm that combines the other two. Experiments
on synthetic data show that the sandwich algorithm achieves
the highest statistical efﬁciency and GMM is the most computationally efﬁcient. Experiments on real-world data at Preﬂib
show that Gaussian k-RUMs provide better ﬁtness than a single Gaussian RUM, the Plackett-Luce model, and mixtures
of Plackett-Luce models w.r.t. commonly-used model ﬁtness
criteria. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work on
learning mixtures of general RUMs.

Introduction
In rank aggregation, the goal is to aggregate rank data to
make an optimal decision, where each data point is a linear
order over a set of alternatives. Rank aggregation has many
applications. For example, in political elections, agents cast
votes to elect a president; in information retrieval, rankings
over documents are combined into a list; in crowdsourcing,
crowd workers sometimes give rankings as answers, which
are aggregated to estimate the correct ranking.
In this paper, we take a machine learning approach towards rank aggregation, by addressing the problem of efﬁciently learning mixtures of Random Utility Models (RUMs).
RUMs are a widely applied statistical model for human behaviors (Thurstone 1927). In a single, non-mixture RUM,
each agent samples a utility for each alternative independently and reports the ranking over alternatives by sorting
their utilities. A special case of RUMs is the Plackett-Luce
model (Plackett 1975; Luce 1959), which can be seen as the
extension of multinomial logistic regression to rank data.
General RUMs can ﬁt data better than Plackett-Luce models
and thus provide more accurate predictions (Azari Souﬁani,

In this paper, we measure learnability by “identiﬁability”,
which means different parameters correspond to different
distributions of rank data. Identiﬁability is important to mixture models for parameter estimation and clustering. The
identiﬁability of k-RUMs depends on the number of components k in the mixture model and the number of alternatives
m, as we show in the following two theorems.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Theorem 1. Let M be any symmetric RUM from the location family. When m ≤ 2k − 1, k-RUMM over m alterna-

Our Contributions

4530

