The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Large Scaled Relation Extraction with Reinforcement Learning
Xiangrong Zeng,12 Shizhu He,2 Kang Liu,12 Jun Zhao12
1

2

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR), Institute of Automation
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China
{xiangrong.zeng, shizhu.he, kliu, jzhao}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Sentence relation extraction aims to extract relational facts
from sentences, which is an important task in natural language processing ﬁeld. Previous models rely on the manually
labeled supervised dataset. However, the human annotation
is costly and limits to the number of relation and data size,
which is difﬁcult to scale to large domains. In order to conduct largely scaled relation extraction, we utilize an existing
knowledge base to heuristically align with texts, which not
rely on human annotation and easy to scale. However, using
distant supervised data for relation extraction is facing a new
challenge: sentences in the distant supervised dataset are not
directly labeled and not all sentences that mentioned an entity pair can represent the relation between them. To solve
this problem, we propose a novel model with reinforcement
learning. The relation of the entity pair is used as distant supervision and guide the training of relation extractor with the
help of reinforcement learning method. We conduct two types
of experiments on a publicly released dataset. Experiment results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method
compared with baseline models, which achieves 13.36% improvement.

Figure 1: Examples of relation extraction task. This task devotes to extract relations between an entity pair.

Introduction

Figure 2: Align relational facts from KB with free texts to
automatically generate large scaled dataset. However, sentences are not directly labeled and some of them (i.e. the
third sentence in the ﬁgure) can not represent the relation of
the entity pair.

Relation Extraction (RE) devotes to extracting relational
facts from sentences, which can be applied to many natural
language processing (NLP) applications such as information
extraction (Wu and Weld 2010) and question answering (Yih
et al. 2015; Dai, Li, and Xu 2016). Given a sentence with an
entity pair e1 and e2 , this task aims to identify the relation
between e1 and e2 . For example, RE devotes to extracting
the relation of Steve Jobs and Apple by given the ﬁrst sentence in Figure 1.
RE has drawn much attention of many researchers in NLP
ﬁeld. (Zeng et al. 2014) is among the ﬁrst work to apply neural networks in this task. They adopted Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) to automatically extract the sentence representations with the raw input words for RE, which achieved
signiﬁcant improvements compared with traditional models.
(Zhou et al. 2016) applied attention mechanism with Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) Networks to capture the semantic information in a sentence, which didn’t utilize any

features derived from lexical resources or NLP systems.
They achieved higher F1 score than most baselines methods. These models are heavily relied on supervised dataset
like ACE-05 (Grishman, Westbrook, and Meyers 2005) and
SemEval-2010 task 8 (Hendrickx et al. 2009). However,
supervised data relies on human annotation which is very
costly. Therefore, generating data with human annotation is
difﬁcult to apply in the large scaled domain. How to extract
relations in large domain dataset remains a challenging task.
To obtain large scaled relation extraction dataset, (Mintz
et al. 2009) proposed Distant Supervision paradigm to automatically scale RE to large domains. They used the relational facts from large scaled Knowledge Bases (KB) to
automatically align with texts. Speciﬁcally, for a triplet fact
r(e1 , e2 ) in a KB, all sentences that mention both entities

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5658

