The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Improved Text Matching by
Enhancing Mutual Information
Yang Liu,1,2 Wenge Rong,1,2 Zhang Xiong1,2
1

State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China
{liuyang1123, w.rong, xiongz}@buaa.edu.cn

relationship, they share more mutual information. A better
matching model means a better information channel, thus
uncovering more mutual information between QA. Most
prior work (Tan et al. 2016; Wang and Jiang 2017) tries to
build a better matching model to enhance mutual information. We, instead, enhance mutual information by generating extra text, i.e., reformulating the original text in another
expression.
To be speciﬁc, we focus on matching QA and adopt the
generative adversarial network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al.
2014) framework to rewrite questions in an unsupervised
way. In the GAN framework, a generator consisting of recurrent neural networks (RNN) is used to generate new
question. Meanwhile, a discriminator is trained to force the
new question to be semantically close to original question
in embedding space. The rewriting process is similar to
monolingual machine translation where the rewriting question is translated from original question. A main problem
for the generator is the non-differentiability of discrete text.
Since each word of the generated question is derived from
the argmax (non-differentiable) operation on the probability distribution over vocabulary, the predicted word is nondifferentiable w.r.t. generator parameters. Thus, the generator parameters cannot be updated in back propagation. To
address this issue, we adopt the policy gradients (Williams
1992; Sutton et al. 1999), which is usually used in teaching
machine playing games. We use policy gradients from the
discriminator to guide the updation of generator parameters
so that the generator can generate more plausible samples.
Experiments are conducted on Zhihu, WikiQA and SemEval
datasets and the results demonstrate that the rewriting module improves ranking performance consistently.

Abstract
Text matching is a core issue for question answering (QA),
information retrieval (IR) and many other ﬁelds. We propose to reformulate the original text, i.e., generating a new
text that is semantically equivalent to original text, to improve text matching degree. Intuitively, the generated text improves mutual information between two text sequences. We
employ the generative adversarial network as the reformulation model where there is a discriminator to guide the text
generating process. In this work, we focus on matching question and answers. The task is to rank answers based on QA
matching degree. We ﬁrst reformulate the original question
without changing the asker’s intent, then compute a relevance
score for each answer. To evaluate the method, we collected
questions and answers from Zhihu. In addition, we also conduct substantial experiments on public data such as SemEval
and WikiQA to compare our method with existing methods.
Experimental results demonstrate that after adding the reformulated question, the ranking performance across different
matching models can be improved consistently, indicating
that the reformulated question has enhanced mutual information and effectively bridged the semantic gap between QA.

1

Introduction

Text matching is of great importance for many applications.
The matching methods vary from traditional words matching to modern semantic matching . Various deep matching models (Severyn and Moschitti 2015; Tymoshenko and
Moschitti 2015; Bogdanova et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2016)
have been proposed in recent years. Those models can be divided into representation-focused methods and interactionfocused methods. The representation-focused methods (Hu
et al. 2014; Jansen, Surdeanu, and Clark 2014; Tan et al.
2016) aim to learn a good latent representation for a text
sequence and then conduct matching between the two representations. The interaction-focused (Bogdanova et al. 2017;
Wang and Jiang 2017) methods could account for lexical interactions while learning text representations, a typical instance is the attention mechanism (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015). In the view of information theory, those matching models can be regarded as a kind of information channel
between question answering (QA). For QA that has close

2

Related Work

Deep Matching Models. In recent years, neural networks
have shown great superiority in learning sequences’ semantic representation and have achieved a great success in a variety of NLP tasks as well as computer vision and speech
recognition tasks. In the QA matching domain, (Wang
and Nyberg 2015) explores a stacked bidirectional LSTM
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) to capture context information for the current representation of words. In parallel with recurrent neural networks, convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) are also used to learn representations of

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5269

