The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Computational Results for
Extensive-Form Adversarial Team Games
Andrea Celli, Nicola Gatti
Politecnico di Milano
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 32
Milano, Italy
{andrea.celli, nicola.gatti}@polimi.it
the inefﬁciency a team can incur in normal-form games
when teammates cannot correlate their strategies w.r.t. when
they can. They also provide algorithms to approximate the
Team-maxmin equilibrium—introduced by von Stengel and
Koller (1997)—that is the optimal solution when correlation
is not possible. Furthermore, it is known that ﬁnding a Teammaxmin equilibrium is FNP-hard and inapproximable in additive sense (Hansen et al. 2008; Borgs et al. 2010).
When extensive-form games enter the picture, adversarial
team games become much more intriguing, various forms of
correlation being possible. Nevertheless, to the best of our
knowledge, this game class is still unexplored in the literature. In the present paper, we focus on three main forms
of correlation (Forges 1986). In the ﬁrst, preplay and intraplay communication is possible, corresponding to the
case in which a communication device receives inputs from
the teammates about the information they observe during
the play, and sends them recommendations about the action to play at each information set. In the second, only preplay communication among the teammates is possible, corresponding to the case in which a correlation device communicates a plan of actions to each teammate before playing the
game.1 Finally, in the third, no communication is possible2 .
Original contributions. We formally deﬁne game models capturing the three aforementioned cases and the most
suitable solution concepts (trivially, the Team-maxmin equilibrium in the third setting). Furthermore, we deﬁne three

Abstract
We provide, to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst computational study of extensive-form adversarial team games. These
games are sequential, zero-sum games in which a team of
players, sharing the same utility function, faces an adversary.
We deﬁne three different scenarios according to the communication capabilities of the team. In the ﬁrst, the teammates
can communicate and correlate their actions both before and
during the play. In the second, they can only communicate
before the play. In the third, no communication is possible
at all. We deﬁne the most suitable solution concepts, and we
study the inefﬁciency caused by partial or null communication, showing that the inefﬁciency can be arbitrarily large in
the size of the game tree. Furthermore, we study the computational complexity of the equilibrium-ﬁnding problem in the
three scenarios mentioned above, and we provide, for each
of the three scenarios, an exact algorithm. Finally, we empirically evaluate the scalability of the algorithms in random
games and the inefﬁciency caused by partial or null communication.

Introduction
The design of algorithms for strategic settings has been a
central problem in Artiﬁcial Intelligence for several years,
with the aim of developing agents capable of behaving optimally when facing strategic opponents. Many efforts have
been made for 2-player games, e.g., ﬁnding a Nash equilibrium (Lemke and Howson, Jr 1964; Gatti et al. 2012) and,
more recently, ﬁnding a Stackelberg equilibrium (Conitzer
and Sandholm 2006). The study of this latter problem paved
the way to the ﬁeld of Security Games, which is, nowadays,
one of the application ﬁelds of non-cooperative game theory
with the highest social impact (Tambe 2011).
Fewer results are known, instead, about games with more
than 2 players—except for games with particular structures,
e.g., congestion and polymatrix games (Nisan et al. 2007).
An interesting class of games widely unexplored in the literature is that one of adversarial team games. Here, a team
of players with the same utilities faces an adversary (von
Stengel and Koller 1997). These games can model many realistic security scenarios and can provide tools to coordinate
teammates acting strategically. Basilico et al. (2017) study

1

With only preplay correlation, three solution concepts are
known: Normal-Form, Extensive-Form, and Agent-Form Correlated Equilibrium. The spaces of players’ strategies achievable with
the three correlation devices are the same, while the players’ incentive constraints are different (even if it is not known whether the
spaces of the outcomes for the three equilibria in adversarial team
games are different). The complexity of computing the equilibrium
maximizing the team’s utility in adversarial team games with at
least 2 teammates is NP-hard for all the three equilibria (von Stengel and Forges 2008). In our paper, we focus on the ﬁrst one.
2
This setting is frequent in practice. Consider, for example, a
security problem where a set of defensive resources from different security agencies are allocated to protect an environment at risk
but, due to organizational constraints, they are not able to share information with each other. The resources have the same goal (i.e.,
to secure the environment) but cannot coordinate strategy execution. The same happens when a set of resources has to operate in
stealth mode.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

965

