The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Gated-Attention Architectures for Task-Oriented Language Grounding
Devendra Singh Chaplot

Kanthashree Mysore Sathyendra∗

chaplot@cs.cmu.edu
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University

ksathyen@cs.cmu.edu
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University

Rama Kumar Pasumarthi∗

Dheeraj Rajagopal∗

Ruslan Salakhutdinov

rpasumar@cs.cmu.edu
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University

dheeraj@cs.cmu.edu
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University

rsalakhu@cs.cmu.edu
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
To perform tasks speciﬁed by natural language instructions, autonomous agents need to extract semantically meaningful representations of language and map it to visual elements and actions in the environment. This problem is called task-oriented
language grounding. We propose an end-to-end trainable neural architecture for task-oriented language grounding in 3D
environments which assumes no prior linguistic or perceptual
knowledge and requires only raw pixels from the environment
and the natural language instruction as input. The proposed
model combines the image and text representations using a
Gated-Attention mechanism and learns a policy to execute
the natural language instruction using standard reinforcement
and imitation learning methods. We show the effectiveness of
the proposed model on unseen instructions as well as unseen
maps, both quantitatively and qualitatively. We also introduce
a novel environment based on a 3D game engine to simulate
the challenges of task-oriented language grounding over a rich
set of instructions and environment states.

Figure 1: An example of task-oriented language grounding
in the 3D Doom environment with sample instructions. The
test set consists of unseen instructions.
actions in the environment, reason about the pragmatics of
language based on the objects in the current environment (for
example instructions with superlative tokens, such as ‘Go to
the largest object’) and navigate to the correct object while
avoiding incorrect ones.
To tackle this problem, we propose an architecture that
comprises of a state processing module that creates a joint
representation of the instruction and the images observed
by the agent, and a policy learner to predict the optimal
action the agent has to take in that timestep. The state processing module consists of a novel Gated-Attention multimodal fusion mechanism, which is based on multiplicative
interactions between both modalities (Dhingra et al. 2017;
Wu et al. 2016).
The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: 1) We propose an end-to-end trainable architecture
that handles raw pixel-based input for task-oriented language
grounding in a 3D environment and assumes no prior linguistic or perceptual knowledge. We show that the proposed
model generalizes well to unseen instructions as well as unseen maps. 2) We develop a novel Gated-Attention mechanism for multimodal fusion of representations of verbal and
visual modalities. We show that the gated-attention mechanism outperforms the baseline method of concatenating the
representations using various policy learning methods. The
visualization of the attention weights in the gated-attention
unit shows that the model learns to associate attributes of

Introduction
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) systems are expected to perceive
the environment and take actions to perform a certain task
(Russell and Norvig 1995). Task-oriented language grounding refers to the process of extracting semantically meaningful representations of language by mapping it to visual
elements and actions in the environment in order to perform
the task speciﬁed by the instruction.
Consider the scenario shown in Figure 1, where an agent
takes natural language instruction and pixel-level visual information as input to carry out the task in the real world. To
accomplish this goal, the agent has to draw semantic correspondences between the visual and verbal modalities and
learn a policy to perform the task. This problem poses several challenges: the agent has to learn to recognize objects
in raw pixel input, explore the environment as the objects
might be occluded or outside the ﬁeld-of-view of the agent,
ground each concept of the instruction in visual elements or
∗

Equal contribution
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2819

