The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

On the Satisﬁability Problem of Patterns in SPARQL 1.1
Xiaowang Zhang,1,5 Jan Van den Bussche,3 Kewen Wang,2,4 Zhe Wang4
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
School of Computer Software, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
3
Faculty of Sciences, Hasselt University, Hasselt, Belgium
4
School of Information and Communication Technology, Grifﬁth University, Brisbane, Australia
5
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cognitive Computing and Application, Tianjin, China
(Zhang et al., 2016). They showed that the ﬁlter operations
play an important role on the satisﬁability of a SPARQL 1.0
patterns. Especially, without ﬁlter operations, a pattern is always satisﬁable except for trivial cases where a literal occurs
in the wrong place.
SPARQL 1.1 brings in many new language fragments, which make the pattern satisﬁability problem of
SPARQL 1.1 more interesting and challenging. However,
to our best knowledge, this problem has not been explored
by researchers yet. In this work, we present decidability/undecidability results for pattern satisﬁability of several
important fragments of SPARQL 1.1. Moreover, these results allow us to determine decidability/undecidability of all
640 SPARQL 1.1 fragments. Speciﬁcally, our major contributions are summarized in the following:

Abstract
The pattern satisﬁability is a fundamental problem for
SPARQL. This paper provides a complete analysis of decidability/undecidability of satisﬁability problems for SPARQL
1.1 patterns. A surprising result is the undecidability of satisﬁability for SPARQL 1.1 patterns when only AND and MINUS are expressible. Also, it is shown that any fragment
of SPARQL 1.1 without expressing both AND and MINUS
is decidable. These results provide a guideline for future
SPARQL query language design and implementation.

Introduction
The Resource Description Framework (RDF), a popular data
model for information on the Web, represents information
in the form of directed labeled graphs called RDF graphs.
The standard query language for RDF data is SPARQL with
its latest version SPARQL 1.1 (Harris and Seaborne, 2013).
A fundamental problem for SPARQL is that of satisﬁability
of SPARQL patterns. However, the pattern satisﬁability for
full SPARQL language is undecidable since SPARQL patterns can emulate relational algebra expressions (Angles et
al., 2008; Polleres, 2007; Arenas et al., 2011), and satisﬁability for relational algebra is undecidable (Abiteboul et al.,
1995). For this reason, it would be interesting to investigate
computational complexity of pattern satisﬁability for fragments of SPARQL 1.1 so that useful decidable or tractable
language fragments are identiﬁed.
Originally, SPARQL 1.0 contains four operators AND,
UNION, OPT and FILTER (for short, A, U , O and F,
respectively). SPARQL 1.1 extends SPARQL 1.0 by introducing six new operators SELECT (expressing subqueries),
MINUS, EXISTS, NOT EXISTS, BIND and VALUES
(for short, S, M, ∃, , B, and V, respectively). While
SPARQL 1.1 has some other important new features such
as aggregation and property paths (Arenas et al., 2012;
Harris and Seaborne, 2013), they are out of the scope of this
work. A fragment formed by some of the above operators is
denoted as a sequence of abbreviations of the operators. For
instance, AMO is the fragment containing AND, MINUS
and OPT.
The satisﬁability problem for SPARQL 1.0 patterns has
been investigated and some important results are obtained in

1. The problem of deciding whether a pattern is satisﬁable in AM is undecidable. This result is important as
it can be used to identify all undecidable fragments of
SPARQL 1.1 patterns. It is shown in (Zhang et al., 2016)
that pattern satisﬁability of the fragment AMU is undecidable. Their proof relies on the presence of UNION but
it is unclear how to express UNION by only AND and
MINUS. Fortunately, our result is proven by reducing the
satisﬁability of the Downward Algebra, which is undecidable, to the pattern decidability of a fragment AMnav of
AM (Tan et al., 2014).
2. The problem of deciding whether a pattern is satisﬁable
in BFMUV(∃, ) is decidable. This result actually covers all decidable fragments of SPARQL 1.1 that allow neither AND nor OPT. The decidability of pattern satisﬁability in BFMUV(∃, ) is proven by reducing the satisﬁability to that of the guarded fragment of ﬁrst-order logic,
while the latter is decidable (Andréka et al., 1998).
3. The problem of deciding whether a pattern is satisﬁable
in ABFUV(∃) is decidable. This result actually covers
all decidable OPT-free fragments of SPARQL 1.1 containing AND. It is proven by reducing the satisﬁability
of ABFUV(∃) patterns to that of equality logic, which is
decidable (Andréka et al., 1997).
4. The problems of deciding whether a pattern is satisﬁable
in AOU and BOU V are decidable. In fact, their satisﬁability can be decided in linear time.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2054

