The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Robust Stackelberg Equilibria in Extensive-Form Games
and Extension to Limited Lookahead
Christian Kroer, Gabriele Farina, Tuomas Sandholm
Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University
{ckroer,gfarina,sandholm}@cs.cmu.edu

offs (Tambe 2011; Paruchuri et al. 2008). As an alternative, the robust (distribution-free) approach has been suggested for security games: bounds are assumed on the follower’s payoffs (Kiekintveld, Islam, and Kreinovich 2013;
Nguyen et al. 2014).
Extensive-form games (EFGs)—i.e., tree-form games—
are a very general game representation language. EFGs are
exponentially more compact and also more expressive than
normal-form games. Letchford and Conitzer (2010) study
how to compute an optimal strategy to commit to in EFGs
and prove hardness results under several assumptions about
the game structure. Bošanskỳ et al. (2015) provide further
results speciﬁcally for perfect-information EFGs. Bosansky and Cermak (2015) develop a mixed-integer program
(MIP) for computing a Stackelberg strategy, and Cermak
et al. (2016) develop an iterative approach based on upperbounding solutions from extensive-form correlated Stackelberg equilibria.
To our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to consider uncertainty
about the opponent in Stackelberg strategies for EFGs. This
is important because EFGs are a powerful representation
language and because in practice there is typically uncertainty about the opponent. We take a robust approach to
modeling this uncertainty. We introduce robust Stackelberg
equilibria for EFGs, where the uncertainty is about the opponent’s payoffs, as well as ones where the opponent has limited lookahead and the uncertainty is about the opponent’s
node evaluation function.
We develop a new MIP for the deterministic limitedlookahead setting. We then extend the MIP to the robust
setting for Stackelberg equilibrium under unlimited and under limited lookahead by the opponent. We show that for
the speciﬁc case of interval uncertainty about the opponent’s
payoffs (or about the opponent’s node evaluations in the case
of limited lookahead), robust Stackelberg equilibria can be
computed with a MIP that is of the same asymptotic size as
that for the deterministic setting.
Our results for robust Stackelberg equilibria in EFGs are
relevant to security-game settings with sequential interactions, where EFG models can more compactly represent
certain games, as compared to a normal-form representation (Bosansky and Cermak 2015). Robust models are important in security games, where opponent models often
have uncertainty, both in standard security games (Kiek-

Abstract
Stackelberg equilibria have become increasingly important
as a solution concept in computational game theory, largely
inspired by practical problems such as security settings. In
practice, however, there is typically uncertainty regarding the
model about the opponent. This paper is, to our knowledge,
the ﬁrst to investigate Stackelberg equilibria under uncertainty in extensive-form games, one of the broadest classes
of game. We introduce robust Stackelberg equilibria, where
the uncertainty is about the opponent’s payoffs, as well as
ones where the opponent has limited lookahead and the uncertainty is about the opponent’s node evaluation function.
We develop a new mixed-integer program for the deterministic limited-lookahead setting. We then extend the program
to the robust setting for Stackelberg equilibrium under unlimited and under limited lookahead by the opponent. We show
that for the speciﬁc case of interval uncertainty about the opponent’s payoffs (or about the opponent’s node evaluations in
the case of limited lookahead), robust Stackelberg equilibria
can be computed with a mixed-integer program that is of the
same asymptotic size as that for the deterministic setting.

In a Stackelberg equilibrium, a leader commits to a strategy ﬁrst, and then a follower chooses a strategy for herself.
The model was ﬁrst introduced in the context of competition between ﬁrms where the leader picks a quantity to supply, and then the follower picks a quantity to supply (von
Stackelberg 1934). Stackelberg equilibria have become important as a solution concept in computational game theory,
largely inspired by practical problems such as security settings, where the leader is a defender who picks a mixed (i.e.,
potentially randomized) strategy ﬁrst, and then the follower
who is the attacker decides where to attack, if at all.
Most work on Stackelberg equilibria has focused on
normal-form (aka. matrix-form) games. Conitzer and Sandholm (2006) studied the problem of computing an optimal
strategy to commit to in normal-form games. That line of
work has been extended to many security-game applications.
In practice, there is typically uncertainty about the opponent’s payoffs. In normal-form games this has been studied as Bayesian Stackelberg games where the players have
private information about their own payoffs, and there is
common knowledge of the prior distribution over the payc 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1130

