The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Adversarial Discriminative Heterogeneous Face Recognition
Lingxiao Song, Man Zhang, Xiang Wu, Ran He∗
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, CASIA
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS

Abstract

Overall architecture

The gap between sensing patterns of different face modalities
remains a challenging problem in heterogeneous face recognition (HFR). This paper proposes an adversarial discriminative feature learning framework to close the sensing gap via adversarial learning on both raw-pixel space and compact
feature space. This framework integrates cross-spectral face
hallucination and discriminative feature learning into an endto-end adversarial network. In the pixel space, we make use
of generative adversarial networks to perform cross-spectral
face hallucination. An elaborate two-path model is introduced
to alleviate the lack of paired images, which gives consideration to both global structures and local textures. In the feature space, an adversarial loss and a high-order variance discrepancy loss are employed to measure the global and local
discrepancy between two heterogeneous distributions respectively. These two losses enhance domain-invariant feature
learning and modality independent noise removing. Experimental results on three NIR-VIS databases show that our proposed approach outperforms state-of-the-art HFR methods,
without requiring of complex network or large-scale training
dataset.

FV
Identity
cross-entropy

F

IV

share
weights

F

GV

I

N

Adversarial
Loss

+

Variation
Discrepancy

Identity
cross-entropy

N

G (I )

FN

Pixel Space Adversarial Learning
Feature Space Adversarial Learning
DN

IN

GN

IV

Real NIR or
generated NIR?

FN
DF

GV

DV

Real VIS or
generated VIS?

F

VIS feature or
NIR feature?

V

Figure 1: The proposed adversarial discriminative HFR
framework. Adversarial learning is employed on both rawpixel space and compact feature space.
VIS domain. Consequently, the demand for face matching
between NIR and VIS images grows gradually.
A major challenge of HFR comes from the gap between
sensing patterns of different face modalities. In practice, human face appearance is often inﬂuenced by many factors,
including identities, illuminations, viewing angles, expressions and so on. Among all the factors, identity difference
accounts for intra-personal differences while the rest lead
to inter-personal differences. A key effort for face recognition is to alleviate intra-personal differences while enlarge
inter-personal differences. Speciﬁcally, in the heterogeneous
case, the noise factors that cause inter-personal differences
show diverse distributions in different modalities, e.g. various spectrum sensing distribution between VIS domain and
NIR domain, leading to a more complex problem to preserving the identity relevance between different modalities.
A lot of research efforts have been devoted to eliminating the sensing gap (Socolinsky and Selinger 2002;
Yi et al. 2007; Li et al. 2013). One straightforward approach to cope with the sensing gap is to transform heterogeneous data onto a common comparable space (Lei et al.
2012). Another commonly used strategy is to map data from

Introduction
Face recognition research has been signiﬁcantly promoted by deep learning techniques recently. But a persistent challenge remains to develop methods capable of matching heterogeneous faces that have large appearance discrepancy due to various sensing conditions. Typical heterogeneous face recognition (HFR) tasks conclude visual versus
near infrared (VIS-NIR) face recognition (Yi et al. 2007;
2009), visual versus thermal infrared (VIS-TIR) face recognition (Socolinsky and Selinger 2002), face photo versus
face sketch (Tang and Wang 2004; Wang and Tang 2009),
face recognition across pose (Huang et al. 2017) and so on.
VIS-NIR HFR is the most popular and representative task in
HFR. This is because NIR imaging provides a low-cost and
effective solution to acquire high-quality images under lowlight scenarios. It is widely applied in surveillance systems
nowadays. However, the popularization of NIR images is far
from VIS images, and most face databases are enrolled in
∗

corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7355

