The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Towards Experienced Anomaly Detector through Reinforcement Learning
Chengqiang Huang,1 Yulei Wu,1 Yuan Zuo,1 Ke Pei,2 Geyong Min1
1
2

University of Exeter, North Park Road, Exeter, Devon, UK, EX4 4QF
Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd. Shenzhen, Guangdong, China, 518129
{ch544,Y.L.Wu,yz506,G.Min}@exeter.ac.uk, peike@huawei.com

Objectives

Abstract

In this paper, we consider the speciﬁc problem of time series
anomaly detection and emphasize that an anomaly detector
should have the following features:

This abstract proposes a time series anomaly detector which
1) makes no assumption about the underlying mechanism of
anomaly patterns, 2) refrains from the cumbersome work of
threshold setting for good anomaly detection performance
under speciﬁc scenarios, and 3) keeps evolving with the
growth of anomaly detection experience. Essentially, the
anomaly detector is powered by the Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) and adopts the Reinforcement Learning (RL)
method to achieve the self-learning process. Our initial experiments demonstrate promising results of using the detector in
network time series anomaly detection problems.

• The anomaly detector makes no assumption about the
concept of the anomaly, i.e., deﬁnition of the anomaly,
but it learns the concept solely from the training datasets;
• The anomaly detector is threshold-free, which means the
anomaly detector is a logical classiﬁer with no tuning
threshold. Preferably, except hyperparameters, e.g., the
number of layers in the neural network, the detector does
not have other tunable parameters.
• The anomaly detector is dynamically improving with
the accumulation of the anomaly detection experience. In
other words, the detector learns new anomalies and consistently enhances its knowledge for anomaly detection.

Introduction
Anomaly detection is a pervasive topic in various ﬁelds.
In industry, it always serves as the ﬁrst messenger to trigger more complicated procedures such as anomaly localization. As a result, anomaly detection is very signiﬁcant
and, ideally, it should be highly applicable to different scenarios and easily accessible by engineers. However, existing anomaly detection methods do not necessarily satisfy
the requirements. 1) A thorough survey of anomaly detection methods is nicely presented in (Chandola, Banerjee, and
Kumar 2009). It clariﬁes the assumptions made by different types of anomaly detection methods, which reveals that
methods with strong assumptions of the anomaly patterns,
e.g., distribution-based methods, may not produce satisfactory results under scenarios where the assumptions do not
hold. 2) On the other hand, the anomaly detection methods are not always easily accessible. In 2015, Yahoo published their time series anomaly detection system EGADS
(Laptev, Amizadeh, and Flint 2015). Within the system, a
set of methods are implemented and integrated to generate
anomaly detection results. Such a complex system requires
the engineers to not only understand the components but also
comprehend the set of methods so that being able to tune the
parameters for each of them. 3) Additionally, few methods
used in the industry consider the evolvement of the anomaly
patterns, which leads to static anomaly detection parameters
that perform poorly under dynamic scenarios.

Problem Formulation and Solution
In this work, we propose a Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN) based anomaly detector that is trained consistently
through Reinforcement Learning (RL) to meet the objectives. Following the framework of RL, we cast the problem
of time series anomaly detection as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) and deﬁne corresponding concepts.

Deﬁnition 1: Anomaly Detector π
An anomaly detector is deﬁned as a conditional probability
distribution π := p(A|S), where S and A denote the sets of
states in the target system and the set of actions respectively.
Typically, A = {0, 1} in which 1 means the given state is
anomalous and 0 otherwise. And note that π(s, a) = p(A =
a|S = s) is the probability of action a given state s.

Deﬁnition 2: Anomaly Detector Performance Vπ
The performance of an anomaly detector is measured
through its capability of time series anomaly detection,
which is formalized as:


dπ (s)
Q(s, a) · π(s, a),
Vπ =
s∈S
π

a∈A

where d (s) is the probability of the target system being in
the state s under the utilization of the anomaly detector π,

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8087

