The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Video Generation from Text
Yitong Li,†∗ Martin Renqiang Min,‡ Dinghan Shen,† David Carlson,† Lawrence Carin†
†

Duke University, Durham, NC, United States, 27708
NEC Laboratories America, Princeton, NJ, United States, 08540
{yitong.li, dinghan.shen, david.carlson, lcarin}@duke.edu, renqiang@nec-labs.com
‡

also required in video generation. However, simply predicting future frames is not enough to generate a complete video clip. Recent work on video generation has
decomposed video into a static background, a mask and
moving objects (Vondrick, Pirsiavash, and Torralba 2016;
Tulyakov et al. 2017). Both of the cited works use a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) 2014, which has shown
encouraging results on sample ﬁdelity and diversity.
However, in contrast with these previous works on video
generation, here we conditionally synthesize the motion and
background features based on side information, speciﬁcally
text captions. In the following, we call this procedure textto-video generation. Text-to-video generation requires both a
good conditional scheme and a good video generator. There
are a number of existing models for text-to-image generation
(Reed et al. 2016; Mansimov et al. 2016); unfortunately, simply replacing the image generator by a video generator provides poor performance (e.g. severe mode collapse), which
we detail in our experiments. These challenges reveal that
even with a well-designed neural network model, directly
generating video from text is difﬁcult.
In order to solve this problem, we breakdown the generation task into two components. First, a conditional VAE
model is used to generate the “gist” of the video from the input text, where the gist is an image that gives the background
color and object layout of the desired video. The content and
motion of the video is then generated by conditioning on both
the gist and text input. This generation procedure is designed
to mimic how humans create art. Speciﬁcally, artists often
draw a broad draft and then ﬁll in the detailed information. In
other words, the gist-generation step extracts static “universal” features from the text, while the video generator extracts
the dynamic “detailed” information from the text.
One approach to combining the text and gist information
is to simply concatenate the feature vectors from the encoded
text and the gist, as was previously used in image generation (Yan et al. 2016). This method unfortunately struggles to
balance the relative strength of each feature set, due to their
vastly different dimensionality. Instead, our work computes a
set of image ﬁlter kernels based on the input text and applies
the generated ﬁlter on the gist picture to get an encoded textgist feature vector. This combined vector better models the
interaction between the text and the gist than simple concatenation. It is similar to the method used in (De Brabandere

Abstract
Generating videos from text has proven to be a signiﬁcant challenge for existing generative models. We tackle this problem
by training a conditional generative model to extract both static
and dynamic information from text. This is manifested in a hybrid framework, employing a Variational Autoencoder (VAE)
and a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN). The static features, called “gist,” are used to sketch text-conditioned background color and object layout structure. Dynamic features
are considered by transforming input text into an image ﬁlter.
To obtain a large amount of data for training the deep-learning
model, we develop a method to automatically create a matched
text-video corpus from publicly available online videos. Experimental results show that the proposed framework generates
plausible and diverse short-duration smooth videos, while accurately reﬂecting the input text information. It signiﬁcantly
outperforms baseline models that directly adapt text-to-image
generation procedures to produce videos. Performance is evaluated both visually and by adapting the inception score used
to evaluate image generation in GANs.

1

Introduction

Generating images from text is a well-studied topic, but generating video clips based on text has yet to be explored as
extensively. Previous work on the generative relationship
between text and a short video clip has focused on producing text captioning from video (Venugopalan et al. 2015;
Donahue et al. 2015; Pan et al. 2016; Pu et al. 2017). However, the inverse problem of producing videos from text has
more degrees of freedom, and is a challenging problem for
existing methods. A key consideration in video generation
is that both the broad picture and object motion must be determined by the text input. Directly adapting text-to-image
generation methods empirically results in videos in which
the motion is not inﬂuenced by the text.
In this work, we consider motion and background synthesis from text, which is related to video prediction. In
video prediction, the goal is to learn a nonlinear transformation function between given frames to predict subsequent frames (Vondrick and Torralba 2017) – this step is
∗
Most of this work was done when the ﬁrst and third authors
were summer interns at NEC Laboratories America.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7065

