The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Incentivizing High Quality User Contributions:
New Arm Generation in Bandit Learning
Yang Liu

Chien-Ju Ho

yangl@seas.harvard.edu
Harvard University

chienju.ho@wustl.edu
Washington University in St. Louis

quality content, and how does the platform learn the quality
of the contributed content and identify the best one?
Let us ﬁrst consider a simpliﬁed version of our problem and assume the platform has access to the true quality of the contributed content. In particular, we employ the
model in which users are strategic and aim to maximize the
exposure of their contributed content (i.e., the number of
times their content are viewed in the future). 1 This simpliﬁed problem can then be reduced to a standard mechanism design problem: how to allocate the “rewards” (number of times we show the content to future users) to incentivize high quality contributions? This problem turns out to
relatively well-studied in the literature (Ghosh and McAfee
2011; Ghosh and Hummel 2011; Ghosh and McAfee 2012;
Ghosh and Hummel 2012).
However, in practice, the content quality is often not
known in advance. Instead, the platform needs to rely on
user feedback to estimate the content quality, deﬁned as the
probabilities of obtaining positive feedback (e.g., like or upvote) from a random user. This leads to a natural explorationexploitation trade-off as in the bandit literature; the platform wants to learn the content quality (or the payoffs of
arms in bandit settings) through exploration while optimizing user satisfaction through exploitation. However, our setting is more complicated than standard bandit settings in two
aspects. First, the number of arms is not ﬁxed and is increasing over time. Second, the quality distribution of arms
is associated with the design of online learning algorithms,
since users’ decisions on whether to contribute is related to
the number of times the learning algorithm will display their
contributions.
In this paper, we explore this joint incentive and learning
problem in user generated content platforms. In our setting,
users arrive at the platform one at a time, providing feedback
(i.e., votes) to the content displayed to them, and deciding
whether to contribute new content. We assume users are unbiased in providing feedback and are strategic in deciding
whether to contribute (aiming to maximize the exposure of

Abstract
We study the problem of incentivizing high quality contributions in user generated content platforms, in which users arrive sequentially with unknown quality. We are interested in
designing a content displaying strategy which decides which
content should be chosen to show to users, with the goal of
maximizing user experience (i.e., the likelihood of users liking the content). This goal naturally leads to a joint problem of incentivizing high quality contributions and learning
the unknown content quality. To address the incentive issue,
we consider a model in which users are strategic in deciding whether to contribute and are motivated by exposure, i.e.,
they aim to maximize the number of times their contributions
are viewed. For the learning perspective, we model the content quality as the probability of obtaining positive feedback
(e.g., like or upvote) from a random user. Naturally, the platform needs to resolve the classical trade-off between exploration (collecting feedback for all content) and exploitation
(displaying the best content).
We formulate this problem as a multi-arm bandit problem,
where the number of arms (i.e., contributions) is increasing over time and depends on the strategic choices of arriving users. We ﬁrst show that applying standard bandit algorithms incentivizes a ﬂood of low cost contributions, which
in turn leads to linear regret. We then propose Rand UCB
which adds an additional layer of randomization on top of the
UCB algorithm to address the issue of ﬂooding contributions.
We show that Rand UCB helps eliminate the incentives for
low quality contributions, provides incentives for high quality contributions (due to bounded number of explorations for
the low quality ones), and achieves sub-linear regrets with respect to displaying the current best arms.

Introduction
User generated content (UGC) sites are ubiquitous on the
Web – from online Q&A forums (such as Quora and stackoverﬂow), to reviewing sites (such as yelp and tripadvisor),
to content-sharing sites (such as YouTube), and beyond. The
success of UGC platforms relies heavily on user satisfaction.
Ideally, a platform wants to optimize user experience by displaying the best possible content. Naturally, this objective
leads to a joint incentive and learning problem. In particular,
how does the platform incentivize users to contribute high

1
This user incentive model is adopted in the literature (Ghosh
and McAfee 2011; Ghosh and Hummel 2011). It captures the popular scenario that many online users contribute content to get attention. In addition, the number of content views could be translated
into monetary rewards through, for example, embedding advertisements in the content.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1146

