The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Strategic Coordination of Human Patrollers and
Mobile Sensors with Signaling for Security Games
Haifeng Xu, Kai Wang, Phebe Vayanos, Milind Tambe
Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Society
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90007, USA
{haifengx,wang319,phebe.vayanos,tambe}@usc.edu

Moreover, sensors can be more cost-effective additions than
hiring new patrollers (all sensors in this paper will refer to
mobile sensors, unless otherwise speciﬁed). However, the
drawback of sensors is that they usually cannot directly interdict attacks in applications of interest in our work for
law enforcement and wildlife protection – these sensors can
only notify patrollers. This raises the natural question that
we intend to address in this paper: how to incorporate the
advantages of patrollers and sensors to improve security?
Particularly, we generalize the classical security game
model and consider a defender with both patrollers and sensors. Only patrollers can directly interdict attacks. Sensors
can only detect attacks and then notify nearby patrollers (if
any) to come to intervene. So the interdiction effect of sensors relies on whether there are patrollers nearby. Moreover,
we assume that sensors can strategically send signals (e.g.,
by making noise or shining lights) to deter attacks. Our goal
is to compute the globally optimal defender policy, which
includes the joint allocation of patrollers and sensors as well
as the signaling schemes for sensors. Addressing this goal involves two key challenges. The ﬁrst is to optimally coordinate
the allocation of patrollers and sensors since sensors cannot
interdict attacks independently. The second challenge is to
design signaling schemes on top of the resource allocation,
inducing a bi-level optimization problem.
Our Contributions. In this paper, we propose the novel
Sensor-Empowered security Game (SEG) model, which naturally extends classical security games to capture the emerging
application of utilizing UAVs to empower human patrolling.
Our model integrates perhaps the most natural two functionalities of sensors for security, i.e., monitoring and signaling.
On the technical side, we ﬁrst prove that it is NP-hard to compute the optimal defender strategy even in zero-sum SEGs.
We then propose SEGer, a scalable algorithm based on the
branch and price framework with two novel ingredients: 1. a
compact mixed integer linear program (MILP) formulation
that exactly solves the NP-hard slave problem; 2. an efﬁcient
relaxation of the problem for branch-and-bound pruning. To
further accelerate SEGer, we design a novel polynomial
time algorithm that is provably a 12 (1 − 1e )-approximation
to the slave problem in zero-sum cases while it serves as a
useful heuristic for solving general-sum SEGs. Finally, we
experimentally justify the advantage of utilizing sensors for
security as well as the scalability of our new algorithms.

Abstract
Traditional security games concern the optimal randomized
allocation of human patrollers, who can directly catch attackers or interdict attacks. Motivated by the emerging application
of utilizing mobile sensors (e.g., UAVs) for patrolling, in this
paper we propose the novel Sensor-Empowered security Game
(SEG) model which captures the joint allocation of human
patrollers and mobile sensors. Sensors differ from patrollers
in that they cannot directly interdict attacks, but they can notify nearby patrollers (if any). Moreover, SEGs incorporate
mobile sensors’ natural functionality of strategic signaling.
On the technical side, we ﬁrst prove that solving SEGs is
NP-hard even in zero-sum cases. We then develop a scalable
algorithm SEGer based on the branch-and-price framework
with two key novelties: (1) a novel MILP formulation for the
slave; (2) an efﬁcient relaxation of the problem for pruning. To
further accelerate SEGer, we design a faster combinatorial
algorithm for the slave problem, which is provably a constantapproximation to the slave problem in zero-sum cases and
serves as a useful heuristic for general-sum SEGs. Our experiments demonstrate the signiﬁcant beneﬁt of utilizing mobile
sensors.

Introduction
The past decade has seen signiﬁcant interest in security
games, which concern the allocation of limited security resources to protect critical targets from attack. This is driven in
part by many real-world security applications (Tambe 2011;
Yin et al. 2016; Rosenfeld and Kraus 2017; Bucarey et al.
2017). The security resources in most of these models and
applications are human patrollers, who can directly interdict attacks. Recent advances in technology have stimulated
the rapidly growing trend of utilizing automated sensors for
patrolling and monitoring. Among these, Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UAVs) – or more generally, mobile sensors – are
perhaps the most widely used. Indeed, the UAV market is
estimated at USD 13 billions in 2016 and the law enforcement/patrolling segment of the market is expected to account
for the largest share (Market Report 2016). The advantage of
mobile sensors is that they can automatically detect attacks
with advanced image processing techniques (Ren et al. 2015;
Bondi et al. 2017), thus serving as effective monitoring tools.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1290

