The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

MERCS:
Multi-Directional Ensembles of
Regression and Classiﬁcation Trees
Elia Van Wolputte, Evgeniya Korneva, Hendrik Blockeel
KU Leuven, Department of Computer Science, 3001 Leuven, Belgium
{elia.vanwolputte, evgeniya.korneva, hendrik.blockeel}@cs.kuleuven.be
for any subsets X ⊆ A and Y ⊆ A, M can be used to predict Y from X. We will call such a model a versatile model.

Abstract
Learning a function fX→Y that predicts Y from X is the
archetypal Machine Learning (ML) problem. Typically, both
sets of attributes (X, Y) have to be known before a model
can be trained. When this is not the case, or when functions
fX→Y are needed for varying X and Y, this may introduce
signiﬁcant overhead (separate learning runs for each function). In this paper, we explore the possibility of omitting
the speciﬁcation of X and Y at training time altogether, by
learning a multi-directional, or versatile model, which will
allow prediction of any Y from any X. Speciﬁcally, we introduce a decision tree-based paradigm that generalizes the
well-known Random Forests approach to allow for multidirectionality. The result of these efforts is a novel method
called MERCS: Multi-directional Ensembles of Regression
and Classiﬁcation treeS. Experiments show the viability of
the approach.

Deﬁnition 1 (Versatile model) A versatile model is a
model M (A), learned from a dataset D, that can be used
to predict any set of variables Y ⊆ A from any other set
X ⊆ A.
The ability to omit this speciﬁcation of X and Y at training time has a wide variety of potential applications, e.g.:
• Imputation: assume new instances are given with some
attribute values missing, and the attributes missing vary
from one instance to another. The missing values need to
be ﬁlled in by the model M . This kind of missing value
imputation is closely related to tasks such as pattern completion, e.g., image completion in vision (Drori, CohenOr, and Yeshurun 2003).
• Specialization: assume X and Y are constant, but only
known at prediction time. One could learn the function
fX→Y from the data at that time, but this may be slow,
and it requires that the training data are still available. If
a versatile model M was learned in advance, this can be
used to efﬁciently derive fX→Y from it, without needing
to re-access data.
• Anomaly detection: assume a new instance is given, with
all attributes known, and the task is to determine if this
instance is anomalous; that is, do some of the values in
the instance differ from what one would expect after inspecting the earlier data D? (Aggarwal 2015) This can be
tested by predicting each attribute value and comparing it
to the observed value.

Introduction
Learning predictive functions from data is one of the most
common tasks in machine learning or data mining. The
task can be described as follows: given a dataset D with
instances of the form (x, y) with x ∈ X and y ∈ Y, learn
a function f : X → Y that can be used to predict the
value of y, given an instance x. Usually, these instances are
described using a ﬁxed set of variables: a set of variables
X = {X1 , . . . , Xm } called the input variables, and an
output variable Y . If Dom
mmaps a variable onto its domain,
then X = Dom(X) = i=1 Dom(Xi ) and Y = Dom(Y ).
This predictive learning task is easily extended to the case
where more than one target variable needs to be predicted;
instead of a nominal or scalar value y, f then predicts a
k
tuple y ∈ Y = i=1 Dom(Yi ) with k the dimensionality
of the output space. This is sometimes called multi-target
prediction or multivariate prediction; variants include
multi-label prediction (Madjarov et al. 2012) and structured
output prediction (Kocev et al. 2013).

Furthermore, versatile models are especially useful in
the context of big or streaming data, where learning many
different, specialized, predictive models can be slow. Here,
it is particularly desirable that versatile model learners scale
well in terms of model size, training time, and prediction
time.
In this paper, we present a versatile model learner that
is primarily based on decision tree learning. Decision
trees, and ensembles of them (forests), are known to have
excellent scalability both in terms of learning and prediction
(Domingos and Hulten 2000). However, their learning
algorithms assume a ﬁxed set of input and output variables.

In this paper, we consider a related but more general problem: given a dataset D with instances described by a set of
variables A = {A1 , . . . , Am }, learn a model M such that,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4276

