The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Memory Fusion Network for Multi-View Sequential Learning
Amir Zadeh

Paul Pu Liang

Navonil Mazumder

Carnegie Mellon University, USA
abagherz@cs.cmu.edu

Carnegie Mellon University, USA
pliang@cs.cmu.edu

Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Mexico
navonil@sentic.net

Soujanya Poria

Erik Cambria

Louis-Philippe Morency

NTU, Singapore
sporia@ntu.edu.sg

NTU, Singapore
cambria@ntu.edu.sg

Carnegie Mellon University, USA
morency@cs.cmu.edu

of sequences. For example, a video clip of an orator can be
partitioned into three sequential views – text representing
the spoken words, video of the speaker, and vocal prosodic
cues from the audio. In multi-view sequential learning, two
primary forms of interactions exist. The ﬁrst form is called
view-speciﬁc interactions; interactions that involve only one
view. For example, learning the sentiment of a speaker based
only on the sequence of spoken works. More importantly, the
second form of interactions are deﬁned across different views.
These are known as cross-view interactions. Cross-view interactions span across both the different views and time – for
example a listener’s backchannel response or the delayed
rumble of distant lightning in the video and audio views.
Modeling both the view-speciﬁc and cross-view interactions
lies at the core of multi-view sequential learning.
This paper introduces a novel neural model for multiview sequential learning called the Memory Fusion Network
(MFN). At a ﬁrst layer, the MFN encodes each view independently using a component called the System of Long Short
Term Memories (LSTMs). In this System of LSTMs, each
view is assigned one LSTM function to model the dynamics
in that particular view. The second component of MFN is
called the Delta-memory Attention Network (DMAN) which
ﬁnds cross-view interactions across memories of the System
of LSTMs. Speciﬁcally, the DMAN identiﬁes the cross-view
interactions by associating a relevance score to the memory
dimensions of each LSTM. The third component of the MFN
stores the cross-view information over time in the Multi-view
Gated Memory. This memory updates its contents based on
the outputs of the DMAN and its previously stored contents,
acting as a dynamic memory module for learning crucial
cross-view interactions throughout the sequential data. Prediction is performed by integrating both view-speciﬁc and
cross-view and information.
We perform extensive experimentation to benchmark the
performance of MFN on 6 publicly available multi-view
sequential datasets. Throughout, we compare to the stateof-the-art approaches in multi-view sequential learning. In
all the benchmarks, MFN is able to outperform the baselines,
setting new state-of-the-art results across all the datasets.

Abstract
Multi-view sequential learning is a fundamental problem in
machine learning dealing with multi-view sequences. In a
multi-view sequence, there exists two forms of interactions
between different views: view-speciﬁc interactions and crossview interactions. In this paper, we present a new neural architecture for multi-view sequential learning called the Memory
Fusion Network (MFN) that explicitly accounts for both interactions in a neural architecture and continuously models
them through time. The ﬁrst component of the MFN is called
the System of LSTMs, where view-speciﬁc interactions are
learned in isolation through assigning an LSTM function to
each view. The cross-view interactions are then identiﬁed using a special attention mechanism called the Delta-memory
Attention Network (DMAN) and summarized through time
with a Multi-view Gated Memory. Through extensive experimentation, MFN is compared to various proposed approaches
for multi-view sequential learning on multiple publicly available benchmark datasets. MFN outperforms all the multi-view
approaches. Furthermore, MFN outperforms all current stateof-the-art models, setting new state-of-the-art results for all
three multi-view datasets.

Introduction
In many natural scenarios, data is collected from diverse
perspectives and exhibits heterogeneous properties: each of
these domains present a different view of the same data,
where each view can have its own individual representation
space and dynamics. Such forms of data are known as multiview data. In a multi-view setting, each view of the data
may contain some knowledge that other views do not have
access to. Therefore, multiple views must be employed together in order to describe the data comprehensively and
accurately. Multi-view learning has been an active area of
machine learning research (Xu, Tao, and Xu 2013). By exploring the consistency and complementary properties of
different views, multi-view learning can be more effective,
more promising, and has better generalization ability than
single-view learning.
Multi-view sequential learning extends the deﬁnition of
multi-view learning to manage with different views all in
the form of sequential data, i.e. data that comes in the form

Related Work
Researchers dealing with multi-view sequential data have
largely focused on three major types of models.

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5634

