The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Understanding Human Behaviors in Crowds by
Imitating the Decision-Making Process
Haosheng Zou, Hang Su, Shihong Song, Jun Zhu∗
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., State Key Lab of Intell. Tech. & Sys., TNList Lab, CBICR Center
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{zouhs16, songsh15}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {suhangss, dcszj}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Crowd behavior understanding is crucial yet challenging
across a wide range of applications, since crowd behavior is
inherently determined by a sequential decision-making process based on various factors, such as the pedestrians’ own
destinations, interaction with nearby pedestrians and anticipation of upcoming events. In this paper, we propose a novel
framework of Social-Aware Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (SA-GAIL) to mimic the underlying decisionmaking process of pedestrians in crowds. Speciﬁcally, we infer the latent factors of human decision-making process in an
unsupervised manner by extending the Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning framework to anticipate future paths
of pedestrians. Different factors of human decision making
are disentangled with mutual information maximization, with
the process modeled by collision avoidance regularization
and Social-Aware LSTMs. Experimental results demonstrate
the potential of our framework in disentangling the latent
decision-making factors of pedestrians and stronger abilities
in predicting future trajectories.

1

SocialAware
Intention

Exit

Figure 1: Left: Illustration of an imitating decision-making
process. The dashed white rectangle indicates the pedestrian
of interest. The black segment is her observed trajectory.
Controlled by a latent code, the process generates different future trajectories in red, green and blue. Right: Data of
sufﬁcient pedestrians reveal the local approximate motion
trend (yellow arrows) towards the exit in the bottom left corner. We infer this exit to be the intention of this pedestrian
(denoted white disc). However, to accommodate for nearby
pedestrians (purple discs), other assignments of the latent
code generate more social-aware trajectories.

Introduction

With the increase of population and diversity of human activities, accurate analysis of human behaviors in crowds becomes an essential requirement across a wide range of domains, e.g., visual surveillance (Shao, Loy, and Wang 2014;
Shao et al. 2015), robot navigation in crowds (Robicquet
et al. 2016), etc. Recently, there has been a growing interest in developing computational methodologies for modeling crowd behaviors, including visual representations (Zhou,
Wang, and Tang 2011; Luber et al. 2010; Zhou, Wang, and
Tang 2012; Rodriguez, Ali, and Kanade 2009), detection of
abnormal behaviors (Mehran, Oyama, and Shah 2009) and
modeling interaction among pedestrians (Andriluka and Sigal 2012). Despite these strong needs, the complexities of
crowded scenes such as frequent occlusions among pedestrians and large variations of human behaviors across spacetime severely impede the implementation of conventional algorithms. A lot of efforts have been made to address these

issues by leveraging the recent advances in deep learning (Su
et al. 2016; 2017; Alahi et al. 2016; Yi, Li, and Wang 2016;
Lee et al. 2017). However, these methods only learn the general historical motion statistics of a scene, without deeper
investigation into humans in crowds.
Without more thorough modeling, learning crowd behaviors from videos remains difﬁcult partly because the individual motion is affected by many factors that are not directly
captured by videos. Human behaviors in crowds are inherently determined by a sequential decision-making process
according to the persons of interest, environments and social rules (Ali 2008; Xie et al. 2017). In general, pedestrians
ﬁrst decide their destinations, pick paths by considering the
neighboring crowd state, and constantly make minor modiﬁcations to follow the majority or avoid collision (see Fig.
1 (Right) for example). This cognitively-based method was
popularly used in crowd simulation previously (Yu and Terzopoulos 2007; Pellegrini et al. 2009). Nevertheless, only

∗

Corresponding author. The work was supported by the National NSF of China Projects (Nos. 61571261, 61620106010,
61621136008).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7648

