The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

An End-to-End Deep Learning
Architecture for Graph Classiﬁcation
Muhan Zhang, Zhicheng Cui, Marion Neumann, Yixin Chen
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis
{muhan, z.cui, m.neumann}@wustl.edu, chen@cse.wustl.edu

Abstract
Neural networks are typically designed to deal with data in
tensor forms. In this paper, we propose a novel neural network
architecture accepting graphs of arbitrary structure. Given a
dataset containing graphs in the form of (G, y) where G is a
graph and y is its class, we aim to develop neural networks
that read the graphs directly and learn a classiﬁcation function.
There are two main challenges: 1) how to extract useful features characterizing the rich information encoded in a graph
for classiﬁcation purpose, and 2) how to sequentially read a
graph in a meaningful and consistent order. To address the ﬁrst
challenge, we design a localized graph convolution model and
show its connection with two graph kernels. To address the
second challenge, we design a novel SortPooling layer which
sorts graph vertices in a consistent order so that traditional
neural networks can be trained on the graphs. Experiments
on benchmark graph classiﬁcation datasets demonstrate that
the proposed architecture achieves highly competitive performance with state-of-the-art graph kernels and other graph
neural network methods. Moreover, the architecture allows
end-to-end gradient-based training with original graphs, without the need to ﬁrst transform graphs into vectors.

1

  



 



Figure 1: A consistent input ordering is crucial for CNNs.

networks, and text documents with dependencies. The lack
of ordered tensor representations limits the applicability of
neural networks on graphs. In this paper, we aim at designing
novel neural network structures that can accept graphs and
learn predictive functions.
Recently, there is a growing interest in generalizing neural
networks to graphs. (Bruna et al. 2013) generalized convolutional networks to graphs in the spectral domain, where
ﬁlters are applied on a graph’s frequency modes computed
by graph Fourier transform. This transformation involves
expensive multiplications with the eigenvector matrix of the
graph Laplacian. To reduce the computation burden, (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016) parameterized
the spectral ﬁlters as Chebyshev polynomials of eigenvalues,
and achieved efﬁcient and localized ﬁlters. One limitation of
the above spectral formulations is that they rely on the ﬁxed
spectrum of the graph Laplacian, and thus are suitable only
for graphs with a single structure (and varying signals on vertices). Spatial formulations, on the contrary, are not restricted
to a ﬁxed graph structure. To extract local features, several
works independently proposed to propagate features between
neighboring vertices. (Duvenaud et al. 2015) proposed differentiable Neural Graph Fingerprints, which propagate features
between 1-hop neighbors to simulate the traditional circular
ﬁngerprint. (Atwood and Towsley 2016) proposed DiffusionCNN, which propagates neighbors with different hops to the
center using different weights. Later, (Kipf and Welling 2016)
developed a ﬁrst-order approximation of the spectral convolution in (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016) which
also resulted in propagation between neighboring vertices.
(Niepert, Ahmed, and Kutzkov 2016) proposed another way
of spatial graph convolution by extracting ﬁxed-sized local
patches from nodes’ neighborhoods and linearizing these

Introduction

The past few years have seen the growing prevalence of
neural networks on application domains such as image classiﬁcation (Alex, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), natural language
processing (Mikolov et al. 2013), reinforcement learning
(Mnih et al. 2013), and time series analysis (Cui, Chen, and
Chen 2016). The connection structure between layers makes
neural networks suitable for processing signals in tensor
forms where the tensor elements are arranged in a meaningful order. This ﬁxed input order is a cornerstone for neural
networks to extract higher-level features. For example, if we
randomly shufﬂe the pixels of an image shown in Figure 1,
then state-of-the-art convolutional neural networks (CNN)
fail to recognize it as an eagle.
Although images and many other types of data are naturally presented with order, there is another major category of
structured data, namely graphs, which usually lack a tensor
representation with ﬁxed ordering. Examples include molecular structures, knowledge graphs, biological networks, social
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4438

