The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Feature Engineering for Predictive Modeling
Using Reinforcement Learning
Udayan Khurana

Horst Samulowitz

Deepak Turaga

ukhurana@us.ibm.com
IBM Research AI

samulowitz@us.ibm.com
IBM Research AI

turaga@us.ibm.com
IBM Research AI

Abstract
Feature engineering is a crucial step in the process of predictive modeling. It involves the transformation of given feature space, typically using mathematical functions, with the
objective of reducing the modeling error for a given target.
However, there is no well-deﬁned basis for performing effective feature engineering. It involves domain knowledge, intuition, and most of all, a lengthy process of trial and error.
The human attention involved in overseeing this process signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the cost of model generation. We present
a new framework to automate feature engineering. It is based
on performance driven exploration of a transformation graph,
which systematically and compactly captures the space of
given options. A highly efﬁcient exploration strategy is derived through reinforcement learning on past examples.

(a) Original data

(b) Engineered data.

Figure 1: Illustration of different representation choices.

rental demand (kaggle.com/c/bike-sharing-demand) in Figure 2(a). Deriving several features (Figure 2(b)) dramatically
reduces the modeling error. For instance, extracting the hour
of the day from the given timestamp feature helps to capture
certain trends such as peak versus non-peak demand. Note
that certain valuable features are derived through a composition of multiple simpler functions. FE is perhaps the central task in improving predictive modeling performance, as
documented in a detailed account of the top performers at
various Kaggle competitions (Wind 2014).
In practice, FE is orchestrated by a data scientist, using
hunch, intuition and domain knowledge based on continuously observing and reacting to the model performance
through trial and error. As a result, FE is often timeconsuming, and is prone to bias and error. Due to this inherent dependence on human decision making, FE is colloquially referred to as an art, making it difﬁcult to automate.
The existing approaches to automate FE are either computationally expensive and/or lack the capability to discover
complex features.
We present a novel approach to automate FE based on
reinforcement learning (RL). It involves training an agent
on FE examples to learn an effective strategy of exploring
available FE choices under a given budget. The learning
and application of the exploration strategy is performed on
a transformation graph, a directed acyclic graph representing relationships between different transformed versions of
the data. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work
that learns a performance-guided strategy for effective feature transformation from historical instances. Also, this is

Introduction
Predictive analytics are widely used in support for decision
making across a variety of domains including fraud detection, marketing, drug discovery, advertising, risk management, amongst others. Predictive models are constructed using supervised learning algorithms where classiﬁcation or
regression models are trained on historical data to predict
future outcomes. The underlying representation of the data
is crucial for the learning algorithm to work effectively. In
most cases, appropriate transformation of data is an essential prerequisite step before model construction.
For instance, Figure 1 depicts two different representations for points belonging to a classiﬁcation problem dataset.
On the left, one can see that instances corresponding to the
two classes are present in alternating small clusters. For most
machine learning (ML) algorithms, it is hard to draw a reasonable classiﬁer on this representation that separates the
two classes. On the other hand if the feature x is replaced
by its sine, as seen in the image on the right, it makes the
two classes reasonably separable by most classiﬁers. The
task or process of altering the feature representation of a
predictive modeling problem to better ﬁt a training algorithm is called feature engineering (FE). The sine function
is an instance of a transformation used to perform FE. Consider the schema of a dataset for forecasting hourly bike
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3407

