The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning to Generalize:
Meta-Learning for Domain Generalization
Da Li, Yongxin Yang, Yi-Zhe Song

Timothy M. Hospedales

Queen Mary University of London
{da.li, yongxin.yang, yizhe.song}@qmul.ac.uk

The University of Edinburgh
t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk

Standard learning approaches tend to break down when
applied in different conditions (i.e. to data with different
statistics) than used for training. This is known as domain
or covariate shift (Storkey and Sugiyama 2007), and seriously affects the usefulness of machine learning models as
we do not always have access to training data that is exactly representative of the intended testing scenario. Approaches to addressing this issue can be categorized into domain adaptation (DA) and domain generalization (DG). DA
is relatively well studied, and addresses using unlabelled or
sparsely labelled data in the target domain to quickly adapt a
model trained in a different source domain (Patel et al. 2015;
Csurka 2017). The less well studied DG addresses building models that by design function well even in new target/testing domains. In contrast to DA, a DG model is not
updated after training, and the issue is how well it works
out of the box in a new domain. The few existing DG methods typically train on multiple source domains and propose
mechanisms to extract some domain agnostic representation
or model that describes common aspects of known domains
(Khosla et al. 2012; Muandet, Balduzzi, and Schölkopf
2013; Ghifary et al. 2015; Li et al. 2017). They assume that
such a common factor among existing source domains will
persist to new testing domains, and thus provide a basis for
generalization. DG is a harder problem than DA in that it
makes fewer assumptions (target data not required) but for
the same reasons, it may be more valuable if solved.

Abstract
Domain shift refers to the well known problem that a model
trained in one source domain performs poorly when applied
to a target domain with different statistics. Domain Generalization (DG) techniques attempt to alleviate this issue by
producing models which by design generalize well to novel
testing domains. We propose a novel meta-learning method
for domain generalization. Rather than designing a speciﬁc
model that is robust to domain shift as in most previous
DG work, we propose a model agnostic training procedure
for DG. Our algorithm simulates train/test domain shift during training by synthesizing virtual testing domains within
each mini-batch. The meta-optimization objective requires
that steps to improve training domain performance should
also improve testing domain performance. This meta-learning
procedure trains models with good generalization ability to
novel domains. We evaluate our method and achieve state of
the art results on a recent cross-domain image classiﬁcation
benchmark, as well demonstrating its potential on two classic
reinforcement learning tasks.

Introduction
Humans are adept at solving tasks under many different conditions. This is partly due to fast adaptation, but also to a
lifetime of encountering new task conditions providing the
opportunity to develop of strategies that are robust to different task contexts. If a human discovers that their existing
strategy fails in a new context they do not just adapt, but further try to update their strategy to be more context independent, so that next time they arrive in a new context they are
more likely to succeed immediately. We would like artiﬁcial
learning agents to solve many tasks under different conditions (domains) and similarly solve the second order task of
constructing models that are robust to change of domain and
perform well ‘out of the box’ in new domains. For example we might like computer vision systems to recognize objects immediately and without retraining, when the camera
type is changed (Patel et al. 2015), or reinforcement learning trained agents to perform well immediately when placed
in a new environment or subjected to changed morphology
(Taylor and Stone 2009) – without waiting for adaptation.

We take a meta learning approach to DG. Rather than
proposing a speciﬁc model suited for DG (Khosla et al.
2012; Ghifary et al. 2015; Li et al. 2017), we propose
a model-agnostic training algorithm that trains any given
model to be more robust to domain shift. This is related to
the long standing idea of learning to learn (Thrun and Pratt
1998; Schmidhuber, Zhao, and Wiering 1997), which has
recently seen a resurgence of popularity with applications
to few-shot learning (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Ravi
and Larochelle 2017) and learning optimizers (Andrychowicz et al. 2016). The most related of these studies to ours is
the MAML approach of (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017).
MAML takes a meta-learning approach to few-shot learning by training a single model on a set of source tasks
that is only a few gradient descent steps away from a good
task-speciﬁc model. This meta-optimization objective trains
models suited for few-shot ﬁne-tuning to new target tasks.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3490

