The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Deep Modeling of Social
Relations for Recommendation
Wenqi Fan, Qing Li, Min Cheng
Department of Computer Science, City Univeristy of Hong Kong
83 Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong
wenqifan1990@hotmail.com, itqli@cityu.edu.hk, mc.cheng@my.cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Social-based recommender systems have been recently proposed by incorporating social relations of users to alleviate
sparsity issue of user-to-item rating data and to improve recommendation performance. Many of these social-based recommender systems linearly combine the multiplication of social
features between users. However, these methods lack the ability to capture complex and intrinsic non-linear features from
social relations. In this paper, we present a deep neural network based model to learn non-linear features of each user
from social relations, and to integrate into probabilistic matrix factorization for rating prediction problem. Experiments
demonstrate the advantages of the proposed method over stateof-the-art social-based recommender systems.

Figure 1: Graphical model of DeepSoR. Deep neural network
on social relations part in right (dashed-red).
learn non-linear social features from users’ social relations,
rather than the linear. To the best of our knowledge, DeepSoR is among the ﬁrst Deep Neural Network(DNN) based
models to bridge the gap between social relations and recommender systems. Experiments demonstrate the advantages
of DeepSoR over state-of-the-art social-based recommender
systems.

Introduction
Exploiting social relations for recommender systems can help
to mitigate data sparsity issues and potentially improve recommendation performance (Guo, Zhang, and Yorke-Smith
2015). Such social-based recommender systems are developed based on the phenomenon that users usually acquire and
disseminate information through their nearest neighbouring
users.
The exploitation of social relations for recommender systems attracts increasing interest in recent years. SoRec (Ma
et al. 2008) is a co-factorization method, which shares a common latent user-feature matrix factorized by ratings and social
relations. TrustSVD (Guo, Zhang, and Yorke-Smith 2015)
is a trust-based matrix factorization and uses a weighted
regularization to regularize the user- and item-speciﬁc latent feature vectors. TrustPMF (Yang et al. 2017) models
mutual inﬂuences between users, and maps users into two
low-dimensional spaces: truster space and trustee space, by
factorizing social trust networks. However, most of the methods mentioned above combine the multiplication of social
features linearly, which may cause ineffectiveness on learning the non-linear features from social relations. Specially,
SoRec and TrustPMF treat the interests of users close to
the linear combination of their neighbours’ interests. Such a
method is hard to model non-linear social features.
In this paper, we propose a Deep neural network model on
Social Relations for recommendation, namely DeepSoR, to

The Proposed Model
Probabilistic Model of DeepSoR
An overall view of the probabilistic model for DeepSoR is
shown in Figure 1. Suppose that we have I users, J items,
and the observed rating matrix R ∈ RI×J . The goal of
DeepSoR is to ﬁnd user and item latent models (U ∈ Rl×I
and V ∈ Rl×J , where l is the dimension size.) whose
product (U T V ) reconstructs the rating matrix R. The conditional distribution over observed ratings can be deﬁned
I J
2
T
2 Cij
) =
, where
as: p(R|U, V, σR
i
j N (rij |ui vj , σR )
2
N (x|μ, σR ) is the probability density function of the Gaus2
, and
sian normal distribution with mean μ and variance σR
Cij is an indicator function equal to 1 if user i rated item j
and equal to 0 otherwise. Also, zero-mean Gaussian distribution are assumed for item V with variance σV2 .
By replacing the user latent models of the probabilistic matrix factorization(PMF) (Salakhutdinov and Mnih 2007) with
DNN (N etu )(see Figure 1), user latent feature vector u in our
proposed model is approximated by social latent vector generated from DNN(N etu ) as follows: ui = N etu (Z, si ) + i ,
where si is social information of user i and will be described
later. We also model the internal weights Z (weights and bias)
in N etu and noise  as zero-mean Gaussian distribution with

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8075

