The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Hierarchical Nonlinear Orthogonal Adaptive-Subspace SelfOrganizing Map Based Feature Extraction for Human Action Recognition
1

Yang Du,1,2,3 Chunfeng Yuan,1∗ Weiming Hu,1 Hao Yang1,2,3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences;
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
MTdata, Meitu
duyang2014@ia.ac.cn, {cfyuan, wmhu, hao.yang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Gradient and Histogram of Flow. Namely, these two features use two different histogram ﬁlters to represent patterns in the data. Besides, Gabor ﬁlter is widely used for
feature extraction when the targets are moving or their
illumination is varying. These hand-crafted features are
limited in that their mathematical forms are ﬁxed a priori.
They focus on some speciﬁc patterns and are not applicable to various data.

Abstract
Feature extraction is a critical step in the task of action recognition. Hand-crafted features are often restricted because of
their ﬁxed forms and deep learning features are more effective but need large-scale labeled data for training. In this
paper, we propose a new hierarchical Nonlinear Orthogonal Adaptive-Subspace Self-Organizing Map (NOASSOM) to
adaptively and learn effective features from data without supervision. NOASSOM is extended from Adaptive-Subspace
Self-Organizing Map (ASSOM) which only deals with linear data and is trained with supervision by the labeled data.
Firstly, by adding a nonlinear orthogonal map layer, NOASSOM is able to handle the nonlinear input data and it avoids
deﬁning the speciﬁc form of the nonlinear orthogonal map by
a kernel trick. Secondly, we modify loss function of ASSOM
such that every input sample is used to train model individually. In this way, NOASSOM effectively learns the statistic patterns from data without supervision. Thirdly, we propose a hierarchical NOASSOM to extract more representative
features. Finally, we apply the proposed hierarchical NOASSOM to efﬁciently describe the appearance and motion information around trajectories for action recognition. Experimental results on widely used datasets show that our method has
superior performance than many state-of-the-art hand-crafted
features and deep learning features based methods.

• Deep learning features, like those extracted by convolutional ﬁlters, are often learned using supervised methods
(BP Algorithm) on large-scale labeled data. For example,
the TDD (Wang, Qiao, and Tang 2015) and Two-stream
(Simonyan and Zisserman 2014) methods use the labeled
frames to train their deep models, and obtain the effective
CNN features by convolutional ﬁlters. If only unlabeled
data are available or there is not enough training data, it is
not possible to learn accurate ﬁlters.
To overcome the limitations of the above features, we propose a hierarchal Nonlinear Orthogonal Adaptive-Subspace
Self-Organizing Map (NOASSOM) to learn an effective and
adaptive feature from data without supervision. AdaptiveSubspace Self-Organizing Map (ASSOM) (Kohonen, Kaski,
and Lappalainen 1997) is a neural network that learns feature ﬁlters from the labeled data. The data are classiﬁed using subspaces. Each subspace corresponds to a pattern found
by ASSOM. The NOASSOM is extended from the ASSOM.
Compared with ASSOM, the proposed NOASSOM makes
changes on mainly three aspects. Firstly, we use the modiﬁed polynomial kernel to enhance the representative ability
of the ASSOM from linear subspace to nonlinear orthogonal subspace. Secondly, we propose a new loss function and
learning method to learn the ﬁlters from the unlabeled data.
Thirdly, we extend the NOASSOM to a hierarchical architecture to extract the high-level features.
We apply the proposed hierarchical NOASSOM to extract
local features of both motion and appearance information
for action recognition in videos. Speciﬁcally, we use the improved dense trajectories (Wang and Schmid 2013) to extract key regions in videos. Based on the hierarchical NOASSOM, we design a spatial channel to extract the appearance
information along these trajectories, and meanwhile a temporal channel to extract the motion information. Then, we
use the last layer of the hierarchal NOASSOM to fuse and

Introduction
The effective extraction of features from large-scale is a
challenging and highly-focused problem in many data analysis areas, such as text, speech, image and video. Usually,
there exist several invariant patterns in most data, and each
invariant pattern can be represented by a feature ﬁlter. The
input data are ﬁltered by a series of different ﬁlters to achieve
the effective feature. In videos, there are mainly two categories of features for human action recognition:
• Many hand-crafted features are proposed for images and
videos, such as SIFT (Lowe 1999), HoF (Laptev et al.
2008), HoG (Dalal and Triggs 2005) and MBH (Dalal,
Triggs, and Schmid 2006). For HoG and HoF, their focused patterns are respectively Histogram of oriented
∗

Corresponding Author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6805

