The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Premise Set Caching for Enumerating Minimal Correction Subsets
Alessandro Previti

Carlos Mencı́a

HIIT, Department of Computer Science
University of Helsinki, Finland
alessandro.previti@helsinki.ﬁ

Department of Computer Science
University of Oviedo, Spain

Matti Järvisalo

Joao Marques-Silva

HIIT, Department of Computer Science
University of Helsinki, Finland

LASIGE, Faculty of Science
University of Lisbon, Portugal
The focus of this work is on the central task of enumerating minimal relaxations in the concrete setting of analyzing overconstrained (or inconsistent) propositional formulas
in conjunctive normal form (CNF). In the context of CNFs
formulas, minimal relaxations to restore consistency are
called minimal correction subsets (MCSes), whereas minimal explanations of inconsistency are referred to as minimal
unsatisﬁable subsets (MUSes). The development of practical algorithms for MCS extraction has received notable
attention recently (Bailey and Stuckey 2005; Lifﬁton and
Sakallah 2008; Felfernig, Schubert, and Zehentner 2012;
Nöhrer, Biere, and Egyed 2012; Marques-Silva et al. 2013;
Bacchus et al. 2014; Grégoire, Lagniez, and Mazure 2014;
Mencı́a, Previti, and Marques-Silva 2015; Mencı́a et al.
2016). Furthermore, recent algorithmic advances for the
computationally hard task of extracting a single MCS has
enabled more efﬁcient practical approaches to MCS enumeration (Marques-Silva et al. 2013; Mencı́a, Previti, and
Marques-Silva 2015).
Here we take on caching (or memoization) as a complementary approach to improving MCS enumeration. While
subformula caching has been earlier used to speeding up
propositional model counting (Sang et al. 2004; Thurley
2006; Kitching and Bacchus 2007; Bacchus, Dalmao, and
Pitassi 2009; Beame et al. 2010; Kopp, Singla, and Kautz
2016), caching in the context of MCS enumeration was only
very recently proposed as a means of further scaling up
MCS enumeration (Previti et al. 2017). Speciﬁcally, Previti
et al. (2017) proposed caching unsatisﬁable subsets of constraints seen during the MCS enumeration process within a
SAT-based MCS enumeration algorithm, thereby avoiding
some of the potentially time-consuming SAT solvers calls
by querying the cache—implemented itself using another
SAT solver—for an unsatisﬁable core that would render the
SAT solver call unnecessary. The empirical evidence provided in (Previti et al. 2017) suggests that the proposed approach of caching unsatisﬁable subsets of constraints seen
during MCS enumeration can speed up a speciﬁc MCS enumeration approach (namely, ELS, or extended linear search).
In this work, we take the idea of employing caching
as a means of speeding up state-of-the-art MCS enumeration algorithms further. Speciﬁcally, instead of caching unsatisﬁable subsets, we propose to cache so-called premise
sets (Kullmann 2011). While unsatisﬁable subsets and

Abstract
Methods for explaining the sources of inconsistency of overconstrained systems ﬁnd an ever-increasing number of applications, ranging from diagnosis and conﬁguration to ontology
debugging and axiom pinpointing in description logics. Efﬁcient enumeration of minimal correction subsets (MCSes),
deﬁned as sets of constraints whose removal from the system restores feasibility, is a central task in such domains. In
this work, we propose a novel approach to speeding up MCS
enumeration over conjunctive normal form propositional formulas by caching of so-called premise sets (PSes) seen during the enumeration process. Contrasting to earlier work, we
move from caching unsatisﬁable cores to caching PSes and
propose a more effective way of implementing the cache. The
proposed techniques noticeably improves on the performance
of state-of-the-art MCS enumeration algorithms in practice.

Introduction
The analysis of overconstrained systems ﬁnds a wide range
of important AI applications, including numerous problems
of diagnosis, such as type debugging (Stuckey, Sulzmann,
and Wazny 2003; de la Banda, Stuckey, and Wazny 2003;
Bailey and Stuckey 2005), software fault localization (Jose
and Majumdar 2011; Roychoudhury and Chandra 2016),
spreadsheet debugging (Jannach et al. 2014), axiom pinpointing in description logics (Baader and Suntisrivaraporn
2008; Sebastiani and Vescovi 2009), and model based diagnosis in general (Reiter 1987), among many others. Central
to the analysis of overconstrained systems are the tasks of
ﬁnding minimal explanations of inconsistency and minimal
relaxations to recover consistency. In speciﬁc settings, enumeration of explanations or relaxations, i.e., the task of ﬁnding many instead of only a single explanation or relaxation,
is crucial for understanding the underlying sources of inconsistency. For example, enumeration of minimal relaxations
is essential in software fault localization (Jose and Majumdar 2011). Furthermore, in settings where the automatic
analysis of minimal relaxations or minimal explanations is
viable, there is a natural demand for high-performance algorithms, capable of computing high numbers of minimal
relaxations or explanations.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6633

