The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Mobile Network Failure Event Detection and Forecasting
with Multiple User Activity Data Sets
Motoyuki Oki,1∗ Koh Takeuchi,2∗ Yukio Uematsu1
1. NTT Communications Corporation, Tokyo, Japan
2. NTT Communication Science Laboratories, Kyoto, Japan
{m.ooki, y.uematsu}@ntt.com, takeuchi.koh@lab.ntt.co.jp

Abstract
As the demand for mobile network services increases, immediate detection and forecasting of network failure events
have become important problems for service providers. Several event detection approaches have been proposed to tackle
these problems by utilizing social data. However, these approaches have not tried to solve event detection and forecasting problems from multiple data sets, such as web access logs and search queries. In this paper, we propose a machine learning approach that incorporates multiple user activity data into detecting and forecasting failure events. Our approach is based on a two-level procedure. First, we introduce
a novel feature construction method that treats both the imbalanced label problem and the data sparsity problem of user
activity data. Second, we propose a model ensemble method
that combines outputs of supervised and unsupervised learning models for each data set and gives accurate predictions
of network service outage. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed models by extensive experiments with realworld failure events occurred at a network service provider in
Japan and three user activity data sets.

I can’t
connect.

Alert

Error ?

Figure 1: Overall view of a failure event detection and forecasting system with multiple user activity data sets. The data
surrounded by the red dotted lines are used in this study.
Mobile network users frequently communicate with a mobile network service and often detect service outage before the service provider detects it (Qiu et al. 2010). They
can immediately publish their impressions on the services
through social media and search for failure information on
the web. There are a few pioneering studies that utilize social data for detecting network failure events (Takeshita,
Yokota, and Nishimatsu 2015; Maru et al. 2016). Although
they have shown better performances by using supervised
learning methods, they have only employed Twitter data and
did not consider utilizing other kinds of user activity data
such as search queries and web access logs. We illustrate a
framework for failure event detection and forecasting for a
network service in Fig. 1.
In a ﬁeld of analyzing social events in the physical world
and the web, the event detection or forecast from multiple
user activity data sets have been a hot topic (Atefeh and
Khreich 2015) and have been applied to various kind of
events including planned server downs (Becker et al. 2012),
natural hazards (Abhik and Toshniwal 2013), inﬂuenza epidemics (Santillana et al. 2015), airport threats (Khandpur et
al. 2017), and civil unrest (Kallus 2014; Zhao et al. 2015;
2016). They have demonstrated considerable improvements
by simultaneously analyzing multiple user activity data sets
because each data represents different aspects of the user behavior. However, to the best of our knowledge, no such study

Introduction
Providing stable and high-quality service is a typical mission
of mobile network service providers. The amount of data
trafﬁc from mobile network services is expected to grow to
49 exabytes per month by 2021, which is seven times the
volume of 2016 (Cisco Systems Inc. 2017). However, due
to an unexpectedly huge amount of data trafﬁc exceeding
network capacity of a provider, a mobile network service
experiences severe failures such as network troubles, performance deterioration, and very slow data trafﬁc on rare occasions.
To recover from failures as soon as possible, immediate detection and forecasting of a service outage are crucial problems. Traditional methods for such problems are
monitoring network trafﬁc and server logs (Gill, Jain, and
Nagappan 2011; Brutlag 2000). However, such methods are
not appropriate for our purpose because a modern service
with thousands of servers and network appliances around the
world and monitoring all of the system equipment is almost
impossible (Takeshita, Yokota, and Nishimatsu 2015).
∗

These two authors contributed equally to this study.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7786

