The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

PAC Reinforcement Learning
with an Imperfect Model
Nan Jiang
Microsoft Research
New York, NY 10011
nanjiang@umich.edu

There are many aspects from which one could address this
challenge. For example, the simulator and the real environment may not share the same observation spaces and we may
need to learn a transfer function that corrects the mismatch,
or the simulator may be signiﬁcantly different from the real
environment that we should only transfer useful features instead of actual policies (Rusu et al. 2016), etc. While there
has been active empirical research in this area, little in theory is known in terms of when transfer is possible and what
guarantees we can have.
In this paper we focus on a particular angle of this problem, and provide some foundational results under stylized
assumptions to help understand the theoretical nature of this
approach. We start with a simple question: given an approximate model (e.g., a simulator) that only differs from the
real environment in 1 state-action pair (but which one is
unknown), can we always learn a near-optimal policy by
collecting signiﬁcantly fewer real trajectories compared to
RL from scratch, i.e., without the model? Perhaps surprisingly, the answer is no due to a lower bound. We understand and draw insights from the hard instances, and come
up with natural conditions that exclude the pathological scenarios (Sec.4). Under these conditions, we describe and analyze two algorithms whose sample complexity guarantees
only depend on the number of incorrect state-action pairs
and have no dependence on the size of the state and action
spaces (Sec.5 and 6).

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) methods have proved to be successful in many simulated environments. The common approaches, however, are often too sample intensive to be applied directly in the real world. A promising approach to addressing this issue is to train an RL agent in a simulator and
transfer the solution to the real environment. When a highﬁdelity simulator is available we would expect signiﬁcant reduction in the amount of real trajectories needed for learning.
In this work we aim at better understanding the theoretical
nature of this approach. We start with a perhaps surprising
result that, even if the approximate model (e.g., a simulator)
only differs from the real environment in a single state-action
pair (but which one is unknown), such a model could be
information-theoretically useless and the sample complexity
(in terms of real trajectories) still scales with the total number
of states in the worst case. We investigate the hard instances
and come up with natural conditions that avoid the pathological situations. We then propose two conceptually simple
algorithms that enjoy polynomial sample complexity guarantees with no dependence on the size of the state-action space,
and prove some foundational results to provide insights into
this important problem.

1

Introduction

Recently, Reinforcement learning (RL) methods have
achieved impressive successes in many challenging domains
(Mnih et al. 2015; Heess et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2016;
Levine et al. 2016; Mnih et al. 2016). Many of these successes occur in simulated environments (e.g., video / board
games, simulated robotics domains), and the state-of-the-art
approaches require a large number of training samples, rendering them inapplicable in non-simulator problems where
data acquisition may be costly.
A promising approach to addressing this issue is to train
an RL agent in a simulator and transfer the solution to the
real environment, which is particularly relevant but not limited to robotics domains (Koos, Mouret, and Doncieux 2010;
Cutler and How 2015; Hanna and Stone 2017). The approach faces a signiﬁcant challenge that the policy trained in
a simulator may have degenerate performance in the real environment due to the imperfectness of the simulator (Kober,
Bagnell, and Peters 2013).

2

Preliminaries

We consider episodic RL problems where the real environment is speciﬁed by a ﬁnite-horizon MDP M =
(S, A, P, R, H, μ). S is the state space, A is the action
space, and for simplicity we assume that S and A are ﬁnite but can be arbitrarily large. P : S × A → Δ(S) is the
transition function (Δ(S) is the probability simplex over S,
i.e., the set of all probability distributions). R : S × A → R
is the reward function; we assume rewards are non-negative.
H is the horizon, and μ ∈ Δ(S) is the initial distribution.
In general, optimal policies in the ﬁnite-horizon setting
are non-stationary, i.e., they are time dependent. To keep
the notations simple, w.l.o.g. we assume that each state only
appears in a particular time step (or level) 1 ≤ h ≤ H,
and the state space can be partitioned into disjoint sets
H
S =
h=1 Sh , where μ is supported on S1 and states

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3334

