The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Elastic Responding Machine for Dialog Generation
with Dynamically Mechanism Selecting
Ganbin Zhou,1,2 Ping Luo,1,2 Yijun Xiao,3 Fen Lin,4 Bo Chen,4 Qing He1,2
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China.{zhouganbin, luop, heqing}@ict.ac.cn
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
3
Department of Computer Science, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA.
4
WeChat Search Application Department, Tencent, China.
els attempt to “translate” an input post x to a response y
by maximizing the probability of p(y|x). A training objective of maximum likelihood tends to produce low-diversiﬁed
high-frequency responses (Li et al. 2016a). Although beam
search algorithm applied in these models offers capability
of generating multiple probable responses to a given input,
there is no guarantee that these responses are diversiﬁed in
terms of language style.
To improve response diversity, models have been proposed including making improvements on the beam search
method (Wiseman and Rush 2016), designing new types of
objective functions for response resorting (Li et al. 2016a),
etc. Specially, Zhou et al. (2017) argues that a machine
translation corpus is inherently different from a conversation corpus. For translation pairs, there almost always is a
phrase alignment between each pair and there is little variation among the target translations for a given source sentence. On the other hand, for conversation corpus, aside from
the language style elements mentioned earlier, responses
can be wildly different from one another focusing on various topics in the input post. Therefore, they proposed a
encoder-diverter-decoder framework MARM which models these variations as latent mechanism parameters. Here,
mechanism refers to the different underlying transduction
regularities from a post to its corresponding response. With
different learned mechanisms speciﬁed, the model is able to
generate responses with various language styles.
In (Zhou et al. 2017), it is assumed that there are a
ﬁxed number of mechanisms for all pairs of posts and responses. During training, for each input post the model always calculates the conditional probability p(y|m, x) over
all mechanisms. However, it is possible that not all mechanisms are relevant for a given input post x. This introduces
an inefﬁciency in computing: the over-all-mechanism training applies back-propagation for all mechanism parameters
including those that are not related to x. Thus, there is more
room for improvements with respect to time efﬁciency.
At test time, MARM utilizes top-K mechanisms for each
input post. However, we argue that it is difﬁcult and unreliable to manually select the hyper-parameter K, since the
number of suitable mechanisms varies for different input
posts. For example, for posts such as “I have an exam tomorrow and I am super nervous”, the responses could be
“What exam?”, “Relax, it is quite easy.”, or “You should not

Abstract
Neural models aiming at generating meaningful and diverse
response is attracting increasing attention over recent years.
For a given post, the conventional encoder-decoder models
tend to learn high-frequency but trivial responses, or are difﬁcult to determine which speaking styles are suitable to generate responses. To address this issue, we propose the elastic
responding machine (ERM), which is based on a proposed
encoder-diverter-ﬁlter-decoder framework. ERM models the
multiple responding mechanisms to not only generate acceptable responses for a given post but also improve the diversity of responses. Here, the mechanisms could be regraded as
some latent variables, and for a given post different responses
may be generated by different mechanisms. The experiments
demonstrate the quality and diversity of the generated responses, intuitively show how the learned model controls response mechanism when responding, and reveal some underlying relationship between mechanism and language style.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the development of conversational models which aim at the generation of relevant and
ﬂuent responses observing user posts. Since the end-to-end
neural machine automatically learns the transduction from
posts to responses, it is attracting increasing number of studies for developing task-oriented as well as open-domain conversation systems. The vast amount of dialogue texts generated by social networks provide the data basis for generative
models of conversational models, and these end-to-end solutions are shown to outperform the conventional ones (Shang,
Lu, and Li 2015).
Despite the surging popularity of these end-to-end neural machines, their performances are still far from perfect.
In real human to human conversations, different language
styles exist. For example, some people compose their speech
with plain declarative statements; some prefer to use negations; others ﬁll their responses with rhetorical questions.
Unlike real conversations, end-to-end neural models often
generate generic and dull responses, and fail in controlling
the language styles of responses. Current generative conversational models follows the line of encoder-decoder framework for statistic machine translation (SMT). These modc 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5730

