The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Towards Automatic Learning of
Procedures from Web Instructional Videos
Luowei Zhou

Chenliang Xu

Jason J. Corso

Robotics Institute
University of Michigan
luozhou@umich.edu

Department of CS
University of Rochester
Chenliang.Xu@rochester.edu

Department of EECS
University of Michigan
jjcorso@eecs.umich.edu

step as a procedure segment, or simply segment for convenience, inspired by (Sener et al. 2015; Alayrac et al. 2016).
For example, there are 8 segments in the making a BLT sandwich video shown in Fig. 1. We represent these segments
by their start and end temporal boundaries in a given video.
Note that one procedure segment could contain multiple actions, but it should be conceptually compact, i.e., described
with a single sentence. The number of procedure segments
and their locations reﬂect human consensus on how the procedure is structured. Can this human-consensus procedure
structure be learned by an agent?
To that end, we deﬁne the Procedure Segmentation problem as: automatically segment a video containing a procedure into category-independent procedure segments. Although this is a new problem, there are two related, existing problems: event proposal and procedure learning. The
event proposal problem (Krishna et al. 2017) is to localize
category-independent temporal events from unconstrained
videos. Both event proposals and procedure segments can
contain multiple actions. However, the event proposal problem emphasizes the recall quality given a large amount of
proposals, rather than the identiﬁcation of a procedure (sequence of segments) from limited but necessary proposals.
Events might overlap and are loosely-coupled but procedure
segments barely overlap, are closely-coupled and usually
have long-term dependencies.
The existing work in procedure learning is less-supervised
than that of event proposals (no labels are given for the segments). It emphasizes video-subtitle alignment (Malmaud et
al. 2015; Bojanowski et al. 2015) and discovery of common
procedure steps of a speciﬁc process (Alayrac et al. 2016;
Sener et al. 2015). However, the methods proposed in these
works make restrictive assumptions: they typically assume
either language is concurrently available, e.g., from subtitles, or the number of procedure steps for a certain procedure
is ﬁxed, or both. Such assumptions are limited: extra textual
input is unavailable in some scenarios; the subtitles or action sequences automatically generated by machines, e.g.,
YouTube’s ASR system, are inaccurate and require manual
intervention; and many procedures of a certain type, such
a speciﬁc recipe, will vary the number of steps in different
instances (process variation).
Unfortunately, work in neither of these two problems
sheds sufﬁcient light on understanding procedure segmen-

Abstract
The potential for agents, whether embodied or software, to
learn by observing other agents performing procedures involving objects and actions is rich. Current research on automatic procedure learning heavily relies on action labels
or video subtitles, even during the evaluation phase, which
makes them infeasible in real-world scenarios. This leads to
our question: can the human-consensus structure of a procedure be learned from a large set of long, unconstrained videos
(e.g., instructional videos from YouTube) with only visual
evidence? To answer this question, we introduce the problem of procedure segmentation—to segment a video procedure into category-independent procedure segments. Given
that no large-scale dataset is available for this problem, we
collect a large-scale procedure segmentation dataset with procedure segments temporally localized and described; we use
cooking videos and name the dataset YouCook2. We propose a segment-level recurrent network for generating procedure segments by modeling the dependencies across segments. The generated segments can be used as pre-processing
for other tasks, such as dense video captioning and event parsing. We show in our experiments that the proposed model outperforms competitive baselines in procedure segmentation.

Introduction
Action understanding remains an intensely studied problemspace, e.g., action recognition (Donahue et al. 2015; Wang
et al. 2016), action detection (Singh et al. 2016; Yeung et
al. 2016; Shou, Wang, and Chang 2016) and action labeling (Kuehne, Richard, and Gall 2017; Huang, Fei-Fei, and
Niebles 2016; Bojanowski et al. 2014). These works all emphasize instantaneous or short term actions, which clearly
play a role in understanding short or structured videos (Chen
et al. 2014). However, for long, unconstrained videos, such
as user-uploaded instructional videos of complex tasks—
preparing coffee (Kuehne, Arslan, and Serre 2014), changing tires (Alayrac et al. 2016)—learning the steps of accomplishing these tasks and their dependencies is essential, especially for agents’ automatic acquisition of language
or manipulation skills from video (Yu and Siskind 2013;
Al-Omari et al. 2017; Yu and Siskind 2015).
We deﬁne procedure as the sequence of necessary steps
comprising such a complex task, and deﬁne each individual
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7590

