The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Measuring Catastrophic Forgetting in Neural Networks
Ronald Kemker,1 Marc McClure,1 Angelina Abitino,2 Tyler L. Hayes,1 Christopher Kanan1
1 Rochester Institute of Technology
2 Swarthmore College
{rmk6217, mcm5756}@rit.edu , aabitin1@swarthmore.edu, {tlh6792, kanan}@rit.edu

Abstract

EWC
FEL
MLP
PathNet
GeppNet
GeppNet
+STM
Ideal
Offline
Model

Average Accuracy Across
All Permutations (%)

60

Deep neural networks are used in many state-of-the-art systems for machine perception. Once a network is trained to
do a speciﬁc task, e.g., bird classiﬁcation, it cannot easily be
trained to do new tasks, e.g., incrementally learning to recognize additional bird species or learning an entirely different
task such as ﬂower recognition. When new tasks are added,
typical deep neural networks are prone to catastrophically forgetting previous tasks. Networks that are capable of assimilating new information incrementally, much like how humans
form new memories over time, will be more efﬁcient than retraining the model from scratch each time a new task needs
to be learned. There have been multiple attempts to develop
schemes that mitigate catastrophic forgetting, but these methods have not been directly compared, the tests used to evaluate them vary considerably, and these methods have only
been evaluated on small-scale problems (e.g., MNIST). In
this paper, we introduce new metrics and benchmarks for directly comparing ﬁve different mechanisms designed to mitigate catastrophic forgetting in neural networks: regularization, ensembling, rehearsal, dual-memory, and sparse-coding.
Our experiments on real-world images and sounds show that
the mechanism(s) that are critical for optimal performance
vary based on the incremental training paradigm and type of
data being used, but they all demonstrate that the catastrophic
forgetting problem is not yet solved.

50
40
30
20
10
00

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Number of Permutations Trained

9

Figure 1: Catastrophic forgetting impairs incremental learning in neural networks. As a network is incrementally trained
(solid lines), ideally its performance would match that of a
model trained ofﬂine with all of the data upfront (dashed
line). In this paper, we develop methods and benchmarks for
measuring catastrophic forgetting. Our experiments show
that even methods designed to prevent catastrophic forgetting perform signiﬁcantly worse than an ofﬂine model. Incremental learning is key to many real-world applications
because it allows the model to adapt after being deployed.

(MLP) architecture and typical training algorithms cannot
handle incrementally learning new tasks or categories without catastrophically forgetting previously learned training
data. Fixing this problem is critical to making agents that incrementally improve after deployment. For non-embedded
or personalized systems, catastrophic forgetting is often
overcome simply by storing new training examples and then
re-training either the entire network from scratch or possibly
only the last few layers. In both cases, retraining uses both
the previously learned examples and the new examples, randomly shufﬂing them so that they are independent and identically distributed (iid). Retraining can be slow, especially if
a dataset has millions or billions of instances.
Catastrophic forgetting was ﬁrst recognized in MLPs almost 30 years ago (McCloskey and Cohen 1989). Since
then, there have been multiple attempts to mitigate this phenomenon (Hinton and Plaut 1987; Robins 1995; Goodrich
and Arel 2014; Draelos et al. 2016; Ren et al. 2017; Fernando et al. 2017; Kirkpatrick et al. 2017). However, these

Introduction
While the basic architecture and training algorithms behind deep neural networks (DNNs) are over 30 years
old, interest in them has never been greater in both industry and the artiﬁcial intelligence research community.
Owing to far larger datasets, increases in computational
power, and innovations in activation functions, DNNs have
achieved near-human or super-human abilities on a number
of problems, including image classiﬁcation (He et al. 2016),
speech-to-text (Khilari and Bhope 2015), and face identiﬁcation (Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015). These
algorithms power most of the recent advances in semantic
segmentation (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015), visual
question answering (Kaﬂe and Kanan 2017), and reinforcement learning (Mnih et al. 2013). While these systems have
become more capable, the standard multi-layer perceptron
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3390

