The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

DyETC: Dynamic Electronic Toll Collection
for Trafﬁc Congestion Alleviation
Haipeng Chen,1,† Bo An,1,† Guni Sharon,2,‡ Josiah P. Hanna,2,§ ,
Peter Stone,2,§ Chunyan Miao,1,† Yeng Chai Soh1,†
1

Nanyang Technological University
2
University of Texas at Austin
†
{chen0939,boan,ascymiao,ecsoh}@ntu.edu.sg
‡
gunisharon@gmail.com
§
{jphanna,pstone}@cs.utexas.edu
over time. However, these tolling schemes still assume that
trafﬁc demands are ﬁxed and are known a priori, and thus are
static in essence. In practice, trafﬁc demands ﬂuctuate and
cannot be predicted accurately, especially when the trafﬁc is
abnormal (e.g., in case of trafﬁc accidents, or city events).
As a result, these static tolling schemes usually have limited
regulation effect. One recent work of Sharon et al. (2017)
proposes a dynamic tolling scheme called Δ-tolling, which
assigns a toll to each road proportional to the difference between its current travel time and its free-ﬂow travel time.
However, Δ-tolling does not take a proactive approach towards changes in the demand side. Instead, D-tolling only
reacts to such changes once they are detected. In contrast,
we propose a novel dynamic tolling scheme which optimizes
trafﬁc over the long run, with the following three major contributions.

Abstract
To alleviate trafﬁc congestion in urban areas, electronic toll
collection (ETC) systems are deployed all over the world.
Despite the merits, tolls are usually pre-determined and ﬁxed
from day to day, which fail to consider trafﬁc dynamics and
thus have limited regulation effect when trafﬁc conditions are
abnormal. In this paper, we propose a novel dynamic ETC
(DyETC) scheme which adjusts tolls to trafﬁc conditions in
realtime. The DyETC problem is formulated as a Markov
decision process (MDP), the solution of which is very challenging due to its 1) multi-dimensional state space, 2) multidimensional, continuous and bounded action space, and 3)
time-dependent state and action values. Due to the complexity of the formulated MDP, existing methods cannot be applied to our problem. Therefore, we develop a novel algorithm, PG-β, which makes three improvements to traditional
policy gradient method by proposing 1) time-dependent value
and policy functions, 2) Beta distribution policy function and
3) state abstraction. Experimental results show that, compared with existing ETC schemes, DyETC increases trafﬁc
volume by around 8%, and reduces travel time by around
14.6% during rush hour. Considering the total trafﬁc volume
in a trafﬁc network, this contributes to a substantial increase
to social welfare.

The ﬁrst key contribution of this paper is a formal model
of the DyETC problem. Since MDPs have various advantages in modelling long term planning problems with uncertainty, we formulate the DyETC problem as a discrete-time
MDP. Though several existing methods have been proposed
to solve the trafﬁc assignment problem with MDP (Akamatsu 1996; Baillon and Cominetti 2008), our method is
notably distinct from these works, in the sense that they consider the uncertainty of drivers’ route choice behavior, while
this work considers the uncertainty of trafﬁc demand as well.
The state of the formulated MDP is the number of vehicles
on a road that are heading to certain destination, the action
is the toll on each road, and the formulated MDP has 1) a
multi-dimensional state space, 2) multi-dimensional, continuous and bounded action space, and 3) time dependent state
and action values.

Introduction
Nowadays, governments face a worsening problem of trafﬁc congestion in urban areas. To alleviate road congestion, a number of approaches have been proposed, among
which ETC has been reported to be effective in many countries and areas (e.g., Singapore (LTA 2017), Norway (AutoPASS 2017)). The tolls of different roads and time periods are different, so that the vehicles are indirectly regulated to travel through less congested roads with lower
tolls. However, although current ETC schemes vary tolls
at different time periods throughout a day, they are predetermined and ﬁxed at the same periods from day to day. A
few dynamic road pricing schemes (Joksimovic et al. 2005;
Lu, Mahmassani, and Zhou 2008; Zhang, Mahmassani, and
Lu 2013) have been proposed in the transportation research
community which consider the variations of trafﬁc demands

Due to the huge size of the MDP, it is very challenging
to ﬁnd its optimal policy. Traditional reinforcement learning
algorithms based on tabular representations of the value and
policy functions (e.g., tabular Q-learning (Watkins 1989),
prioritized sweeping (Moore and Atkeson 1993), Monte
Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) (Coulom 2006) and UCT (UCB
applied to trees) (Kocsis and Szepesvári 2006)) cannot be
applied to our problem due to the large scale state and action spaces. Value-based methods with function approximation (Precup, Sutton, and Dasgupta 2001; Maei et al. 2010;

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

757

