The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Information Directed Sampling for
Stochastic Bandits with Graph Feedback
Fang Liu

Swapna Buccapatnam

Ness Shroff

The Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio 43210
liu.3977@osu.edu

AT&T Labs Research
Middletown, NJ 07748
sb646f@att.com

The Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio 43210
shroff.11@osu.edu

choose one user at each time in an online social network
(e.g., Facebook) to offer a promotion (Caron et al. 2012;
Carpentier and Valko 2016). Each time the decision maker
offers a promotion to a user, he also has an opportunity to
survey the user’s neighbors in the network regarding their
potential interest in a similar offer.1 Users are found to be
more responsive to such surveys using social network information compared to generic surveys (Ugander et al. 2011),
and this effect can be leveraged to construct side observations.
Consider another example, when the actions are advertisements (Mannor and Shamir 2011) - the decision maker
constructs a graph of different vacation places (Hawaii,
Caribbean, Paris, etc.), where links capture similarities between different places. When a customer shows interest in
one of the places, he is also asked to provide his opinion
about the neighboring places in the graph.
Side-observation models are also applicable to sensor networks that monitor events, where an agent must choose one
(or a few) sensor to sample at each time. The reward obtained from choosing a sensor is related to its accuracy of
monitoring the event. Neighboring sensors can communicate their observations to each other and this data aggregation has the desired affect of obtaining side-observations
from neighboring sensors on determining which sensor(s) to
select.
In the existing literature (Caron et al. 2012; Buccapatnam, Eryilmaz, and Shroff 2014; Buccapatnam et al. 2017;
Tossou, Dimitrakakis, and Dubhashi 2017), researchers propose new policies for the side observation model in the
stochastic bandit setting that exploit the graph structure to
accelerate learning. Caron et al. (2012) and Buccapatnam,
Eryilmaz, and Shroff (2014) propose extensions to upper
conﬁdence bound based policies, originally proposed for
the classical MAB setting in Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer (2002). Policies proposed by Buccapatnam, Eryilmaz,
and Shroff (2014), namely t -greedy-LP and UCB-LP, are
shown to be asymptotically optimal, both in terms of the
network structure and time. Tossou, Dimitrakakis, and Dub-

Abstract
We consider stochastic multi-armed bandit problems with
graph feedback, where the decision maker is allowed to observe the neighboring actions of the chosen action. We allow
the graph structure to vary with time and consider both deterministic and Erdős-Rényi random graph models. For such
a graph feedback model, we ﬁrst present a novel analysis of
Thompson sampling that leads to tighter performance bound
than existing work. Next, we propose new Information Directed Sampling based policies that are graph-aware in their
decision making. Under the deterministic graph case, we establish a Bayesian regret bound for the proposed policies that
scales with the clique cover number of the graph instead of
the number of actions. Under the random graph case, we provide a Bayesian regret bound for the proposed policies that
scales with the ratio of the number of actions over the expected number of observations per iteration. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst analytical result for stochastic
bandits with random graph feedback. Finally, using numerical evaluations, we demonstrate that our proposed IDS policies outperform existing approaches, including adaptions of
upper conﬁdence bound, -greedy and Exp3 algorithms.

1

Introduction

Multi-Armed Bandits (MAB) have been used as quintessential models for sequential decision making. In the classical
MAB setting, at each time, a decision maker must choose
an action from a set of K actions with unknown probability
distributions. Choosing an action i at time t reveals a random reward Xi (t) drawn from the probability distribution
of action i. The goal is to ﬁnd policies that minimize the
expected loss due to uncertainty about actions’ distributions
over a given time horizon.
In this work, we consider an important MAB setting,
called the graph-structured feedback or the side-observation
model (Mannor and Shamir 2011; Caron et al. 2012; Buccapatnam, Eryilmaz, and Shroff 2014; Tossou, Dimitrakakis,
and Dubhashi 2017), where choosing an action i not only
generates a reward from action i, but also reveals observations for a subset of the remaining actions.
Such a scenario occurs in social networks, sensors networks, and advertising. For example, a decision maker must

1

This is possible when the online network has an additional survey feature that generates “side observations”. For example, when
user i is offered a promotion, her neighbors may be queried as follows: “User i was recently offered a promotion. Would you also be
interested in the offer?”.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3643

