The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Hi, How Can I Help You? Automating Enterprise IT Support Help Desks
Senthil Mani,1 Neelamadhav Gantayat,1 Rahul Aralikatte,1 Monika Gupta 1
{sentmani, neelamadhav, rahul.a.r, monikgup}@in.ibm.com

Sampath Dechu,1 Anush Sankaran,1 Shreya Khare1
{sampath.dechu, anussank, shkahre4}@in.ibm.com

Barry Mitchell,2 Hemamalini Subramanian,2 Hema Venkatarangan2
bcm@us.ibm.com, {hesubram, hema.sudarshan}@in.ibm.com
1
2
IBM Reseach AI
IBM Global Business Services

large-scale document corpus and provide more cognitive responses (Fang et al. 2016).
Based on the response provided, QA systems can be
broadly classiﬁed into two groups: i) factoid based systems,
which generally answer ‘wh’ questions. The answer is typically an entity with one or few words (Xu et al. 2015) (Oh et
al. 2016), ii) non-factoid based systems providing complex
long answers or a procedural explanation to the question.
Research in factoid QA systems is very mature (Kolomiyets and Moens 2011) with lots of open
domain systems available such as AskHermes (Cao et
al. 2011), AnswerBus (Zheng 2002), QANUS (Ng and
Kan 2015), YodaQA (Baudiš and Šedivỳ 2015), Sirius (Hauswald et al. 2015), and DEQA (Lehmann et al.
2012). Publicly available large-scale knowledge bases,
such as FreeBase, are manually curated to learn and
benchmark factoid based QA systems (Yao and Van Durme
2014) (Bordes et al. 2015).
However, going beyond factoid QA systems, i.e. retrieving long answers is extremely challenging both in deﬁning what constitutes an answer chunk and in evaluating
the retrieval performance (Yang et al. 2016). In such nonfactoid systems, generating syntactically correct long procedural answers is challenging, compelling the use of classiﬁcation or search based approaches for such tasks (Clark et
al. 2016) (Mitra and Baral 2015).
In enterprise IT, one of the main sources of revenue is
providing support to clients. In 2012, the IT support industry revenue in the U.S. alone was estimated to be $212 billion (Shapiro 2014). This is an area where even simple automations can bring about a huge ﬁnancial impact. (Chen,
Chiang, and Storey 2012) studied how intelligent systems
can make this sector more proﬁtable. In this work, we
present a platform which is developed and deployed inside
IBM to share the load of IT support agents.
This system is a classical case of a QA system where the
answers are not factoid but are long explanatory answers
which often contain multiple steps describing the solution
to a problem. The success of such a system in enterprise depends on many factors like: i) accuracy of the answers ii)
speed of answer generation/retrieval iii) ability to rapidly ingest new data.

Abstract
Question answering is one of the primary challenges of natural language understanding. In realizing such a system, providing complex long answers to questions is a challenging
task as opposed to factoid answering as the former needs
context disambiguation. The different methods explored in
the literature can be broadly classiﬁed into three categories
namely: 1) classiﬁcation based, 2) knowledge graph based
and 3) retrieval based. Individually, none of them address the
need of an enterprise wide assistance system for an IT support and maintenance domain. In this domain, the variance of
answers is large ranging from factoid to structured operating
procedures; the knowledge is present across heterogeneous
data sources like application speciﬁc documentation, ticket
management systems and any single technique for a general
purpose assistance is unable to scale for such a landscape. To
address this, we have built a cognitive platform with capabilities adopted for this domain. Further, we have built a general
purpose question answering system leveraging the platform
that can be instantiated for multiple products, technologies in
the support domain. The system uses a novel hybrid answering model that orchestrates across a deep learning classiﬁer, a
knowledge graph based context disambiguation module and
a sophisticated bag-of-words search system. This orchestration performs context switching for a provided question and
also does a smooth hand-off of the question to a human expert
if none of the automated techniques can provide a conﬁdent
answer. This system has been deployed across 675 internal
enterprise IT support and maintenance projects.

1

Introduction

One of the long-term goals of AI is to have a system answering complex questions asked in natural language. The
term question answering (QA) has a very broad interpretation enabling almost any problem to be formulated as one.
The problem of QA originated decades ago with research
focused on retrieving answers from structured databases.
AI has aided the growth of QA systems in more challenging settings with better natural data understanding. QA systems have undergone a revolution in inferring from various information sources such as unstructured web content,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7688

