The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Sequential Copying Networks
Qingyu Zhou,†∗ Nan Yang,‡ Furu Wei,‡ Ming Zhou‡
†

Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
‡
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
qyzhgm@gmail.com, {nanya, fuwei, mingzhou}@microsoft.com

We further observe that the copied words usually form
a continuous chunk of the output, exhibiting a “sequential copying” phenomenon. For example, in the Gigaword
dataset of abstractive sentence summarization task, about
57.7% words are copied from the input as indicated in Figure 1. Moreover, the copied words in multi-word span account for 28.1%, which is also very common. For example,
in Figure 2, there are two copied bi-grams in the output summary. Similar phenomenon has also been observed in question generation task.
However, previous methods fall into one paradigm, which
we call “single word copy”. At each decoding time step, the
models still follow the “word by word” style to make separate decisions of whether to copy. Therefore, this “single
word copy” paradigm may introduce errors due to these separate decisions. For example, the words in a phrase should be
copied consecutively from the input sentence, but these separate decisions cannot guarantee to achieve this. This may
cause that some unrelated words appears unexpectedly in
the middle of the phrase, or the phrase is not copied completely with some words missed. Therefore, we argue that
tasks such as abstractive sentence summarization and question generation can beneﬁt from sequential copying considering the intrinsic nature of these tasks and datasets.

Abstract
Copying mechanism shows effectiveness in sequence-tosequence based neural network models for text generation
tasks, such as abstractive sentence summarization and question generation. However, existing works on modeling copying or pointing mechanism only considers single word copying from the source sentences. In this paper, we propose a
novel copying framework, named Sequential Copying Networks (SeqCopyNet), which not only learns to copy single
words, but also copies sequences from the input sentence.
It leverages the pointer networks to explicitly select a subspan from the source side to target side, and integrates this
sequential copying mechanism to the generation process in
the encoder-decoder paradigm. Experiments on abstractive
sentence summarization and question generation tasks show
that the proposed SeqCopyNet can copy meaningful spans
and outperforms the baseline models.

Introduction
Recently, attention-based sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq)
framework (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Bahdanau,
Cho, and Bengio 2015) has achieved remarkable progress
in text generation tasks, such as abstractive text summarization (Rush, Chopra, and Weston 2015), question generation
(Zhou et al. 2017a) and conversation response generation
(Vinyals and Le 2015). In this framework, an encoder is employed to read the input sequence and produce a list of vectors, which are then fed into a decoder to generate the output
sequence by making word predictions one by one through
the softmax operation over a ﬁxed size target vocabulary.
It has been observed that seq2seq suffers from the unknown or rare words problem (Luong et al. 2015). Gulcehre
et al. (2016) and Gu et al. (2016) makes the key observation
that in tasks like summarization and response generation,
rare words in the output sequence usually can be found in
the input sequence. Based on this observation, they propose
a copying mechanism to directly copy words to the output
sequence from input, which alleviates the rare word problem. In their work, every output words can be either generated by predicting words in the target vocabulary or copied
from the input sequence.

Figure 1: Percentage of generated and copied words in sentence summarization training data.
In this paper, we propose a novel copying framework,
Sequential Copying Networks (SeqCopyNet), to extend the
vanilla seq2seq framework. SeqCopyNet is intended to learn
not only the “single word copy” behavior, but also the “se-

∗

Contribution during internship at Microsoft Research.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4987

