The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Negative-Aware Inﬂuence Maximization on Social Networks∗
Yipeng Chen,† Hongyan Li,† Qiang Qu‡,†

†
MOE Key Laboratory of Machine Perception
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science
Peking University
‡
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology
Chinese Academy of Sciences
chenyipeng@pku.edu.cn, lihy@cis.pku.edu.cn, qiang@siat.ac.cn

To address the above problem brought by negative users
in IM, this paper introduces Negative-aware Inﬂuence Maximization (NIM). Given a social network with labeled positive and negative users, the goal is to maximize the number of positive users while minimize the number of negative
ones in the inﬂuenced user set. The problem can be reduced
from IM thus it is NP-hard. Moreover, the objective function
does not have properties as many other IM problems such
as submodularity and monotonicity for exploration, which
makes it even harder. To this end, we propose a Reverse
Inﬂuence Set based algorithm for NIM (RIS-NIM). Experiments on large real datasets show promising results that RISNIM is able to achieve 70% improvement in expected inﬂuence compared with rivals.

Abstract
How to minimize the impact of negative users within the
maximal set of inﬂuenced users? The Inﬂuenced Maximization (IM) is important for various applications. However, few
studies consider the negative impact of some of the inﬂuenced users. We propose a negative-aware inﬂuence maximization problem by considering users’ negative impact. A
novel algorithm is proposed to solve the problem. Experiments on real-world datasets show the proposed algorithm
can achieve 70% improvement on average in expected inﬂuence compared with rivals.

Introduction
The Inﬂuence Maximization (IM) problem is a fundamental
social network problem that has wide applications including
viral marketing. It aims to ﬁnd a small set of seed users of
size k that can eventually inﬂuence maximum users (Kempe,
Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003).
Existing studies on IM problems mostly consider the cardinality of the inﬂuenced users with less attention paid to
the negative impact of some users. This often poses problems in maximizing the inﬂuence. For example, in the marketing, not all the users receiving promotion can be adapted,
some of which may even have negative impact on the promoted products, e.g., freeloaders or users with bad credits.
It is hereby necessary to consider negative users in the IM
problems. Although some researchers (Chen et al. 2011) realize the existence of negative users, they focus on the spread
of negative opinion. In their models, users are negative when
inﬂuenced by negative users. The studies ﬁnd seeds that
can maximize the inﬂuence of positive users. However, their
models are ineffective to minimize the impact of negative
users. This may cause problems since negative users would
reduce the impact by positive users. For example, if too
many freeloaders are involved in the promotion, the interests of companies may be reduced even if many users get
inﬂuenced.

Problem Formulation
A social network is modeled as a directed graph G(V, E).
The node set V represents users in the network G, which
consists of two disjoint sets V + and V − indicating positive and negative users, respectively. The edge set E represents follower/followee relationships between users. This
paper considers Triggering Model as the underlying diffusion model, which is the generalization of many wellknown models including Independent Cascade (IC) and Linear Threshold (LT) models, to characterize the diffusion process on network G (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003).
Given a social network G(V, E), the Negative-aware Inﬂuence Maximization (NIM) problem is to ﬁnd a size-k node
set S (k is a user-speciﬁed parameter as constraint) that maximizes the expected inﬂuence E[I(S)] deﬁned as follows:


Pr(S  v) −
Pr(S  v). (1)
E[I(S)] =
v∈V +

v∈V −

Existing studies (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003)
prove the NP-hardness of IM. Meanwhile, IM is a special
case of NIM because for each instance of conventional IM,
we can construct a corresponding equivalent NIM instance
by deﬁning V + = V and V − = ∅. Thus, NIM is NP-hard.
Furthermore, the objective function E[I(S)] of NIM does
not have the properties of monotone non-decreasing nor submodular as many other IM problems, which makes it more
difﬁcult to be solved.

∗
The work was partially supported by CAS Pioneer Hundred
Talents Program and the MOE Key Laboratory of Machine Perception at Peking University under grant number K-2017-02. Hongyan
Li is the corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8063

