The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Differences between Visual Scanning Patterns
Can Disambiguate Bipolar and Unipolar Patients
Jonathan Chung,1 Moshe Eizenman,1,2 Uros Rakita,3 Roger McIntyre,3,4,5 Peter Giacobbe3,5
1

2

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences & Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering
3
Department of Psychiatry, 4 Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON
5
Department of Psychiatry, University Health Networks, Toronto, ON

1

Abstract

Introduction

Bipolar Disorder (BD) and Major Depressive Disorder
(MDD) are two common and debilitating mood disorders.
The prevalence of MDD has been estimated to be 16.2%
in the United States, affecting between 32 and 35 million
adults in their lifetime (Kessler et al. 2003). BD is estimated to affect between 7.5 to 8 million adults in the United
States resulting in a lifetime prevalence of between 1 to
5%, however such estimates may be an underestimate due
to unaccounted cases of bipolar spectrum disorders (Bauer
and Pfennig 2005). Both disorders produce signiﬁcant functional and cognitive impairment that compromises the quality of life and increases health-care costs (Grande et al. 2016;
Simon 2003).
BD is deﬁned by the lifetime presence of symptoms of
depression, mania and hypomania. MDD, on the other hand,
is only deﬁned by symptoms of depression. However, BD
patients spend the majority of the time in clinical depressive
states (Judd et al. 2002). Currently, there are no biomarkers or pathognomonic clinical differences to aid clinicians in
distinguishing between patients with BD and MDD while in
a depressive state (Goodwin and Jamison 2007; Mitchell et
al. 2008), increasing the risk of misdiagnosis. In fact, misdiagnosing BD as MDD is relatively common, as revealed by
Stensland et al., (2010), who analyzed claims from a United
States health plan and found that more than a quarter of BD
patients were incorrectly diagnosed at one point during their
illness as having MDD. Importantly, misdiagnosis can lead
to sub-optimal treatment as MDD is treated with antidepressants, while this class of medication is not recommended as
a ﬁrst-line approach to those with BD. Furthermore, antidepressant can worsen mood cyclicity in those with BD, which
can lead to poor outcomes as well as increased medical costs
(Bowden 2001) pointing to the need for improved tools to
help disambiguate the underlying polarity of the illness in
those who present in depressed states.
Differences in emotional and attentional processing in
MDD and BD populations is one approach to improve diagnostic precision (Grotegerd et al. 2014). Neuroimaging
studies have uncovered important neural mechanisms that
differentiate emotional and attentional processing in BD and
MDD patients. These discoveries suggest unique traits that
may also be present in behavioural responses to emotionally
charged themes. Considering that eye movements are reﬂec-

Bipolar Disorder (BD) and Major Depressive Disorder
(MDD) are two common and debilitating mood disorders.
Misdiagnosing BD as MDD is relatively common and the introduction of markers to improve diagnostic accuracy early
in the course of the illness has been identiﬁed as one of the
top unmet needs in the ﬁeld. In this paper, we present novel
methods to differentiate between BD and MDD patients. The
methods use deep learning techniques to quantify differences
between visual scanning patterns of BD and MDD patients.
In the methods, visual scanning patterns that are described
by ordered sequences of ﬁxations on emotional faces are encoded into a lower dimensional space and are fed into a longshort term memory recurrent neural network (RNN). Fixation
sequences are encoded by three different methods: 1) using
semantic regions of interests (RoIs) that are manually deﬁned
by experts, 2) using semi-automatically deﬁned grids of RoIs,
or 3) using a convolutional neural network (CNN) to automatically extract visual features from saliency maps.
Using data from 47 patients with MDD and 26 patients with
BD we showed that using semantic RoIs, the RNN improved
the performance of a baseline classiﬁer from an AUC of 0.603
to an AUC of 0.878. Similarly using grid RoIs, the RNN improved the performance of a baseline classiﬁer from an AUC
of 0.450 to an AUC of 0.828. The classiﬁer that automatically
extracted visual features from saliency maps (a long recurrent
convolutional network that is fully data-driven) had an AUC
of 0.879. The results of the study suggest that by using RNNs
to learn differences between ﬁxation sequences the diagnosis
of individual patients with BD or MDD can be disambiguated
with high accuracy. Moreover, by using saliency maps and
CNN to encode the ﬁxation sequences the method can be
fully automated and achieve high accuracy without relying
on user expertise and/or manual labelling. When compared
with other markers, the performance of the class of classiﬁers that was introduced in this paper is better than that of
detectors that use differences in neural structures, neural activity or cortical hemodynamics to differentiate between BD
and MDD patients. The novel use of RNNs to quantify differences between ﬁxation sequences of patients with mood
disorders can be easily generalized to studies of other neuropsychological disorders and to other ﬁelds such as psychology and advertising.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18

