The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Labeled Memory Networks
for Online Model Adaptation
Shiv Shankar

Sunita Sarawagi

shiv shankar@iitb.ac.in
IIT Bombay

sunita@iitb.ac.in
IIT Bombay

as text auto-completion, user trajectory prediction, or nexturl prediction. Even when the prediction model has been
trained on many sequences, next-token predictions on new
sequences can beneﬁt from true tokens observed online. Another example is image recognition where a trained model
should be able to recognize new objects not seen during
batch training based on a few examples. This has led to a
surge of interest in few-shot learning (Kaiser et al. 2017;
Santoro et al. 2016; Vinyals et al. 2016; Snell, Swersky, and
Zemel 2017). Few-shot learning is an artiﬁcially simpliﬁed
setting where a small set of new labels deﬁne independent
classiﬁcation tasks. We consider the more useful but more
difﬁcult and less explored task where an existing image classiﬁer has to be extended to handle new labels.
An established technique for model adaptation is to retune part or all of the model parameters using the domainlabeled data in a separate adaptation phase (Daumé III ).
More recently, deep meta-networks have been proposed that
”learn to learn” such adaptation (Rei 2015; Finn, Abbeel,
and Levine 2017; Huang et al. 2015; Ravi and Larochelle
2017). Parameter retuning methods typically require a onetime adaptation step, and operating them in online settings
is slow. Secondly with a pre-trained network the multiple gradient updates of meta-learning tend to destroy useful information learned by the PCN. This phenomenon is
closely related to ’catastrophic forgetting’ (French 1999;
Kirkpatrick et al. 2016).
An alternative to parameter retuning is memorizing. In
this approach neural networks are augmented with memory that can grow without correspondingly increasing the
number of parameters to be trained. Many exciting uses
have been found of such MANNs including program learning (Graves, Wayne, and Danihelka 2014), question answering (Weston 2016; Gülçehre et al. 2016), learning rare
events (Kaiser et al. 2017), and meta learning (Santoro et
al. 2016). They hold promise for model adaptation because
memory they can cut short the conventional path of iterative
training to percolate new facts to model parameters.
However, our initial attempts at using existing MANNs
like NTMs (Graves, Wayne, and Danihelka 2014) and
DNTMs (Gülçehre et al. 2016) for online sequence prediction did not improve the baseline model. One major challenge is correctly balancing the roles of the memory and
batch-trained model. On the one hand, we have a shared

Abstract
Augmenting a neural network with memory that can grow
without growing the number of trained parameters is a recent
powerful concept with many exciting applications. In this paper, we establish their potential in online adapting a batch
trained neural network to domain-relevant labeled data at deployment time.
We present the design of Labeled Memory Network (LMN),
a new memory augmented neural network (MANN) for fast
online model adaptation. We highlight three key features of
LMNs. First, LMNs treat memory as a second boosted stage
following the trained network thereby allowing the memory
and network to play complementary roles. Unlike all existing MANNs that write to memory at every cycle, LMNs provide better memory utilization by writing only labeled data
with non-zero loss. Second, LMNs organize the memory with
the discrete class label as the primary key unlike existing
MANNs where key is a real vector derived from the input.
This simple, yet surprisingly unexplored alternative organization, safeguards against catastrophic forgetting of rare labels that current LRU based MANNs are subject to. Finally,
LMNs model the evolving expertise of memory and network
using a RNN, to determine online their respective weights
We evaluate online model adaptation strategies on ﬁve sequence prediction tasks, an image classiﬁcation task, and
two language modeling tasks. We show that LMNs are better than other MANNs designed for meta-learning. We also
found them to be more accurate and faster than state-of-theart methods of retuning model parameters for adapting to
domain-speciﬁc labeled data.

Introduction
While deep learning models achieve impressive accuracy in supervised learning tasks such as computer vision (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), translation (Wu 2016), and speech recognition (Yu and Deng 2014)
training such models places signiﬁcant demands on the
amount of labeled data, computational resources, and manual efforts in tuning. Training is thus considered an infrequently performed resource-intensive batch process. Many
applications require trained models to quickly adapt to new
examples and settings during deployment. Consider the online sequence prediction task that arises in applications such
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4034

