The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

An Ant-Based Algorithm to Solve
Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems
Ziyu Chen,1 Tengfei Wu,2 Yanchen Deng,3 Cheng Zhang1
1

Chongqing University
{chenziyu,bootan}@cqu.edu.cn, 2 wutengfei0404@163.com, 3 dyc941126@126.com

MGM2 (Maheswaran, Pearce, and Tambe 2004), DSAN
(Arshad and Silaghi 2004), GDBA (Okamoto, Zivan, and
Nahon 2016), etc. In those algorithms, agents make decisions based on their neighbor states. Recently, several mechanisms such as anytime local search framework (ALS) (Zivan, Okamoto, and Peled 2014), k−optimality (Pearce and
Tambe 2007) and partial decision scheme (PDS) (Yu et al.
2017) have been proposed to enhance the solution quality
of local search algorithms. Max-sum(Farinelli et al. 2008)
and its variants (Rogers et al. 2011; Zivan and Peled 2012;
Chen, Deng, and Wu 2017) are typical inference based incomplete algorithms, where agents propagate and accumulate utilities through the whole factor graph. Sample based
algorithms including DUCT (Ottens, Dimitrakakis, and Faltings 2012) and D-Gibbs (Nguyen, Yeoh, and Lau 2013) are
emerging incomplete algorithms, which sample the search
space to approximate a function as a product of statistical
inference.
Many existing DCOP algorithms derive from centralized single-solution optimization approaches such as hillclimbing algorithm and simulated annealing. Ant colony
optimization (Dorigo, Birattari, and Stutzle 2006), as a
population-based metaheuristic, has been successfully applied into various NP-Hard problems including traveling
salesman problem (TSP) (Dorigo and Gambardella 1997),
constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) (Solnon 2002) and
many others. However, to the best of our knowledge, the ant
solver for DCSP (Semnani and Zamanifar 2012) is the only
ant-based algorithm for solving distributed constraint reasoning problems. Unfortunately, since solving DCOPs requires to enumerate all possible assignment combinations to
ﬁnd the optimal solution rather than just ﬁnd a feasible solution, the ant solver for DCSP cannot directly be applied into
solving DCOPs. Considering the difference between DCOPs
and DCSPs, we propose a novel ant-based DCOP algorithm
in which agents try to keep track of promising areas of the
search space by employing pheromone trails as a guide to
make wiser decisions.

Abstract
As an important population-based algorithm, ant colony optimization (ACO) has been successfully applied into various
combinatorial optimization problems. However, much existing work in ACO focuses on solving centralized problems. In
this paper, we present a novel algorithm that takes the power
of ants to solve Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems (DCOPs), called ACO DCOP. In ACO DCOP, a new
mechanism that captures local beneﬁts is proposed to compute heuristic factors and a new method that considers the
cost structure of DCOPs is proposed to compute pheromone
deltas appropriately. Moreover, pipelining technique is introduced to make full use of the computational capacity and improve the efﬁciency. In our theoretical analysis, we prove that
ACO DCOP is an anytime algorithm. Our empirical evaluation indicates that ACO DCOP is able to ﬁnd solutions
of equal or signiﬁcantly higher quality than state-of-the-art
DCOP algorithms.

Introduction
Distributed Constraint Satisfaction and Optimization Problems (DCSPs and DCOPs) (Yokoo et al. 1998) are fundamental frameworks for Multi-agent Systems (MAS) in
which agents need to coordinate their decisions to ﬁnd a feasible solution (for DCSPs) or optimize the global objective
(for DCOPs). They have been successfully deployed into
various real applications including sensor networks (Zhang
et al. 2005), task scheduling (Sultanik, Modi, and Regli
2007), power networks (Fioretto et al. 2017), etc.
Algorithms for solving DCOPs can be classiﬁed into complete algorithms and incomplete algorithms according to
whether they guarantee to ﬁnd the optimal solutions. Typical
search based complete algorithms include ADOPT (Modi et
al. 2005), BnB-ADOPT (Yeoh, Felner, and Koenig 2008),
AFB (Gershman, Meisels, and Zivan 2009) and so on. DPOP
(Petcu and Faltings 2005), on the other hand, is an inference
based complete algorithm to solve DCOPs by using a dynamic programming technique. Since DCOPs are NP-Hard,
considerable research efforts have been made to develop incomplete algorithms. Local search algorithms are the most
popular incomplete algorithms including DSA (Zhang et
al. 2005), MGM (Maheswaran, Pearce, and Tambe 2004),

Background
Distributed Constraint Satisfaction and
Optimization Problems

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

DCSPs can be deﬁned by a tuple A, X, D, C where

4654

