The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

DeepHit: A Deep Learning Approach to Survival Analysis with Competing Risks
Changhee Lee,1 William R. Zame, 2 Jinsung Yoon, 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 3, 1, 4
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, USA
2
Department of Economics, University of California, Los Angeles, USA
3
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, UK
4
Alan Turing Institute, London, UK
chl8856@ucla.edu, zame@econ.ucla.edu, jsyoon0823@ucla.edu, mihaela.vanderschaar@oxford-man.ox.ac.uk
operate, and the features of the individual patient. Especially
in medical setting, the survival analysis is further applied
to discovering risk factors affecting the survival (Koene et
al. 2016), comparison among risks of different subjects at a
certain time of interest (Yoon et al. 2017), decision of a costefﬁcient sensing period (e.g. screening for cancer) (Ahuja,
Zame, and van der Schaar 2017).
Most of the previous work in this area has approached
the problem by assuming a speciﬁc form for the underlying
stochastic process, using available data to learn the relationship between the covariates and the parameters of the model,
and then deducing the relationship between covariates and
the distribution of ﬁrst hitting times – the risk of the event. (In
the medical setting, this is typically the risk of death or onset
of a certain disease.) The Cox proportional hazards model
(Cox 1972) is the most widely-used model in the medical
setting but it makes many strong assumptions about the underlying stochastic process and about the relationship between
the covariates and the parameters of that process. Other models allow for various other speciﬁc forms of the underlying
stochastic process and for more general relationships between covariates and the parameters, but still maintain strong
parametric assumptions (especially that the relationship between covariates and parameters of the stochastic process are
time-invariant).
This paper proposes a very different approach to survival
analysis: we construct and use a deep neural network that
learns the distribution of ﬁrst hitting times directly. An important aspect of our method, which we call DeepHit, is that it
smoothly handles situations in which there is a single underlying risk (cause) and situations in which there are multiple
competing risks (causes). DeepHit employs a network architecture that consists of a single shared sub-network and a
family of cause-speciﬁc sub-networks. We train the network
by using a loss function that exploits both survival times and
relative risks. DeepHit makes no assumptions about the form
of the underlying stochastic process; it therefore allows for
the possibility that, even for a ﬁxed cause or causes (e.g. a
disease or diseases), both the parameters and the form of the
stochastic process depend on the covariates.
Although our approach is quite general and applies to all
the settings mentioned above, and many others, we focus here
on the medical setting (and so we will use medical language,
and speak of patients rather than instances, etc.). In the med-

Abstract
Survival analysis (time-to-event analysis) is widely used in
economics and ﬁnance, engineering, medicine and many other
areas. A fundamental problem is to understand the relationship
between the covariates and the (distribution of) survival times
(times-to-event). Much of the previous work has approached
the problem by viewing the survival time as the ﬁrst hitting
time of a stochastic process, assuming a speciﬁc form for the
underlying stochastic process, using available data to learn the
relationship between the covariates and the parameters of the
model, and then deducing the relationship between covariates
and the distribution of ﬁrst hitting times (the risk). However,
previous models rely on strong parametric assumptions that
are often violated. This paper proposes a very different approach to survival analysis, DeepHit, that uses a deep neural
network to learn the distribution of survival times directly.
DeepHit makes no assumptions about the underlying stochastic process and allows for the possibility that the relationship
between covariates and risk(s) changes over time. Most importantly, DeepHit smoothly handles competing risks; i.e. settings
in which there is more than one possible event of interest.
Comparisons with previous models on the basis of real and
synthetic datasets demonstrate that DeepHit achieves large
and statistically signiﬁcant performance improvements over
previous state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Survival analysis – also called time-to-event analysis – is
fundamental in many areas, including economics and ﬁnance,
engineering and medicine. A long and diverse literature approaches survival analysis by viewing the event of interest as
the ﬁrst hitting time of an underlying stochastic process; i.e.
the ﬁrst time at which the stochastic process reaches a prescribed boundary. Depending on the context, the ﬁrst hitting
time may represent the time until a stock option can proﬁtably
be exercised, the time to failure of a mechanical system or
the length of time a patient survives following treatment (or
non-treatment); see (Lee and Whitmore 2006) for many other
examples. A fundamental problem of survival analysis in all
of these areas is to understand the relationship between the
(distribution of) hitting times and the covariates, such as the
characteristics of the stock on which the option is written, the
physical environment in which the mechanical system must
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2314

