The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Emergence of Grounded Compositional
Language in Multi-Agent Populations
Igor Mordatch

Pieter Abbeel

OpenAI
San Francisco, California, USA

University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, California, USA

Recently there has been a surge of renewed interest in the
pragmatic aspects of language use and it is also the focus
of our work. We adopt a view of (Gauthier and Mordatch
2016) that an agent possesses an understanding of language
when it can use language (along with other tools such as
non-verbal communication or physical acts) to accomplish
goals in its environment. This leads to evaluation criteria that
can be measured precisely and without human involvement.
In this paper, we propose a physically-situated multiagent learning environment and learning methods that bring
about emergence of a basic compositional language. This
language is represented as streams of abstract discrete symbols uttered by agents over time, but nonetheless has a coherent structure that possesses a deﬁned vocabulary and syntax. The agents utter communication symbols alongside performing actions in the physical environment to cooperatively
accomplish goals deﬁned by a joint reward function shared
between all agents. There are no pre-designed meanings associated with the uttered symbols - the agents form concepts
relevant to the task and environment and assign arbitrary
symbols to communicate them.
There are similarly no explicit language usage goals, such
as making correct utterances, and no explicit roles agents
are assigned, such as speaker or listener, or explicit turntaking dialogue structure as in traditional language games.
There may be an arbitrary number of agents in a population communicating at the same time and part of the difﬁculty is learning to refer speciﬁc agents. A population
of agents is situated as moving particles in a continuous
two-dimensional environment, possessing properties such as
color and shape. The goals of the population are based on
non-linguistic objectives, such as moving to a location and
language arises from the need to coordinate on those goals.
We do not rely on any supervision such as human demonstrations or text corpora.
Similar to recent work,we formulate the discovery the action and communication protocols for our agents jointly as
a reinforcement learning problem. Agents perform physical
actions and communication utterances according to an identical policy that is instantiated for all agents and fully determines the action and communication protocols. The policies are based on neural network models with an architecture composed of dynamically-instantiated recurrent modules. This allows decentralized execution with a variable

Abstract
By capturing statistical patterns in large corpora, machine
learning has enabled signiﬁcant advances in natural language
processing, including in machine translation, question answering, and sentiment analysis. However, for agents to intelligently interact with humans, simply capturing the statistical patterns is insufﬁcient. In this paper we investigate if,
and how, grounded compositional language can emerge as a
means to achieve goals in multi-agent populations. Towards
this end, we propose a multi-agent learning environment and
learning methods that bring about emergence of a basic compositional language. This language is represented as streams
of abstract discrete symbols uttered by agents over time, but
nonetheless has a coherent structure that possesses a deﬁned
vocabulary and syntax. We also observe emergence of nonverbal communication such as pointing and guiding when
language communication is unavailable.

Introduction
Development of agents that are capable of communication
and ﬂexible language use is one of the long-standing challenges facing the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence. Agents need
to develop communication if they are to successfully coordinate as a collective. Furthermore, agents will need some
language capacity if they are to interact and productively
collaborate with humans or make decisions that are interpretable by humans. If such a capacity were to arise artiﬁcially, it could also offer important insights into questions
surrounding development of human language and cognition.
But if we wish to arrive at formation of communication
from ﬁrst principles, it must form out of necessity. The approaches that learn to plausibly imitate language from examples of human language, while tremendously useful, do
not learn why language exists. Such supervised approaches
can capture structural and statistical relationships in language, but they do not capture its functional aspects, or
that language happens for purposes of successful coordination between humans. Evaluating success of such imitationbased approaches on the basis of linguistic plausibility also
presents challenges of ambiguity and requirement of human
involvement.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1495

