The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Avoiding Dead Ends in Real-Time Heuristic Search
Bence Cserna, William J. Doyle, Jordan S. Ramsdell, Wheeler Ruml
Department of Computer Science
University of New Hampshire
Durham, NH 03824 USA
bence, doyle, ruml at cs.unh.edu

tice, the state spaces of many real-world applications can be
considered ﬁnite, but unfortunately they often contain deadend states from which a goal is not reachable. For example,
if a robot is traveling too fast towards an obstacle, it may
be impossible to avoid a crash. As we will see below, conventional real-time search methods quickly succumb to dead
ends. This prevents existing search methods from being applied to many on-line planning problems.
In this paper, we study general methods for avoiding dead
ends in real-time search. In contrast to traditional off-line
safety veriﬁcation, we aim to avoid a pre-speciﬁed controller
and lengthy preprocessing and rather allow an agent to dynamically plan for its current goals and prove on-line that its
next action will be safe. We deﬁne a general problem setting
for safe on-line planning and several new real-time search
algorithms and prove conditions under which they can keep
an agent safe. We deﬁne a new safety-oriented node evaluation function and develop practical methods that exploit its
information to efﬁciently preserve safety while selecting appropriate actions. We empirically test these methods on two
simulated domains, trafﬁc crossing and controlling a vehicle with inertia, and ﬁnd that the new methods dramatically
outperform the conventional ones.

Abstract
Many systems, such as mobile robots, need to be controlled
in real time. Real-time heuristic search is a popular on-line
planning paradigm that supports concurrent planning and execution. However, existing methods do not incorporate a notion of safety and we show that they can perform poorly in
domains that contain dead-end states from which a goal cannot be reached. We introduce new real-time heuristic search
methods that can guarantee safety if the domain obeys certain properties. We test these new methods on two different
simulated domains that contain dead ends, one that obeys the
properties and one that does not. We ﬁnd that empirically the
new methods provide good performance. We hope this work
encourages further efforts to widen the applicability of realtime planning.

Introduction
Systems that interact with the external physical world often must be controlled in real time. Examples include systems that interact with humans and robotic systems, such
as autonomous vehicles. In this paper, we address real-time
planning, where the planner must return the next action for
the system to take within a speciﬁed wall-clock time bound.
We assume the system has fully observable state, discrete
time, and discrete deterministic actions. We adopt a heuristic state-space search approach: while the system transitions
from state s1 to s2 , the planner exploits a heuristic cost-to-go
function to explore promising parts of the state-space graph
starting from s2 to ﬁnd an appropriate action to execute once
the transition completes. The duration of the transition gives
rise to the time bound for the planner. The problem domain
is represented by an initial starting state, a successor state
generator, and a goal predicate on states.
Because the planner cannot necessarily ﬁnd a complete
path to a goal state within the time bound, there is no guarantee that the selected action leads to a goal. In fact, it may
be necessary to return to a previously visited state in order
to reach a goal, so real-time heuristic search methods update their heuristic function to avoid becoming trapped in
cycles (Korf 1990). If the state space is ﬁnite and a goal
is reachable from every state, most real-time search methods are complete and will eventually reach a goal. In prac-

Preliminaries
The algorithms we discuss are based on a modern generalpurpose real-time search algorithm, Local Search Space
Learning Real-Time A* (LSS-LRTA*) (Koenig and Sun
2009). (Note that incremental approaches, such as D*
(Koenig and Likhachev 2002), or anytime approaches, such
as ARA* (Lik ha chev, Gordon, and Thrun 2004), have planning times that are not tightly bounded, rendering them inapplicable.) We begin by introducing LSS-LRTA* and studying its behavior in domains with dead ends.

Real-time Heuristic Search
Psuedocode for LSS-LRTA* is sketched in Figure 1. The
algorithm proceeds in two phases: planning and learning.
The planning phase is similar to A*: expanding nodes in
best-ﬁrst order, preferring low f values, where f (n) =
g(n) + h(n), the cost-so-far plus an estimate of the cost-togo. To obey the real-time bound, only a pre-speciﬁed number of nodes are expanded, forming a local search space.
In the learning phase, a Dijkstra-like propagation updates

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1306

