The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Regularizing Deep Networks Using
Efﬁcient Layerwise Adversarial Training
Swami Sankaranarayanan

Arpit Jain

University of Maryland
College Park, MD
swamiviv@umiacs.umd.edu

GE Global Research
Niskayuna, NY
arpit.jain@ge.com

Rama Chellappa

Ser Nam Lim

University of Maryland
College Park, MD
rama@umiacs.umd.edu

GE Global Research
Niskayuna, NY
limser@ge.com
an adversarial class. This forces the network to learn robust
representations at each layer resulting in improved discriminability. Even though these perturbations are not adversarial
at the input layer, we show that they are strongly adversarial
when applied at the intermediate layers.
The proposed regularization approach does not add any
signiﬁcant overhead during training and thus can be easily
extended to very deep neural networks, as shown in our experiments. Our approach complements dropout and achieves
regularization beyond dropout. It avoids over-ﬁtting and
generalizes well by achieving signiﬁcant improvement in
performance on the test set. We show that the trained network develops robustness against adversarial examples even
when it is not explicitly trained with adversarial inputs.
While previous works have focused on generating adversarial perturbations for standalone images, our work focuses
on using these to efﬁciently regularize training. We perform
several ablative experiments to highlight the properties of
the proposed approach and present results for very deep
networks such as VGG (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014),
ResNets (He et al. 2016) and state of the art models such as
WideResNets (Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2016) on CIFAR10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet datasets.

Abstract
Adversarial training has been shown to regularize deep neural
networks in addition to increasing their robustness to adversarial examples. However, the regularization effect on very
deep state of the art networks has not been fully investigated.
In this paper, we present a novel approach to regularize deep
neural networks by perturbing intermediate layer activations
in an efﬁcient manner. We use these perturbations to train
very deep models such as ResNets and WideResNets and
show improvement in performance across datasets of different sizes such as CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet. Our
ablative experiments show that the proposed approach not
only provides stronger regularization compared to Dropout
but also improves adversarial robustness comparable to traditional adversarial training approaches.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown tremendous
success in several computer vision tasks in recent years
[(He et al. 2016),(Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin
2015),(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012)]. However, seminal works on adversarial examples [(Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2014), (Szegedy et al. 2013)] have
shown that DNNs are susceptible to imperceptible perturbations at input and intermediate layer activations. From an
optimization perspective, they also showed that adversarial
training can be used as a regularization approach while training deep networks. The focus of adversarial training techniques has been to improve network robustness to gradient
based adversarial perturbations. In this work, we propose a
novel variant of adversarial training with a focus to improve
regularization performance on test data.
The proposed approach is efﬁcient and simple to implement. It uses adversarial perturbations of intermediate layer
activations to provide a stronger regularization compared to
traditional techniques like Dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014).
By generating the perturbations from a different class compared to the current input, we ensure that the resulting perturbations in the intermediate layers are directed towards

Related Work
Many approaches have been proposed to regularize the training procedure of very deep networks. Early stopping and
statistical techniques like weight decay are commonly used
to prevent overﬁtting. Specialized techniques such as DropConnect (Wan et al. 2013), Dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014)
have been successfully applied with very deep networks.
Faster convergence of such deep architectures was made
possible by Batch Normalization (BN) (Ioffe and Szegedy
2015). One of the added beneﬁt of BN was that the additional regularization provided during training even made
dropout regularization unnecessary in some cases.
The work of Szegedy et al. (Szegedy et al. 2013) showed
the existence of adversarial perturbations for computer vision tasks by solving a box-constrained optimization approach to generate these perturbations. They also showed
that training the network by feeding back these adversar-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4008

