The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Streaming Non-Monotone Submodular Maximization:
Personalized Video Summarization on the Fly
Baharan Mirzasoleiman

Stefanie Jegelka

Andreas Krause

ETH Zurich, Switzerland
baharanm@ethz.ch

MIT, United States
stefje@mit.edu

ETH Zurich, Switzerland
krausea@ethz.ch

In this paper, we are motivated by applications of nonmonotone submodular maximization. In particular, we consider video summarization in a streaming setting, where video
frames are produced at a fast pace, and we want to keep an
updated summary of the video so far, with little or no memory
overhead. This has important applications e.g. in surveillance
cameras, wearable cameras, and astro video cameras, which
generate data at too rapid a pace to efﬁciently analyze and
store it in main memory. The same framework can be applied
more generally in many settings where we need to extract a
small subset of data from a large stream to train or update
a machine learning model. At the same time, various constraints may be imposed by the underlying summarization
application. These may range from a simple limit on the size
of the summary to more complex restrictions such as focusing
on particular individuals or objects, or excluding them from
the summary. These requirements often arise in real-world
scenarios to consider privacy (e.g. in case of surveillance
cameras) or personalization (according to users’ interests).
In machine learning, Determinantal Point Processes (DPP)
have been proposed as computationally efﬁcient methods for
selecting a diverse subset from a ground set of items (Kulesza,
Taskar, and others 2012). They have recently shown great
success for video summarization (Gong et al. 2014), document summarization (Kulesza, Taskar, and others 2012)
and information retrieval (Gillenwater, Kulesza, and Taskar
2012). While ﬁnding the most likely conﬁguration (MAP)
is NP-hard, the DPP probability is a log-submodular function, and submodular optimization techniques can be used to
ﬁnd a near-optimal solution. In general, the above submodular function is very non-monotone, and we need techniques
for maximizing a non-monotone submodular function in the
streaming setting. Although efﬁcient streaming methods have
been recently developed for maximizing a monotone submodular function f with a variety of constraints, there is no
effective streaming solution for non-monotone submodular
maximization under general types of constraints.
In this work, we provide S TREAMING L OCAL S EARCH,
the ﬁrst single pass streaming algorithm for non-monotone
submodular function maximization, subject to the intersection of a collection of independence systems I and d knapsack constraints. Our approach builds on local search, a
widely used technique for maximizing non-monotone submodular functions in a batch mode. Local search, however,

Abstract
The need for real time analysis of rapidly producing data
streams (e.g., video and image streams) motivated the design
of streaming algorithms that can efﬁciently extract and summarize useful information from massive data “on the ﬂy”.
Such problems can often be reduced to maximizing a submodular set function subject to various constraints. While
efﬁcient streaming methods have been recently developed
for monotone submodular maximization, in a wide range of
applications, such as video summarization, the underlying
utility function is non-monotone, and there are often various constraints imposed on the optimization problem to consider privacy or personalization. We develop the ﬁrst efﬁcient single pass streaming algorithm, S TREAMING L OCAL
S EARCH, that for any streaming monotone submodular maximization algorithm with approximation guarantee α under
a collection

√of independence systems
√ I, provides a constant
1/ 1 + 2/ α + 1/α + 2d(1 + α) approximation guarantee for maximizing a non-monotone submodular function
under the intersection of I and d knapsack constraints. Our
experiments show that for video summarization, our method
runs more than 1700 times faster than previous work, while
maintaining practically the same performance.

Introduction
Data summarization–the task of efﬁciently extracting a representative subset of manageable size from a large dataset–has
become an important goal in machine learning and information retrieval. Submodular maximization has recently been
explored as a natural abstraction for many data summarization tasks, including image summarization (Tschiatschek et
al. 2014), scene summarization (Simon, Snavely, and Seitz
2007), document and corpus summarization (Lin and Bilmes
2011), active set selection in non-parametric learning (Mirzasoleiman et al. 2016) and training data compression (Wei,
Iyer, and Bilmes 2015). Submodularity is an intuitive notion
of diminishing returns, stating that selecting any given element earlier helps more than selecting it later. Given a set
of constraints on the desired summary, and a (pre-designed
or learned) submodular utility function f that quantiﬁes the
representativeness f (S) of a subset S of items, data summarization can be naturally reduced to a constrained submodular
optimization problem.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1379

