The Twenty-Third AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium

Reasonableness Monitors
Leilani H. Gilpin
MIT Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
32 Vassar Street
Cambridge, MA 02139
{ lgilpin } @ mit.edu

dependencies and dependency analysis. I also present preliminary technical contributions and a methodology towards
monitoring non-local inconsistencies. This methodology is
inspired by the structure of successful human organizations,
where tasks are accomplished by committees of multiple
people. Committees are able to survive bad work by any
single member, because members of the committee observe
each other’s work and can jointly decide on actions to correct bad work or remove misbehaving members. The goal
of reasonableness monitoring is to apply this philosophy of
committees to subsystems of machines, with the aim of producing more robust and secure systems for safety-critical or
mission-critical tasks.

Abstract
As we move towards autonomous machines responsible for
making decisions previously entrusted to humans, there is an
immediate need for machines to be able to explain their behavior and defend the reasonableness of their actions. To implement this vision, each part of a machine should be aware
of the behavior of the other parts that they cooperate with.
Each part must be able to explain the observed behavior of
those neighbors in the context of the shared goal for the local
community. If such an explanation cannot be made, it is evidence that either a part has failed (or was subverted) or the
communication has failed. The development of reasonableness monitors is work towards generalizing that vision, with
the intention of developing a system-construction methodology that enhances both robustness and security, at runtime
(not static compile time), by dynamic checking and explaining of the behaviors of parts and subsystems for reasonableness in context.

Methods
Each reasonableness monitor has its own knowledge base:
a set of behaviors that are considered to be reasonable. For
monitoring machine perception, ConceptNet 5 (Speer and
Havasi 2013) is used as a knowledge base of reasonableness.
Monitors search through the knowledge base for premises
and generate explanations of inconsistencies. The premises
are used as evidence for explaining inconsistent (or consistent) information.
These methods are greatly inﬂuenced by work on knowledge representation (Fahlman 1979), analogical chaining (Blass and Forbus 2017), and monitoring systems for
planning (Veloso, Pollack, and Cox 1998). Explanatory systems have also been applied to multi-agent domains (Molineaux and Aha 2015) and story understanding (Winston and
Holmes 2017).

Introduction
An important problem of complex autonomous systems is
that they cannot provide insight into their behaviors and
thought processes. This work on reasonableness monitoring is a ﬁrst step towards developing the methodologies and
technologies to support building robust, articulate systems.
Such systems will be introspective and able to explain their
behaviors. They will be able to use explanations to dynamically detect, and mitigate, anomalous behaviors.
Reasonableness monitors are implemented as two types
of interfaces around the subsystems of a complex machine.
Local monitors dynamically check the behavior of a speciﬁc
subsystem, and non-local reasonableness monitors monitor
committees of subsystems for plausibility (reasonableness)
in context. Reasonableness monitors are able to build an explanation of a problem (or a reasonable state) by examining
the premises supporting the observation of a contradiction
(or consistency).
I present preliminary results on applying a local reasonableness monitoring system to machine perception. The key
contribution here is determining the reasonableness of a
perception-derived scene description with the careful use of

Preliminary Results
Take the observed perception of “a mailbox crossing the
street.” This is clearly unreasonable since mailboxes are
heavy, inanimate objects found at the sidewalk of a street
that do not move. Reasonableness monitors can detect and
explain this unreasonable perception.
input: "A mailbox crossing the street"
parsed as: (mailbox, cross, street)
This perception is UNREASONABLE,
using data from ConceptNet5.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8014

