The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Imitation Upper Conﬁdence
Bound for Bandits on a Graph
Andrei Lupu, Doina Precup
Reasoning and Learning Lab
McGill University, 3480 University St.
Montreal, Quebec H3A 0E9
Phone: (514) 398-6443
E-mail: andrei.lupu@mail.mcgill.ca, dprecup@cs.mcgill.ca
where Aj (t) is the arm selected by agent j at time t and
{I(t)} is simply the indicator function of event I(t). Also,
let

ln t
k
k
(2)
Ci (t) := Xi (t) + c
nki (t)

Introduction
Bandit problems are of high theoretical interest, as they represent a simple setup for the study of the explore-exploit
trade-off faced by an agent in an unknown environment.
Despite the large corpus on the topic, most prior work has
focused on a single-agent setup (Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi
2012).
Here, we consider the scenario of a graph of multiple
interconnected agents implementing a common policy and
each playing a bandit problem with identical reward distributions. We impose a restriction on the information propagated in the graph such that ”neighbouring” agents can only
observe each other’s actions, but not the corresponding payoffs.
Not only does the resulting problem expand bandit theory, but it can also be of particular applicability to online
inﬂuencers, the prediction of viral trends, or the modeling
of other social behaviours relying heavily on imitation with
limited communication between individuals.
Our approach extends the vanilla Upper Conﬁdence
Bound (UCB) algorithm (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer
2002) to the imitating multi-agent bandit problem described
above. The resulting Imitation Upper Conﬁdence Bound
(IUCB) algorithm involves an action selection process in
two parts according to which an agent either acts individually using UCB or imitates the most popular action among
all its neighbours.

be the original UCB conﬁdence bound, with c > 0 a tunable
parameter.
The action selection proceeds as such: every agent initializes the IUCB algorithm by selecting each bandit arm exactly once. Then, for all the following timesteps, a random
variable v k (t) ∈ [0, 1] is sampled from a uniform distribution for each agent. The action is subsequently selected according to:
⎧


⎨arg max Cik (t) , v k (t) ≥ α
i


(3)
Ak (t) =
⎩arg max Pik (t) , v k (t) < α,
i

where α ∈ [0, 1] is the imitation frequency.

Results
We implemented the IUCB algorithm on graphs with different structures and sizes, and empirically demonstrate the
improved performance over vanilla UCB on a large set of
10-armed bandits with Gaussian reward distributions. Full
details of the experimental methodology can be found in the
supplemental material.
Fig. 1 shows the average cumulated regret R̄ for all structures tested as a function of graph size. As can be seen
in panel (a), the IUCB algorithm cumulates only approximately half the regret of vanilla UCB, thus achieving a
signiﬁcantly better performance. This is a direct effect of
the actions done through imitation, as will become apparent
from Fig. 2
From the detailed view in panel (b), we observe that regret
draws a non-linear beneﬁt from an increase in graph size.
This beneﬁt is especially seen in the case of the Erdős-Rényi
random and Barabási-Albert small-world graphs (Albert and
Barabási 2002).
In the case of the BA small-world graphs, the sharp decrease in regret is particularly noteworthy, since they were
all generated with the same new node degree parameter
(m = 3). Consequently, the larger graphs are effectively
sparser than smaller ones.

IUCB Algorithm
Let k be an agent in the graph and let B k be the set of all
agents connected to k with a single edge (i.e. the neighbours
of k). For each of its own plays of arm i, the agent updates
a running average Xik (t) of rewards and a play count nki (t)
for that arm. At each timestep t, the agent also keeps track
of the number Pik (t) of times that the arm was selected by
one of its neighbours in the last 10 time steps. Formally, this
measure of popularity is deﬁned to be
Pik (t) =



t−1


{Aj (s) = i},

(1)

j∈B k s=t−10

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8113

