The Eighth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence 2018 (EAAI-18)

Dropout Model Evaluation in MOOCs
Josh Gardner, Christopher Brooks
School of Information
The University of Michigan
jpgard@umich.edu, brooksch@umich.edu

The process of building such models involves several stages, including extracting structured data from the
raw, semi-structured MOOC data (clickstream server logs,
database tables, etc.); selecting, training, testing, and tuning
different algorithms to predict dropout status; and using statistical inference to identify the “best” combination of these
techniques. Together, these stages profoundly inﬂuence the
effectiveness of predictive MOOC dropout models.
There are three problems with prior learning analytics
research on this task: (1) this work isolates the steps of
the model-building process, e.g., evaluating different approaches to feature extraction or algorithm selection separately without considering their interplay; (2) there exists no
consensus on methods for rigorous and reproducible statistical inference for the MST; and (3) this research is often
limited to small subsets of students who display the behaviors within the feature set of interest.
In this paper we apply a nonparametric statistical model
evaluation procedure to a large sample of MOOC data. In so
doing, we demonstrate the importance of this technique in
understanding the relative effectiveness of feature sets and
algorithms together on the MST. We ﬁnd that many complex features which have have shown explanatory power
within MOOC student subpopulations show poor performance when applied to dropout prediction on the full population of students. A simple set of clickstream-based features demonstrates much stronger performance, with other
features not statistically signiﬁcantly improving results even
in combination with clickstream features, calling into question the value of non-clickstream based approaches.

Abstract
The ﬁeld of learning analytics needs to adopt a more rigorous approach for predictive model evaluation that matches the
complex practice of model-building. In this work, we present
a procedure to statistically test hypotheses about model performance which goes beyond the state-of-the-practice in the
community to analyze both algorithms and feature extraction
methods from raw data. We apply this method to a series of
algorithms and feature sets derived from a large sample of
Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs). While a complete
comparison of all potential modeling approaches is beyond
the scope of this paper, we show that this approach reveals a
large gap in dropout prediction performance between forum-,
assignment-, and clickstream-based feature extraction methods, where the latter is signiﬁcantly better than the former
two, which are in turn indistinguishable from one another.
This work has methodological implications for evaluating
predictive or AI-based models of student success, and practical implications for the design and targeting of at-risk student
models and interventions.

Introduction
Building predictive models of student success has emerged
as a core task in the ﬁelds of learning analytics and educational data mining. As MOOCs have grown, so has this need
for effective and reliable machine learning models of complex student behavior patterns which identify students likely
to drop out in order to provide appropriate interventions or
support. The present work is concerned with building and
evaluating models to address the following task:
The Model Selection Task (MST): Given the full set
of learner data in N courses up to time t, ﬁnd the best
of k methods to predict learner dropout at time t + 1.

Related Work
Previous predictive modeling research in MOOCs has evaluated features derived from clickstreams (Brinton et al.
2015; Xing et al. 2016), forum post text and behavior patterns (Yang et al. 2013; Crossley et al. 2015), assignments
(Veeramachaneni, O’Reilly, and Taylor 2014), higher-order
time series representations (Brooks, Thompson, and Teasley
2015), emotion (Dillon et al. 2016), and social networks
(Rosé et al. 2014), among many others. In addition, research
has applied many modeling algorithms to dropout prediction, including logistic regression (Kizilcec and Halawa
2015; Veeramachaneni, O’Reilly, and Taylor 2014), support
vector machines (Kloft et al. 2014), tree-based methods (Li

More casually, we are interested in determining the best
model to use based on Coursera data exports in order to
predict learner dropout (no further engagement) at a given
week. We are especially interested in building these models
for the early weeks of the course: for example, predicting
likely dropouts in the third week given data from weeks one
and two. We leave the development and evaluation of interventions based on these models to future work.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7906

