The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Framework for Evaluating Barriers to the
Democratization of Artificial Intelligence
Colin Garvey
PhD Candidate, Science & Technology Studies Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Sage Labs 5710, 110 8th Street, Troy, NY, 12180 USA
garvec@rpi.edu

The “democratization” of AI has been taken up as a primary
goal by several major tech companies. However, these efforts resemble earlier “freeware” and “open access” initiatives, and it is unclear how or whether they are informed by
political conceptions of democratic governance. A political
formulation of the democratization of AI is thus necessary.
This paper presents a framework for the democratic governance of technology through intelligent trial and error (ITE)
that can be utilized to evaluate barriers to the democratization of AI and suggest strategies for overcoming them.

Woodhouse’s framework for the democratic governance of
technology through intelligent trial and error (hereafter, the
“ITE framework”) is a design-based approach to the governance of technological research and development (R&D)
that synthesizes concerns from the philosophy of technology with democratic political decision theory (Lindblom &
Woodhouse 1993). This paper outlines the ITE framework
and indicates how it can be used to examine AI R&D,
identify barriers to democratization, and aid in developing
measures to overcome such barriers.

What does it mean to “Democratize AI”?

The ITE Framework

Abstract

The ITE framework consists of 5 strategies, each with 4
dimensions, for a total of 20 variables. Technologies are
evaluated and scored on each variable on a scale of 1–5
points. The points are then summed, and the resultant value
is divided by 100 to provide an overall percentage “grade”
on the ITE scale of democratization.

Recently Microsoft, Google, IBM, and other major tech
companies have adopted the “democratization” of AI as a
primary goal. But what does this explicitly political claim
mean? These companies are offering APIs, code libraries,
and other developer tools online for free. It is unclear,
however, how these initiatives differ from earlier “freeware” and “open access” movements. Therefore, a clearer
concept of “democratization” that specifically applies to
the governance of technology is necessary (Woodhouse
2005). This paper introduces a framework drawn from
democratic decision theory and the philosophy of technology that can be used to identify barriers to the democratization of AI and suggest strategies for overcoming them.

Strategy 1: Public Deliberation
Public deliberation about issues relevant to citizens’ lives
is central to all democracies. Technology is an increasingly
influential aspect of modern life, making nearly all of us
potential stakeholders. Yet while political legislation is
typically deliberated at length before adoption in democratic countries, emerging technologies are not. The ITE
framework thus directs us to consider the amount and quality of deliberation taking place in technological R&D.
(1) Has deliberation been initiated early in development?
(2) Is a maximum feasible diversity of concerns being debated? (3) How well-informed are the participants? (4) Are
deliberations superficial and short, or deep and recurring?

Woodhouse’s Framework for the
Democratic Governance of Technology by
Intelligent Trial and Error (ITE)
Developed through analysis of risk governance in major
20th century technologies such as nuclear power and recombinant DNA (Morone & Woodhouse 1986, 1989),

Strategy 2: Democratic Decision Making Process
In contrast to top-down, authoritarian chains of command,
democratic governance utilizes collective decision making
processes involving a majority of stakeholders. Nevertheless, a degree of hierarchy is inevitable, as non-hierarchical
decision making processes can incur significant time costs.

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8079

