The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

HARP: Hierarchical Representation Learning for Networks
Haochen Chen

Bryan Perozzi

Stony Brook University
haocchen@cs.stonybrook.edu

Google Research
bperozzi@acm.org

Yifan Hu

Steven Skiena

Yahoo! Research
yifanhu@oath.com

Stony Brook University
skiena@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
We present HARP, a novel method for learning low dimensional embeddings of a graph’s nodes which preserves higherorder structural features. Our proposed method achieves this
by compressing the input graph prior to embedding it, effectively avoiding troublesome embedding conﬁgurations (i.e.
local minima) which can pose problems to non-convex optimization.
HARP works by ﬁnding a smaller graph which approximates
the global structure of its input. This simpliﬁed graph is used
to learn a set of initial representations, which serve as good
initializations for learning representations in the original, detailed graph. We inductively extend this idea, by decomposing a graph in a series of levels, and then embed the hierarchy
of graphs from the coarsest one to the original graph.
HARP is a general meta-strategy to improve all of the stateof-the-art neural algorithms for embedding graphs, including
DeepWalk, LINE, and Node2vec. Indeed, we demonstrate that
applying HARP’s hierarchical paradigm yields improved implementations for all three of these methods, as evaluated on
classiﬁcation tasks on real-world graphs such as DBLP, BlogCatalog, and CiteSeer, where we achieve a performance gain
over the original implementations by up to 14% Macro F1.

(a) Can 187

(b) LINE

(c) HARP

(d) Poisson 2D

(e) LINE

(f) HARP

Figure 1: Comparison of two-dimensional embeddings from
LINE and our proposed method, for two distinct graphs. Observe how HARP’s embedding better preserves the higher
order structure of a ring and a plane.

Introduction

then be used as features for common tasks on graphs such as
multi-label classiﬁcation, clustering, and link prediction.
Traditional methods for graph dimensionality reduction
(Belkin and Niyogi 2001; Roweis and Saul 2000; Tenenbaum, De Silva, and Langford 2000) perform well on small
graphs. However, the time complexity of these methods are
at least quadratic in the number of graph nodes, makes them
impossible to run on large-scale networks.
A recent advancement in graph representation learning,
DeepWalk (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014) proposed
online learning methods using neural networks to address
this scalability limitation. Much work has since followed
(Cao, Lu, and Xu 2015; Grover and Leskovec 2016; Perozzi
et al. 2017; Tang et al. 2015). These neural network-based
methods have proven both highly scalable and performant,
achieving strong results on classiﬁcation and link prediction
tasks in large networks.
Despite their success, all these methods have several
shared weaknesses. Firstly, they are all local approaches –
limited to the structure immediately around a node. Deep-

From social networks to the World Wide Web, graphs are a
ubiquitous way to organize a diverse set of real-world information. Given a network’s structure, it is often desirable to
predict missing information (frequently called attributes or
labels) associated with each node in the graph. This missing
information can represent a variety of aspects of the data –
for example, on a social network they could represent the
communities a person belongs to, or the categories of a document’s content on the web.
Because many information networks can contain billions
of nodes and edges, it can be intractable to perform complex
inference procedures on the entire network. One technique
which has been proposed to address this problem is dimensionality reduction. The central idea is to ﬁnd a mapping
function which converts each node in the graph to a lowdimensional latent representation. These representations can
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2127

