The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Selective Veriﬁcation Strategy
for Learning from Crowds
Tian Tian, Yichi Zhou, Jun Zhu∗
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., CBICR Center, State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Systems
TNList, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{tiant16@mails., zhouyc15@mails., dcszj@}tsinghua.edu.cn

the workers’ behaviors and an EM algorithm for learning its parameters. Recently, researchers have developed
many advanced methods, which make different assumptions on human behaviors (Jagabathula, Subramanian, and
Venkataraman 2014; Li and Yu 2014; Tian and Zhu 2015a;
Wauthier and Jordan 2011; Welinder et al. 2010; Zhou et
al. 2012), task difﬁculties (Whitehill et al. 2009), and label
structures (Tian and Zhu 2015b; Welinder et al. 2010), or
have different inference methods (Liu, Peng, and Ihler 2013;
Zhang et al. 2016). Although each method can achieve good
performance on several benchmark datasets, some recent
comparisons have shown a disappointing fact that the superiority of most methods is not consistent (Hung et al. 2013;
Sheshadri and Lease 2013; Zheng et al. 2017). Their performance may drop down when the model assumptions do not
hold. Since the applicable situations of methods are not clear,
there still exists a gap between label aggregation methods
and real crowdsourcing applications.
From our perspective, the model assumption is one of the
key points that inﬂuence the aggregating accuracy, and complex assumptions could be violated by certain datasets. One
possible solution towards building robust label aggregation
methods is to introduce oracle veriﬁcation directly to reduce
the inﬂuence of invalid assumptions. If we select suitable veriﬁcation tasks, comparing the responses of web workers with
the ground truths on the selected tasks can help us understand
the workers’ behaviors and do better label aggregation.
Based on the above idea, we focus on an approach we
call learning from crowds with selective veriﬁcation (Hung
et al. 2015). This approach requires two kinds of labels, the
crowdsourced labels and the truths for a well-chosen portion of tasks. After querying the crowds, we analyze the
responses and select the most valuable veriﬁcation tasks.
Then we further collect the ground truths from the oracle
for this subset of tasks. Finally based on the patterns discovered from both the noisy crowdsourced labels and the
ground truths, we infer the truths of the rest tasks. In this
way, the potential mismatches of model assumptions can be
complemented by the veriﬁcation step. The two key learning
problems of this approach are: (1) how to combine the oracle
labels and the crowdsourced responses to infer the ground
truths? (2) how to select a most valuable veriﬁcation subset?
We solve the ﬁrst problem through a ﬂexible transductive
semi-supervised learning approach (Zhu, Ghahramani, and

Abstract
To deal with the low qualities of web workers in crowdsourcing, many unsupervised label aggregation methods have been
investigated but most of them provide inconsistent performance. In this paper, we explore the learning from crowds
with selective veriﬁcation problem. In addition to the noisy
responses from the crowds, it also collects the ground truths
for a well-chosen subset of tasks as the reference, then aggregates the redundant responses based on the patterns provided
by both the supervised and unsupervised signal. To improve
the labeling efﬁciency, we propose the EBM selecting strategy
for choosing the veriﬁcation subset, which is based on the
loss error minimization. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst establish the expected loss error given the semi-supervised learning estimate,
then ﬁnd the subset that minimizes this selecting criterion.
We do extensive empirical comparisons on both synthetic and
real-world datasets to show the beneﬁts of this new learning
setting as well as our proposal.

Introduction
How to collect a massive scale of high-quality labels quickly?
This question frequently appears when building modern artiﬁcial intelligence agents, where the interminable data acquiring procedure is often a bottleneck (Deng et al. 2009). To
schedule this manual work efﬁciently, crowdsourcing platforms, such as Amazon Mechanical Turks (AMT), provide a
way to distribute micro-tasks to a large group of web workers,
so the tasks can be done much faster and cheaper than expert
labeling (Snow et al. 2008). However, due to the different
backgrounds of humans, responses of the crowds may contain substantial errors. Among existing attempts to improve
the quality of crowdsourced data, a large proportion of methods suggest labeling each task by multiple workers, and then
infer the underlying truths based on the patterns within the
redundant responses. This inference problem is known as
learning from crowds.
There has been abundant literature for noisy label aggregation methods, which date back to the intuitive majority voting method that just chooses the majority opinions of workers. Dawid and Skene (1979) proposed a generative model, which uses confusion matrices to describe
∗

corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4147

