The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Spatiotemporal Activity Modeling Under Data Scarcity:
A Graph-Regularized Cross-Modal Embedding Approach
Chao Zhang,1 Mengxiong Liu,1 Zhengchao Liu,1 Carl Yang,1 Luming Zhang,2 Jiawei Han1
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
2
EmoKit Tech Co., Ltd., Beijing, China
1
{czhang82, mliu60, zliu80, jiyang3, hanj}@illinois.edu} 2 zglumg@gmail.com

people are increasingly sharing their activities in the physical world on social media platforms (e.g., Twitter, Facebook, Instagram). Every day, billions of people go to different places (restaurants, malls, airports, etc.) in the world
and leave behind them massive trace data on social media platforms (Cheng et al. 2011; Cranshaw et al. 2012;
Zhang et al. 2017b). Complementary to conventional sensing data (Yao et al. 2017), such socially sensed behavioral
data consist of not only rich location and time information
but also the textual descriptions of people’s activities, thus
serving a multi-dimensional what-where-when data source
for understanding people’s activities in the physical world.
State-of-the-art spatiotemporal activity models (Xie et al.
2016; Zhang et al. 2017b; 2017c) rely on cross-modal embedding. They embed the units from different modalities (location, time, and keywords) into the same latent space to
derive their vectorized representations; and two units that
are highly correlated (e.g., the 5th Avenue location and the
keyword ‘shopping’) tend to have close embeddings. Once
the embeddings are learned, the typical activities at different locations and time can be easily retrieved based on vector similarities. Compared with earlier topic model-based
methods (Sizov 2010; Kling et al. 2014; Yin et al. 2011;
Hong et al. 2012; Yuan et al. 2013), such a cross-modal embedding approach does not impose assumptions about the
distributions of different modalities, and demonstrate excellent scalability (Zhang et al. 2017b).
Unfortunately, spatiotemporal activity modeling based on
cross-modal embedding largely relies on data sufﬁciency.
They often require a sufﬁcient amount of user behavioral
data, such that the learned embeddings can well capture the
correlation structures between location, time, and text, and
thus generalize well for prediction tasks. Many practical scenarios, however, involve a limited amount of user behavioral
data. For instance, while massive social media records are
published in large cities like New York City, there may be a
small amount of them in a less populous town, yet it is still
important to build spatiotemporal activity models for such
towns. As another example, to understand people’s activities in a speciﬁc time period (e.g., Christmas holiday), it is
desirable to put emphasis on the records during that period,
but again, one has to deal with the data scarcity problem as
the training data for that speciﬁc period could be small.
We study the problem of modeling people’s spatiotempo-

Abstract
Spatiotemporal activity modeling, which aims at modeling
users’ activities at different locations and time from user behavioral data, is an important task for applications like urban planning and mobile advertising. State-of-the-art methods for this task use cross-modal embedding to map the units
from different modalities (location, time, text) into the same
latent space. However, the success of such methods relies
on data sufﬁciency, and may not learn quality embeddings
when user behavioral data is scarce. To address this problem,
we propose B RANCH N ET, a spatiotemporal activity model
that transfers knowledge from external sources for alleviating data scarcity. B RANCH N ET adopts a graph-regularized
cross-modal embedding framework. At the core of it is a main
embedding space, which is shared by the main task of reconstructing user behaviors and the auxiliary graph embedding tasks for external sources, thus allowing external knowledge to guide the cross-modal embedding process. In addition to the main embedding space, the auxiliary tasks also
have branched task-speciﬁc embedding spaces. The branched
embeddings capture the discrepancies between the main task
and the auxiliary ones, and free the main embeddings from
encoding information for all the tasks. We have empirically
evaluated the performance of B RANCH N ET, and found that it
is capable of effectively transferring knowledge from external sources to learn better spatiotemporal activity models and
outperforming strong baseline methods.

Introduction
Spatiotemporal activity modeling aims at modeling people’s activities at different geographical locations and temporal points. It is an important task for a wide variety of
real-life applications. For example: 1) what are the typical leisure activities around 8pm on the 5th Avenue? 2)
which areas in the New York City do people usually visit
for shopping electronic products? Answering such questions is highly useful for applications ranging from mobile advertising to urban planning and tourism recommendation. Recent years have witnessed inspiring results of leveraging user behavioral data for this problem (Sizov 2010;
Kling et al. 2014; Yin et al. 2011; Zhang et al. 2017b; 2016;
2017a; Abdelhaq, Sengstock, and Gertz 2013; Feng et al.
2015). With the ubiquitous access to the mobile Internet,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

531

