The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Variance Reduced K-means Clustering
Yawei Zhao, Yuewei Ming, Xinwang Liu, En Zhu

Jianping Yin

College of Computer
National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, China, 410073

Dongguan University of Technology
Dongguan, China, 523000

Abstract
It is challenging to perform k-means clustering on a large
scale dataset efﬁciently. One of the reasons is that k-means
needs to scan a batch of training data to update the cluster centers at every iteration, which is time-consuming. In
the paper, we propose a variance reduced k-means VRKM,
which outperforms the state-of-the-art method, and obtain 4×
speedup for large-scale clustering. The source code is available on https://github.com/YaweiZhao/VRKM_
sofia-ml.

X x1 … xvi … xn

∇fi (ck ) = ck − xi

C c1 … cvk … cK ∇ xi (C)

0 ck − xi 0

Figure 1: The illustration of the basic data structures and
operations where ck is nearest to xi .

Symbols and deﬁnitions
As illustrated in Figure 1, X ∈ Rd×n represents the dataset
which contains n instances, and each of instance has d features. Xc denotes the instance set of a cluster c ∈ Rd×1 , and
its size is denoted by v. c represents the center of Xc . xi with
i ∈ {1, 2, ..., n} represents an instance. ∇f (c) and ∇fi (c)
represent the batch and stochastic gradients with respect to c,
respectively. K is the number of clusters. C ∈ Rd×K represents K centers such that C = [c1 , c2 , ..., cK ]. x{C} represents the nearest center of x. ∇x (C) represents the gradient
with respect to x{C}. If x belongs to the cluster ck , ∇x (C)
is obtained by using the k-th column of C to subtract x and
setting other columns to be 0.

Motivation
K-means clustering needs to pass over a batch of instances
in order to update cluster centers at each iteration, which
is computationally intensive. The pioneering work in (Bottou, Bengio, and others 1995) proposes a stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) variant of k-means in which one instance is
randomly sampled to update cluster centers at each iteration.
However, this variant usually brings in stochastic noise1 . Besides, a mini-batch variant of k-means is proposed in (Sculley 2010) to decrease the stochastic noise while increasing
the computational cost in calculating the gradient.
Recently, SVRG has been developed to decrease the
stochastic noise of SGD via variance reduced gradients(Johnson and Zhang 2013). However, we observe that
k-means is sharply divergent at iterations when applying
SVRG directly. The reason is that the optimization objective of k-means is jointly dominated by cluster centers and
instance partitions. Directly applying SVRG to k-means will
ﬁrst search an optimal decreased direction based on the current instance partition. When the instance partition changes,
this direction may not be optimal or even not be a decreased
one. It is called the drift of cluster centers, which impedes
SVRG to be used into k-means. Moreover, SVRG needs
to compute a batch gradient at every epoch, which is timeconsuming for a large dataset. Therefore, it is valuable to improve k-means by using SVRG efﬁciently for a large dataset.

Deﬁne 1 Given a cluster center set C = [c1 , ..., cK ], the
nearest cluster center of x is denoted by x{C} ∈ Rd×1
which is one of the K centers. The index of the center is
denoted by Ix{C} which is an integer ranging from 1 to K.
Deﬁne 2 Given a cluster center set C = [c1 , ..., cK ] and an
instance x. The gradient with respect to x{C} is denoted by
∇x (C) ∈ Rd×K . The Ix{C} -th column of ∇x (C) is x{C}−
x, and the other columns are zeros.

Variance reduced k-means clustering
formulation of k-means is min f (C)
=
C
K 
1/2 min i=1 x∈Xc  ci −x 2 . The gradient with
i
C

respect to a center ci is ∇f (ci ) = x∈Xc ci − x. Furtheri
more, suppose xit is randomly picked at the t-th iteration,
the stochastic gradient is ∇fit (ci ) = ci − xit . When the
cluster center c̃ drifts, it is corrected by the average gradient
of the instances:

c̃new ← c̃ − v1 ∇f (c̃) = c̃ − (c̃ − v1 x∈Xc̃ x) = X̄c̃ .
The

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The stochastic noise and variance are equivalent in the paper.

The position correction of c̃ guarantees that it is close to the
optimum based on the current instance partition.

8187

