The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Path-Based Attention Neural Model for Fine-Grained Entity Typing
Denghui Zhang,1 Manling Li,1 Pengshan Cai,2 Yantao Jia,1 Yuanzhuo Wang,1
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China
2
School of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts Amherst, MA 01003
zhangdenghui@ict.ac.cn, limanlingcs@gmail.com, pengshancai@cs.umass.edu,
jamaths.h@gmail.com, wangyuanzhuo@ict.ac.cn

to select relevant sentences to each type, which can dynamically reduce the weights of wrong labeled sentences for
each type during training. This idea is inspired by some
successful attempts to reduce noise in relation extraction,
e.g.,(Lin et al. 2016). However, these methods fail to consider type hierarchy, which is distinct in ﬁne-grained entity
typing. Speciﬁcally, if a sentence indicates a type, its parent
type can be also deduced from the sentence. Like the example above, “politician” is the subtype of “person”. Since
the sentence indicates that “Donald Trump” is “politician”,
“person” should also be assigned. Thus, we build path-based
attention for each type by utilizing its path to its coarsest parent type (e.g., person) in the type hierarchy. Compared to the
simple attention in relation extraction, it enables parameter
sharing for types in the same path. With the support of hierarchical information of types, it can reduce noise effectively.

Abstract
Fine-grained entity typing aims to assign entity mentions in
the free text with types arranged in a hierarchical structure. It
suffers from the label noise in training data generated by distant supervision. Although recent studies use many features
to prune wrong label ahead of training, they suffer from error propagation and bring much complexity. In this paper, we
propose an end-to-end typing model, called the path-based
attention neural model (PAN), to learn a noise-robust performance by leveraging the hierarchical structure of types. Experiments on two data sets demonstrate its effectiveness.

Introduction
Fine-grained entity typing aims to assign types to entity
mentions in the local context (a single sentence), and the
type set constitutes a tree-structured hierarchy (i.e., type hierarchy). Recent years witness the boost of neural models
in this task, e.g., (Shimaoka et al. 2016) employs an attention based LSTM to attain sentence representations and
achieves state-of-the-art performance. However, it still suffers from noise in training data, which is a main challenge in
this task. The training data is generated by distant supervision, which assumes that if an entity has a type in knowledge
bases (KBs), then all sentences containing this entity will
express this type. This method inevitably introduces irrelevant types to the context. For example, the entity “Donald
Trump” has types “person”, “businessman” and “politician”
in KBs, thus all three types are annotated for its mentions
in the training corpora. But in sentence “Donald Trump announced his candidacy for President of US.”, only “person”
and “politician” are correct types, while “businessman” can
not be deduced from the sentence, thus serves as noise. To
alleviate this issue, a few systems try to denoise training data
by ﬁltering irrelevant types ahead of training. For instance,
(Ren et al. 2016) proposes PLE to identify correct types by
jointly embedding mentions, context and type hierarchy, and
then use clean data to train classiﬁers. However, the denoising and training process are not uniﬁed, which may cause
error propagation and bring much additional complexity.
Motivated by this, we propose an end-to-end typing
model, called the Path-based Attention Neural model (PAN),

Path-Based Attention Neural Model
The architecture of PAN is illustrated in Figure1. Supposing that there are n sentences containing entity e, i.e.,
Se = {s1 , s2 , ..., sn }, and Te is the automatically labeled
types based on KBs. Firstly PAN employs LSTM to generate representations of sentences si following (Shimaoka
et al. 2016), where si ∈ Rd is the semantic representation
of si , i ∈ {1, 2, ..., n}. Afterwards, we build path-based attention αi,t over sentences si for each type t ∈ Te , which
is expected to focus on relevant sentences to type t. Then,
the representation of sentence set Se for type t, denoted by
se,t ∈ Rd , is calculated through weighted sum of vectors
of sentences. Finally, we obtain predicted types through a
classiﬁcation layer.
classiﬁcation layer

se,t
α1,t
s1

s2

LSTM

LSTM

s1

s2

α2,t

α3,t
s3

αn,t
···

sn

LSTM

···

LSTM

s3

···

sn

Figure 1: The architecture of PAN for given entity e, type t

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

More precisely, given e, an attention αi,t is learned to

8179

