The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Measuring the Popularity of Job Skills
in Recruitment Market: A Multi-Criteria Approach
1

Tong Xu,1,2 Hengshu Zhu,2,∗ Chen Zhu,2 Pan Li,1,2 Hui Xiong1,3,∗
Anhui Province Key Lab of Big Data Analysis and Application, University of Science and Technology of China
tongxu@ustc.edu.cn, lp970625@mail.ustc.edu.cn
2
Baidu Talent Intelligence Center, Baidu Inc.
{zhuhengshu, zhuchen02}@baidu.com
3
Rutgers Business School, Rutgers University
hxiong@rutgers.edu
to timely measure the popularity of job skills in recruitment
market to guide the employment.
Indeed, the analysis of job skills with measuring their
popularity is not novel. Currently, many organizations like
Linkedin (LinkedIn 2017) and ComputerWorld (World 2017)
have released annual reports for the hottest job skills, which
provide insightful guidance for job seekers. However, there
still exists several critical challenges along this line. First, in
practice, different people tend to have different criteria for
their dream jobs, e.g., some applicants pursue high salary,
so they choose the big companies in huge cities, while some
others tend to select small companies in hometown, even
with lower income. Second, job skills are not isolated, but
mutually connected to form the latent connections, e.g., skills
like “Javascript”, “PHP” and “Node.js” usually appeared
together, as they are all necessary for the “Web Front-End
Development”. Therefore, hierarchical structure with mutual
connections should be integrated when measuring popularity
of jobs skills.
To address the aforementioned issues, in this paper, we
propose a data-driven approach for measuring the popularity
of the job skills based on the analysis of large-scale recruitment data. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst build a job skill network
“Skill-Net” by exploring a large corpus of job postings in recruitment market. Then, we develop a novel Skill Popularity
based Topic Model (SPTM) for modeling the generation of
job skills. Particularly, SPTM can integrate different criteria
of jobs (e.g., salary level, company size), skill categories,
and the latent connections within skills. Therefore, with the
help of SPTM, we can effectively rank the job skills based
on their multi-perspective popularity. Finally, we evaluate
the proposed model with real-world recruitment data and
extensive experiments. Speciﬁcally, the contribution of this
paper can be summarized as follows:
• We explore to measure the popularity of job skills in recruitment market with a multi-criteria perspective, which
can help to eliminate the “Skill Gap” between employers
and job seekers in talent recruitment.
• We propose a novel SPTM model based on the analysis of
large-scale recruitment data, which can effectively model
the relations between categorical skills and job criteria.
• We evaluate the proposed model with real-world recruit-

Abstract
To cope with the accelerating pace of technological changes,
talents are urged to add and refresh their skills for staying in
active and gainful employment. This raises a natural question:
what are the right skills to learn? Indeed, it is a nontrivial task
to measure the popularity of job skills due to the diversiﬁed
criteria of jobs and the complicated connections within job
skills. To that end, in this paper, we propose a data driven
approach for modeling the popularity of job skills based on
the analysis of large-scale recruitment data. Speciﬁcally, we
ﬁrst build a job skill network by exploring a large corpus
of job postings. Then, we develop a novel Skill Popularity
based Topic Model (SPTM) for modeling the generation of
the skill network. In particular, SPTM can integrate different
criteria of jobs (e.g., salary levels, company size) as well as
the latent connections within skills, thus we can effectively
rank the job skills based on their multi-faceted popularity.
Extensive experiments on real-world recruitment data validate
the effectiveness of SPTM for measuring the popularity of
job skills, and also reveal some interesting rules, such as the
popular job skills which lead to high-paid employment.

Introduction
With the coming of knowledge economy era, the competition for skilled talents becomes extremely severe. Indeed,
talents who are qualiﬁed with employer-targeted skills will
get hired easily and obtain attractive reward, such as high
compensation and quick promotion. However, there still exists a “Skill Gap” (SkillsYouNeed 2017) between employers
and job seekers. Speciﬁcally, on the one hand, companies are
urgent to seek highly-skilled talents, especially when their
demands of job skills change frequently due to the severe
business campaigns. On the other hand, to compete against
other candidates and outstand from the large personnel pool,
job seekers have to acquire certain job skills that target companies pay the most attention on. Such situation is especially
signiﬁcant in massive-population countries like China, where
6 million fresh-graduate students enter the job market every
year (Daily 2016), far exceeding the number of available jobs
on the recruitment market. Therefore, it is very appealing
∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2572

