The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

IMS-DTM: Incremental Multi-Scale Dynamic Topic Models ∗
Xilun Chen, K. Selçuk Candan

Maria Luisa Sapino

Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ, USA
xilun.chen@asu.edu and candan@asu.edu

University of Torino
Torino, Italy
mlsapino@di.unito.it

Abstract
Dynamic topic models (DTM) are commonly used for mining latent topics in evolving web corpora. In this paper, we
note that a major limitation of the conventional DTM based
models is that they assume a predetermined and ﬁxed scale of
topics. In reality, however, topics may have varying spans and
topics of multiple scales can co-exist in a single web or social media data stream. Therefore, DTMs that assume a ﬁxed
epoch length may not be able to effectively capture latent topics and thus negatively affect accuracy. In this paper, we propose a Multi-Scale Dynamic Topic Model (MS-DTM) and
a complementary Incremental Multi-Scale Dynamic Topic
Model (IMS-DTM) inference method that can be used to capture latent topics and their dynamics simultaneously, at different scales. In this model, topic speciﬁc feature distributions
are generated based on a multi-scale feature distribution of
the previous epochs; moreover, multiple scales of the current
epoch are analyzed together through a novel multi-scale incremental Gibbs sampling technique. We show that the proposed model signiﬁcantly improves efﬁciency and effectiveness compared to the single scale dynamic DTMs and prior
models that consider only multiple scales of the past.







Figure 1: Topics and topic relationships discovered by the
proposed multi-scale dynamic topic model at different scales
over time (NIPS dataset)
     

     
$%! 

$#

  

  



#
!#


#

!

"

#

$#



        
   

#

"

    

$$& 
$#% 
$"$ 

!$

" 

#$

& 

! 

!$ 

" 

        
   

#$ 

    

Figure 2: Document- and epoch-level perplexities of different data as a function of the epoch size; different data have
different perplexity behaviors; for the NIPS data, the perepoch and per-document accuracies behave differently

Introduction
Web and social media data evolve over time reﬂecting events
and trending topics in the real world: a topic may last active
for a long time or may end abruptly after a short and intense
activity. Consequently, understanding the temporal scales of
these topics and leveraging this information for inference
can potentially help make better decisions and recommendations based on web data.
Recently, probabilistic models for discovering latent patterns in data have drawn signiﬁcant attention due to the attractiveness of the underlying theory and the practical effectiveness of the probabilistic approaches to data analysis
Topic models (TM) are a good example for the successful
application of probabilistic techniques for discovery of latent patterns, including in scientiﬁc analysis (Chang et al.
2009), image analysis (Wang and Mori 2009), and web social media data (Ahmed et al. 2011) analysis. The basic topic

model does not consider time; i.e., it assumes that the data
corpus is ﬁxed; therefore, dynamic topic models (DTMs) extend the idea by allowing the data corpus to evolve in epochs
and by chaining topics from consecutive epochs together to
track their evolution in time (Blei and Lafferty 2006). DTM
and its variations have been successfully applied in many domains with evolving data, including in the analysis of web
and social media data streams (Wang, Blei, and Heckerman
2008). Figure 1 shows an example set of topics extracted
from a scientiﬁc data stream.

Limitations of the DTM
We note that a major limitation of most existing DTM approaches is that they assume a predetermined and ﬁxed span
(or epoch) of topics, whereas an evolving document corpus
may contain topics of different temporal scales and, moreover, topics at one scale may impact the prediction of the
topics at another scale.
Difﬁculty of Picking an Epoch Size. One of the major chal-

∗

This work is partially funded by NSF grants #1610282,
#1633381, #1318788, #1339835 and also supported in part by the
NSF I/UCRC through the NSF grant #0856090.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5078

