The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

StarSpace: Embed All The Things!
Ledell Wu, Adam Fisch, Sumit Chopra, Keith Adams,
Antoine Bordes Jason Weston
Facebook AI Research

hence the “star” (“*”, meaning all types) and “space” in the
name, and in that common space compares them against
each other. It learns to rank a set of entities, documents or
objects given a query entity, document or object, where the
query is not necessarily of the same type as the items in the
set.
We evaluate the quality of our approach on six different
tasks, namely text classiﬁcation, link prediction in knowledge bases, document recommendation, article search, sentence matching and learning general sentence embeddings.
StarSpace is available as an open-source project at https:
//github.com/facebookresearch/Starspace.

Abstract
We present StarSpace, a general-purpose neural embedding
model that can solve a wide variety of problems: labeling
tasks such as text classiﬁcation, ranking tasks such as information retrieval/web search, collaborative ﬁltering-based
or content-based recommendation, embedding of multirelational graphs, and learning word, sentence or document
level embeddings. In each case the model works by embedding those entities comprised of discrete features and comparing them against each other – learning similarities dependent on the task. Empirical results on a number of tasks show
that StarSpace is highly competitive with existing methods,
whilst also being generally applicable to new cases where
those methods are not.

1

2

Related Work

Latent text representations, or embeddings, are vectorial representations of words or documents, traditionally learned in
an unsupervised way over large corpora. Work on neural
embeddings in this domain includes (Bengio et al. 2003),
(Collobert et al. 2011), word2vec (Mikolov et al. 2013) and
more recently fastText (Bojanowski et al. 2017). In our experiments we compare to word2vec and fastText as representative scalable models for unsupervised embeddings; we
also compare on the SentEval tasks (Conneau et al. 2017)
against a wide range of unsupervised models for sentence
embedding.
In the domain of supervised embeddings, SSI (Bai et al.
2009) and WSABIE (Weston, Bengio, and Usunier 2011)
are early approaches that showed promise in NLP and information retrieval tasks ((Weston et al. 2013), (Hermann et al.
2014)). Several more recent works including (Tang, Qin, and
Liu 2015), (Zhang and LeCun 2015), (Conneau et al. 2016),
TagSpace (Weston, Chopra, and Adams 2014) and fastText
(Joulin et al. 2016) have yielded good results on classiﬁcation tasks such as sentiment analysis or hashtag prediction.
In the domain of recommendation, embedding models
have had a large degree of success, starting from SVD
(Goldberg et al. 2001) and its improvements such as SVD++
(Koren and Bell 2015), as well as a host of other techniques, e.g. (Rendle 2010; Lawrence and Urtasun 2009;
Shi et al. 2012). Many of those methods have focused on
the collaborative ﬁltering setup where user IDs and movie
IDs have individual embeddings, such as in the Netﬂix challenge setup (see e.g., (Koren and Bell 2015), and so new
users or items cannot naturally be incorporated. We show

Introduction

We introduce StarSpace, a neural embedding model that is
general enough to solve a wide variety of problems:
• Text classiﬁcation, or other labeling tasks, e.g. sentiment
classiﬁcation.
• Ranking of sets of entities, e.g. ranking web documents
given a query.
• Collaborative ﬁltering-based recommendation, e.g. recommending documents, music or videos.
• Content-based recommendation where content is deﬁned
with discrete features, e.g. words of documents.
• Embedding graphs, e.g. multi-relational graphs such as
Freebase.
• Learning word, sentence or document embeddings.
StarSpace can be viewed as a straight-forward and efﬁcient strong baseline for any of these tasks. In experiments
it is shown to be on par with or outperforming several competing methods, whilst being generally applicable to cases
where many of those methods are not.
The method works by learning entity embeddings with
discrete feature representations from relations among collections of those entities directly for the task of ranking or classiﬁcation of interest. In the general case, StarSpace embeds
entities of different types into a vectorial embedding space,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5569

