The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Cross Temporal Recurrent Networks
for Ranking Question Answer Pairs
Yi Tay,1 Luu Anh Tuan,2 Siu Cheung Hui3
1,3

Nanyang Technological University
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Singapore
2
Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore

both automatically learning features and scoring of QA
pairs. Popular neural encoders for neural question answering include long short-term memory (LSTM) networks
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) and convolutional neural networks (CNN). The key idea behind neural encoders
is to learn to compose (Li et al. 2015), i.e., compressing an
entire sentence into a single feature vector.
While it is possible to encode questions and answers independently, and later merge them with multi-layer perceptrons (MLP) (Severyn and Moschitti 2015), tensor layers (Qiu and Huang 2015) or holographic layers (Tay et
al. 2017), it would be desirable for question and answer
pairs to beneﬁt from information available from their partner. There have been many models proposed for doing so
which adopt techniques for jointly learning question and answer representations. Many of these recent techniques adopt
soft-attention matching (Yang et al. 2016; Santos et al. 2016;
Zhang et al. 2017) to learn attention weights that are jointly
inﬂuenced by both question and answer. Subsequently, the
joint attention weights are applied accordingly to learn a ﬁnal representation of question and answer. Performance results have shown that incorporating the interactions between
QA pairs can indeed improve the performance of QA systems.
Temporal gates form the cornerstone of modern recurrent
neural encoders such as long short-term memory (LSTM) or
gated recurrent units (GRU), serving as one of the key mitigation strategies against vanishing gradients. In these models, temporal gates control the inner recursive loop along
with the amount of information being discarded and retained
at each time step, allowing ﬁne-grained control over the
semantic compositionality of learned representations. Our
work explores the idea of jointly learning temporal gates for
sequence pairs, aiming to learn ﬁne-grained representations
of QA pairs which beneﬁt from information pertaining to
what each other is remembering or forgetting.
The key idea here is as follows: By exploiting information
about the question, can we learn an optimal way to semantically compose the answer? (and vice versa). First, consider
the following example in Table 1 which highlights the importance of semantic compositionality.
First, it would be easy for many soft-attention and
matching-based models to classify this question and answer
pair with a high relevance score due to the underlined words

Abstract
Temporal gates play a signiﬁcant role in modern recurrentbased neural encoders, enabling ﬁne-grained control over recursive compositional operations over time. In recurrent models such as the long short-term memory (LSTM), temporal
gates control the amount of information retained or discarded
over time, not only playing an important role in inﬂuencing the learned representations but also serving as a protection against vanishing gradients. This paper explores the idea
of learning temporal gates for sequence pairs (question and
answer), jointly inﬂuencing the learned representations in a
pairwise manner. In our approach, temporal gates are learned
via 1D convolutional layers and then subsequently cross applied across question and answer for joint learning. Empirically, we show that this conceptually simple sharing of temporal gates can lead to competitive performance across multiple benchmarks. Intuitively, what our network achieves can
be interpreted as learning representations of question and answer pairs that are aware of what each other is remembering or forgetting, i.e., pairwise temporal gating. Via extensive experiments, we show that our proposed model achieves
state-of-the-art performance on two community-based QA
datasets and competitive performance on one factoid-based
QA dataset.

Introduction
Learning-to-rank for QA (question answering) is a long
standing problem in NLP and IR research which beneﬁts a
wide assortment of subtasks such as community-based question answering (CQA) and factoid based question answering. The problem is mainly concerned with computing relevance scores between questions and prospective answers
and subsequently ranking them. Across the rich history of
answer or document retrieval, statistical approaches based
on feature engineering are commonly adopted. These models are largely based on complex lexical and syntactic features (Wang and Manning 2010; Zhou et al. 2011; Wang,
Ming, and Chua 2009) and a learning-to-rank classiﬁer such
as Support Vector Machine (SVM) (Severyn et al. 2014;
Filice et al. 2016).
Today, we see a shift into neural question answering.
Speciﬁcally, end-to-end deep neural networks are used for
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5512

