The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Deep Learning for Case-Based Reasoning through Prototypes:
A Neural Network that Explains Its Predictions
Oscar Li,∗1 Hao Liu,∗3 Chaofan Chen,1 Cynthia Rudin1,2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA 27708
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA 27708
3
Kuang Yaming Honors School, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China, 210000
runliang.li@duke.edu, 141242059@smail.nju.edu.cn, {cfchen, cynthia}@cs.duke.edu
In this work, we create an architecture for deep learning
that explains its own reasoning process. The learned models
naturally come with explanations for each prediction, and
the explanations are loyal to what the network actually computes. As we will discuss shortly, creating the architecture
to encode its own explanations is in contrast with creating
explanations for previously trained black box models, and
aligns more closely with work on prototype classiﬁcation
and case-based reasoning.

Abstract
Deep neural networks are widely used for classiﬁcation.
These deep models often suffer from a lack of interpretability – they are particularly difﬁcult to understand because of
their non-linear nature. As a result, neural networks are often treated as “black box” models, and in the past, have been
trained purely to optimize the accuracy of predictions. In this
work, we create a novel network architecture for deep learning that naturally explains its own reasoning for each prediction. This architecture contains an autoencoder and a special
prototype layer, where each unit of that layer stores a weight
vector that resembles an encoded training input. The encoder
of the autoencoder allows us to do comparisons within the
latent space, while the decoder allows us to visualize the
learned prototypes. The training objective has four terms: an
accuracy term, a term that encourages every prototype to be
similar to at least one encoded input, a term that encourages
every encoded input to be close to at least one prototype, and
a term that encourages faithful reconstruction by the autoencoder. The distances computed in the prototype layer are used
as part of the classiﬁcation process. Since the prototypes are
learned during training, the learned network naturally comes
with explanations for each prediction, and the explanations
are loyal to what the network actually computes.

1

In the past, neural networks have often been designed
purely for accuracy, with posthoc interpretability analysis.
In this case, the network architecture was chosen ﬁrst, and
afterwards one aims to interpret the trained model or the
learned high-level features. To do the interpretability analysis requires a separate modeling effort. One problem with
generating explanations posthoc is that the explanations
themselves can change based on the model for the explanation. For instance, it may be easy to create multiple conﬂicting yet convincing explanations for how the network
would classify a single object, none of which are the correct reason for why the object was classiﬁed that way. A
related issue is that posthoc methods often create explanations that do not make sense to humans. This means that
extra modeling is needed to ensure that the explanations are
interpretable. This happens, for instance, in the Activation
Maximization (AM) approach, where one aims to ﬁnd an
input pattern that produces a maximum model response for
a quantity of interest to the user (Erhan et al. 2009). Since
the images from AM are not generally interpretable (they
tend to be gray), regularized optimization is used to ﬁnd an
interpretable high activation image (Hinton 2012; Lee et al.
2009; van den Oord, Kalchbrenner, and Kavukcuoglu 2016;
Nguyen et al. 2016). When we add regularization, however,
the result is a combination of what the network actually
computes and the extrinsic regularization. Given that the explanations themselves come from a separate modeling process with strong priors that are not part of training, we then
wonder how we can trust the explanations from the posthoc
analysis. In fact there is a growing literature discussing the
issues mentioned above for AM (Montavon, Samek, and
Müller 2017). For images, posthoc analysis often involves
visualization of layers of a neural network. For instance, an
alternative to AM was provided by Zeiler and Fergus (2014),
who use deconvolution as a technique to visualize what a

Introduction

As machine learning algorithms have gained importance for
important societal questions, interpretability (transparency)
has become a key issue for whether we can trust predictions
coming from these models. There have been cases where
incorrect data fed into black box models have gone unnoticed, leading to unfairly long prison sentences (e.g., prisoner Glen Rodriguez was denied parole due to an incorrect
COMPAS score, Wexler, 2017). In radiology, lack of transparency causes challenges to FDA approval for deep learning products. Because of these issues, “opening the black
box” of neural networks has become a debated issue in
the media (Citron 2016; Smith 2016; Angwin et al. 2016;
Westervelt 2017). Artiﬁcial neural networks are particularly
difﬁcult to understand because their highly nonlinear functions do not naturally lend to an explanation that humans are
able to process.
∗

Contributed equally
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3530

