The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Framework and Positive Results for IAR-Answering
Despoina Trivela

Giorgos Stoilos

Vasilis Vassalos

Athens University of
Economics and Business
Athens, Greece
despoina@aueb.gr

Babylon Health
London, SW3 3DD, UK

Athens University of
Economics and Business
Athens, Greece
vassalos@aueb.gr

the IAR semantics demonstrate nice computational properties as the problem over DL-Lite ontologies is in AC0 w.r.t.
data complexity, while when using the AR semantics it is
already coNP-complete.
Nevertheless, the problem of IAR-answering becomes intractable when considering more expressive DLs. More precisely, Rosati (2011) showed that IAR-answering for almost
all well-known DLs from EL⊥ to SHIQ is at least coNPhard w.r.t. data complexity (in some cases it is even harder
for ICAR- and AR-answering). This is to some extent surprising since query answering over consistent datasets is
known to be tractable for many DLs in that range like EL
and even Horn-SHIQ. To provide a positive result in terms
of tractable data complexity Rosati deﬁned EL⊥nr which
is currently the only positive tractability result for IARanswering over a DL different than DL-Lite.
In the current paper we study IAR-answering over DLbased ontologies attempting to shed light why the problem
is so difﬁcult and identify positive tractable results. First,
we provide a general algorithm for computing IAR-answers
over any given DL ontology. The algorithm is an extension of the one by Lembo et al. (2015) and obviously need
not terminate. However, if it terminates then the output is
a ﬁrst-order structure (a disjunctive datalog program extended with negative body atoms) which if evaluated over
the data it computes the IAR-answers. Second, using this
algorithm we are able to pinpoint the main reason for the
difﬁculty of IAR-answering and devise a sufﬁcient condition for its termination. Interestingly our condition is related to UCQ-rewritability a notion that has been studied
quite extensively (Artale et al. 2009; Bienvenu, Lutz, and
Wolter 2013; Hansen et al. 2015). More precisely, we can
already show that this condition is always satisﬁed by ontologies expressed in the DL semi-acyclic-EL⊥ (Bienvenu,
Lutz, and Wolter 2012) as well as in DL-Litebool (Artale
et al. 2009) providing what is, to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst tractability result for IAR-answering in a
DL that allows for disjunctions. Third, our condition reveals some deﬁciencies in the original deﬁnition of EL⊥nr
which we redeﬁne. Fourth, even for arbitrary DLs our condition may well be satisﬁed by a given ﬁxed ontology and
recent works provide practical means to check this for a
wide range of Horn-DLs (Bienvenu, Lutz, and Wolter 2013;
Bienvenu et al. 2014; Hansen et al. 2015). All in all, our

Abstract
Inconsistency-tolerant semantics, like the IAR semantics,
have been proposed as means to compute meaningful query
answers over inconsistent Description Logic (DL) ontologies. So far query answering under the IAR semantics (IARanswering) is known to be tractable only for arguably weak
DLs like DL-Lite and the quite restricted EL⊥nr fragment
of EL⊥ . Towards providing a systematic study of IARanswering, in the current paper we ﬁrst present a general
framework/algorithm for IAR-answering which applies to arbitrary DLs but need not terminate. Nevertheless, this framework allows us to develop a sufﬁcient condition for tractability of IAR-answering and hence of termination of our algorithm. We then show that this condition is always satisﬁed by
the arguably expressive DL DL-Litebool , providing the ﬁrst
positive result for IAR-answering over a non-Horn-DL. In
addition, recent results show that this condition usually holds
for real-world ontologies and techniques and algorithms for
checking it in practice have also been studied recently; thus,
overall our results are highly relevant in practice. Finally, we
have provided a prototype implementation and a preliminary
evaluation obtaining encouraging results.

Introduction
Answering queries over data described using Description
Logic (DL) ontologies has recently received signiﬁcant attention. In the vast majority of cases the problem has
been studied over consistent datasets (Calvanese et al.
2007; Pérez-Urbina, Motik, and Horrocks 2010; Kikot,
Kontchakov, and Zakharyaschev 2012; Trivela et al. 2015).
However, in real-world applications datasets may often be
inconsistent with respect to the axioms speciﬁed in the ontology because, e.g., they may originate from different sources
or generated automatically from an information extraction
module.
In order to be able to provide “meaningful” answers to
user queries even in the presence of inconsistencies the
so-called inconsistency-tolerant semantics have been proposed (Arenas, Bertossi, and Chomicki 1999; Bertossi 2006;
Lembo et al. 2011; Bienvenu and Rosati 2013). Examples
are the IAR, ICAR, and AR semantics (Lembo et al. 2011;
2010), which are based in the notion of repair, that is a maximal consistent subset of the original dataset. Among them
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1973

