The Twenty-Third AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium

Constraint Satisfaction Techniques
for Combinatorial Problems
David E. Narváez
Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences
Rochester Institute of Technology
Rochester, NY, USA 14623
den9562@rit.edu
understood, giving us a better benchmark to understand the
behavior of algorithms on a class of problems. This is supported by a number of results that have used combinatorial
problems to exemplify the limitations of well-known techniques in constraint satisfaction and theorem proving in general: Tseitin’s expander graphs (Urquhart 1987), Ramsey
formulas (Krishnamurthy and Moll 1981), and pigeon hole
formulas (Krajı́ček 2001) were used to provide hard cases
for resolution; while pebble games are used to study proof
complexity (Järvisalo et al. 2012) given the well-understood
structure of pebbling formulas.

Abstract
The last two decades have seen extraordinary advances in
industrial applications of constraint satisfaction techniques,
while combinatorial problems have been pushed to the sidelines. We propose a comprehensive analysis of the state of the
art in constraint satisfaction problems when applied to combinatorial problems in areas such as graph theory, set theory,
algebra, among others. We believe such a study will provide
us with a deeper understanding about the limitations we still
face in constraint satisfaction problems.

Introduction

Background and Deﬁnitions

In recent years, constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs) have
drawn much attention due to their applications to several areas of industrial research. This research focus has brought
a torrent of positive results in areas like SAT solvers, satisﬁability modulo theories, answer set programming, etc.
These results often rely on the fact that even though determining the satisﬁability of a constraint program is NP-hard,
many industrial applications exhibit constraints that computers are able to deal with easily. Benchmarks stemming from
these applications often showcase the advantages of the different techniques presented, and seldom are there references
to where these techniques perform poorly. Often times their
worst-case scenarios can be found in combinatorial problems which are more structured, have more symmetries and
encode deeper questions in discrete mathematics. These
problems fall conveniently outside the common deﬁnition
of what an industrial application is, and thus new techniques
are seldom analyzed for these problems. In this sense, the
fact that we have come a long way from determining the
satisﬁability problem is NP-complete to solving answer set
programs with thousands of variables can be reinterpreted as
a change of the yardstick used to measure advances.
Neglecting these combinatorial problems has a negative
effect not only in the study of discrete mathematics but in
our true understanding of constraint satisfaction. The lack
of a formal deﬁnition of what an industrial application of
CSP is makes it hard to understand exactly what distribution of CSPs arises from these. In the case of combinatorial problems, their deﬁnition and structure is much better

In its more general form, constraint satisfaction problems
(CSPs) consist of a set of variables X each taking values in
a domain D and a set of constraints C involving variables
in X and operations over these variables. For instance, in
Boolean satisﬁability problems the domain D takes the form
of {⊥, } and the constraints are expressed over the operations ∧, ∨, ¬. In the case of integer linear programs (ILP),
the domain of the variables is the set of integers, and the
constraints are inequalities over the operations of addition
and multiplication.
Many problems can be modeled as CSPs, where different encodings offer different advantages and nuisances. The
types of problems for which CSPs have been applicable can
be roughly divided into two categories: industrial applications and abstract applications. While no formal deﬁnition
of these has been given in the literature, one can informally
deﬁne industrial applications as those arising from practical applications like circuit design and hardware checking, whereas abstract applications correspond to CSPs arising from problems in discrete mathematics. The work by
Ansótegui et. al (Ansótegui, Bonet, and Levy 2009) shows
a structural characterization of industrial SAT instances by
looking at the bi-partite graph representing the relationships
between clauses and variables.

Preliminary Result on Boolean Formulas
Since my goal is to study the applications of state-of-the-art
techniques in CSPs to combinatorial problems, it is natural
to start by looking at the SAT problem and its variations.
Within this domain, my strategy is to understand what are

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8028

