The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Proper Loss Functions for Nonlinear Hawkes Processes
Aditya Krishna Menon

Young Lee∗

Data61 and the Australian National University
aditya.menon@data61.csiro.au

National University of Singapore
dcsleey@nus.edu.sg

Hardiman, Bercot, and Bouchaud 2013), and social media
(Crane and Sornette 2008; Zhou, Zha, and Song 2013).
Given historical data of event times, the standard way to
ﬁt a Hawkes process is to maximise its log-likelihood (Ozaki
1979). This approach is appealing owing to its conceptual
simplicity; however, for a generic nonlinear Hawkes process
(deﬁned formally in the next section), the resulting objective
may be non-convex. Further, even for linear Hawkes processes, optimisation of the likelihood requires an involved
iterative optimisation. This raises a natural question: how
might we design other losses for training Hawkes processes
that have favourable properties compared to the likelihood?
In this paper, we provide a framework to design loss functions for (non-)linear Hawkes processes. Speciﬁcally, given
a particular choice of nonlinearity, we provide loss function
that is suitable for estimating the parameters of the corresponding nonlinear Hawkes process, and which is further
convex given a particular structure on the kernel. We study
three concrete instantiations of this framework:

Abstract
Temporal point processes are a statistical framework for modelling the times at which events of interest occur. The Hawkes
process is a well-studied instance of this framework that captures self-exciting behaviour, wherein the occurrence of one
event increases the likelihood of future events. Such processes have been successfully applied to model phenomena
ranging from earthquakes to behaviour in a social network.
We propose a framework to design new loss functions to train
linear and nonlinear Hawkes processes. This captures standard maximum likelihood as a special case, but allows for
other losses that guarantee convex objective functions (for
certain types of kernel), and admit simpler optimisation.
We illustrate these points with three concrete examples: for
linear Hawkes processes, we provide a least-squares style loss
potentially admitting closed-form optimisation; for exponential Hawkes processes, we reduce training to a weighted logistic regression; and for sigmoidal Hawkes processes, we propose an asymmetric form of logistic regression.

(a) for linear Hawkes processes, we propose a loss with a
potential closed-form solution; to our knowledge, the
only extant closed-form solution for Hawkes processes
arises in EM training (Lewis and Mohler 2011).

Introduction
Temporal point processes are a classical statistical framework for modelling the times at which certain events of
interest occur, such as failure times of a hard drive or
the impact times of an earthquake (Cox and Isham 1980;
Daley and Vere-Jones 2003). The simplest incarnation of
these models is the Poisson process, which assumes the
times between successive events are independent, and the
number of events occurring in a time window follows a suitable Poisson distribution (Kingman 1993). Such models are
a core tool in queuing theory (Erlang 1909; Kendall 1953).
Despite their versatility, Poisson processes have an important limitation: they are incapable of modelling selfexcitation, wherein the occurrence of one event increases
the likelihood of further events. This characteristic is present
in many real-world phenomena, such as the occurrence of
an earthquake triggering an aftershock. The Hawkes process
(Hawkes 1971; Laub, Taimre, and Pollett 2015) is an important extension of the classical Poisson process to allow for
such “burstiness”. The model has been applied in ﬁelds ranging from seismology (Ogata 1988), ﬁnance (Bowsher 2007;

(b) for exponential Hawkes processes1 , we establish the
suitability of the logistic loss, which allows us to reduce
training to a logistic regression problem.
(c) for sigmoidal Hawkes processes, we show the viability
of a modiﬁed logistic regression objective, which provides a convex objective for training.
At a technical level, our proposal rests upon three simple
observations: (1) the Hawkes likelihood can be interpreted
as a binary classiﬁcation objective; (2) the asymptotic optimiser of the likelihood is a scaled density estimate; and (3)
the broader family of proper losses (Buja, Stuetzle, and Shen
2005) retains this optimal solution, and thus also the fundamental target of interest. While these observations are conceptually simple, the explication of their connections for ﬁtting Hawkes processes is to our knowledge novel, and their
implications we believe of interest.

∗ Work conducted while at Data61.

1 The term “exponential Hawkes” is sometimes used to mean a

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

linear Hawkes process with exponential kernel. We use the term to
mean a Hawkes process with exponential link, but arbitrary kernel.

3804

