The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Geometric Relationship between
Word and Context Representations
Jiangtao Feng, Xiaoqing Zheng
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
{fengjt16, zhengxq}@fudan.edu.cn

In this paper, we study the nature of word representation
learning algorithms under a general framework, and ﬁnd out
that the learned representation of a target word belongs to
the conic hull formed by the representations of its contexts,
which means that the directions of word representations are
strongly correlated with context representations while their
magnitudes are relatively neglected. Such observation can
give an explanation on why word similarity measured by
cosine similarity usually achieves signiﬁcantly higher correlation with gold standard than that measured by Euclidean
distance-based similarity measures. Inspired by this observation, we explore the feasibility to learn the word vectors
whose directions and magnitudes are both taken into account
by combining a hierarchical Gaussian model with maximum a posteriori estimation (MAP). The proposed model
is also extended to represent a polysemous word under a
speciﬁc context approximately by moving a word representation closer to the representation of the given context. Finally, our approaches were validated on several NLP tasks,
and achieved promising results. Especially in word similarity tasks, our results showed strong improvements using Euclidean distance-based similarity measure.

Abstract
Pre-trained distributed word representations have been
proven to be useful in various natural language processing
(NLP) tasks. However, the geometric basis of word representations and their relations to the representations of word’s
contexts has not been carefully studied yet. In this study, we
ﬁrst investigate such geometric relationship under a general
framework, which is abstracted from some typical word representation learning approaches, and ﬁnd out that only the
directions of word representations are well associated to their
context vector representations while the magnitudes are not.
In order to make better use of the information contained in
the magnitudes of word representations, we propose a hierarchical Gaussian model combined with maximum a posteriori estimation to learn word representations, and extend it to
represent polysemous words. Our word representations have
been evaluated on multiple NLP tasks, and the experimental
results show that the proposed model achieved promising results, comparing to several popular word representations.

Introduction
Much research has been devoted to distributed word representation learning, such as (Bengio et al. 2003), (Mikolov
et al. 2013a), (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014). In
these approaches, words are mapped to dense vectors in
a low-dimensional latent embedded space, and these word
vectors keep meaningful linguistic characteristics that words
sharing similar meanings aggregate together whereas dissimilar words repel each other. Many empirical results show
that such pre-trained word representations can enhance the
supervised models on a variety of NLP tasks (Collobert et al.
2011; Socher et al. 2011). One of the possible explanation
why such semi-supervised systems work is that pre-trained
word representations act as a regularizer by constraining
parts of the parameters in an appropriate region, which leads
to better generalization (Erhan et al. 2010).
Word representation learning algorithms often follow
Harris’s distributed hypothesis that word meanings are determined by their contexts (Harris 1954). However, the relationship between the learned word and context representations has not been carefully studied in mathematics or geometry yet.

Background & Notation
Word representation learning algorithms are usually designed to predict the central word wi in a given context
c = {w0 , ..., wi−1 , wi+1 , ..., wl }, c ∈ C, where l is the range
of a context, and C is the context vocabulary. The word vocabulary V is usually associated with two different look-up
tables F, G ∈ Rd×|V| , where d is the dimensionality of the
embedded vector space, and |V| is the vocabulary size, in
order to transform a word w to its vector representations
(uw , vw ∈ Rd ) respectively. The ﬁrst vector (uw = fF (w))
represents a context word, and is used to generate a dense
context representation uc ∈ Rd , i.e.,
uc = fM (c)
= fM ({uw0 , ..., uwi−1 , uwi+1 , ..., uwl })

(1)

where M denotes the parameters of the context model fM .
The second vector (vw = fG (w)) represents the target word,
and is used to compute the similarity u
c vw between a word
w and a context c, which is further used to estimate the likelihood of the word w occurring in the given context c, namely

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5102

