The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Adversarial Network Embedding
1

Quanyu Dai,1 Qiang Li,1,2 Jian Tang,3,4 Dan Wang1

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
2
School of Software, FEIT, The University of Technology Sydney, Australia
3
HEC Montreal, Canada
4
Montreal Institute for Learning Algorithms, Canada
csqydai@comp.polyu.edu.hk, leetsiang.cloud@gmail.com, tangjianpku@gmail.com, csdwang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Learning low-dimensional representations of networks has
proved effective in a variety of tasks such as node classiﬁcation, link prediction and network visualization. Existing
methods can effectively encode different structural properties into the representations, such as neighborhood connectivity patterns, global structural role similarities and other highorder proximities. However, except for objectives to capture
network structural properties, most of them suffer from lack
of additional constraints for enhancing the robustness of representations. In this paper, we aim to exploit the strengths of
generative adversarial networks in capturing latent features,
and investigate its contribution in learning stable and robust
graph representations. Speciﬁcally, we propose an Adversarial Network Embedding (ANE) framework, which leverages
the adversarial learning principle to regularize the representation learning. It consists of two components, i.e., a structure preserving component and an adversarial learning component. The former component aims to capture network structural properties, while the latter contributes to learning robust representations by matching the posterior distribution of
the latent representations to given priors. As shown by the
empirical results, our method is competitive with or superior
to state-of-the-art approaches on benchmark network embedding tasks. The source code will be available online.

2

2

1

1

0

0

-1

-1
-2

0

2

4

6

(a) IDW.

8

10

12

-2

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

(b) AIDW.

Figure 1: Visualization of two dimensional representations
of Zachary’s Karate network (Zachary 1977) from Inductive DeepWalk (IDW) and Adversarial Inductive DeepWalk
(AIDW). Different colors represent different communities
detected by modularity-based clustering. As shown by the
ﬁgure, AIDW can better capture community structure information, demonstrating that adversarial learning contributes
to learning more meaningful and robust representations.

In recent years, many methods for network embedding have been proposed, such as DeepWalk (Perozzi, AlRfou, and Skiena 2014), LINE (Tang et al. 2015) and
node2vec (Grover and Leskovec 2016). They aim to capture various connectivity patterns in network during representation learning. These patterns include relations of local
neighborhood connectivity, ﬁrst and second order proximities, global structural role similarities (i.e. structural equivalence), and other high-order proximities. As demonstrated
in the literature, network embedding methods were shown to
be more effective in many network analysis tasks than some
classical approaches, such as Common Neighbors (LibenNowell and Kleinberg 2007) and Spectral Clustering (Tang
and Liu 2011).
Though existing methods are effective in structure preserving with different carefully designed objectives, they
suffer from lack of additional constraints for enhancing the
robustness of the learned representations. When processing
noisy network data, which is very common in real-world
applications, these unsupervised network embedding techniques can easily result in poor representations. Thus, it is
critical to consider some amount of uncertainty in the process of representation learning. One famous technique for
robust representation learning in unsupervised manner is de-

Introduction
Graph is a natural way of organizing data objects with
complicated relationships, and encodes rich information of
nodes in the graph. For example, paper citation networks
capture the information of innovation ﬂow, and can reﬂect topic relatedness between papers. To analyze graphs,
an efﬁcient and effective way is to learn low-dimensional
representations for nodes in the graph, i.e., node embedding (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014; Tang et al. 2015;
Cao, Lu, and Xu 2015). The learned representations should
encode meaningful semantic, relational and structural information, so that they can be used as features for downstream
tasks such as network visualization, link prediction and node
classiﬁcation. Network embedding is a challenging research
problem because of the high-dimensionality, sparsity and
non-linearity of the graph data.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2167

