The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Context Aware Conversational Understanding
for Intelligent Agents with a Screen
Vishal Ishwar Naik,∗1 Angeliki Metallinou,2 Rahul Goel,2
1

Arizona State University, 2 Amazon Alexa Machine Learning
vnaik1@asu.edu, {ametalli, goerahul }@amazon.com

items on screen etc. We describe the system design and spoken language understanding (SLU) methodologies that enable screen integration functionality, where the user can act
on screen objects using voice commands. We propose joint
modeling of text and screen context in a single SLU model
trained to optimize end to end semantic accuracy of the spoken request. We show that our model is able to learn the
desired behavior directly from contextual training instances
and outperforms an alternative system with hand engineered
context rules. While there is some relevant multimodal work
on combining text with speech emphasis features for conversational understanding (Ning et al. 2017) and on using gaze
and linguistic information for coreference resolution (Iida,
Yasuhara, and Tokunaga 2011), to our knowledge there is
no prior work on developing a multimodal conversational
system for screen integration.
In summary, the main contributions of this work are:

Abstract
We describe an intelligent context-aware conversational system that incorporates screen context information to service
multimodal user requests. Screen content is used for disambiguation of utterances that refer to screen objects and for
enabling the user to act upon screen objects using voice commands. We propose a deep learning architecture that jointly
models the user utterance and the screen and incorporates detailed screen content features. Our model is trained to optimize end to end semantic accuracy across contextual and
non-contextual functionality, therefore learns the desired behavior directly from the data. We show that this approach
outperforms a rule-based alternative, and can be extended in
a straightforward manner to new contextual use cases. We
perform detailed evaluation of contextual and non-contextual
use cases and show that our system displays accurate contextual behavior without degrading the performance of noncontextual user requests.

1

• We describe the design of a context aware virtual agent
that allows understanding and executing multimodal user
requests. We use a ﬂexible representation of the semantic content of the user’s request and corresponding screen
content cues that cover a wide range of visual use cases.
• We propose deep learning architectures that jointly model
the input user utterance and the screen information and
are trained to optimize end to end semantic accuracy. We
show that our models can learn from data the desired behavior and can outperform a hand engineered rule-based
system for screen integration.
• We perform detailed analysis of our system for contextual
and non-contextual use cases to ensure improvement in
the former without degradation in the latter, and discuss
the effect of different types of screen features.

Introduction

Voice powered personal assistants like Amazon Alexa,
Google Now and Apple Siri have become powerful among
consumers as they enable intuitive user-interfaces that resemble human communication. Natural human interaction
is to a large extend contextual, where interlocutors’ successful communication often depends on a shared understanding
of their environment, that inﬂuences the semantics of the dialog. For example, interlocutors may refer to or act upon
objects or imply shared knowledge. Building intelligent assistants that feel and act natural requires enriching conversational understanding systems with the ability to incorporate
context while processing a spoken user request.
Here we focus on screen content as the shared environment context for intelligent devices with access to a screen.
Our goal is to enable multimodal functionality where screen
content is used to interpret and disambiguate the user’s intention and the objects they are referring to. For example,
a request like ‘select harry potter’ may refer to a book
or a movie, and the screen content can be used for disambiguation. ‘play the ﬁrst one’ is a similarly ambiguous
anaphoric request that could refer to music, movies, news

2

Related Work

Deep learning advances on Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) and Long Short Term Memory networks (LSTMs)
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), (Gers, Schraudolph,
and Schmidhuber 2002), and the availability of fast GPU
computing resources, have made such deep learning methods state of the art for many natural language processing tasks (NLP), such as sequence tagging (Chung et al.
2014), (Ma and Hovy 2016), sequence to sequence modeling (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014), and sentence classi-

∗

Work done during an internship at Amazon Alexa
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5325

