The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Rational Inference Patterns Based on Conditional Logic
Christian Eichhorn, Gabriele Kern-Isberner

Marco Ragni

Chair 1 of Computer Science
TU Dortmund University, Dortmund, Germany
christian.eichhorn@tu-dortmund.de
gabriele.kern-isberner@cs.tu-dortmund.de

Cognitive Computation Lab
University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
ragni@informatik.uni-freiburg.de

presented with the “right” stimulus material. In the discussion of the results, these studies usually analyze the usage
of each inference rule by the majority of the participants,
separately.
In this paper, we consider the application or neglect of
the our rules as an inference pattern. These patterns constitute a descriptive model that can explain the answers of
an agent in solving conditional inference problems. With
these inference patterns we propose a formal model for the
studies on the assumption that the majority of the participants in these studies answered in a rational fashion. In this,
the test cases for this formal basis are inference studies regarding human reasoning about a rule, rather than the participants of the studies themselves. Our proposed model is
based upon conditional logic, that is, it is substantially different from classical as well as probabilistic logic, but combines interesting aspects of both. We assess the rationality
of an inference pattern and by this the rationality of the inferences drawn based on the plausibility semantics of Ordinal Conditional Functions (OCF) (Spohn 1988). This shifts
the assessment of rationality from rigidly following logical
inference rules to satisﬁability of plausibility constraints in
semi-quantitative plausibility models situated between classical logic and probabilities.
For rational inference patterns, we use the inductive approach of c-representations (Kern-Isberner 2001) to algorithmically reverse engineer a conditional knowledge base
to which the OCF that satisﬁes the inference pattern is admissible. In this way we ensure that these knowledge bases
yield ranking models that are compatible with the inference
patterns. We furthermore argue that this means that since
each inductive ranking model of the knowledge base brings
forth the inferences drawn in the study, the knowledge bases
are hypotheses for the formalization of suitable background
knowledge the participants may have activated when giving
their answers in the studies. This means that the inductively
generated knowledge bases serve as explanatory conditional
models for the results of the considered inference study.
The paper is organized as follows: In the next section we
recall relevant psychological ﬁndings regarding human conditional reasoning, from which two studies are to be used as
running examples to illustrate the approach throughout the
rest of the paper. We brieﬂy deﬁne the formal preliminaries and notations necessary for the paper in Section 3. This

Abstract
Conditional information is an integral part of representation and inference processes of causal relationships, temporal events, and even the deliberation about impossible scenarios of cognitive agents. For formalizing these inferences, a
proper formal representation is needed. Psychological studies
indicate that classical, monotonic logic is not the approriate
model for capturing human reasoning: There are cases where
the participants systematically deviate from classically valid
answers, while in other cases they even endorse logically invalid ones. Many analyses covered the independent analysis
of individual inference rules applied by human reasoners. In
this paper we deﬁne inference patterns as a formalization of
the joint usage or avoidance of these rules. Considering patterns instead of single inferences opens the way for categorizing inference studies with regard to their qualitative results.
We apply plausibility relations which provide basic formal
models for many theories of conditionals, nonmonotonic reasoning, and belief revision to asses the rationality of the patterns and thus the individual inferences drawn in the study.
By this replacement of classical logic with formalisms most
suitable for conditionals, we shift the basis of judging rationality from compatibility with classical entailment to consistency in a logic of conditionals. Using inductive reasoning
on the plausibility relations we reverse engineer conditional
knowledge bases as explanatory model for and formalization
of the background knowledge of the participants. In this way
the conditional knowledge bases derived from the inference
patterns provide an explanation for the outcome of the study
that generated the inference pattern.

1

Introduction

For a conditional statement “If A then B” and a respective
fact, four inference patterns can be deﬁned (not all are logically valid though): Modus Ponens, that from the statement
and A it follows that B, and Modus Tollens, that from the
statement and ¬B it follows that ¬A, and the classically invalid rules Afﬁrmation of the Consequent, stating that from
the statement and B it follows that A and, ﬁnally, Denial
of the Antecedent, stating that from the statement and ¬A it
follows that ¬B. Established and accepted studies show that
all these inferences are indeed drawn by human reasoners, if
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1827

