The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Dual-Reference Face Retrieval
BingZhang Hu,1 Feng Zheng,2 Ling Shao 3,1
1

2

School of Computing Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA
3
JD Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research (JDAIR), Beijing, China
bingzhang.hu@uea.ac.uk, feng.zheng@pitt.edu, ling.shao@ieee.org

Considering such a task – retrieving Emma Watson’s image at 23, although it is not absolutely impossible to be
solved by the conventional face retrieval frameworks, for example, one can achieve it by concatenating an age estimation
system at the end of the traditional face retrieval system to
select the right images as illustrated in Figure. 1.(a), there
exist many drawbacks in such a hierarchical framework. One
of them is that using a single numeral is not capable to describe the human perceptions of the age, because the human
performance on age estimation is with a large mean absolute error(MAE) as well as a large variance (Han, Otto, and
Jain 2013), which means generally a human prefers to guess
the age within a range rather than a certain numeral. Also,
for humans, it is easier to estimate someones’ age by comparing with age-known faces than directly assigning a facial
image to a numeral(Chang, Chen, and Hung 2011).
As the old saying goes, ‘One look is worth a thousand
words’, the problem of retrieving Emma Watson’s images is
better solved by inputting one Emma Watson’s picture and
telling the machine: retrieving the images of the one shown
in the input. Since a numeral is not representative enough to
describe a person’s age, and in some scenarios, we do not
even care about the certain age but the similarities in term
of the age, what if we use an image to represent the target
age? In this paper, we propose a novel face retrieval framework as shown in Figure. 1.(b), in which an age reference
image besides the identity reference image is inputted to reﬂect the target age . We refer to the proposed framework
as dual-reference face retrieval (DRFR). In the DRFR, the
problem of retrieving Emma Watson’s image at 23 is turned
into retrieving the images of the one shown in the ﬁrst input,
and in the similar age reﬂected in the second input.
In DRFR, the raw images are ﬁrst projected onto a joint
manifold, which preserves both the age and identity locality. Subsequently, as the age and identity are supposed to
be measured differently on the joint manifold, a similarity
metric for each is exploited and optimized via our proposed
quartet-based model shown in Figure. 3. The ﬁnal retrieval
is conducted on the learned metric.
The contributions of this paper mainly lie in the following
three aspects:

Abstract
Face retrieval has received much attention over the past few
decades, and many efforts have been made in retrieving face
images against pose, illumination, and expression variations.
However, the conventional works fail to meet the requirements of a potential and novel task — retrieving a person’s
face image at a speciﬁc age, especially when the speciﬁc ‘age’
is not given as a numeral, i.e. ‘retrieving someone’s image at
the similar age period shown by another person’s image’. To
tackle this problem, we propose a dual reference face retrieval
framework in this paper, where the system takes two inputs:
an identity reference image which indicates the target identity
and an age reference image which reﬂects the target age. In
our framework, the raw images are ﬁrst projected on a joint
manifold, which preserves both the age and identity locality.
Then two similarity metrics of age and identity are exploited
and optimized by utilizing our proposed quartet-based model.
The experiments show promising results, outperforming hierarchical methods.

Introduction
Over the past few decades, face retrieval has received great
interest in the research community for its potential applications such as ﬁnding missing persons (Jain, Klare, and
Park 2012) and matching criminals with CCTV footage
for law enforcement (Tang and Wang 2002). Apart from a
pinch of face retrieval works (Bhattacharjee et al. 2011) that
are text-based, most existing frameworks (Luo et al. 2016;
Lin, Li, and Tang 2017) are based on the content, in which a
target person’s image is required as the query input, and the
system retrieves all the images belong to the target person
in the database. Though these works in some kind improved
the benchmark in the past, they fail to catch up with the pace
of the new demands of the face retrieval in the age of big
data. For example, rather than retrieving all the query identity’s images indiscriminately, we may prefer picking out the
speciﬁc ones with some certain attribute, e.g. age. The huge
volume of online images makes this kind of ﬁne-grained
face retrieval both feasible and indispensable. It is feasible
as such large-scale dataset can contain many images taken
from someone’s different age periods, thereby it is necessary
to select them out in some potential applications.

1) The task: retrieving someone’s image at some age is an
emerging task as more and more precise retrieval is required due to the explosive web images.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6918

