The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

DiSAN: Directional Self-Attention Network for
RNN/CNN-Free Language Understanding
Tao Shen,† Jing Jiang,† Tianyi Zhou,‡ Shirui Pan,† Guodong Long,† Chengqi Zhang†
†Centre of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, FEIT, University of Technology Sydney
‡Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
tao.shen@student.uts.edu.au, tianyizh@uw.edu
{guodong.long, jing.jiang, shirui.pan, chengqi.zhang}@uts.edu.au

performance on a large number of NLP tasks, including neural machine translation (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015;
Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015), natural language inference (Liu et al. 2016), conversation generation (Shang, Lu,
and Li 2015), question answering (Hermann et al. 2015;
Sukhbaatar et al. 2015), machine reading comprehension
(Seo et al. 2017), and sentiment analysis (Kokkinos and
Potamianos 2017). The attention uses a hidden layer to compute a categorical distribution over elements from the input sequence to reﬂect their importance weights. It allows
RNN/CNN to maintain a variable-length memory, so that
elements from the input sequence can be selected by their
importance/relevance and merged into the output. In contrast to RNN and CNN, the attention mechanism is trained
to capture the dependencies that make signiﬁcant contributions to the task, regardless of the distance between the elements in the sequence. It can thus provide complementary
information to the distance-aware dependencies modeled by
RNN/CNN. In addition, computing attention only requires
matrix multiplication, which is highly parallelizable compared to the sequential computation of RNN.
In a very recent work (Vaswani et al. 2017), an attention mechanism is solely used to construct a sequence to
sequence (seq2seq) model that achieves a state-of-the-art
quality score on the neural machine translation (NMT) task.
The seq2seq model, “Transformer”, has an encoder-decoder
structure that is only composed of stacked attention networks, without using either recurrence or convolution. The
proposed attention, “multi-head attention”, projects the input sequence to multiple subspaces, then applies scaled dotproduct attention to its representation in each subspace,
and lastly concatenates their output. By doing this, it can
combine different attentions from multiple subspaces. This
mechanism is used in Transformer to compute both the
context-aware features inside the encoder/decoder and the
bottleneck features between them.
The attention mechanism has more ﬂexibility in sequence
length than RNN/CNN, and is more task/data-driven when
modeling dependencies. Unlike sequential models, its computation can be easily and signiﬁcantly accelerated by existing distributed/parallel computing schemes. However, to the
best of our knowledge, a neural net entirely based on attention has not been designed for other NLP tasks except NMT,
especially those that cannot be cast into a seq2seq problem.

Abstract
Recurrent neural nets (RNN) and convolutional neural nets
(CNN) are widely used on NLP tasks to capture the long-term
and local dependencies, respectively. Attention mechanisms
have recently attracted enormous interest due to their highly
parallelizable computation, signiﬁcantly less training time,
and ﬂexibility in modeling dependencies. We propose a novel
attention mechanism in which the attention between elements
from input sequence(s) is directional and multi-dimensional
(i.e., feature-wise). A light-weight neural net, “Directional
Self-Attention Network (DiSAN)”, is then proposed to learn
sentence embedding, based solely on the proposed attention
without any RNN/CNN structure. DiSAN is only composed
of a directional self-attention with temporal order encoded,
followed by a multi-dimensional attention that compresses
the sequence into a vector representation. Despite its simple
form, DiSAN outperforms complicated RNN models on both
prediction quality and time efﬁciency. It achieves the best
test accuracy among all sentence encoding methods and improves the most recent best result by 1.02% on the Stanford
Natural Language Inference (SNLI) dataset, and shows stateof-the-art test accuracy on the Stanford Sentiment Treebank
(SST), Multi-Genre natural language inference (MultiNLI),
Sentences Involving Compositional Knowledge (SICK), Customer Review, MPQA, TREC question-type classiﬁcation
and Subjectivity (SUBJ) datasets.

1

Introduction

Context dependency plays a signiﬁcant role in language
understanding and provides critical information to natural
language processing (NLP) tasks. For different tasks and
data, researchers often switch between two types of deep
neural network (DNN): recurrent neural network (RNN)
with sequential architecture capturing long-range dependencies (e.g., long short-term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997) and gated recurrent unit (GRU) (Chung
et al. 2014)), and convolutional neural network (CNN) (Kim
2014) whose hierarchical structure is good at extracting local or position-invariant features. However, which network
to choose in practice is an open question, and the choice relies largely on the empirical knowledge.
Recent works have found that equipping RNN or CNN
with an attention mechanism can achieve state-of-the-art
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5446

