The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Synthesis of Programs from Multimodal Datasets
Shantanu Thakoor∗

Simoni Shah

Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
thakoor@cs.stanford.edu

IIT Bombay
Mumbai, 400076, India
simonisamirshah@gmail.com

Ganesh Ramakrishnan

Amitabha Sanyal

IIT Bombay
Mumbai, 400076, India
ganesh@cse.iitb.ac.in

IIT Bombay
Mumbai, 400076, India
tas@cse.iitb.ac.in
extreme case is that of an inherently confused dataset (i.e.
confused with respect to any P ) where two examples with
the same input are mapped to different outputs. For example, consider the machine translation domain, where a sentence may be translated in more than one way. Given a multimodal and confused dataset, we wish to synthesize a set
of programs that satisﬁes each example in the dataset as accurately as possible. Additionally, we would like the set of
programs to be as simple as possible (Blumer et al. 1987;
Ellis, Solar-Lezama, and Tenenbaum 2015; 2016), in order to minimize the uncertainty of its applicability on test
data; that is, to ensure that the predictive capability of the
program set generalizes well on the test data. Applications
for such synthesis include: (i) Semi-automating repetitive
data transformations using examples (Gulwani 2011; Raza,
Gulwani, and Milic-Frayling 2014; Le and Gulwani 2014;
Barowy et al. 2015; Kini and Gulwani 2015) (obtained
through logs represented as XML). (ii) The more general
problem of Data Wrangling1 (Gulwani 2016), which is the
process of transforming the data from a somewhat unstructured format to a visually appealing and structured format
that is more suitable for analysis (iii) Word preordering for
machine translation (Bisazza and Federico 2016).
Approaches to PBE vary with the nature of the example
dataset. In the case of a dataset and program space, such that
there exists at least one program that satisﬁes all examples
in the dataset, the synthesis algorithm searches the program
space for the (set of) such programs and ranks them based
on some criteria. The reader may refer to (Kitzelmann 2011;
Gulwani 2016) for some of the recent efforts in this direction. In another case, the dataset may have some outliers
(noise), and the synthesis algorithm must disregard such
points, after detecting them, while assuming that a single
best program satisﬁes all the other (non-noise) examples.
A recent work (Raychev et al. 2016), addresses the problem of supervised learning of programs from noisy datasets,
by detecting outliers. Their approach involves the use of an
iterative feedback mechanism between a program generator and a noise-eliminator. On the other hand, (Ellis, SolarLezama, and Tenenbaum 2016) present unsupervised learning of programs from noisy observations based on ﬁnd-

Abstract
We describe MultiSynth, a framework for synthesizing
domain-speciﬁc programs from a multimodal dataset of examples. Given a domain-speciﬁc language (DSL), a dataset
is multimodal if there is no single program in the DSL that
generalizes over all the examples. Further, even if the examples in the dataset were generalized in terms of a set of
programs, the domains of these programs may not be disjoint, thereby leading to ambiguity in synthesis. MultiSynth is
a framework that incorporates concepts of synthesizing programs with minimum generality, while addressing the need
of accurate prediction. We show how these can be achieved
through (i) transformation driven partitioning of the dataset,
(ii) least general generalization, for a generalized speciﬁcation of the input and the output, and (iii) learning to rank,
for estimating feature weights in order to map an input to the
most appropriate mode in case of ambiguity. We show the effectiveness of our framework in two domains: in the ﬁrst case,
we extend an existing approach for synthesizing programs for
XML tree transformations to ambiguous multimodal datasets.
In the second case, MultiSynth is used to preorder words for
machine translation, by learning permutations of productions
in the parse trees of the source side sentences. Our evaluations
reﬂect the effectiveness of our approach.

1

Introduction and Related Work

Programming by Example (PBE) has been a widely studied research area with applications in program synthesis in
general, and domain-speciﬁc program synthesis in particular. Given a dataset of input-output pairs (or examples), we
say that a program P in some program space P covers the
example e = (i, o) if P predicts some output for the input i.
On the other hand, we say that P satisﬁes the example e, if
P correctly predicts its output o on input i. The dataset is
multimodal with respect to P if there is no single program
in P that satisﬁes all the examples, else it is unimodal. On
the other hand, the dataset is confused with respect to P if
there does not exist a subset of programs from P such that
each example of the dataset is satisﬁed by every program
that covers it, and is covered by at least one program. An
∗ Work done while at IIT Bombay

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1 Supposedly takes up 80% of the time of data scientists

184

