The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Predicting Aesthetic Score Distribution
through Cumulative Jensen-Shannon Divergence
1

Xin Jin,1 Le Wu,1 Xiaodong Li,1 Siyu Chen,1 Siwei Peng,3
Jingying Chi,3 Shiming Ge,4,∗ Chenggen Song,2 Geng Zhao1
Department of Computer Sci. and Tech., Beijing Electronic Science and Technology Institute, Beijing, 100070, China
2
Department of Info. Sec., Beijing Electronic Science and Technology Institute, Beijing, 100070, China
3
College of Info. Sci. and Tech., Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China
4
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100093, China
∗Corresponding author email: geshiming@iie.ac.cn
Abstract

PHDQ

Aesthetic quality prediction is a challenging task in the computer vision community because of the complex interplay
with semantic contents and photographic technologies. Recent studies on the powerful deep learning based aesthetic
quality assessment usually use a binary high-low label or a
numerical score to represent the aesthetic quality. However
the scalar representation cannot describe well the underlying
varieties of the human perception of aesthetics. In this work,
we propose to predict the aesthetic score distribution (i.e., a
score distribution vector of the ordinal basic human ratings)
using Deep Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN). Conventional DCNNs which aim to minimize the difference between the predicted scalar numbers or vectors and the ground
truth cannot be directly used for the ordinal basic rating distribution. Thus, a novel CNN based on the Cumulative distribution with Jensen-Shannon divergence (CJS-CNN) is presented to predict the aesthetic score distribution of human ratings, with a new reliability-sensitive learning method based
on the kurtosis of the score distribution, which eliminates the
requirement of the original full data of human ratings (without normalization). Experimental results on large scale aesthetic dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our introduced
CJS-CNN in this task.




































LPDJH

VFRUH
KLVW
YDU
PHGLDQ
VNHZ
NXU

Figure 1: Images with similar mean scores (i.e., around
5). The rating distributions are approximated by the score
histograms (1-10). The hist., var., skew. and kur. are short
for histogram, variance, skewness and kurtosis. The mean
scores of the histogram are nearly the same. However, the
histograms themselves with their statistics differ from each
other. Images are from the AVA dataset (Murray, Marchesotti, and Perronnin 2012), which contains a list of photo
IDs from www.dpchallenge.com.
Related work. As summarized by (Deng, Loy, and Tang
2017), in early work, various hand-crafted aesthetic features
(i.e. aesthetic rule based features) are designed and connected with a machine classiﬁcation or regression method.
Another line is to use generic image description features.
After that, the powerful deep feature representation learned
from large amount of data has shown an ever-increased performance on this task, surpassing the capability of conventional hand-crafted features. (Karayev et al. 2014; Lu et al.
2014; Kao, Wang, and Huang 2015; Lu et al. 2015a; 2015b;
Dong and Tian 2015; Kao, Huang, and Maybank 2016;
Wang et al. 2016; Mai, Jin, and Liu 2016; Kong et al. 2016;
Jin et al. 2016; Kao, He, and Huang 2017; Ma, Liu, and Chen
2017).
The training data of aesthetic quality assessment are often
collected from the online photo sharing communities such
as photo.net and dpchallenge.com, in which people rate an
image by selecting one of the predeﬁned ordinal basic integer ratings (i.e., 1-7 or 1-10). Higher values indicate better

Introduction
Recently, the ability of recognizing the semantic meaning
of the objects in an image by computers is greatly increasing through deep convolutional neural networks. However,
recognizing or assessing the aesthetic quality of an image
by computers has not reached the practical precision people
need.
Subjective Image Aesthetic Quality Assessment (IAQA)
is still challenging (Mai, Jin, and Liu 2016) since the large
intra class difference of images with high or low aesthetic
quality, the large amount of low or high level aesthetic features, and the subjective evaluation of human rating. IAQA
has been a hot topic in the communities of Computer Vision (CV), Computational Aesthetics (CA) and Computational Photography (CP).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

77

