The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

OTyper: A Neural Architecture
for Open Named Entity Typing
Zheng Yuan, Doug Downey
Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science
Northwestern University, Evanston IL 60208, USA
zys133@eecs.northwestern.edu, d-downey@northwestern.edu

whether a given entity belongs to a speciﬁc type that is not
present in our limited training dataset. Learning whether an
entity belongs to an unseen type is an instance of “zeroshot learning,” where no training examples exist for a given
output label (Palatucci et al. 2009; Socher et al. 2013;
Chang et al. 2008). While existing hypernym discovery techniques can identify whether a given phrase belongs to a
type, hypernym discovery is context insensitive, whereas
NET is context sensitive. For example, given the sentence
“I went to Chicago last year,” hypernym discovery would
output all possible types of “Chicago” (city, band, movie,
etc.). Whereas in NET we must only assign types that are
correct for “Chicago” in the given context, e.g. city and location. Unsupervised Named Entity Recognition (Huang et
al. 2017) is context-sensitive and in principle can handle
entities of unseen types, but these techniques require mutually exclusive entity categories—i.e. they cannot apply to
the multi-label setting encountered in ﬁne-grained NET.

Abstract
Named Entity Typing (NET) is valuable for many natural language processing tasks, such as relation extraction, question
answering, knowledge base population, and co-reference resolution. Classical NET targeted a few coarse-grained types,
but the task has expanded to sets of hundreds of types in
recent years. Existing work in NET assumes that the target
types are speciﬁed in advance, and that hand-labeled examples of each type are available. In this work, we introduce the
task of Open Named Entity Typing (ONET), which is NET
when the set of target types is not known in advance. We propose a neural network architecture for ONET, called OTyper
, and evaluate its ability to tag entities with types not seen in
training. On the benchmark FIGER(GOLD) dataset, OTyper
achieves a weighted AUC-ROC score of 0.870 on unseen
types, substantially outperforming pattern- and embeddingbased baselines.

1

Introduction

Named Entity Typing (NET) is the task of labeling a given
entity mention in text with a semantic label. NET is valuable
for many natural language processing tasks, such as relation
extraction, question answering, knowledge base population,
and co-reference resolution.
Traditional NET focused on a small set of mutuallyexclusive types, such as person, location, and organization
(Tjong Kim Sang and De Meulder 2003; Carreras, Marquez,
and Padró 2002; Abdul-Hamid and Darwish 2010; Chinchor
and Robinson 1997). More recent work has generalized NET
to much larger type systems that include ﬁne-grained types,
e.g. book, artist, city, and so on (Rabinovich and Klein 2017;
Shimaoka et al. 2016b; Ling and Weld 2012; Yogatama,
Gillick, and Lazic 2015). In ﬁne-grained NET, often the target types are non-disjoint (“Paris” is both a city and a location, for example) and thus ﬁne-grained NET is a multi-label
task, i.e. each mention may be assigned multiple positive labels.
Existing ﬁne-grained NET techniques have a limitation:
they require labeled training mentions for each target type.
For types that are not in the training set—referred to as unseen types—NET systems cannot output the labels. This
is a limitation because in many cases, we want to know

In this paper, we introduce the task of Open Named Entity Typing (ONET), which is ﬁne-grained NET when the
set of target types is not known in advance. We propose a
novel neural architecture for ONET. The intuition behind
our approach is simple: we represent mentions and types
in our model using word embeddings pre-trained on unlabeled text, and leverage regularities in the embedding space
to extend to unseen types. Speciﬁcally, our model projects
the embeddings of mentions and types into a common space.
We train the model such that in the common space, the representations of correct types are close to the mention representation, while the representations for incorrect types are far
away. Our hypothesis is that regularities in the pre-trained
embedding space will allow this approach to extend to unseen types. That is, if our model learns to map mentions
of the type “musician” to be close to the representation for
the word “musician,” it will also map mentions of the type
“drummer” to be close to the representation of the word
“drummer,” even if the latter type never appears in training. Our architecture extends previous work (Shimaoka et
al. 2016b) by adding a new component, type embeddings,
and a method for comparing the type embedding to a given
mention embedding. In addition, our model is able to incorporate mention- and pattern-based features as optional components.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6037

