The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

AIVAT: A New Variance Reduction Technique
for Agent Evaluation in Imperfect Information Games
Neil Burch,1 Martin Schmid,1,2 Matej Moravčı́k,1,2 Dustin Morill,1 Michael Bowling1
1

2

Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
Department of Applied Mathematics, Charles University in Prague
{nburch,mschmid,moravcik,morill,mbowling}@ualberta.ca

Abstract

simply observe more samples, so we must turn to statistical
techniques that use additional information to help narrow the
conﬁdence interval.
This agent evaluation problem is commonly encountered
in games, where the goal is to estimate the expected performance difference between players. For example, consider
poker games. Poker is not only a long-standing challenge
problem for AI (von Neumann 1928; Koller and Pfeffer
1997; Billings et al. 2002) with annual competitions (Zinkevich and Littman 2006; Annual Computer Poker Competition ), but also a very popular game played by an estimated
150 million players worldwide (Eco 2007). Heads-up nolimit Texas hold’em (HUNL) is a particular variant of the
game that has received considerable attention in the AI community in recent years, including a “Brains vs. AI” event pitting Claudico (Brains Vs. AI 2015), a top HUNL computer
program, against professional poker players. This match involved 80,000 hands of poker with four poker players playing dozens of hours each over thirteen days. Despite Claudico losing by over 9 big blinds per 100 hands (a margin that
is considered “huge” by poker professionals (Wood 2015)),
the result is only on the edge of statistical signiﬁcance, making it hard to draw a conclusion from this large investment
of human time.
Even more recently, two more man-machine competitions
were held in close succession. Over a period of four weeks
between November 7th and December 12th 2016, DeepStack played a pool of professional poker players recruited
by the International Federation of Poker. Soon after, Libratus
played a team of four professional heads-up poker specialists in a HUNL competition held January 11-30, 2017. While
both computer agents were victorious versus their respective
opponents, these two competitions serve as canonical example of the importance of strong variance reduction.
The DeepStack competition used the techniques described in this paper. The Libratus competition used more
basic variance reduction methods. As a result, the DeepStack
competition was able to achieve statistically signiﬁcant results on individual participants with only a few hours of play.
In comparison, Libratus required full days from the participants for nearly three straight weeks to achieve a result just
for the aggregation of all of the players.
Previous techniques for variance reduction in this setting have used two broad classes of statistical techniques.

Evaluating agent performance when outcomes are stochastic and agents use randomized strategies can be challenging when there is limited data available. The variance of
sampled outcomes may make the simple approach of Monte
Carlo sampling inadequate. This is the case for agents playing heads-up no-limit Texas hold’em poker, where manmachine competitions typically involve multiple days of
consistent play by multiple players, but still can (and sometimes did) result in statistically insigniﬁcant conclusions.
In this paper, we introduce AIVAT, a low variance, provably unbiased value assessment tool that exploits an arbitrary heuristic estimate of state value, as well as the explicit
strategy of a subset of the agents. Unlike existing techniques
which reduce the variance from chance events, or only consider game ending actions, AIVAT reduces the variance both
from choices by nature and by players with a known strategy.
The resulting estimator produces results that signiﬁcantly
outperform previous state of the art techniques. It was able
to reduce the standard deviation of a Texas hold’em poker
man-machine match by 85% and consequently requires 44
times fewer games to draw the same statistical conclusion.
AIVAT enabled the ﬁrst statistically signiﬁcant AI victory
against professional poker players in no-limit hold’em. Furthermore, the technique was powerful enough to produce
statistically signiﬁcant results versus individual players, not
just an aggregate pool of the players. We also used AIVAT
to analyze a short series of AI vs human poker tournaments,
producing statistical signiﬁcant results with as few as 28
matches.

Introduction
Evaluating an agent’s performance in stochastic settings can
be hard. Non-zero variance in outcomes means the game
must be played multiple times to compute a conﬁdence interval that likely contains the true expected value. Regardless of whether the variance arises from player actions or
from chance events, we might need to observe many samples before we get a narrow enough interval to draw desirable conclusions. In many situations, it is simply not feasible
(e.g., when the evaluation involves human participation) to
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

949

