The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Detecting Adversarial Examples
through Image Transformation∗
Shixin Tian, Guolei Yang, Ying Cai
Department of Computer Science, Iowa State University
{stian,yanggl,yingcai}@iastate.edu

Normal Image

Abstract

Transformed Image
Image
Transformation

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have demonstrated remarkable performance in a diverse range of applications. Along
with the prevalence of deep learning, it has been revealed that
DNNs are vulnerable to attacks. By deliberately crafting adversarial examples, an adversary can manipulate a DNN to
generate incorrect outputs, which may lead catastrophic consequences in applications such as disease diagnosis and selfdriving cars. In this paper, we propose an effective method
to detect adversarial examples in image classiﬁcation. Our
key insight is that adversarial examples are usually sensitive
to certain image transformation operations such as rotation
and shifting. In contrast, a normal image is generally immune
to such operations. We implement this idea of image transformation and evaluate its performance in oblivious attacks.
Our experiments with two datasets show that our technique
can detect nearly 99% of adversarial examples generated by
the state-of-the-art algorithm. In addition to oblivious attacks,
we consider the case of white-box attacks. We propose to introduce randomness in the process of image transformation,
which can achieve a detection ratio of around 70%.

Classifier

+

Result: “0”

Classifier

Result: “0”

Perturbations
Transformed Image
Image
Transformation

Adversaial
Example

Classifier

Result: “2”

Misclassification as
the result of attack

Classifier

Result: “0”

Different result after
transformation

Figure 1: An illustration of image transformation-based adversarial example detection.
versarial example is generated by adding certain perturbations into a normal image. The perturbed image is speciﬁcally generated so that it is visually similar to the original
image, but will be misclassiﬁed when fed into the DNNs.
By deliberately crafting adversarial examples, a malicious
attacker can manipulate a well-trained DNN to generate incorrect outputs. This situation may lead to catastrophic consequences and cost human lives in applications such as disease diagnosis and self-driving cars. For example, an attacker could modify a stop sign so that an auto-driving system mistakes it as a speed limit sign and fails to stop. It could
result in a severe trafﬁc accident and pose direct threat to the
passengers.
Adversarial example attacks raise crucial security concerns in applications where DNNs are used to support decision making. In response to the threat, many defensive techniques have been proposed by the machine learning and security community. A signiﬁcant number of these techniques
attempt to thwart the attack through adversarial examples
detection, i.e., distinguishing adversarial examples from normal ones. Unfortunately, the recent research (Carlini and
Wagner 2017a) has demonstrated that the adversarial examples generated by the Carlini-Wagner (CW) attack (Carlini
and Wagner 2017a) can circumvent all existing detection
techniques, especially in white-box threat model. This calls
for new research on effective methods to detect adversary
examples.
In this paper, we propose a novel adversarial example detection method that can effectively thwart the state-of-theart CW attack. Our key insight is, adversarial examples are

Introduction
The past decade has witnessed the unprecedented thrift
of machine learning techniques. Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs), at the front of this machine learning trend, has been
used to assist decision making in a diverse range of applications from disease diagnosis (Esteva et al. 2017), navigating self-driving cars (Bojarski et al. 2016), to natural language processing (Petrov 2016) and playing the game of
Go (Silver et al. 2016). In all these tasks where traditional
machine learning techniques found challenging to handle,
DNNs have demonstrated superior performance.
Along with the prevalence of deep learning techniques,
however, it has been revealed that DNNs are vulnerable to
attacks using adversarial examples (Szegedy et al. 2013;
Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016; Baluja and Fischer 2017; Carlini and
Wagner 2017b) in the case of image classiﬁcation. An ad∗

This research was supported in part by a grant from the Defense Advanced Research Project Agency and a research contract
from Kingland Systems Corporation.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4139

