The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning an Image-Based Obstacle Detector
with Automatic Acquisition of Training Data
Stefano Toniolo, Jérôme Guzzi, Luca Maria Gambardella, Alessandro Giusti
Dalle Molle Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, USI-SUPSI, Lugano (Switzerland)
Email: stefano.toniolo@idsia.ch

sors and one forward-looking webcam (Fig. 2 Left); our approach however is general and would directly apply when
using different robot platforms or sensing modalities.
At a given time t, the camera acquires an image I(t)
and each of the ﬁve proximity sensors either detects an obstacle or not; we represent the sensor outputs by means
of a vector y(t) containing Boolean values (1 if the sensor detected an obstacle, 0 otherwise). In our case, y(t) =
[yLL , yL , yC , yR , yRR ], representing the output of the leftmost,
center-left, center, center-right, and rightmost proximity sensors, respectively.
Our goal is to gather training data, in the form of a set of
pairs (I(t), y(t)) and then build a classiﬁer that given I(t)
estimates ŷ(t); ŷ(t) will be a vector of real-valued numbers
in the range [0, 1], representing the probability that the corresponding element of y(t) is 1.

Abstract
We detect and localize obstacles in front of a mobile robot by
means of a deep neural network that maps images acquired
from a forward-looking camera to the outputs of ﬁve proximity sensors. The robot autonomously acquires training data in
multiple environments; once trained, the network can detect
obstacles and their position also in unseen scenarios, and can
be used on different robots, not equipped with proximity sensors. We demonstrate both the training and deployment
phases on a small modiﬁed Thymio robot.

Overview
We propose a learning-based approach (Muller et al. 2006)
for perceiving obstacles in the images acquired by a
forward-facing camera mounted on a small robot. Other than
detecting whether an obstacle is present, the system also estimates its position.
Instead of attempting to reconstruct the 3D structure of
the environment in front of the robot, we follow a conceptually simpler and computationally lighter approach which
considers each frame independently and does not rely on a
sophisticated computer vision pipeline. As humans, when
we observe a single picture, we can instinctively infer where
an obstacle is present and which areas are free; this is because we have a prior expectation (learned from experience)
on the appearance of free space and obstacles, not because
we performed a multi-view 3D reconstruction of the scene.
In order to achieve a similar goal, our approach works
by acquiring training datasets on a robot that is equipped
with both a camera and a number of proximity sensors that
can detect obstacles in the same area imaged by the camera,
and thus produce a ground truth. For dataset generation, the
robot autonomously explores a scenario unattended, driven
by an ad-hoc controller that maximizes the amount of useful
information acquired. The quality of the resulting classiﬁers
and their generalization ability to different environments is
quantitatively measured using a cross-validation scheme on
multiple datasets acquired in disjoint scenarios.
Our demonstration uses a modiﬁed Thymio1 robot, which
is equipped with 5 forward-facing infrared proximity sen-

Figure 1: Images paired with corresponding proximity sensor data (groundtruth)

Automated acquisition of training datasets
Data gathering is automated by a smart controller which
drives our robot inside an environment following three simple rules for obtaining a varied dataset. 1) The robot drives
forward if no obstacles are detected by the sensors. 2) When
an obstacle is detected by a sensor, the robot starts rotating
in place towards the obstacle, so that the obstacle is seen
at different positions in the camera ﬁeld of view. 3) When
the detected obstacle exits from the sensors’ range, the robot
continues rotating for a random angle between 0 and 180
degrees, which ensures a non-repetitive coverage of an unknown environment.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.thymio.org

8220

