The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Democratization of Deep Learning Using DARVIZ
Anush Sankaran,1 Naveen Panwar,1 Shreya Khare,1 Senthil Mani1
{anussank, naveen.panwar, shkhare4, sentmani}@in.ibm.com

Akshay Sethi,2∗ Rahul Aralikatte,1 Neelamadhav Gantayat1
akshay14133@iiitd.ac.in, {rahul.a.r, neelamadhav}@in.ibm.com
1
2
IBM Reseach
IIIT Delhi

3. Extract information from deep learning design ﬂow diagrams and tables available in a research paper

Abstract
With an abundance of research papers in deep learning, adoption and reproducibility of existing works becomes a challenge. To make a DL developer life easy, we propose a novel
system, DARVIZ, to visually design a DL model using a
drag-and-drop framework in an platform agnostic manner.
The code could be automatically generated in both Caffe and
Keras. DARVIZ could import (i) any existing Caffe code, or
(ii) a research paper containing a DL design; extract the design, and present it in visual editor.

4. Static validation and veriﬁcation of deep learning designs.

Key Features
Visual IDE for Deep Learning Design
Deep learning model designs are graph-like structures having a set of layers as nodes and each node having a set of
hyper-parameters. DARVIZ provides an intuitive drag-anddrop UI, where a user can construct the complete network
using basic units like layers. While the visual coding environment is not completely new to the community with the
likes of SubGraphs1 , Machine UI 2 , Fabrik3 , DARVIZ is one
of the oldest and highly ﬂexible platform built over the opensource Node-Red4 library. DARVIZ provides support to 23
distinct layers that can be used to build complex deep learning networks, processing both text and image data. The designed deep network design can be translated to an execution
ready deep learning code in Caffe and Keras (Tensorﬂow,
Theano). The network designed is converted to an abstract
computational graph using platform-speciﬁc comprehensive
rule base. The inference engine consists of a comprehensive
list of templates and dictionaries built manually for every library. These template-based structures transfer each component from the abstract representation into a platform-speciﬁc
structure using dictionary mappings. Further, this inference
engine is extremely ﬂexible, permitting easy extension and
addition of new layer deﬁnitions and new libraries. A dictionary mapping can be written to support a new layer converting the abstract representation to the library speciﬁc code.
For instance, one of the deep learning models used in computer vision called VGG19 network (Chatﬁeld et al. 2014),
could be designed using the drag-and-drop UI within minutes.
DARVIZ also enables data handling and manipulation using the user interface. Data in different formats and structures can be pre-processed by providing speciﬁcations in the

Introduction
In the recent years, deep learning algorithms have a played
a crucial role in pushing the boundaries of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). These algorithms have shown out of the box
successful results in various tasks such as automatic speech
recognition, image recognition, natural language processing,
and recommendation systems. Deep learning algorithms use
a cascade of many layers to transform the raw data and perform feature extraction in an unsupervised manner. To easily
enable implementation of such algorithms, there are many
deep learning libraries such as like Caffe, Tensorﬂow, and
Torch based out of different programming languages. The
variety of deep learning libraries implies that each library
have their own syntax, design principles, and merits. These
libraries have minimum communication and interoperability across them, making the code and model reproducibility
minimum. Thus, software engineers are limited in designing
applications and are also hindered in reusing existing public
implementations (Sankaran et al. 2017).
To address these challenges, we propose a novel framework called DARVIZ: Deep Abstract Representation, Visualization, and Veriﬁcation. This framework is made publicly
available at http://darviz.mybluemix.net. As shown in Figure 1, the primary features of DARVIZ are:
1. Platform agnostic “no-code” visual designing of deep
learning models
2. Easy interoperability across various deep learning platforms by converting code from one library to another

1

https://subgraphs.com/#/
https://machineui.co/
3
http://fabrik.cloudcv.org/
4
https://nodered.org/

∗

Akshay Sethi was working as an intern in IBM Research, India
during his contribution to this project.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

8218

