The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Information Gathering with Peers:
Submodular Optimization with Peer-Prediction Constraints
Goran Radanovic

Adish Singla

Andreas Krause

Boi Faltings

Harvard University
Cambridge, USA
gradanovic@g.harvard.edu

MPI-SWS
Saarbrücken, Germany
adishs@mpi-sws.org

ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
krausea@ethz.ch

EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
boi.faltings@epﬂ.ch

Data collector

Abstract
We study a problem of optimal information gathering from
multiple data providers that need to be incentivized to provide accurate information. This problem arises in many real
world applications that rely on crowdsourced data sets, but
where the process of obtaining data is costly. A notable example of such a scenario is crowd sensing. To this end, we
formulate the problem of optimal information gathering as
maximization of a submodular function under a budget constraint, where the budget represents the total expected payment
to data providers. Contrary to the existing approaches, we base
our payments on incentives for accuracy and truthfulness, in
particular, peer-prediction methods that score each of the selected data providers against its best peer, while ensuring that
the minimum expected payment is above a given threshold.
We ﬁrst show that the problem at hand is hard to approximate within a constant factor that is not dependent on the
properties of the payment function. However, for given topological and analytical properties of the instance, we construct
two greedy algorithms, respectively called PPCGreedy and
PPCGreedyIter, and establish theoretical bounds on their performance w.r.t. the optimal solution. Finally, we evaluate our
methods using a realistic crowd sensing testbed.

Payment

28.7ppb
Measurement

Data provider

Air-quality sensor

Correlation between
the measurements of
the two sensors.

Figure 1: An example of crowdsourcing with incentives:
Crowd-sensors (air-quality eggs1 ) report air-quality measurements and a data collector rewards them with monetary payments. An edge (black line) indicates that there is a sufﬁcient
correlation between the measurements of two sensors to verify accuracy.
• The data collector pays to the data providers a value that
compensates for the cost of effort.
An example scenario is shown in Figure 1.
The problem, however, arises if the data providers are
susceptible to moral hazard, that is, deviation to reporting
heuristically without obtaining the data in the ﬁrst place. In
fact, such a behavior is expected for a rational participant
who aims to maximize their utility, since heuristic reporting
typically carries no cost of effort. To avoid this problem,
the data collector can design payment functions τ that are
dependent on the accuracy of the reported information, for
example, by installing random spot-checks that validate some
of the reports (Gao, Wright, and Leyton-Brown 2016). While
this approach has often been used in standard micro-task
crowdsourcing, it is often too costly to apply it in a more
complex elicitation setting. Consider, for example, a crowdsensing scenario shown in Figure 1, where sensors measure
spatially distributed phenomenon that is highly localized. To
apply a spot-checking procedure, the data collector would
need to have mobile sensors that would change their locations
at each time-step. Furthermore, due to the localized nature
of the measured phenomenon, the density of the spot-check
sensor network has to be relatively large.

Introduction
The recent success of various machine learning techniques
can partly be attributed to the existence of large sets of labeled
data that can readily be used for training purposes. In the past
decade, the predominant form of obtaining useful data is
through crowdsourcing approaches, where human subjects
either directly label data or have private devices that provide
measurements about spatially distributed phenomena.
One of the most important aspects of data is its accuracy,
which can only be established if data providers (e.g. crowdparticipants) report accurate information. To incentivize accurate reporting, a data collector can provide incentives that
compensate data providers for their effort. In its simplest
form, this type of data elicitation process can be modeled as
a three step protocol:
• Data providers acquire accurate data experiencing a cost
of effort;
• Data providers report the acquired data to a data collector;
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

1603

https://airqualityegg.wickeddevice.com

