The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Interpretable Spatial Operations
in a Rich 3D Blocks World
1

Yonatan Bisk,1∗ Kevin J. Shih,2 Yejin Choi,1 Daniel Marcu3∗

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
2
3
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Amazon Inc.
{ybisk,yejin}@cs.washington.edu, kjshih2@illinois.edu, marcud@amazon.com

“On the (new) fourth tower, mirror Nvidia with UPS.”

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of mapping natural language instructions to complex spatial actions in a 3D blocks
world. We ﬁrst introduce a new dataset that pairs complex 3D
spatial operations to rich natural language descriptions that
require complex spatial and pragmatic interpretations such
as “mirroring”, “twisting”, and “balancing”. This dataset,
built on the simulation environment of Bisk, Yuret, and Marcu
(2016), attains language that is signiﬁcantly richer and more
complex, while also doubling the size of the original dataset
in the 2D environment with 100 new world conﬁgurations and
250,000 tokens. In addition, we propose a new neural architecture that achieves competitive results while automatically
discovering an inventory of interpretable spatial operations
(Figure 5).

⇒

Figure 1: Example language instruction in our new dataset.
The action requires ﬁne-grained positioning and utilizes a
complex concept: mirror.
Lifting Grid Assumptions We ﬁnd that language situated
in a richer world leads to richer language. One such example
is presented in Figure 1. To correctly place the UPS block,
the system must understand the complex physical, spatial,
and pragmatic meaning of language including: (1) the 3D
concept of a tower, (2) that new or fourth are referencing an
assumed future, and (3) that mirror implies an axis and reﬂection. However, concepts such as above are often outside
the scope of most existing language grounding systems.
In this work, we introduce a new dataset that allows for
learning signiﬁcantly richer and more complex spatial language than previously explored. Building on the simulator provided by Bisk, Yuret, and Marcu (2016), we create
roughly 13,000 new crowdsourced instructions (9 per action), nearly doubling the size of the original dataset in the
2D blocks world introduced in their previous work. We address the challenge of realism in the simulated data by introducing three crucial but previously absent complexities:

Motivation
One of the longstanding challenges of AI, ﬁrst introduced as
SHRDLU in early 70s (Winograd 1971), is to build an agent
that can follow natural language instructions in a physical
environment. The ultimate goal is to create systems that can
interact in the real world using rich natural language. However, due to the complex interdisciplinary nature of the challenge (Harnad 1990), which spans across several ﬁelds in
AI, including robotics, language, and vision, most existing
studies make varying degrees of simplifying assumptions.
On one end of the spectrum is rich robotics paired with
simple constrained language (Roy and Reiter 2005; Tellex
et al. 2011), as acquiring a large corpus of natural language
grounded with a real robot is prohibitively expensive (Misra
et al. 2014; Thomason et al. 2017). On the other end of the
spectrum are approaches based on simulation environments,
which support broader deployment at the cost of unrealistic
simplifying assumptions about the world (Bisk, Yuret, and
Marcu 2016; Wang, Liang, and Manning 2016). In this paper, we seek to reduce the gap between two complementary
research efforts by introducing a new level of complexity to
both the environment and the language associated with the
interactions.

1. 3D block structures (lifting 2D assumptions)
2. Fine-grained real valued locations (lifting grid assumptions)
3. Rotational, angled movements (lifting grid assumptions)
Learning Interpretable Operators In addition, we introduce an interpretable neural model for learning spatial operations in the rich 3D blocks world. In particular, in our
model instead of using a single layer conditioned on the language for interpreting the operations, we have the model
choose which parameters to apply via a softmax over the

∗

Work performed at USC’s Information Sciences Institute.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5028

