The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Attention-Based Belief or Disbelief
Feature Extraction for Dependency Parsing
Haoyuan Peng, Lu Liu, Yi Zhou, Junying Zhou, Xiaoqing Zheng
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
{hypeng15, l liu15, zhouyi13, junyingzhou14, zhengxq}@fudan.edu.cn
Donald et al. 2005). In graph-based models, parameters are
learned to assign a correct score to each possible subgraph.
McDonald and Satta (2007) show that when the tree score
is factorized into high-order subgraphs instead of single arcs,
exactly searching the parse tree with the highest score is an
NP-hard problem. For that reason, graph-based parsers typically factorize the tree score in a ﬁrst-order way (i.e. the arc
scores are estimated independently), and assign a score to
an arc with a set of local features by a linear model. Limited
by the factorization over single arcs (up to three-order) , the
primary shortcoming of graph-based parsers is that features
are deﬁned over a limited subgraph although the model can
use global learning and inference.
Much effort have been devoted to solving this problem.
Some works (Nivre and McDonald 2008; McDonald and
Nivre 2011) try to integrate transition-based parsers and
graph-based parsers by using the result of one to deﬁne features for the other. For graph-based parsers as example, the
shortcoming of insufﬁcient on features is partly made up
by transition-based parsers which can take rich parsing history into account. Another way for improvement is to introduce high-order features such as the modiﬁer’s siblings and
children for each head-modiﬁer pair, and search the optimal
parse tree with an approximation algorithm (McDonald and
Pereira 2006).
Regardless of how to introduce rich feature into the
dependency parsers, these traditional graph-based parsers
heavily rely on handcrafted feature design and selection.
Those features are often manually designed to capture the
syntactic structure, and the design of feature becomes a challengeable task. In order to avoid such feature engineering,
many recent approaches use deep neural networks to learn
dense features rather than traditional sparse indicator features, and the shallow classiﬁers for predicting the correct
action in transition-based models, or the score functions in
graph-based models are replaced by different kinds of neural networks such as two-layer neural networks (Chen and
Manning 2014), recurrent neural networks (Kiperwasser and
Goldberg 2016b) and convolutional neural networks (Zheng
2017).
Long-short Term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997) is widely applied to generate feature
representations with long distance information, which are
thought to be useful for dependency parsing (Kiperwasser

Abstract
Existing neural dependency parsers usually encode each word
in a sentence with bi-directional LSTMs, and estimate the
score of an arc from the LSTM representations of the head
and the modiﬁer, possibly missing relevant context information for the arc being considered. In this study, we propose
a neural feature extraction method that learns to extract arcspeciﬁc features. We apply a neural network-based attention
method to collect evidences for and against each possible
head-modiﬁer pair, with which our model computes certainty
scores of belief and disbelief, and determines the ﬁnal arc
score by subtracting the score of disbelief from the one of belief. By explicitly introducing two kinds of evidences, the arc
candidates can compete against each other based on more relevant information, especially for the cases where they share
the same head or modiﬁer. It makes possible to better discriminate two or more competing arcs by presenting their
rivals (disbelief evidence). Experiments on various datasets
show that our arc-speciﬁc feature extraction mechanism signiﬁcantly improves the performance of bi-directional LSTMbased models by explicitly modeling long-distance dependencies. For both English and Chinese, the proposed model
achieve a higher accuracy on dependency parsing task than
most existing neural attention-based models.

Introduction
Dependency parsing has been proven useful for several natural language understanding tasks, such as relation extraction
(Fundel, Küffner, and Zimmer 2006) and machine translation (Carreras and Collins 2009). A dependency parser represents the syntactic structure of a sentence with a dependency tree, in which each word and its modiﬁer are connected by a labeled edge. There are typically two paradigms
of dependency parsing models: transition-based and graphbased models. A transition-based model (Yamada and Matsumoto 2003) learns to predict a proper action from current
parsing state and parsing history, and the parsing process
is done by performing the predicted sequence of actions. A
graph-based model deﬁnes the score of parse trees by summing the scores of its subgraphs. Various maximum spanning tree algorithms (Chu and Liu 1965; Eisner 1996) are
adopted to ﬁnd the parse tree with the highest score (Mcc 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5382

