The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Efﬁcient Point Cloud
Generation for Dense 3D Object Reconstruction
Chen-Hsuan Lin, Chen Kong, Simon Lucey
The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
chlin@cmu.edu, {chenk,slucey}@cs.cmu.edu

Hitherto, most existing works on 3D model generation resort to volumetric representations, allowing 3D Euclidean
convolution to operate on regular discretized voxel grids. 3D
CNNs (as opposed to the classical 2D form) have been applied successfully to 3D volumetric representations for both
discriminative (Wu et al. 2015; Maturana and Scherer 2015;
Hegde and Zadeh 2016) and generative (Girdhar et al. 2016;
Choy et al. 2016; Yan et al. 2016b; Wu et al. 2016) problems.
Despite their recent success, 3D CNNs suffer from an
inherent drawback when modeling shapes with volumetric representations. Unlike 2D images, where every pixel
contains meaningful spatial and texture information, volumetric representations are information-sparse. More specifically, a 3D object is expressed as a voxel-wise occupancy
grid, where voxels “outside” the object (set to off) and “inside” the object (set to on) are unimportant and fundamentally not of particular interest. In other words, the richest
information of shape representations lies on the surface of
the 3D object, which makes up only a slight fraction of all
voxels in an occupancy grid. Consequently, 3D CNNs are
extremely wasteful in both computation and memory in trying to predict much unuseful data with high-complexity 3D
convolutions, severely limiting the granularity of the 3D volumetric shapes that can be modeled even on high-end GPUnodes commonly used in deep learning research.
In this paper, we propose an efﬁcient framework to represent and generate 3D object shapes with dense point clouds.
We achieve this by learning to predict the 3D structures from
multiple viewpoints, which is jointly optimized through 3D
geometric reasoning. In contrast to prior art that adopts 3D
CNNs to operate on volumetric data, we leverage 2D convolutional operations to predict point clouds that shape the
surface of the 3D objects. Our experimental results show
that we generate much denser and more accurate shapes than
state-of-the-art 3D prediction methods.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:

Abstract
Conventional methods of 3D object generative modeling
learn volumetric predictions using deep networks with 3D
convolutional operations, which are direct analogies to classical 2D ones. However, these methods are computationally
wasteful in attempt to predict 3D shapes, where information
is rich only on the surfaces. In this paper, we propose a novel
3D generative modeling framework to efﬁciently generate object shapes in the form of dense point clouds. We use 2D convolutional operations to predict the 3D structure from multiple viewpoints and jointly apply geometric reasoning with 2D
projection optimization. We introduce the pseudo-renderer, a
differentiable module to approximate the true rendering operation, to synthesize novel depth maps for optimization. Experimental results for single-image 3D object reconstruction
tasks show that we outperforms state-of-the-art methods in
terms of shape similarity and prediction density.

Introduction
Generative models using convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have achieved state of the art in image/object generation problems. Notable works of the class include variational autoencoders (Kingma and Welling 2013) and generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al. 2014), both
of which have drawn large success in various applications (Isola et al. 2017; Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2015;
Zhu et al. 2016; Wang and Gupta 2016; Yan et al. 2016a).
With the recent introduction of large publicly available 3D
model repositories (Wu et al. 2015; Chang et al. 2015),
the study of generative modeling on 3D data using similar
frameworks has also become of increasing interest.
In computer vision and graphics, 3D object models can
take on various forms of representations. Of such, triangular meshes and point clouds are popular for their vectorized (and thus scalable) data representations as well as
their compact encoding of shape information, optionally embedded with texture. However, this efﬁcient representation
comes with an inherent drawback as the dimensionality per
3D shape sample can vary, making the application of learning methods problematic. Furthermore, such data representations do not elegantly ﬁt within conventional CNNs as Euclidean convolutional operations cannot be directly applied.

• We advocate that deep networks with 2D convolutional operations are capable of generating dense point
clouds that shapes the surface of 3D objects in an
undiscretized 3D space.
• We introduce a pseudo-rendering pipeline to serve as
a differentiable approximation of true rendering. We
further utilize the pseudo-rendered depth images for

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7114

