The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Less-Forgetful Learning for Domain Expansion in Deep Neural Networks
Heechul Jung

Jeongwoo Ju

Minju Jung

Junmo Kim

School of EE
KAIST
heechul@kaist.ac.kr

Division of Future Vehicle
KAIST
veryju@kaist.ac.kr

School of EE
KAIST
alswn0925@kaist.ac.kr

School of EE
KAIST
junmo.kim@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Expanding the domain that deep neural network has already
learned without accessing old domain data is a challenging
task because deep neural networks forget previously learned
information when learning new data from a new domain. In
this paper, we propose a less-forgetful learning method for
the domain expansion scenario. While existing domain adaptation techniques solely focused on adapting to new domains,
the proposed technique focuses on working well with both
old and new domains without needing to know whether the
input is from the old or new domain. First, we present two
naive approaches which will be problematic, then we provide a new method using two proposed properties for lessforgetful learning. Finally, we prove the effectiveness of our
method through experiments on image classiﬁcation tasks.
All datasets used in the paper, will be released on our website
for someone’s follow-up study.

Figure 1: Domain expansion and domain adaptation. Domain expansion enables DNNs to adapt to new environments while preserving their performance within old environments. Joint domain involves both old and new domains.

the information previously learned from ImageNet dataset
while learning the failed data collected from the real-world
environment. In other words, the object recognition system
gradually loses its original ability, and hence, requires the
domain expansion functionality to preserve its ability for the
ImageNet domain and adapt to the new domain that was not
covered by the ImageNet dataset.
The DNN domain expansion problem is speciﬁcally important for the following three main reasons:
• It enables the DNNs to continually learn from sequentially incoming data.
• In practice, users can ﬁne-tune their DNNs using only new
data collected from new environments without access to
data from the old domain.
• Making a single uniﬁed network that performs in several
domains is possible.
In this paper, we propose a method to enable DNNs to
achieve domain expansion functionality by alleviating the
forgetting problem.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have advanced to nearly human levels of object, face, and speech recognition (Taigman
et al. 2014) (Graves, Mohamed, and Hinton 2013) (Szegedy
et al. 2014) (Richardson, Reynolds, and Dehak 2015). Despite these advances, issues still remain. Domain adaptation
(the same tasks but in different domains) is one of these remaining issues (Ganin and Lempitsky 2014) (Ganin et al.
2016) (Long and Wang 2015). The domain adaptation problem concerns how well a DNN works in a new domain that
has not been learned. In other words, these domain adaptation techniques focus on adapting only to new domains,
but in an actual situation, applications often need to remember old domains as well without seeing the old domain data
again. We call this the DNN domain expansion problem. Its
concept is illustrated in Figure 1.
For example, suppose you have an object recognition system mounted on a robot or a smartphone that has been
trained with ImageNet dataset (Russakovsky et al. 2015).
The real-world environment is so diverse (e.g., with various
lighting changes) that the system will sometimes fail. Learning the failed data collected from the real-world environment
might prevent the repetition of the failure when the DNN encounters the same situation. Unfortunately, the DNN forgets

Domain Expansion Problem
We deﬁne the domain expansion problem as the problem
of creating a network that works well both on an old domain
and a new domain even after it is trained in a supervised way
using only the data from the new domain without accessing
the data from the old domain. Two challenging issues need
to be faced in solving the domain expansion problem. First,
the performance of the network on the old domain should
not be degraded even if the new domain data are learned
without seeing those of the old domain (A general term is
the catastrophic forgetting problem). Second, a DNN should

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3358

