The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Sparse Gaussian Conditional Random Fields
on Top of Recurrent Neural Networks
Xishun Wang, Minjie Zhang, Fenghui Ren
School of Computing and Information Technology,
University of Wollongong, 2522, NSW, Australia.
xw357@uowmail.edu.au; {minjie, fren}@uow.edu.au

SGCRF is an effective structured learning model, while it
is weak in representing nonlinearities in features. As a consequence, SGCRF relies heavily on feature engineering. RNN
can effectively model time-series data and represent heterogeneous features, while it misses the structured information in
the output. This paper proposes Sparse Gaussian Conditional
Random Fields on top of Recurrent Neural Networks (CoR)
for multi-step time-series prediction. CoR shows several advantages over RNN and SGCRF. Compared to RNN, CoR
can learn structured information and thus lead to a signiﬁcant
boost in performance. Compared to SGCRF, CoR can effectively represent heterogeneous temporal features and greatly
outperform SGCRF. Moreover, CoR consumes many fewer
computational resources than SGCRF.
CoR has a deep architecture as illustrated in Figure 1.
To enhance the representational capacity, we build stacked
Bi-directional RNNs. On top of the deep RNNs is then SGCRF. The challenges of training CoR come from two aspects:
1) CoR is a complex hybrid of deep neural networks and
densely-connected graphical models; 2) The training of CoR
is a constrained optimization problem, where the precision
matrix in SGCRF must be positive-deﬁnite. It is natural to
resort to alternative training for CoR, in which RNN and
SGCRF are trained alternatively until they converge. Furthermore, we propose an end-to-end training method for CoR
based on projected gradient descent (Lin 2007). Compared
to alternative training, end-to-end training is more efﬁcient
and results in better prediction accuracy.
In experiments, the advantages of CoR over stacked BiRNNs and SGCRF are demonstrated via synthetic data. Under varying conditions of synthetic data, we also discover
several interesting properties of SGCRF, stacked Bi-RNNs
and CoR. CoR is also evaluated by real-world data from an
electricity demand prediction competition, and it shows better
performance than other state-of-the-art methods.
The contributions of this paper may be summarized in three
aspects. 1) We propose a new model called CoR for multi-step
time-series prediction. CoR gains advantages from RNN and
SGCRF. It can simultaneously represent nonlinear temporal
features and capture the structured information of the output.
2) CoR is a complex hybrid model that is challenging to train.
We propose two methods, alternative training and end-to-end
training, to train CoR. In comparison, the end-to-end training
is more effective. 3) CoR shows a signiﬁcant improvement

Abstract
Predictions of time-series are widely used in different disciplines. We propose CoR, Sparse Gaussian Conditional Random Fields (SGCRF) on top of Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNN), for problems of this kind. CoR gains advantages from
both RNN and SGCRF. It can not only effectively represent
the temporal correlations in observed data, but can also learn
the structured information of the output. CoR is challenging
to train because it is a hybrid of deep neural networks and
densely-connected graphical models. Alternative training can
be a tractable way to train CoR, and furthermore, an end-toend training method is proposed to train CoR more efﬁciently.
CoR is evaluated by both synthetic data and real-world data,
and it shows a signiﬁcant improvement in performance over
state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Predictions of time-series data occur widely in ﬁnancial analysis, market demand prediction and video analysis (Box et al.
2015). This paper studies multi-step prediction of time-series
data, which can be formally deﬁned as follows:
y = fW (X),

(1)

where fW is a transformation (to be learned) parameterized
by W , X = [x1 , x2 , · · · , xT ] is a T × D matrix, representing
T steps and D observed features in each step, and y is a
T -dimension structured output.
The challenge of this problem comes from two aspects:
1) There are temporal and nonlinear correlations in the observed data X; 2) The predicted sequence y is inherently structured. AutoRegressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA)
is a traditional model for time-series prediction (Box and
Pierce 1970), which utilizes the temporal correlations of the
observed data and output for prediction. Gradient boosting
(Friedman 2001) has shown competitive performance for regression problems. However, gradient boosting calls for extra
effort (usually by feature engineering) to model time-series
data. Recently, deep Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) (Pascanu et al. 2013) and Sparse Gaussian Conditional Random
Fields (SGCRF) (Wytock and Kolter 2013) have been introduced to time-series prediction, showing promising results.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4219

