The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multi-Adversarial Domain Adaptation∗
Zhongyi Pei,† Zhangjie Cao,† Mingsheng Long, Jianmin Wang
KLiss, MOE; NEL-BDS; TNList; School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
{peizhyi,caozhangjie14}@gmail.com {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

using target labels, and the classiﬁer learned from source domain can be directly applied to target domain. Recent studies
have revealed that deep neural networks can learn more transferable features for domain adaptation (Donahue et al. 2014;
Yosinski et al. 2014), by disentangling explanatory factors
of variations behind domains. The latest advances have been
achieved by embedding domain adaptation modules in the
pipeline of deep feature learning to extract domain-invariant
representations (Tzeng et al. 2014; Long et al. 2015; Ganin
and Lempitsky 2015; Tzeng et al. 2015; Long et al. 2016;
Bousmalis et al. 2016; Long et al. 2017).
Recently, adversarial learning has been successfully embedded into deep networks to learn transferable features to
reduce distribution discrepancy between the source and target domains. Domain adversarial adaptation methods (Ganin
and Lempitsky 2015; Tzeng et al. 2015) are among the topperforming deep architectures. These methods mainly align
the whole source and target distributions, without considering
the complex multimode structures underlying the data distributions. As a result, not only all data from the source and
target domains will be confused, but also the discriminative
structures could be mixed up, leading to false alignment of
the corresponding discriminative structures of different distributions, with intuitive example shown in Figure 1. Hence,
matching the whole source and target domains as previous
methods without exploiting the discriminative structures may
not work well for diverse domain adaptation scenarios.
There are two technical challenges to enabling domain
adaptation: (1) enhancing positive transfer by maximally
matching the multimode structures underlying data distributions across domains, and (2) alleviating negative transfer by
preventing false alignment of modes in different distributions
across domains. Motivated by these challenges, we present
a multi-adversarial domain adaptation (MADA) approach,
which captures multimode structures to enable ﬁne-grained
alignment of different data distributions based on multiple
domain discriminators. A key improvement over previous
methods is the capability to simultaneously promote positive
transfer of relevant data and alleviate negative transfer of
irrelevant data. The adaptation can be achieved by stochastic gradient descent with the gradients computed by backpropagation in linear-time. Empirical evidence demonstrates
that the proposed MADA approach outperforms state of the
art methods on standard domain adaptation benchmarks.

Abstract
Recent advances in deep domain adaptation reveal that adversarial learning can be embedded into deep networks to
learn transferable features that reduce distribution discrepancy between the source and target domains. Existing domain adversarial adaptation methods based on single domain
discriminator only align the source and target data distributions without exploiting the complex multimode structures. In
this paper, we present a multi-adversarial domain adaptation
(MADA) approach, which captures multimode structures to
enable ﬁne-grained alignment of different data distributions
based on multiple domain discriminators. The adaptation can
be achieved by stochastic gradient descent with the gradients
computed by back-propagation in linear-time. Empirical evidence demonstrates that the proposed model outperforms state
of the art methods on standard domain adaptation datasets.

Introduction
Deep networks, when trained on large-scale labeled datasets,
can learn transferable representations which are generically
useful across diverse tasks and application domains (Donahue et al. 2014; Yosinski et al. 2014). However, due to a
phenomenon known as dataset bias or domain shift (Torralba
and Efros 2011), predictive models trained with these deep
representations on one large dataset do not generalize well
to novel datasets and tasks. The typical solution is to further
ﬁne-tune these networks on task-speciﬁc datasets, however,
it is often prohibitively expensive to collect enough labeled
data to properly ﬁne-tune the high-capacity deep networks.
Hence, there is strong motivation to establishing effective
algorithms to reduce the labeling consumption by leveraging
readily-available labeled data from a different but related
source domain. This promising transfer learning paradigm,
however, suffers from the shift in data distributions across
different domains, which poses a major obstacle in adapting
classiﬁcation models to target tasks (Pan and Yang 2010).
Existing transfer learning methods assume shared label
space and different feature distributions across the source
and target domains. These methods bridge different domains
by learning domain-invariant feature representations without
∗

Corresponding author: Mingsheng Long
Equal contribution
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3934

