The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Contrastive Training for
Models of Information Cascades
Shaobin Xu, David A. Smith
College of Computer and Information Science
Northeastern University
440 Huntington Avenue
Boston, MA, 02115
{shaobinx,dasmith}@ccs.neu.edu
press releases from particular businesses or universities. Depending on our data source, some of these structures could
be directly observed. With the right API calls, we might observe retweets (links), chains of retweets (cascades), and follower relations (networks) on Twitter. We might also be interested in inferring an underlying social network for which
the Twitter follower relation is partial evidence. In contrast,
politicians interviewed on television do not explicitly cite
the sources of their talking points, which must be inferred.
Observing the diffusion process often reduces to keeping
track of when nodes (newspapers, bills, people, etc.) mention a piece of information, reuse a text, get infected, or exhibit a contagion in a general sense. When the structure of
the propagation of contagion is hidden and we cannot tell
which node infected which, all we have is the result of diffusion process—that is, the timestamp and possibly other information when the nodes get infected. We want to infer the
diffusion process itself by using such information to predict
the links of underlying network. There have been increasing
efforts to uncover and model different types of information
cascades on networks (Brugere, Gallagher, and Berger-Wolf
2016): modeling hidden networks from observed infections
(Stack et al. 2012; Rodriguez et al. 2014), modeling topic
diffusion in networks (Gui et al. 2014), predicting social inﬂuence on individual mobility (Mastrandrea, Fournet, and
Barrat 2015) and so on.
This work all focuses on using parametric models of the
time differences between infections. Such models are useful when the only information we can get from the result of
diffusion process is the timestamps of infections. We can
hope to make better predictions, however, with access to
additional features, such as the location of each node, the
similarity between the messages received by two nodes, etc.
Popular parametric models cannot incorporate these features
into unsupervised training.
In this paper, we propose an edge-factored, conditional
log-linear directed spanning tree (DST) model with an unsupervised, contrastive training procedure to infer the link
structure of information cascades. After reviewing related
work, we describe the DST model in detail, including an
efﬁcient inference algorithm using the directed matrix-tree
theorem and the gradient of our maximum conditional likelihood optimization problem. We then report experiments on
the ICWSM Spinn3r dataset, where we can observe the true

Abstract
This paper proposes a model of information cascades as directed spanning trees (DSTs) over observed documents. In
addition, we propose a contrastive training procedure that exploits partial temporal ordering of node infections in lieu of
labeled training links. This combination of model and unsupervised training makes it possible to improve on models that
use infection times alone and to exploit arbitrary features of
the nodes and of the text content of messages in information
cascades. With only basic node and time lag features similar to previous models, the DST model achieves performance
with unsupervised training comparable to strong baselines on
a blog network inference task. Unsupervised training with additional content features achieves signiﬁcantly better results,
reaching half the accuracy of a fully supervised model.

Introduction
As is their wont, politicians talk—on television, on the ﬂoor
of the legislature, in printed quotations, and on their websites and social media feeds. If you read and listen to all
these statements, you might notice common tropes and turns
of phrase that groups of politicians used to describe some issue (Grimmer and Stewart 2013). You might even discover
a list of “talking points” underlying this common behavior.1
Similarly, you might be reading the literature in a scientiﬁc
ﬁeld and ﬁnd that a paper from another discipline starts getting cited repeatedly. Which previous paper, or papers, introduced the new technique? Or perhaps you read several news
stories about a new product from some company and then
ﬁnd that they all share text with a press release put out by
the company.
In each of these cases, we might be interested in structures at differing levels of detail. We might be interested in
individual links, e.g., knowing which previous paper it was
that later papers were mining for further citations; in cascades, e.g., knowing which news stories are copying from
which press releases or from each other; and in networks,
e.g., knowing which politicians are most likely to share talking points or which newspapers are most likely to publish
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The U.S. State Department, for example, produced a muchdiscussed set of talking points memos in response to the 2012 attack in Benghazi.

483

