The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multi-Label Community-Based Question Classiﬁcation
via Personalized Sequence Memory Network Learning
Xinyu Duan,1 Shengyu Zhang,2 Zhou Zhao,1 Fei Wu1

1

{duanxinyu, zhaozhou, wufei}@zju.edu.cn, 2 light.e.gal@gmail.com
1
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
2
School of Information management, Wuhan University
No.38 Zheda Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China, 310027
context) and tags through PSMN for multi-label communitybased question classiﬁcation. When a certain user posts a
new question, our method can recursively generate the candidate tag sequences with the trained PSMN.

Abstract
Multi-label community-based question classiﬁcation is a
challenging problem in Community-based Question Answering (CQA), arising in many real applications such as question navigation and expert ﬁnding. Most of the existing approaches consider the problem as content-based tag suggestion task, which suffers from the textual sparsity issue. In
this paper, we consider the problem from the viewpoint of
personalized sequence learning. We introduce the personalized sequence memory network that leverages not only the
semantics of questions but also the personalized information
of askers to provide the sequence tag learning function to capture the high-order tag dependency. The experiment on realworld dataset shows the effectiveness of our method.

Methodology
We denote the input question by Q = {q1 , q2 , q3 , ..., qn },
where n is the number of questions in question set Q. qi is
an one-hot vector representing the textual content of the i-th
input question using bag-of-word (BOW) feature. We then
denote the set of user context by U = {u1 , u2 , u3 , ..., um }
for personalized context representation, where m is the number of users. ui is also an one-hot vector representing the K
most frequent words in a decreasing order based on the TFIDF scores from the user’s posted questions. Using TF-IDF
scores means that we hope to neglect the general terms that
users commonly use, since they are not helpful for personalization. The set of tags are denoted by L = {l1 , l2 , l3 , ..., lk },
where k is the number of distinct tags.
Inspired by some works of image caption, we construct
three memories to store three types of context information:
1. question memory that stores the semantics of the original
question; 2. user context memory for TF-IDF weighted K
frequent words from questions one user post; 3. tag memory
for the generated tags. The whole architecture of our model
is outlined in Figure 1. The internal memory vector for each
memory at time step t is computed as follows:

Introduction
The beneﬁts of CQA have been well recognized today (Zhao
et al. 2015). Most existing methods consider the problem of
multi-label community-based question classiﬁcation as text
categorization task, which trains the discriminative classiﬁer
model, and then ranks the tags to the given question based
on their semantic relevance. Although existing methods have
achieved excellent performance, they mainly use the textual
content, which still suffer from the textual sparsity issue. On
the other hand, these methods ignore the important inﬂuences of question askers. Let us take the question ”what is
the price of apple?” as an example. In this case, the businessman tends to know the stock price of the apple company
while the teenagers may be aware of the price of apple product. Therefore, the role of question askers is important for
tackling the textual sparsity issue of question classiﬁcation,
where the above question can be classiﬁed into the category
of company or product based on the askers role.
In this paper, we consider the problem of multi-label
community-based question classiﬁcation from the viewpoint of Personalized Sequence Memory Networks (PSMN)
learning. Our proposed model leverages not only the semantics of questions but also the peculiar interest of each user.
Speciﬁcally, we introduce the tag sequence learning method
with sequence memory networks to exploit the semantic tag
dependency. We jointly learn the embedding of questions,
personalized information (which can be extracted from user

a∗i = W∗a xi ;
qt = W l l t ;

c∗i = W∗c xi

p∗i = a∗i qt ;

o∗i = p∗i c∗i

where ∗ represents one of the three memory deﬁned
above. W represents the embedding matrix. xi is the i-th
stored feature in the corresponding memory. a, b and c are
the internal vector of the memory. p is a probability vector
over the input and o is the output vector of the memory.
Then we use a convolutional neural network (CNN) with
one convolutional layer and one pooling layer to obtain a
more powerful representation. The output vectors of CNN
from three memories are concatenated and form mt which is
then passed through a ﬁnal weight matrix Wg and a softmax
to produce the predicted tag probability vector ht :

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

ht = Sof tmax(Wg mt )

8071

