The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Flow-GAN: Combining Maximum Likelihood
and Adversarial Learning in Generative Models
Aditya Grover, Manik Dhar, Stefano Ermon
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
{adityag, dmanik, ermon}@cs.stanford.edu

The lack of characterization of an explicit density in
GANs is however problematic for two reasons. Several application areas of deep generative models rely on density
estimates; for instance, count based exploration strategies
based on density estimation using generative models have
recently achieved state-of-the-art performance on challenging reinforcement learning environments (Ostrovski et al.
2017). Secondly, it makes the quantitative evaluation of the
generalization performance of such models challenging. The
typical evaluation criteria based on ad-hoc sample quality
metrics (Salimans et al. 2016; Che et al. 2017) do not address
this issue since it is possible to generate good samples by
memorizing the training data, or missing important modes
of the distribution, or both (Theis, Oord, and Bethge 2016).
Alternatively, density estimates based on approximate inference techniques such as annealed importance sampling
(AIS; (Neal 2001; Wu et al. 2017)) and non-parameteric
methods such as kernel density estimation (KDE; (Parzen
1962; Goodfellow et al. 2014)) are computationally slow
and crucially rely on assumptions of a Gaussian observation model for the likelihood that could lead to misleading
estimates as we shall demonstrate in this paper.
To sidestep the above issues, we propose Flow-GANs,
a generative adversarial network with a normalizing ﬂow
generator. A Flow-GAN generator transforms a prior noise
density into a model density through a sequence of invertible transformations. By using an invertible generator, FlowGANs allow us to tractably evaluate exact likelihoods using
the change-of-variables formula and perform exact posterior
inference over the latent variables while still permitting efﬁcient ancestral sampling, desirable properties of any probabilistic model that a typical GAN would not provide.
Using a Flow-GAN, we perform a principled quantitative
comparison of maximum likelihood and adversarial learning
on benchmark datasets viz. MNIST and CIFAR-10. While
adversarial learning outperforms MLE on sample quality
metrics as expected based on strong evidence in prior work,
the log-likelihood estimates of adversarial learning are orders of magnitude worse than those of MLE. The difference
is so stark that a simple Gaussian mixture model baseline
outperforms adversarially learned models on both sample
quality and held-out likelihoods. Our quantitative analysis
reveals that the poor likelihoods of adversarial learning can
be explained as a result of an ill-conditioned Jacobian ma-

Abstract
Adversarial learning of probabilistic models has recently
emerged as a promising alternative to maximum likelihood.
Implicit models such as generative adversarial networks
(GAN) often generate better samples compared to explicit
models trained by maximum likelihood. Yet, GANs sidestep
the characterization of an explicit density which makes quantitative evaluations challenging. To bridge this gap, we propose Flow-GANs, a generative adversarial network for which
we can perform exact likelihood evaluation, thus supporting both adversarial and maximum likelihood training. When
trained adversarially, Flow-GANs generate high-quality samples but attain extremely poor log-likelihood scores, inferior
even to a mixture model memorizing the training data; the opposite is true when trained by maximum likelihood. Results
on MNIST and CIFAR-10 demonstrate that hybrid training
can attain high held-out likelihoods while retaining visual ﬁdelity in the generated samples.

1

Introduction

Highly expressive parametric models have enjoyed great
success in supervised learning, where learning objectives
and evaluation metrics are typically well-speciﬁed and easy
to compute. On the other hand, the learning objective for unsupervised settings is less clear. At a fundamental level, the
idea is to learn a generative model that minimizes some notion of divergence with respect to the data distribution. Minimizing the Kullback-Liebler divergence between the data
distribution and the model, for instance, is equivalent to performing maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) on the observed data. Maximum likelihood estimators are asymptotically statistically efﬁcient, and serve as natural objectives for
learning prescribed generative models (Mohamed and Lakshminarayanan 2016).
In contrast, an alternate principle that has recently attracted much attention is based on adversarial learning,
where the objective is to generate data indistinguishable
from the training data. Adversarially learned models such
as generative adversarial networks (GAN; (Goodfellow et
al. 2014)) can sidestep specifying an explicit density for any
data point and belong to the class of implicit generative models (Diggle and Gratton 1984).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3069

