The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Minesweeper with Limited Moves
Serge Gaspers

Stefan Rümmele

Abdallah Safﬁdine

Kevin Tran

UNSW Sydney and
Data61, CSIRO
Australia

UNSW Sydney and
University of Sydney
Australia

UNSW Sydney, Australia

UNSW Sydney, Australia

Table 1: Complexity for Minesweeper problems when varying the number of clicks and probability of winning. The
results labeled ∗ were obtained by de Bondt (2012).

Abstract
We consider the problem of playing Minesweeper with a limited number of moves: Given a partially revealed board, a
number of available clicks k, and a target probability p, can
we win with probability p. We win if we do not click on a
mine, and, after our sequence of at most k clicks (which reveal information about the neighboring squares) can correctly
identify the placement of all mines. We make the assumption,
that, at all times, all placements of mines consistent with the
currently revealed squares are equiprobable.
Our main results are that the problem is PSPACE-complete,
and it remains PSPACE-complete when p is a constant, in
particular when p = 1. When k = 0 (i.e., we are not allowed
to click anywhere), the problem is PP-complete in general,
but co-NP-complete when p is a constant, and in particular
when p = 1.

Clicks
0
unbounded
input

Probability
1

constant

input

co-NP-c
∈ Δ2P
PSPACE-c

co-NP-c
PP-h∗
PSPACE-c

PP-c
PSPACE-c∗
PSPACE-c

• Can the player win for certain (with probability 1)?
• Can the player win with probability C, for some constant
C ∈ (0, 1)?
• Can the player win with probability p, where p is part of
the input?

Introduction
Minesweeper is a puzzle game where the player is initially
presented with a blank grid of squares. Some squares contain
a mine, while others do not. The player can click on a square
to reveal information about the grid. If the clicked square is
a mine, the player instantly loses. Otherwise, a number from
0 to 8 is revealed, indicating the number of immediately adjacent squares that contain a mine. The goal of the game is to
determine the location of all the mines without being blown
up.
Traditionally, the game ends once the player has revealed
every square that is not a mine. However we consider a slight
variant where the player instead can, at any time, state for
each square whether there is a mine there. The player wins
if they are right, otherwise they lose.
A natural question is: given a partially revealed board,
does the player have a strategy that wins with probability p?
This question has been studied by de Bondt (2012). We will
consider the variant which combines this question of winning probability with a restriction on the number of times
the player can click. We assume, at any time, that each placement of mines that is consistent with the partially revealed
board is equiprobable.
We consider three questions about winning probability
(de Bondt (2012) considers the latter two).

We consider four restrictions on the number of clicks the
player can make:
• The player may click 0 times.
• The player may click as many times as they want (N
times, where N is the number of squares).
• The player may click k times, where k is part of the input.
This leads to 9 combinations of problems. We mainly focus on the 6 variants where the number of clicks is 0 or part
of the input, and our results are summarized in Table 1.

Related work
Kaye (2000) established that the Minesweeper Consistency
problem is NP-complete. This is the problem to decide
whether, for a partially revealed board, there is a placement
of mines consistent with the board. This result is among
the most well-known NP-completeness results, and helped
popularize the famous P vs NP problem (Stewart 2000).
Fix and McPhail (2004) showed that Minesweeper Consistency remains NP-complete when each cell is surrounded
by at most 1 mine. Pedersen (2004) proved that checking
whether a partially revealed board has a unique solution is
DP-complete, as is checking whether a move is safe. In that
paper, a move is a click or a placement of a ﬂag indicating
that the cell contains a mine and the input is not guaranteed

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

860

