The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Question Answering as Global Reasoning over Semantic Abstractions
Daniel Khashabi∗
University of Pennsylvania
danielkh@cis.upenn.edu

Tushar Khot

Ashish Sabharwal

Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI2)
tushark,ashishs@allenai.org

Dan Roth∗
University of Pennsylvania
danroth@cis.upenn.edu

derive multiple semantic views of the text and perform reasoning over these views to answer a variety of questions.
As an example, consider the following snippet of sports
news text and an associated question:

Abstract
We propose a novel method for exploiting the semantic structure of text to answer multiple-choice questions. The approach is especially suitable for domains that require reasoning over a diverse set of linguistic constructs but have limited
training data. To address these challenges, we present the
ﬁrst system, to the best of our knowledge, that reasons over
a wide range of semantic abstractions of the text, which are
derived using off-the-shelf, general-purpose, pre-trained natural language modules such as semantic role labelers, coreference resolvers, and dependency parsers. Representing multiple abstractions as a family of graphs, we translate question
answering (QA) into a search for an optimal subgraph that
satisﬁes certain global and local properties. This formulation
generalizes several prior structured QA systems. Our system,
S EMANTIC ILP, demonstrates strong performance on two domains simultaneously. In particular, on a collection of challenging science QA datasets, it outperforms various state-ofthe-art approaches, including neural models, broad coverage
information retrieval, and specialized techniques using structured knowledge bases, by 2%-6%.

P : Teams are under pressure after PSG purchased Neymar this season. Chelsea purchased Morata. The Spaniard
looked like he was set for a move to Old Trafford for the
majority of the summer only for Manchester United to sign
Romelu Lukaku instead, paving the way for Morata to ﬁnally
move to Chelsea for an initial £56m.
Q: Who did Chelsea purchase this season?
A: {Alvaro Morata, Neymar, Romelu Lukaku }

Given the bold-faced text P  in P , simple word-matching
sufﬁces to correctly answer Q. However, P  could have
stated the same information in many different ways. As
paraphrases become more complex, they begin to involve
more linguistic constructs such as coreference, punctuation,
prepositions, and nominals. This makes understanding the
text, and thus the QA task, more challenging.
For instead, P  could instead say Morata is the recent acquisition by Chelsea. This simple looking transformation
can be surprisingly confusing for highly successful systems
such as B I DAF (Seo et al. 2016), which produces the partially correct phrase “Neymar this season. Morata”. On the
other hand, one can still answer the question conﬁdently by
abstracting relevant parts of Q and P , and connecting them
appropriately. Speciﬁcally, a verb SRL frame for Q would
indicate that we seek the object of the verb purchase, a nominal SRL frame for P  would capture that the acquisition was
of Morata and was done by Chelsea, and textual similarity
would align purchase with acquisition.
Similarly, suppose P  instead said Morata, the recent
acquisition by Chelsea, will start for the team tomorrow.
B I DAF now incorrectly chooses Neymar as the answer, presumably due to its proximity to the words purchased and
this season. However, with the right abstractions, one could
still arrive at the correct answer as depicted in Figure 1 for
our proposed system, S EMANTIC ILP. This reasoning uses
comma SRL to realize that the Morata is referring to the acquisition, and a preposition SRL frame to capture that the
acquisition was done by Chelsea.
One can continue to make P  more complex. For exam-

Introduction
Question answering (QA) is a fundamental challenge in AI,
particularly in natural language processing (NLP) and reasoning. We consider the multiple-choice setting where Q is
a question, A is a set of answer candidates, and the knowledge required for answering Q is available in the form of
raw text P . This setting applies naturally to reading comprehension questions, as well as to open format multiple-choice
questions for which information retrieval (IR) techniques are
able to obtain relevant text from a corpus.
Several state-of-the-art QA systems excel at locating the
correct answer in P based on proximity to question words,
the distributional semantics of the text, answer type, etc
(Clark et al. 2016), however, often struggle with questions
that require some form of reasoning or appeal to a more subtle understanding of the supporting text or the question. We
demonstrate that we can use existing NLP modules, such as
semantic role labeling (SRL) systems with respect to multiple predicate types (verbs, prepositions, nominals, etc.), to
∗
Part of the work was done when the ﬁrst and last authors were
afﬁliated with the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1905

