The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Sentence Ordering and Coherence
Modeling Using Recurrent Neural Networks
Lajanugen Logeswaran,1 Honglak Lee,1 Dragomir Radev2
1

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Michigan
2
Department of Computer Science, Yale University
llajan@umich.edu, honglak@eecs.umich.edu, dragomir.radev@yale.edu

(Park and Kim 2015; Kiddon, Zettlemoyer, and Choi 2016).
Coherence models aid the better design of these systems.
Exploiting unlabelled corpora to learn semantic representations of data has become an active area of investigation.
Self-supervised learning is a typical approach that uses information naturally available as part of the data as supervisory
signals (Wang and Gupta 2015; Doersch, Gupta, and Efros
2015). Noroozi and Favaro (2016) attempt to learn visual
representations by solving image jigsaw puzzles. Sentence
ordering can be considered as a jigsaw puzzle in the language
domain and an interesting question is whether we can learn
useful textual representations by performing this task.
Our approach to coherence modeling is driven by recent
success in capturing semantics using distributed representations and modeling sequences using Recurrent Neural Nets
(RNN). RNNs are now the dominant approach to sequence
learning and mapping problems. The Sequence-to-sequence
(seq2seq) framework (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014) and
its variants have fueled RNN based approaches to a range of
problems such as language modeling, text generation, MT,
QA, and many others.
In this work we propose an RNN-based approach to the
sentence ordering problem which exploits the set-to-sequence
framework of Vinyals, Bengio, and Kudlur (2015). A wordlevel RNN encoder produces sentence embeddings, and a
sentence-level set encoder RNN iteratively attends to these
embeddings and constructs a context representation. Initialized with this representation, a sentence-level pointer network
selects the sentences sequentially.
The most widely studied task relevant to sentence ordering and coherence modeling is the order discrimination task.
Given a document and a permuted version of it, the task involves identifying the more coherent ordering. Our proposed
model achieves state-of-the-art performance on two benchmark datasets for this task, outperforming several classical
approaches and recent data-driven approaches.
Addressing the more challenging task of ordering a given
collection of sentences, we consider the novel and interesting
task of ordering sentences from abstracts of scientiﬁc articles.
Our model strongly outperforms previous work on this task.
We visualize the learned sentence representations and show
that our model captures high-level discourse structure. We
provide visualizations that help understand what information
in the sentences the model uses to identify the next sentence.

Abstract
Modeling the structure of coherent texts is a key NLP problem.
The task of coherently organizing a given set of sentences
has been commonly used to build and evaluate models that
understand such structure. We propose an end-to-end unsupervised deep learning approach based on the set-to-sequence
framework to address this problem. Our model strongly outperforms prior methods in the order discrimination task and a
novel task of ordering abstracts from scientiﬁc articles. Furthermore, our work shows that useful text representations can
be obtained by learning to order sentences. Visualizing the
learned sentence representations shows that the model captures
high-level logical structure in paragraphs. Our representations
perform comparably to state-of-the-art pre-training methods
on sentence similarity and paraphrase detection tasks.

1

Introduction

Modeling the structure of coherent texts is an important problem in NLP. A well-written text has a particular high-level
logical and topical structure. The actual word and sentence
choices and their transitions come together to convey the
purpose of the text. Our primary goal is to build models that
can learn such structure by arranging a given set of sentences
to make coherent text.
Multi-document Summarization (MDS) and retrievalbased Question Answering (QA) involve extracting information from multiple documents and organizing it into a
coherent summary. Since the relative ordering of sentences
from different sources can be unclear, being able to automatically evaluate a particular order is essential. Barzilay and
Elhadad (2002) discuss the importance of an ordering component in MDS and show that ﬁnding acceptable orderings
can enhance user comprehension.
More importantly, by learning to order sentences we can
model text coherence. It is difﬁcult to explicitly characterize
the properties of text that make it coherent. Ordering models
attempt to understand these properties by learning high-level
structure that causes sentences to appear in a speciﬁc order
in human-authored texts. Automatic methods for evaluating
human/machine generated text have great importance, with
applications in essay scoring (Miltsakaki and Kukich 2004;
Burstein, Tetreault, and Andreyev 2010) and text generation
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5285

