The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

An Interpretable Generative Adversarial Approach to Classiﬁcation
of Latent Entity Relations in Unstructured Sentences
Shiou Tian Hsu, Changsung Moon, Paul Jones, Nagiza F. Samatova
North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, 27606
{shsu3,cmoon2,pjones}@ncsu.edu, samatova@csc.ncsu.edu

models, and these beneﬁts have propagated into many
other important applications like document classiﬁcation,
sentiment analysis, summarization, topic discovery, wordsense disambiguation, co-reference identiﬁcation and more.
Initially neural models pushed classiﬁcation performance to
new heights, improving F1 score on relation classiﬁcation to
88% (?) compared to 82.2% using an SVM with engineered
features (?). However, neural models often seem to perform
incomprehensible operations on the sentence to reason
desired knowledge, whereas human readers usually derive
relations between entities by locating key indicating words.
For instance, given the following sentence, a human will
likely focus only on a few keywords that explain the
core relationships, such as the Component-Whole(e1 ,e2 )
relationship, whereas a neural model will leverage every
word in the sentence based on computed scores:

Abstract
We propose a generative adversarial neural network model
for relation classiﬁcation that attempts to emulate the way in
which human analysts might process sentences. Our approach
provides two unique beneﬁts over existing capabilities: (1)
we make predictions by ﬁnding and exploiting supportive rationales to improve interpretability (i.e. words or phrases extracted from a sentence that a person can reason upon), and
(2) we allow predictions to be easily corrected by adjusting
the rationales. Our model consists of three stages: Generator, Selector, and Encoder. The Generator identiﬁes candidate
text fragments; the Selector decides which fragments can be
used as rationales depending on the goal; and ﬁnally, the Encoder performs relation reasoning on the rationales. While
the Encoder is trained in a supervised manner to classify relations, the Generator and Selector are designed as unsupervised models to identify rationales without prior knowledge,
although they can be semi-supervised through human annotations. We evaluate our model on data from SemEval 2010
that provides 19 relation-classes. Experiments demonstrate
that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art models, and
that our model is capable of extracting good rationales on its
own as well as beneﬁting from labeled rationales if provided.

Example sentence: The disgusting scene was retaliation
against her brother Philip who rents the [room]e1 inside this
apartment [house]e2 on Lombard street.
Human interpretation: The disgusting scene was retaliation against her brother Philip who rents the [room]e1 inside this apartment [house]e2 on Lombard street.
Attention-based CNN models: The0.02 disgusting0.03
scene0.1 was0.02 retaliation0.03 against0.07 her0.015
brother0.02 Philip0.04 who0.08 rents0.03 the0.1 [room]e1
inside0.13 this0.03 apartment0.09 [house]e2 on0.01
Lombard0.03 street0.08 .
(value behind the words stands for the derived importance of the word for determining the relation)

Introduction
Sentence-level entity relation classiﬁcation is the task
of recognizing the relationship between two entities
within a sentence. It is the core function of autonomous
knowledge discovery in unstructured text (such as web
documents), and thus is critical for applications including information extraction, knowledge base construction, and many other higher level NLP tasks (?;
?). For example, given the following sentence:

In this research, we aim to improve interpretability of neural models by imitating the logic used by human annotators through a three-stage Generator-Selector-Encoder approach. The Generator ﬁrst enumerates candidate text fragments from the sentence using a Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN) model, then the Selector extracts fragments that are
informative for determining the relation and passes these on
to the Encoder to make ﬁnal relation predictions. We refer to
the text fragments as rationales as per the deﬁnition in (?;
?; ?). Some good examples of rationales are like “inside” in
the above example sentence, or “caused”, “resulted in” and
“leads to” for entities of Cause-Effect relationship.
However, under most situations, a heavily annotated

He had chest pains and [headaches]e1 from [mold]e2 in the
bedrooms.
with marked target entity e1 = “headaches” and e2 =
“mold”, the goal would be to correctly identify that this sentence expresses a casual relationship from e2 to e1 , for which
we use the notation Cause-Effect(e2 ,e1 ).
The ﬁeld of entity-relation classiﬁcation has greatly
beneﬁted from recent developments in neural network
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5181

