The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Deep Model with Local Surrogate Loss
for General Cost-Sensitive Multi-label Learning
Cheng-Yu Hsieh, Yi-An Lin, Hsuan-Tien Lin
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering
National Taiwan University
{r05922048, r02922163}@ntu.edu.tw htlin@csie.ntu.edu.tw

well may not be a good choice for other criteria, and it is
difﬁcult to modify those classical algorithms towards other
criteria. The demands from real-world applications call for
algorithms that can adapt to optimize different evaluation
criteria. Such algorithms allows applications to not only conduct goal-speciﬁc optimization but also change their goals
more easily if needed. As the evaluation criterion deﬁnes the
cost for misclassiﬁcations made by the learning algorithms,
MLL algorithms that adapt to optimize different criteria is
generally referred to as cost-sensitive multi-label learning
(CSMLL) algorithms (Li and Lin 2014).
Many CSMLL algorithms have been proposed in recent years (Dembczynski, Cheng, and Hüllermeier 2010;
Lo et al. 2011; Li and Lin 2014; Wu and Lin 2017;
Huang and Lin 2017). For example, probabilistic classiﬁer
chain (Dembczynski, Cheng, and Hüllermeier 2010) makes
cost-sensitive prediction with inference steps towards Bayesoptimal decisions, often with the help of an efﬁcient inference
rule that corresponds to the criterion of interest; condensed
ﬁlter tree (Li and Lin 2014) adapts to optimize different
criteria by transforming the criterion into sample weights
when training the underlying classiﬁers; progressive random
k-labelsets (Wu and Lin 2017) reduces the original CSMLL
problem into multiple cost-sensitive multi-class classiﬁcation
subproblems. Nonetheless, current CSMLL algorithms are
generally restricted to a certain class of criteria that can be
decomposed to per-instance measures, and cannot deal with
other criteria such as Precision-at-k.
In this work, we loosen the restriction and study a more
general CSMLL setting that requires the algorithms to adapt
to optimize virtually any common MLL criterion. However,
given the complicated nature of MLL criteria, designing such
general cost-sensitive algorithm is challenging. In particular, most of the criteria are highly non-convex and even
discontinuous, and it is thus generally impossible to optimize the criterion directly through numerical optimization.
A common practice to tackle the difﬁculty is to develop
appropriate surrogate loss function of the criterion of interest to make the optimization procedure tractable. (Petterson and Caetano 2010; 2011; Zhang and Zhou 2006;
Gong et al. 2013; Nam et al. 2014; Gao and Zhou 2011;
Dembczynski, Kotlowski, and Hüllermeier 2012). The surrogate loss function serves as a smooth proxy of the criterion
and carries better optimization properties during training.

Abstract
Multi-label learning is an important machine learning problem
with a wide range of applications. The variety of criteria for
satisfying different application needs calls for cost-sensitive
algorithms, which can adapt to different criteria easily. Nevertheless, because of the sophisticated nature of the criteria for
multi-label learning, cost-sensitive algorithms for general criteria are hard to design, and current cost-sensitive algorithms
can at most deal with some special types of criteria. In this
work, we propose a novel cost-sensitive multi-label learning
model for any general criteria. Our key idea within the model
is to iteratively estimate a surrogate loss that approximates the
sophisticated criterion of interest near some local neighborhood, and use the estimate to decide a descent direction for
optimization. The key idea is then coupled with deep learning
to form our proposed model. Experimental results validate
that our proposed model is superior to existing cost-sensitive
algorithms and existing deep learning models across different
criteria.

1

Introduction

Multi-label learning (MLL) addresses the problem of associating each data point with a set of relevant labels. It has
recently attracted much research attention since the problem
setting meets the needs of various real-world applications.
For instance, in image classiﬁcation, an image may contain
multiple objects simultaneously (Boutell et al. 2004). Other
MLL applications include text categorization (Schapire and
Singer 2000), music tag annotation (Lo et al. 2011), and video
classiﬁcation (Qi et al. 2007). Different MLL applications
often aim for different goals, and thus a variety of criteria
have been proposed to measure the performance of MLL algorithms from different angles. Some popular criteria include
Hamming loss, Rank loss, Example-F1, Micro-F1, Macro-F1,
and Precision-at-k (Tsoumakas, Katakis, and Vlahavas 2010;
Madjarov et al. 2012).
Classical MLL algorithms such as binary relevance
(Tsoumakas, Katakis, and Vlahavas 2010), classiﬁer chain
(Read et al. 2011), and label powerset (Tsoumakas, Katakis,
and Vlahavas 2010) are designed to optimize some speciﬁc
criterion. Nevertheless, because of the different behaviors of
different criteria, an algorithm that optimizes one criterion
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3239

