The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

RNN-Based Sequence-Preserved
Attention for Dependency Parsing
Yi Zhou, Junying Zhou, Lu Liu, Jiangtao Feng, Haoyuan Peng, Xiaoqing Zheng
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
{zhouyi13, junyingzhou14, l_liu15, fengjt16, hypeng15, zhengxq}@fudan.edu.cn

Deep neural networks are widely used in feature generation and selection in these years to produce relevant representations for tasks of interest automatically (Chen and
Manning 2014). Dyer et al (2015) ﬁrstly employed Recurrent Neural Networks for dependency parsing, since the recurrent structure is good at bridging long time lags between
relative inputs, which will be of great advantage at detecting
and representing the long-distance dependencies (Dyer et al.
2015; Kiperwasser and Goldberg 2016b; Cheng et al. 2016;
Dozat and Manning 2016; Zhang, Cheng, and Lapata 2017).
However, Recurrent Neural Networks may suffer from the
phenomenon that inputs in early time steps tend to have less
inﬂuence on the ﬁnal outputs. To overcome such shortcoming, the attention mechanism has been proposed to emphasize the relevant features.
The attention mechanism has gained popularity for its
ability to learn alignments between two different modularities (Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015). It was ﬁrstly
introduced in the area of machine translation (Bahdanau,
Cho, and Bengio 2014), learning to align words between the
source language and the target one. It has later been applied
in dialog generation (Shang, Lu, and Li 2015) by automatically align information in the response with those in the post,
and applied in reading comprehension (Seo et al. 2016) by
aligning keywords in the query with those in the context to
ﬁnd the answer.
However, unlike encoder-decoder models such as machine translation and dialog generation, dependency parsing
is quite another task. A key difference is that in encoderdecoder tasks, there exists a strong one-to-one relationship
between the source modularity and the target one, measured by semantic relatedness (often similarity) between two
words. However, during the search for the head of a word
in dependency parsing, many different parts of the sentence
should be taken into consideration. Sequential order among
these parts is one of most important factors.
In this work, we propose a novel approach to capture
helpful information sequentially, unlike the parallel style in
vanilla attention. During the sequence-preserved procedure,
the word of interest is ﬁrst provided as initial information
to generate a prior representation; then a sequence of words
is processed in order by attention-based network. The attention score and attentional representation at each time step is
dependent on those at the previous step, thus preserving the

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNN) combined with attention
mechanism has proved to be useful for various NLP tasks including machine translation, sequence labeling and syntactic parsing. The attention mechanism is usually applied by
estimating the weights (or importance) of inputs and taking
the weighted sum of inputs as derived features. Although
such features have demonstrated their effectiveness, they may
fail to capture the sequence information due to the simple
weighted sum being used to produce them. The order of the
words does matter to the meaning or the structure of the sentences, especially for syntactic parsing, which aims to recover
the structure from a sequence of words. In this study, we
propose an RNN-based attention to capture the relevant and
sequence-preserved features from a sentence, and use the derived features to perform the dependency parsing. We evaluated the graph-based and transition-based parsing models enhanced with the RNN-based sequence-preserved attention on
the both English PTB and Chinese CTB datasets. The experimental results show that the enhanced systems were improved
with signiﬁcant increase in parsing accuracy.

Introduction
Typical approaches to dependency parsing can be divided
into graph-based and transition-based parsers. Graph-based
parsers (McDonald 2006; Zheng 2017) utilize a certain algorithm to ﬁnd the best tree based on a scoring function over
candidate dependency trees, which is usually formulated as
the sum of arc scores. Transition-based parsers (Nivre 2004;
2008) view parsing as a sequence of transitions to incrementally build a dependency tree, with each transition selected by a classiﬁer at each step during the parsing process.
Speciﬁcally, graph-based parsers are globally trained, taking
into account the ﬁrst-order or high-order features, which are
deﬁned on the graph or subgraph for later decoding (Mcdonald, Crammer, and Pereira 2005). But those features are
deﬁned over a limited history of parsing decisions. On the
contrary, transition-based ones are trained locally and make
use of greedy inference algorithms, while it can deﬁne features over a rich history of parsing decisions. In a word, the
features used in two paradigms are quite different from each
other.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5738

