The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Visual Explanation by High-Level Abduction: On Answer-Set
Programming Driven Reasoning about Moving Objects
Jakob Suchan,1 Mehul Bhatt,1,2 Przemysław Wał˛ega,3 Carl Schultz4
1

Cognitive Vision – www.cognitive-vision.org
HCC Lab., University of Bremen, Germany, 2 MPI Lab., Örebro University, Sweden
3
University of Warsaw, Poland, and 4 Aarhus University, Denmark
VX P 2 : revise spatio-temporal beliefs, e.g., by nonmonotonically updating conﬂicting knowledge, to ﬁx inherently incompatible conﬁgurations in space-time defying geometric constraints and commonsense laws of naive physics,
e.g., pertaining to physical (un)realisability, spatio-temporal
continuity.
VX P 3 : make default assumptions, e.g., about spatiotemporal property persistence concerning occupancy or position of objects; identity of tracked objects in space-time.
Explanatory reasoning in general is one of the hallmarks
of general human reasoning ability; robust explainable visual perception particularly stands out as a foundational
functional capability within the human visuo-spatial perception faculty. In this respect, the following considerations —
establishing the scope of this paper— are important wrt.
VX P 1−3 :

Abstract
We propose a hybrid architecture for systematically computing robust visual explanation(s) encompassing hypothesis
formation, belief revision, and default reasoning with video
data. The architecture consists of two tightly integrated synergistic components: (1) (functional) answer set programming
based abductive reasoning with SPACE - TIME TRACKLETS as native entities; and (2) a visual processing pipeline for detection
based object tracking and motion analysis.
We present the formal framework, its general implementation as a (declarative) method in answer set programming,
and an example application and evaluation based on two diverse video datasets: the MOTChallenge benchmark developed by the vision community, and a recently developed
Movie Dataset.

Introduction

• our notion of explainability is driven by the ability to
support commonsense, semantic question-answering over
dynamic visuo-spatial imagery within a declarative KR
setting;
• the features alluded to in VX P 1−3 are not exhaustive; we
focus on those aspects that we deem most essential for the
particular case of movement tracking.

A range of empirical research areas such as cognitive psychology and visual perception articulate human visual sensemaking as an inherently abductive (reasoning) process (Moriarty 1996; Magnani 2015) involving tight linkages between
low-level sub-symbolic processes on the one hand, and highlevel object and event-based segmentation and inference involving concepts and relations on the other. In spite of the
state of the art in artiﬁcial intelligence and computer vision, and most recent advances in neural visual processing,
generalised explainable visual perception with conceptual
categories in the context of dynamic visuo-spatial imagery
remains an exceptionally challenging problem presenting
many research opportunities at the interface of Logic, Language, and Computer Vision.

A Hybrid Architecture for Visual Explanation This paper is driven by the development of a visual explanation
component within a large-scale computational vision & perception system targeted at a range of cognitive interaction technologies and autonomous systems where dynamic
visuo-spatial imagery is inherent.
The key contribution is a hybrid visual explanation
method based on the integration of high-level abductive reasoning within Answer Set Programming (ASP) ((Brewka,
Eiter, and Truszczyński 2011)) on the one hand, and lowlevel visual processing for object tracking on the other. The
core focus of the paper is on the theory, implementation, and
applied evaluation of the visual explanation method. We particularly emphasise the closely-knit nature of two key subcomponents representing abductive explanation (Σabd ) and
low-level motion tracking (Σtrk ) modules respectively:
Σabd . ASP-based abductive reasoning with abstract visuospatial concepts —such as OBJECTS, EVENTS, SPACE - TIME TRACK LETS— as native objects within ASP

Explainable Visual Perception We deﬁne explainable visual perception from a human-centred, and commonsense
reasoning viewpoint. In this paper, it denotes the ability to
declaratively:
VX P 1 : hypothesise spatio-temporal belief (states) and
events; events may be both primitive or temporally-ordered
aggregates; from a more foundational viewpoint, what is alluded to here is a robust mechanism for counterfactual reasoning.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1965

