The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Co-Attending Free-Form Regions and Detections with Multi-Modal
Multiplicative Feature Embedding for Visual Question Answering
Pan Lu,† Hongsheng Li,‡∗ Wei Zhang, Jianyong Wang,† Xiaogang Wang,‡∗
†

Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList)
Department of Computer Science, Tsinghua University
‡
Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Computing, East China Normal University
{lupantech, zhangwei.thu2011}@gmail.com, {hsli, xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, jianyong@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
Region-based
Multiplicative
Feature

Recently, the Visual Question Answering (VQA) task has
gained increasing attention in artiﬁcial intelligence. Existing VQA methods mainly adopt the visual attention mechanism to associate the input question with corresponding image regions for effective question answering. The free-form
region based and the detection-based visual attention mechanisms are mostly investigated, with the former ones attending free-form image regions and the latter ones attending prespeciﬁed detection-box regions. We argue that the two attention mechanisms are able to provide complementary information and should be effectively integrated to better solve
the VQA problem. In this paper, we propose a novel deep
neural network for VQA that integrates both attention mechanisms. Our proposed framework effectively fuses features
from free-form image regions, detection boxes, and question
representations via a multi-modal multiplicative feature embedding scheme to jointly attend question-related free-form
image regions and detection boxes for more accurate question
answering. The proposed method is extensively evaluated on
two publicly available datasets, COCO-QA and VQA, and
outperforms state-of-the-art approaches. Source code is available at https://github.com/lupantech/dual-mfa-vqa.

1

Question: What is the
elderly man pouring?

Answer:
Wine

Detection-based
Multiplicative
Feature

Figure 1: Co-attending free-form regions and detection
boxes based on the question, the whole image, and detection boxes for better utilizing complementary information to
solve the VQA task.

gions for accurate question answering. Most visual attention
mechanisms in VQA can be categorized into free-form region based methods (Lu et al. 2016; Fukui et al. 2016) and
detection-based methods (Li and Jia 2016; Shih, Singh, and
Hoiem 2016). For the free-form region based methods, the
question features learned by a Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) network and the image features learned by a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) are fused by either addictive, multiplicative or concatenation operations at every
image spatial location. The free-form attention map is obtained by applying a softmax non-linearity operation across
the fused feature map. Since there is no restriction on the obtained attention map, the free-form attention region is able
to attend both global visual context and speciﬁc foreground
objects for inferring answers. However, since there is no restriction, the free-form attentive regions might focus on partial objects or irrelevant context sometimes. For instance, for
an question, “What animal do you see?”, a free-form region attention map might mistakenly focus on only a part
of the foreground cat and generate an answer of “dog”. On
the other hand, for the detection-based attention methods,
the attention mechanism is utilized for relating the question
to pre-speciﬁed detection boxes (e.g., Edge boxes (Zitnick
and Dollár 2014)). Instead of applying the softmax operation
over all image spatial locations, the operation is calculated

Introduction

In recent years, multi-modal learning for language and vision has gained much attention in artiﬁcial intelligence.
Great progress has been achieved for different tasks including image captioning (Karpathy and Fei-Fei 2015), visual question generation (Mostafazadeh et al. 2016; Li et
al. 2017b), video question answering (Ye et al. 2017) and
text-to-image retrieval (Xie, Shen, and Zhu 2016; Li et al.
2017a). The Visual Question Answering (VQA) (Antol et
al. 2015) task has recently emerged as a more challenging
task. The algorithms are required to answer natural language
questions about a given image’s contents. Compared with
the conventional visual-language tasks such as image captioning and text-to-image retrieval, the VQA task requires
the algorithms to have a better understanding on both the
input image and question in order to infer the answer.
State-of-the-art VQA approaches utilize visual attention
mechanism to relate the question to meaningful image re∗

Co-corresponding authors.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7218

