The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Conditional Linear Regression
Diego Calderon

Brendan Juba, Zongyi Li

Lisa Ruan

University of Arkansas
dacalder@uark.edu

Washington University in St. Louis
{bjuba, zli}@wustl.edu

M.I.T.
llruan@mit.edu

Problem Deﬁnition

Abstract

Our input is deﬁned in terms of accessing examples
from a joint distribution D over {0, 1}n × Rd × R,
where a single example is denoted as (x(i) , y (i) , z (i) ) =
(x1 , . . . , xn , y1 , . . . , yd , z)i . In this notation, x(i) represents
the Boolean attributes (which are described by a binary
(i)
string of length n whose j-th bit is the value of xj ), y (i)
represents the input vectors (attributes), and z (i) is the variable we are interested in (label). For example, imagine we
want to estimate the price of a car. The label z ∈ R is the
price, the attributes y ∈ Rd are the Mileage, Year, and Number of accidents. The Boolean attributes x ∈ {0, 1}3 can be
“is American-made,” “is 4x4,” and “is Electric.” In this case,
the example (1,0,1,56000,2015,0) describes an Americanmade, 4x2 electric car, with 56000 miles, from 2015, and
with no recorded accidents. In this case, we would be interested in identifying a segment of the population for which
a linear rule is highly predictive of the price of certain cars,
whereas this linear rule may not provide a good prediction
overall in the larger population. Let us imagine that for this
data set, and for a target fraction of the population, we found
a simple rule that describes the sub-population, along with
its linear ﬁt. Recall that our Boolean attributes have the form
x ∈ {0, 1}3, and suppose that the example must satisfy the
condition “is American-made,” and “is Electric.” Now, if we
look at an example from the data set, we can verify if it satisﬁes the condition, and if it does, we have an improvement
over a general prediction rule. To be speciﬁc, if we look at an
arbitrary example, say, (1,0,1,45568, 2016,2), we can make
a more approximate prediction of the price of the car. Formally, Juba proposed the following task:

Previous work in machine learning and statistics commonly
focuses on building models that capture the vast majority of
data, possibly ignoring a segment of the population as outliers. By contrast, we may be interested in ﬁnding a segment
of the population for which we can ﬁnd a linear rule capable
of achieving more accurate predictions. We give an efﬁcient
algorithm for the conditional linear regression task, which is
the joint task of identifying a signiﬁcant segment of the population, described by a k-DNF, along with its linear regression
ﬁt.

Introduction
Linear regression, a model for understanding the relationship among variables in a data set, is a standard tool widely
used in biological and social sciences to predict events and to
describe possible relationships between variables. When addressing the task of prediction, machine learning and statistics commonly focus on capturing the vast majority of data,
occasionally ignoring a segment of the population as ”outliers” or ”noise,” which could be helpful to better understand
the data. Previous work by Juba (2016) gave an algorithm
to identify a signiﬁcant segment of the population for which
there exists a highly sparse linear ﬁt, along with a simple rule
that describes the subset. Even though sparsity is a desirable
feature to have in a linear regression, we might encounter
cases with solutions that are not sparse. In these cases, the
previous state of the art suffers a running time blow-up that
depends on the number of factors considered for the linear
prediction rule. To address this problem, Juba (2016) also
introduces an algorithm for the dense linear rule case, which
chooses the single best term, thus picking only a fraction of
the condition. We give an algorithm for conditional linear
regression that does not require constant sparsity and recovers a condition of nearly optimal probability. Our algorithm
extends an approach introduced by Charikar et al. (2017),
which obtains a list of candidate parameter vectors that is
guaranteed to have a good set of parameters for any small
subset of the data.

Deﬁnition 1 (Conditional l2 -linear regression) Suppose
that D is a joint distribution over x ∈ {0, 1}n , y ∈ H ⊂ Rd
and z ∈ R, where H has l2 radius r. If there exists an
optimal k-DNF condition c∗ , and a∗ ∈ H ⊂ Rd :
ED [(a∗ , y − z)2 |c∗ (x) = 1] ≤ 
P r[c∗ (x) = 1] ≥ μ
And the error (a∗ , y − z) follows σ-sub gaussian distribution,
Then for δ, γ ∈ (0, 1), we want to ﬁnd a k-DNF ĉ, and

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8055

