The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Fair Rent Division on a Budget
Ariel D. Procaccia

Rodrigo A. Velez

Dingli Yu

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University

Department of Economics
Texas A&M University

Institute for Interdisciplinary
Information Sciences
Tsinghua University

to the total rent. We make the standard assumption that the
utility functions of the agents are quasi-linear: the utility of
an agent for getting a room he values at x for the price of y
is x − y. The goal is to ﬁnd an allocation that is envy free:
the utility of each agent for his room at its price should be at
least as high as his utility for any other room, at the price of
that room.
It is well known that an envy-free allocation always exists (Svensson 1983), and one can be computed in polynomial time (Aragones 1995). In fact, there is an embarrassment of riches, as there are typically many envy-free allocations, which necessitates selecting between them. A natural choice is the maximin solution of Alkan et al. (1991),
which selects the allocation that maximizes the minimum
utility of any agent, subject to the envy-freeness constraint.
A linear-programming-based algorithm of Gal et al. (2017)
can compute the maximin solution in polynomial time; this
algorithm has been deployed on Spliddit since May 2015.
One advantage of the foregoing approach (especially the
assumption of quasi-linear utilities) is that preference elicitation is straightforward: participants only need to report
their value for each room. It many ways, it does hit a sweet
spot between expressiveness and ease of elicitation. But it
certainly does not address the needs of some users, and its
most prominent shortcoming is ignoring budget constraints.
This is reﬂected in feedback from Spliddit users — the following representative example was submitted in December
2016:

Abstract
The standard approach to fair rent division assumes that
agents have quasi-linear utilities, and seeks allocations that
are envy free; it underlies an algorithm that is widely used
in practice. However, this approach does not take budget
constraints into account, and, therefore, may assign agents
to rooms they cannot afford. By contrast, we design a
polynomial-time algorithm that takes budget constraints as
part of its input; it determines whether there exist envy-free
allocations that satisfy the budget constraints, and, if so, computes one that optimizes an additional criterion of justice. In
particular, this gives a polynomial-time implementation of the
budget-constrained maximin solution, where the maximization objective is the minimum utility of any agent. We show
that, like its non-budget-constrained counterpart, this solution
is unique in terms of utilities (when it exists), and satisﬁes additional desirable properties.

1

Introduction

A recent story in New Scientist1 nicely introduces a familiar
dilemma:
Every renter knows that not all rooms are created
equally. One bedroom might have an en-suite bathroom
and a view of the seaside, whereas another is half the
size and overlooks a dump. It’s only fair that the person who gets the better room pays a larger share of the
rent. The question [...] is: how much?
The ubiquity and simplicity of the rent division problem
have made it a poster child for computational fair division.
Indeed, of the ﬁve applications on the not-for-proﬁt fair division website Spliddit.org (Goldman and Procaccia 2014),
the rent calculator is the most popular — almost 30,000 rent
division instances have been created by users since the website’s launch in November 2014.
The standard rent division setup involves n agents, who
share an apartment with n rooms. Every agent has a value
for each room. An allocation matches the agents with rooms,
and assigns a price to each room, such that the prices add up

I’ve tried to use your fair calculator, but it did not work
in my case. In our situation, I am the guy with the most
tight [sic] budget. Unfortunately, your system does not
take into account the ‘maximum’ budget restrictions. I
was assigned an option that was too expensive for me,
so it did not help. Please advise if there is a way to use
the system, taking that kind of limitation into account.
Unfortunately, when agents are budget-constrained, an
envy-free allocation is no longer guaranteed to exist. For example, suppose there are two agents; a total rent of $1000;
two rooms where the ﬁrst is valued at $800 by both agents,
and the second is valued at $200 by both agents; and budget constraints of $600 for both agents. To avoid envy, the
desirable room must be priced at $800, but this is more than
either agent can pay.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.newscientist.com/article/2137642maths-website-stops-you-being-ripped-oﬀ-by-yourﬂatmates

1177

