The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Label Distribution Learning by
Exploiting Sample Correlations Locally
Xiang Zheng, Xiuyi Jia∗

Weiwei Li

School of Computer Science and Engineering
Nanjing University of
Science and Technology
Nanjing 210014, China

College of Astronautics
Nanjing University of
Aeronautics and Astronautics
Nanjing 210016, China
(LDL), which is a further extension of multi-label learning.
Different from traditional multi-label learning to output a label set, LDL outputs a label distribution, and each component in the distribution represents the degree of description
of the corresponding label to the instance which is called the
description degree.
After LDL has been put forward, more and more researchers tried to solve label ambiguity problems by using
LDL and achieved good results. To name a few, Geng et
al. (2010) proposed the IIS-LLD algorithm and applied it
into the facial age estimation problem, in which the original single-label dataset was transformed into a label distribution dataset. In their further works, to improve the efﬁciency of IIS-LLD, they proposed conditional probability
neural network (CPNN) algorithm (Geng, Yin, and Zhou
2013) and BFGS-LLD algorithm (Geng and Ji 2014). Yang
et al. (2015) attempted to combine LDL with deep learning
and proposed the deep label distribution learning (DLDL)
algorithm.
However, the above research does not take into account
the information of label correlations, i.e., one label may be
related to another one under certain conditions. For example, when a movie has a high description degree on label
action, it is more likely to have a higher description degree
on label adventure than label romance. By considering the
label correlations, LDL can exploit more data information
to improve the performance. Certain studies used label correlations in different ways, e.g., in (Zhou et al. 2016), the
relations of emotions were captured based on the Plutchiks
wheel of emotions (Plutchik 1980); Zhou el al. (2015) considered the label correlations by seeking Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcients between two labels. Although above algorithms attempted to exploit label correlations, they usually
considered label correlations in a global way by assuming
that the correlations were shared by all instances. However,
in most real-world applications, label correlations are usually appeared in a local way, where the correlations may be
shared by only a subset of instances instead of all instances.
For example, as shown in Figure 1, we assume ﬂower and
butterﬂy have a correlation. In image (b), butterﬂy is less
prominent and thus could be difﬁcult to predict; in this case,
the correlation between ﬂower and butterﬂy can be helpful
in learning label butterﬂy since the label ﬂower is relatively
easier to predict in this image. However, for image (c), with

Abstract
Label distribution learning (LDL) is a novel multi-label learning paradigm proposed in recent years for solving label ambiguity. Existing approaches typically exploit label correlations
globally to improve the effectiveness of label distribution
learning, by assuming that the label correlations are shared
by all instances. However, different instances may share different label correlations, and few correlations are globally applicable in real-world applications. In this paper, we propose
a new label distribution learning algorithm by exploiting sample correlations locally (LDL-SCL). To encode the inﬂuence
of local samples, we design a local correlation vector for each
instance based on the clustered local samples. Then we predict the label distribution for an unseen instance based on the
original features and the local correlation vector simultaneously. Experimental results demonstrate that LDL-SCL can
effectively deal with the label distribution problems and perform remarkably better than the state-of-the-art LDL methods.

Introduction
Learning with ambiguity is a hot topic in machine learning
and data mining areas. There are mainly two sophisticated
paradigms for solving label ambiguity at present, namely
single-label learning and multi-label learning (Tsoumakas,
Katakis, and Taniar 2007) respectively. In single-label learning framework, an instance is associated with a single class
label, whereas in multi-label learning, an instance may have
multiple class labels simultaneously. A great deal of research (Read, Pfahringer, and Holmes 2008; Read et al.
2011) have shown that multi-label learning is an effective
and widely applied paradigm, which can be seen as an extension of single-label learning. However, multi-label learning can only model the ambiguity of “what describes the instance” , i.e., it usually outputs a set of labels which are associated with the instance. Sometimes we need to deal with the
more general ambiguity of “how to describe the instance”.
For example, in some cases, we need not only know which
labels are associated with an instance, but also the extent
to which each label describes the instance. To solve such
problems, Geng (2010) proposed label distribution learning
∗

Corresponding author: Xiuyi Jia (jiaxy@njust.edu.cn).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4556

