The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Transferable Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Huaxin Xiao,1,2 Yunchao Wei,3 Yu Liu, 1 Maojun Zhang,1 Jiashi Feng2
1

Department of System Engineering, National University of Defense Technology
2
Department of ECE, National University of Singapore
3
Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{xiaohuaxin, jasonyuliu, mjzhang}@nudt.edu.cn, wychao1987@gmail.com, elefjia@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
The performance of deep learning based semantic segmentation models heavily depends on sufﬁcient data with careful
annotations. However, even the largest public datasets only
provide samples with pixel-level annotations for rather limited semantic categories. Such data scarcity critically limits
scalability and applicability of semantic segmentation models in real applications. In this paper, we propose a novel
transferable semi-supervised semantic segmentation model
that can transfer the learned segmentation knowledge from a
few strong categories with pixel-level annotations to unseen
weak categories with only image-level annotations, signiﬁcantly broadening the applicable territory of deep segmentation models. In particular, the proposed model consists of
two complementary and learnable components: a Label transfer Network (L-Net) and a Prediction transfer Network (PNet). The L-Net learns to transfer the segmentation knowledge from strong categories to the images in the weak categories and produces coarse pixel-level semantic maps, by effectively exploiting the similar appearance shared across categories. Meanwhile, the P-Net tailors the transferred knowledge through a carefully designed adversarial learning strategy and produces reﬁned segmentation results with better details. Integrating the L-Net and P-Net achieves 96.5% and
89.4% performance of the fully-supervised baseline using
50% and 0% categories with pixel-level annotations respectively on PASCAL VOC 2012. With such a novel transfer
mechanism, our proposed model is easily generalizable to a
variety of new categories, only requiring image-level annotations, and offers appealing scalability in real applications.

Figure 1: Illustration on two different settings for semisupervised image semantic segmentation: conventional Incategory Semi-supervised Semantic Segmentation (I3S) and
the novel Cross-category Semi-supervised Semantic Segmentation (C3S) (which we consider in this work). Different
from the I3S problem where each category (e.g., dog) has
a few in-category pixel-level annotations as well as considerable image-level labels, we introduce a more general and
realistic C3S problem where some categories (e.g., horse
and aeroplane) have pixel-level annotations and some
other categories to segment (e.g., dog and cat) only have
image-level labels. The C3S problem is more challenging
and requires the segmentation model to have a strong transferable learning ability. Best viewed in color.

models are developed to provide an alternative for comparable segmentation quality with less annotation cost.
In the setting of conventional semi-supervised semantic
segmentation (Papandreou et al. 2015; Hong, Noh, and Han
2015), namely the In-category Semi-supervised Semantic
Segmentation (I3S) as illustrated in the top panel of Figure 1, each category in the training set must be provided
with a few pixel-level annotations as well as considerable
image-level annotations. This setting however deviates from
real applications because a new introduced category still requires extra efforts on re-labeling the category samples. This
scheme thus becomes impractical for dealing with hundreds
of thousands of categories. For instance, over 20,000 categories are included in ImageNet (Russakovsky et al. 2015)
and people can recognize much more categories.

Introduction
Fully-supervised deep learning algorithms for semantic segmentation (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Chen et al.
2015; Pan et al. 2017) generally demand a large amount of
high-quality pixel-level annotation. However, such annotation is only available for a small number of categories to
date, e.g., 20 categories in PASCAL VOC 2012 (Everingham et al. 2014) and 80 categories in MS-COCO (Lin et al.
2014). Scarcity of annotated data severely limits the deployment of advanced segmentation models in real applications.
The semi-supervised learning based semantic segmentation
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7420

