The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Coalition Manipulation of Gale-Shapley Algorithm∗
Weiran Shen, Pingzhong Tang

Yuan Deng

Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
{emersonswr,kenshinping}@gmail.com

Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708, USA
ericdy@cs.duke.edu

women. At each round of the procedure, each man proposes
to his favorite woman among those who have not rejected
him yet. Then each woman rejects all men but her favorite
one. The algorithm terminates when no man can make any
proposal.
It is shown that the matching computed by the GaleShapley algorithm is stable and the algorithm is guaranteed
to terminate for each legal input, which immediately implies
that every instance of the stable matching problem has a stable matching. There are many interesting structural results in
the literature of stable matching theory. For example, among
all stable matchings, the matching computed by the GaleShapley algorithm is preferred by all men to other matchings, and thus is called the M-optimal (W-pessimal) matching. Similarly, the W-optimal (M-pessimal) matching can be
found by switching the roles of men and women. In fact, all
men and women have opposite preferences over the set of
stable matchings, i.e., for every two stable matchings μ1 and
μ2 , all men prefer μ1 to μ2 , if and only if all women prefer
μ2 to μ1 . Moreover, the set of all stable matchings forms a
lattice structure.

Abstract
It is well-known that the Gale-Shapley algorithm is not truthful for all agents. Previous studies in this category concentrate
on manipulations using incomplete preference lists by a single woman and by the set of all women. Little is known about
manipulations by a subset of women.
In this paper, we consider manipulations by any subset of
women with arbitrary preferences. We show that a strong
Nash equilibrium of the induced manipulation game always
exists among the manipulators and the equilibrium outcome
is unique and Pareto-dominant. In addition, the set of matchings achievable by manipulations has a lattice structure. We
also examine the super-strong Nash equilibrium in the end.

Introduction
The stable matching theory was introduced by Gale and
Shapley (1962). Since then, stability has been a central
concept in matching market design. The area has attracted
intensive research attention, putting theory into practice
through a large amount of important applications, such as
college admissions and school matchings (Abdulkadiroglu
and Sönmez 2003; Abdulkadiroğlu, Pathak, and Roth 2005;
Gale and Shapley 1962), hospitals-residents matchings (Irving and Manlove 2009; Irving, Manlove, and Scott 2000;
Roth 1996), kidney exchange programs (Abraham, Blum,
and Sandholm 2007; Roth, Sönmez, and Ünver 2004; 2005;
Liu, Tang, and Fang 2014), and water right trading (Liu et
al. 2016; Zhan et al. 2017).
We study the standard stable matching model, where two
set of agents, namely men and women, have preferences
over each other. A matching is a one-to-one correspondence
between the two sets. A pair of a man and a woman, who
are not matched together, but prefer each other to their designated partner, is said to be a blocking pair. A matching is called stable if there exists no blocking pair. The
Gale-Shapley algorithm, which was ﬁrst proposed by Gale
and Shapley (1962), takes as input the preference lists of
all agents, and computes a stable matching in O(n2 ) time.
The algorithm simulates the procedure of men proposing to

Incentive Issue
However, the Gale-Shapley algorithm suffers from the incentive issue, i.e., some agents have incentive to misreport
their preference lists. Although it is shown that the GaleShapley algorithm is group strategy-proof for all men (Dubins and Freedman 1981)1 , when the algorithm is adopted,
the women may have incentives to misreport their preferences. Moreover, a well-known impossibility result by
Roth (1982) states that no stable matching algorithm is truthful for all agents.
Gale and Sotomayor (1985) shows that if all women truncate their preference lists properly, the Gale-Shapley algorithm will output a matching that matches each of them to
their partner in the W-optimal matching. Teo, Sethuraman,
and Tan (2001) provide a polynomial time algorithm to ﬁnd
the optimal single-agent truncation manipulation. However,

∗

1

Precisely, group strategy-proof means no coalition manipulation can make all men in the coalition strictly better off, in this
context. If considering the case where no man is worse off and at
least one man is strictly better off, the Gale-Shapley algorithm is
not group strategy-proof (Huang 2006).

This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China Grant 61561146398 and a China Youth
1000-talent program.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1210

