The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

FILE: A Novel Framework for
Predicting Social Status in Signed Networks
Xiaoming Li, Hui Fang,∗ Jie Zhang
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
∗
Research Institute for Interdisciplinary Sciences and School of Information Management and Engineering
∗
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, China
lixiaoming@ntu.edu.sg, fang.hui@mail.shufe.edu.cn, zhangj@ntu.edu.sg
few methods have been proposed by also considering norelation as a meaningful social status to facilitate link prediction. For example, Song et al. (2015) demonstrate that
leveraging the no-relation status can improve the prediction
of positive links. However, they only focus on the prediction performance of positive links but cannot predict the
no-relation status. Li et al. (2017b) carry out the ﬁrst attempt to extend the link prediction to a more realistic setting by also predicting the no-relation status. They show that
no-relation can be distinguished from positive and negative
links, through a feature-based model, where the features are
extracted from social theories. However, this model is limited to the assumption that users have the same criteria to
link with others (Nguyen et al. 2011), which is unrealistic.
For example, some users might be more willingly to connect
to others while some are more inﬂuential and easily connected by others (Nguyen et al. 2011).
In fact, the link prediction problem in signed social networks becomes rather difﬁcult mainly due to the diversity of
no-relation. It is conceivable that most pairs of users with norelation have limited common connections (Stranger). However, in reality, many user pairs keep the no-relation status
even though they have many common connections (Frenemy). For example, in the Epinions dataset1 , 40, 779 out of
94, 732 user pairs who share more than 100 common neighbors still have no-relation with each other. It is very easy to
mispredict those users, who have many common neighbors
but are not linked, with a linked status.
In this paper, we propose a novel Framework of Integrating both Latent and Explicit features (FILE), to better deal
with the no-relation status in signed networks. The key idea
is to design two essential parts to represent the link formation probability. The ﬁrst part is the social linkage criteria
from the perspective of individual users, and the second part
is the external social inﬂuence from the perspective of user
pairs. Speciﬁcally, we design two latent features for the ﬁrst
part. One is the propensity to connect to others, namely the
activeness, and the other is the propensity to be connected
by others, namely the popularity. We train these two features via the matrix factorization technique with a rankingoriented loss function, and then we represent the linkage
likelihood as the inner product between the corresponding

Abstract
Link prediction in signed social networks is challenging because of the existence and imbalance of the three kinds of social status (positive, negative and no-relation). Furthermore,
there are a variety types of no-relation status in reality, e.g.,
strangers and frenemies, which cannot be well distinguished
from the other linked status by existing approaches. In this
paper, we propose a novel Framework of Integrating both Latent and Explicit features (FILE), to better deal with the norelation status and improve the overall link prediction performance in signed networks. In particular, we design two latent
features from latent space and two explicit features by extending social theories, and learn these features for each user
via matrix factorization with a specially designed rankingoriented loss function. Experimental results demonstrate the
superior of our approach over state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Signed social networks have been widely adopted by online
communities over the last few years, as they better reﬂect
real-life human relationships than unsigned networks (Tang
et al. 2016). Under the structure, three kinds of social status exist between two users: positive (trust or friend), negative (distrust or foe), and no-relation. For example, in the
Wikipedia vote network, a user may vote a candidate entity
as positive or negative, and can also choose not to vote and
thus maintain no-relation with the entity. The increasing interest in signed networks has heightened the need to rethink
the link prediction problem (Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg
2007), since it becomes more challenging in the scenario
of signed networks than unsigned networks which consider
only two kind of social status (linked or not).
Most studies (Leskovec, Huttenlocher, and Kleinberg
2010a; Chiang et al. 2011; Hsieh, Chiang, and Dhillon 2012;
Ye et al. 2013) on link prediction in signed networks focus
on predicting the sign of a link, i.e., assigning either a positive or negative sign to any pair of users. They show that
positive links and negative links can be distinguished with
a high accuracy. However, these studies simply assume that
it is already known whether there is a link between any two
users, which is invalid in real-world scenarios. Recently, a
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

330

www.trustlet.org/epinions.html

