The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Canonical Correlation Inference
for Mapping Abstract Scenes to Text
Nikos Papasarantopoulos

Helen Jiang

Shay B. Cohen

School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
nikos.papasa@ed.ac.uk

Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
helennn@stanford.edu

School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
scohen@inf.ed.ac.uk

or other computer vision techniques to solve a similar problem for real images (Section 2.2). Our work is most closely
related to the work by Ortiz, Wolff, and Lapata (2015) who
used phrase-based machine translation to translate images to
corresponding descriptions.

Abstract
We describe a technique for structured prediction, based on
canonical correlation analysis. Our learning algorithm ﬁnds
two projections for the input and the output spaces that aim
at projecting a given input and its correct output into points
close to each other. We demonstrate our technique on a
language-vision problem, namely the problem of giving a textual description to an “abstract scene.”

1

2

Background and Notation

We give in this section some background information about
CCA and the problem which we aim to solve with it.

Introduction

2.1

Canonical Correlation Analysis

Canonical correlation analysis (CCA; Hotelling, 1935) is a
technique for multiview dimensionality reduction, related to
co-training (Blum and Mitchell 1998). CCA assumes that
there are two views for a given set of data, where these two
views are represented by two random vectors X ∈ Rd and

Y ∈ Rd .
The procedure that CCA follows ﬁnds a projection of
the two views in a shared space of dimension m, such
that the correlation between the two views is maximized
at each coordinate, and there is minimal redundancy between the coordinates of each view. This means that CCA
solves the following sequence of optimization problems for

j ∈ {1, . . . , m} where aj ∈ R1×d and bj ∈ R1×d :

Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) is a method to reduce the dimensionality of multiview data, introduced by
Hotelling (1935). It takes two random vectors and computes their corresponding empirical cross-covariance matrix.
It then applies singular value decomposition (SVD) on this
matrix to get linear projections of the random vectors that
have maximal correlation.
In this paper, we investigate the idea of using CCA for
a full-ﬂedged structured prediction problem. More specifically, we suggest a method in which we take a structured
prediction problem training set, and then project both the inputs and the outputs to low-dimensional space. The projection ensures that inputs and outputs that correspond to each
other are projected to close points in low-dimensional space.
Decoding happens in the low-dimensional space. As such,
our training algorithm builds on previous work by Udupa
and Khapra (2010) and Jagarlamudi and Daumé III (2012)
who used CCA for transliteration.
Our approach of canonical correlation inference is simple
to implement and does not require complex engineering tailored to the task. It mainly needs two feature functions, one
for the input values and one for the output values and does
not require features combining the two. We also propose a
simple decoding algorithm when the output space is text.
We test our learning algorithm on the domain of language
and vision. We use the abstract scene dataset of Zitnick and
Parikh (2013), with the goal of mapping images (in the form
of clipart abstract scenes) to their corresponding image descriptions. This problem has a strong relationship to recent
work in language and vision that has used neural networks

arg max

corr(aj X  , bj Y  )

such that

corr(aj X  , ak X  ) = 0,

aj ,bj





corr(bj Y , bk Y ) = 0,

k<j
k<j

where corr is a function that accepts two vectors and returns
the Pearson correlation between the pairwise elements of the
two vectors. The problem of CCA can be solved by applying
singular value decomposition (SVD) on a cross-covariance
matrix between the two random vectors X and Y , normalized by the covariance matrices of X and Y .
More speciﬁcally, CCA is solved by applying thin singular value decomposition (SVD) on the empirical version of
the following matrix:
1

1

(E[XX  ])− 2 E[XY  ](E[Y Y  ])− 2 ≈ U ΣV  ,

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

where E[·] is the expectation operator and Σ is a diagonal
matrix of size m × m for some small m. Since this version

5358

