The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Attention Model from Human for Visuomotor Tasks
Luxin Zhang,1 Ruohan Zhang,2 Zhuode Liu,2 Mary M. Hayhoe,3 Dana H. Ballard2
1

Department of Intelligence Science, Peking University, Beijing, China, 100871
2
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin
3
Center for Perceptual Systems, The University of Texas at Austin
1
zhangluxin@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
A wealth of information regarding intelligent decision making is conveyed by human gaze and visual attention, hence,
modeling and exploiting such information might be a promising way to strengthen algorithms like deep reinforcement
learning. We collect high-quality human action and gaze data
while playing Atari games. Using these data, we train a deep
neural network that can predict human gaze positions and visual attention with high accuracy.

(a) Original image with gaze

(b) Human perceived image

Figure 1: (a) An original game frame for Atari Seaquest with
a red circle indicating the human gaze position. The gaze position is used to generate a foveated image (b) that is biologically plausible retinal representations of the visual stimulus
(the stimulus as perceived by the human).

Introduction
Humans have high acuity foveal vision in the central 1-2 visual degrees of the visual ﬁeld (i.e., covering the width of a
ﬁnger at arms length), with resolution decreasing exponentially in the periphery. While the machine perceives images
like in Fig. 1a, a human would see Fig. 1b (Perry and Geisler
2002). A foveal visual system may seem inferior compared
to a full resolution camera, but it leads to an outstanding
property of human intelligence: The visual attention mechanism. Humans manage to move their foveae to the correct
place at the right time in order to emphasize important taskrelevant features (Rothkopf, Ballard, and Hayhoe 2007). In
this way, a wealth of information is encoded in human gaze
behaviors–for example, the priority of one object over another in performing an action.
Previous work in computer vision has formalized visual attention modeling as a saliency prediction problem
where saliency is mostly derived from image statistics, such
as intensity, color, and orientation in the classic Itti-Koch
model (Itti, Koch, and Niebur 1998). This approach has
made tremendous progress due to large benchmark datasets
and deep neural networks (Bylinskii et al. 2016). In contrast,
top-down models emphasizes the effects of task-dependent
variables on visual attention (Hayhoe and Ballard 2005).
(Rothkopf, Ballard, and Hayhoe 2007) have shown that
varying task instructions drastically alters the gaze distributions on different categories of objects (e.g., task-irrelevant
objects are ignored even though they are salient). The topdown attention model is hence closely related to reinforcement learning since they both concern visual state features
that matter the most for acquiring the reward.

Regardless of their approaches, these works argue that
there is much valuable information encoded in gaze behaviors. It should be said that the two approaches are not
mutually exclusive, since attention is modulated in both
saliency-driven and volition-controlled manners (Itti, Koch,
and Niebur 1998). As mentioned before, deep neural networks have been a standard approach to predict bottom-up
saliency. In contrast, top-down gaze models often rely on
manually deﬁned task variables. Our approach seeks to combine these approaches and use the representation learning
power of deep networks to extract task-relevant visual features, given task-driven gaze data.

Experiments and Results
We collected human data using eight Atari games in the Arcade Learning Environment (Bellemare et al. 2012). The raw
image frame, the human keystroke action, and the gaze position were recorded. The gaze data was recorded using an
EyeLink 1000 eye tracker at 1000Hz.
We formalize visual attention modeling as an end-to-end
saliency prediction problem, whereby a deep network can
be used to predict a probability distribution of the gaze
(saliency map). The full network architecture is a threechannel convolution-deconvolution network. The inputs to
the top channel are the images where the preprocessing procedure follows (Mnih et al. 2015) and hence consist of a
sequence of 4 frames stacked together where each frame

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8181

