The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Anchors: High-Precision Model-Agnostic Explanations
Marco Tulio Ribeiro

Sameer Singh

Carlos Guestrin

University of Washington
marcotcr@cs.washington.edu

University of California, Irvine
sameer@uci.edu

University of Washington
guestrin@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
(a) Instances

We introduce a novel model-agnostic system that explains the
behavior of complex models with high-precision rules called
anchors, representing local, “sufﬁcient” conditions for predictions. We propose an algorithm to efﬁciently compute these
explanations for any black-box model with high-probability
guarantees. We demonstrate the ﬂexibility of anchors by explaining a myriad of different models for different domains
and tasks. In a user study, we show that anchors enable users
to predict how a model would behave on unseen instances
with less effort and higher precision, as compared to existing
linear explanations or no explanations.

(b) LIME explanations

(c) Anchor explanations

Introduction

Figure 1: Sentiment predictions, LSTM

Sophisticated machine learning models such as deep neural
networks have been shown to be highly accurate for many
applications, even though their complexity virtually makes
them black-boxes. As a consequence of the need for users
to understand the behavior of these models, interpretable
machine learning has seen a resurgence in recent years,
ranging from the design of novel globally-interpretable machine learning models (Lakkaraju, Bach, and Leskovec 2016;
Ustun and Rudin 2015; Wang and Rudin 2015) to local explanations (for individual predictions) that can be computed
for any classiﬁer (Baehrens et al. 2010; Ribeiro, Singh, and
Guestrin 2016b; Strumbelj and Kononenko 2010).
A question at the core of interpretability is whether humans
understand a model enough to make accurate predictions
about its behavior on unseen instances. For instances where
humans can conﬁdently predict the behavior of a model, let
(human) precision be the fraction in which they are correct
(note that this is human precision, not model precision). High
human precision is paramount for real interpretability - one
can hardly say they understand a model if they consistently
think they know what it will do, but are often mistaken.
Most local approaches provide explanations that describe
the local behavior of the model using a linearly weighted combination of the input features (Baehrens et al. 2010; Ribeiro,
Singh, and Guestrin 2016b; Strumbelj and Kononenko 2010).
Linear functions can capture relative importance of features
in an easy-to-understand manner. However, since these linear

explanations are in some way local, it is not clear whether
they apply to an unseen instance. In other words, their coverage (region where explanation applies) is unclear. Unclear
coverage can lead to low human precision, as users may think
an insight from an explanation applies to unseen instances
even when it does not. When combined with the arithmetic involved in computing the contribution of the features in linear
explanations, the human effort required can be quite high.
Take for example LIME (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin
2016b) explanations for two sentiment predictions made by
an LSTM in Figure 1. Although both explanations are computed to be locally accurate, if one took the explanation on
the left and tried to apply it to the sentence on the right, one
might be tempted to think that the word “not” would have a
positive inﬂuence, which it does not. While such explanations
provide insight into the model, their coverage is not clear, e.g.
when does “not” have a positive inﬂuence on sentiment?
In this paper, we introduce novel model-agnostic explanations based on if-then rules, which we call anchors. An
anchor explanation is a rule that sufﬁciently “anchors” the
prediction locally – such that changes to the rest of the feature
values of the instance do not matter. In other words, for instances on which the anchor holds, the prediction is (almost)
always the same. For example, the anchors in Figure 1c state
that the presence of the words “not bad” virtually guarantee a
prediction of positive sentiment (and “not good” of negative

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1527

