The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Bayesian Functional Optimization
Ngo Anh Vien

Heiko Zimmermann

Marc Toussaint

EEECS/ECIT,
Queen’s University Belfast

MLR, University of Stuttgart

MLR, University of Stuttgart

etc.. Speciﬁcally, the goal is to optimize an unknown realvalued objective function f (x) on some bounded subset X ,
mostly a subset of d . At each round t, the optimizer can
only access a noisy evaluation yt by querying f (xt ) at a
sample point xt . The target is to ﬁnd the minimizer x∗
of the objective function while also minimizing the overall evaluation cost. To this end making decisions on an optimal next query point needs to integrate the information
of all previous queries. A common approach of BayesOpt
is to incorporate a Gaussian process prior as a probabilistic surrogate model of the unknown function. New candidate points are then sampled based on the posterior distribution of the learned model. Hence, the decision making process becomes a belief search problem. Many criteria can be
used to exploit the distribution of this learned model, for
example the probability of improvement (Kushner 1964),
the expected improvement (Močkus 1975), the conﬁdence
bound criteria (Cox and John 1992; Srinivas et al. 2012), and
information-based approaches (Hennig and Schuler 2012;
Shahriari et al. 2014).
In this work, we are concerned with black-box optimization of functional objectives. By modeling candidate functions in reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) we enable BayesOpt to optimize in non-parametric, rich solution
spaces while inheriting the useful structures and properties
from a RKHS.
As a summary, our major contributions are three-fold:
First, we propose the novel Bayesian functional optimization framework (BFO), that enables optimization in function
spaces that are potentially inﬁnite-dimensional. To this end
BFO adopts a functional Gaussian process prior as a surrogate model for objective functionals, moreover we propose
three acquisition functionals to select which function should
be evaluated next: Probability of Improvement, Expected
Improvement, and iGP-UCB functionals (inﬁnite GP-UCB).
Second, by assuming the domain of BFO is a RKHS HK
with a kernel K, we show that functional gradients of those
acquisition functionals can be derived analytically. Moreover, those functional gradients are functions in HK which
results in an efﬁcient functional gradient update. Third, we
provide a cumulative regret bound for iGP-UCB.
There have recently been similar effort in proposing new
machine learning frameworks for learning on functional
data, such as functional regression by (Kadri et al. 2015),

Abstract
Bayesian optimization (BayesOpt) is a derivative-free approach for sequentially optimizing stochastic black-box functions. Standard BayesOpt, which has shown many successes
in machine learning applications, assumes a ﬁnite dimensional domain which often is a parametric space. The parameter space is deﬁned by the features used in the function
approximations which are often selected manually. Therefore, the performance of BayesOpt inevitably depends on
the quality of chosen features. This paper proposes a new
Bayesian optimization framework that is able to optimize directly on the domain of function spaces. The resulting framework, Bayesian Functional Optimization (BFO), not only extends the application domains of BayesOpt to functional optimization problems but also relaxes the performance dependency on the chosen parameter space. We model the domain
of functions as a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS),
and use the notion of Gaussian processes on a real separable Hilbert space. As a result, we are able to deﬁne traditional improvement-based (PI and EI) and optimistic acquisition functions (UCB) as functionals. We propose to optimize
the acquisition functionals using analytic functional gradients
that are also proved to be functions in a RKHS. We evaluate
BFO in three typical functional optimization tasks: i) a synthetic functional optimization problem, ii) optimizing activation functions for a multi-layer perceptron neural network,
and iii) a reinforcement learning task whose policies are modeled in RKHS.

Introduction
Bayesian optimization is a derivative-free optimization
scheme and is approached from the viewpoint of Bayesian
theory (Jones, Schonlau, and Welch 1998; Brochu, Cora,
and De Freitas 2010). It frames the optimization problem of unknown functions as a sequential decision task.
These unknown functions are often costly to evaluate, especially in stochastic tasks, hence query points have to
be selected such that the total cost of evaluations is optimized, for example, cost minimization in robotic control
tasks as thoroughly discussed by (Deisenroth, Neumann, and
Peters 2013), proﬁt maximization in advertisement placement problems (Pandey, Chakrabarti, and Agarwal 2007),
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4171

