The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

It Takes (Only) Two: Adversarial Generator-Encoder Networks
Dmitry Ulyanov

Andrea Vedaldi

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Yandex
dmitry.ulyanov@skoltech.ru

University of Oxford
vedaldi@robots.ox.ac.uk

Victor Lempitsky
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
lempitsky@skoltech.ru

Krähenbühl, and Darrell 2017; Dumoulin et al. 2017). Alternatively, the method of (Zhu et al. 2016) starts by learning a
unidirectional GAN, and then learns a corresponding inverse
mapping (the encoder) post-hoc.
While compounding autoencoding and adversarial discrimination does improve GANs and VAEs, it does so at
the cost of added complexity. In particular, each of these
systems involves at least three deep mappings: an encoder,
a decoder/generator, and a discriminator. In this work, we
show that this is unnecessary and that the advantages of autoencoders and adversarial training can be combined without
increasing the complexity of the model.
In order to do so, we propose a new architecture, called
an Adversarial Generator-Encoder (AGE) Network, that contains only two feed-forward mappings, the encoder and the
generator, operating in opposite directions. As in VAEs, the
generator maps a simple prior distribution in latent space
to the data space, while the encoder is used to move both
the real and generated data samples into the latent space.
In this manner, the encoder induces two latent distributions,
corresponding respectively to the encoded real data and the
encoded generated data. The AGE learning process then considers the divergence of each of these two distributions to the
original prior distribution.
There are two advantages of this approach. First, due to the
simplicity of the prior distribution, computing its divergence
to the latent data distributions reduces to the calculation of
simple statistics over small batches of images. Second, unlike GAN-like approaches, real and generated distributions
are never compared directly, thus bypassing the need for
discriminator networks as used by GANs. Instead, the adversarial signal in AGE comes from learning the encoder to
increase the divergence between the latent distribution of the
generated data and the prior, which works against the generator, which tries to decrease the same divergence (Figure 1).
Optionally, AGE training may include reconstruction losses
typical of AEs.
The AGE approach is evaluated on a number of standard
image datasets, where we show that the quality of generated
samples is comparable to that of GANs (Goodfellow et al.
2014; Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2016), and the quality of
reconstructions is comparable or better to that of the more

Abstract
We present a new autoencoder-type architecture that is trainable in an unsupervised mode, sustains both generation and
inference, and has the quality of conditional and unconditional
samples boosted by adversarial learning. Unlike previous hybrids of autoencoders and adversarial networks, the adversarial
game in our approach is set up directly between the encoder
and the generator, and no external mappings are trained in the
process of learning. The game objective compares the divergences of each of the real and the generated data distributions
with the prior distribution in the latent space. We show that direct generator-vs-encoder game leads to a tight coupling of the
two components, resulting in samples and reconstructions of a
comparable quality to some recently-proposed more complex
architectures.

Introduction
Deep (Variational) Auto Encoders (AEs (Bengio 2009) and
VAEs (Kingma and Welling 2014; Rezende, Mohamed, and
Wierstra 2014)) and deep Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs (Goodfellow et al. 2014)) are two of the most popular approaches to generative learning. These methods have
complementary strengths and weaknesses. VAEs can learn a
bidirectional mapping between a complex data distribution
and a much simpler prior distribution, allowing both generation and inference; on the contrary, the original formulation
of GAN learns a unidirectional mapping that only allows
sampling the data distribution. On the other hand, GANs
use more complex loss functions compared to the simplistic
data-ﬁtting losses in (V)AEs and can usually generate more
realistic samples.
Several recent works have looked for hybrid approaches
to support, in a principled way, both sampling and inference like AEs, while producing samples of quality comparable to GANs. Typically this is achieved by training a AE
jointly with one or more adversarial discriminators whose
purpose is to improve the alignment of distributions in the
latent space (Brock et al. 2017; Makhzani et al. 2016), the
data space (Che et al. 2017; Larsen, Sønderby, and Winther
2015) or in the joint (product) latent-data space (Donahue,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1250

