The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Proposition Entailment in Educational Applications
Using Deep Neural Networks
Florin Bulgarov, Rodney Nielsen
University of North Texas
1155 Union Circle, Denton, Texas, 76203, USA
FlorinBulgarov@my.unt.edu
Rodney.Nielsen@unt.edu
Abstract

Data

To have a more meaningful impact, educational applications
need to signiﬁcantly improve the way feedback is offered to
teachers and students. We propose two methods for determining propositional-level entailment relations between a reference answer and a student’s response. Both methods, one
using hand-crafted features and an SVM and the other using
word embeddings and deep neural networks, achieve signiﬁcant improvements over a state-of-the-art system and two alternative approaches.

We use a modiﬁed version of the dataset introduced by
Godea, Bulgarov and Nielsen (2016), which contains realclassroom questions, each associated with a teacher input
reference answer and an average of 22 student responses.
The most important difference is adding the entailment labels. Two graduate students from the Education and Linguistics Department established the proper entailment relations between each pair of reference answer MMP and student response – understood (31%) or not understood (69%),
with a third annotator acting as an adjudicator. A total of
20,815 entailment instances resulted, which were split into
train (60%), development (20%) and test (20%) sets.

Introduction
Recent advancements in machine learning have started to
put their mark on educational technology. Although the vast
majority of the classrooms around the world look essentially
the same as they have for several decades, many teachers and
students have started to embrace the advantages that technology can bring to the learning process. Moreover, extensive
studies have already shown that students who use Intelligent
Tutoring Systems outperform students from regular classes
(Kulik and Fletcher 2016). This paper focuses on increasing
the learning gains in classrooms through algorithms that enhance the analysis between the teacher’s reference answer,
a student’s response, and the relations between them. We
contribute by proposing two ﬁne-grained approaches that
predict entailment relations between a student’s response
and each proposition or clause from the teacher’s answer.
Both methods, one that uses neural networks with word embeddings and the other an SVM model with hand-crafted
features, reach similar average F1 -scores, signiﬁcantly outperforming a state-of-the-art system and two alternative approaches. On this account, we make use of Minimal Meaningful Propositions (MMPs) (Godea, Bulgarov, and Nielsen
2016). MMPs have recently been introduced as a decomposition of text into the set of propositions that individually
represent single minimal claims or arguments that cannot
be further decomposed without losing contextual meaning.
By splitting the instructor’s reference answer into MMPs,
we can make more meaningful comparisons between the
learner’s response and the individual claims expressed in the
reference answer.

Classiﬁcation
A ﬁrst approach to this task uses hand-crafted features. The
features are split into general features and facet (Nielsen,
Ward, and Martin 2009) features. The 45 general features
describe general relations between the reference answer
MMP and the student response, such as the overall similarities and dependencies between words, Pointwise Mutual Information (PMI) scores, overlapping content, BLEU score,
etc. For the rest of the features, we make use of facets due to
their granularity level, allowing us to pinpoint the main relations between the two texts. Governor, modiﬁer and relation
features are used for each of the following facets: (1) the
least likely understood; (2) the most likely understood; and
(3), as the averages of all facets. The least and most likely
understood facets are chosen by averaging the PMI value
between the governors and modiﬁers of a reference answer
MMP facet and all student response’s facets. Our second approach to this task is using GloVe word embeddings with a
deep neural network (DNN). Speciﬁcally, we computed the
average embedding vector for each text (reference answer
MMP and student response), and combined them into a single vector by concatenating the element-by-element product vector and absolute difference vector (thus, experiments
with 200-dimensional word embeddings resulted in a 400dimensional input to the neural network). The DNN has two
hidden layers, each having 64 hidden nodes and a dropout
rate of 0.5. Only a small number of iterations was needed to
reach the reported results (10 to 20).

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8053

