The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Towards a Uniﬁed Framework for Syntactic Inconsistency Measures
Glauber De Bona

John Grant

Anthony Hunter

Sébastien Konieczny

Escola Politécnica
Universidade de São Paulo
São Paulo, Brasil

Dept. of Computer Science
and UMIACS
University of Maryland
College Park, MD, USA

Dept. of Computer Science
University College London
London, UK

CRIL
CNRS - Université d’Artois
Lens, France

some alternatives have been proposed (e.g. (Besnard 2014))
which offer some groupings of approaches. Nevertheless,
our understanding of inconsistency measures lacks a general framework in which to position and compare them. To
address this shortcoming, in this paper we propose a general
framework for syntactic inconsistency measures.
There is currently no formal deﬁnition of syntactic inconsistency measures, though informally in the literature, they
are regarded as measures deﬁned in terms of the proof theory, rather than for instance the semantics, of a logic. The
majority of syntactic inconsistency measures in the literature
are based on minimal inconsistent subsets (MISs), with each
such measure focusing on a different aspect of these sets. In
this paper, we introduce the notion of an inconsistency graph
to capture substantial information about the minimal inconsistent subsets of a knowledgebase. We show how and when
functions on inconsistency graphs yield inconsistency measures, and identify new measures based on these functions.
In the second part of the paper, we present a way of classifying inconsistency measures in a hierarchy starting with abstractions of the inconsistency graph. We then consider how
existing and new inconsistency measures can be classiﬁed
by this hierarchy. This is, as far we know, the ﬁrst proposal
for a general deﬁnition of a (large) family of inconsistency
measures. Interestingly, we show how some examples of inconsistency measures, that do not appear at ﬁrst to be syntactic, ﬁt into this hierarchy.

Abstract
A number of proposals have been made to deﬁne inconsistency measures. Each has its rationale. But to date, it is not
clear how to delineate the space of options for measures, nor
is it clear how we can classify measures systematically. In
this paper, we introduce a general framework for comparing
syntactic inconsistency measures. It uses the construction of
an inconsistency graph for each knowledgebase. We then introduce abstractions of the inconsistency graph and use the
hierarchy of the abstractions to classify a range of inconsistency measures.

Introduction
Inconsistency is a key issue for operating in the real world.
If we are to build computing systems that are inconsistency
tolerant (i.e. systems that can handle inconsistency in information, opinions, requirements, desires, plans, etc.) then we
need technologies for assessing and acting on inconsistency
(Gabbay and Hunter 1991; Bertossi, Hunter, and Schaub
2004; Calvanese et al. 2008; Eiter et al. 2014).
A key aspect of inconsistency tolerance is the need to
measure inconsistency so that we can better assess the nature
of the inconsistency. By knowing more about the kind and
degree of inconsistency, we are better able to take an appropriate action to deal with it. Application areas being developed that harness measures of inconsistency included software engineering (Mu, Liu, and Jin 2012; Borgida, Jureta,
and Zamansky 2015), network intrusion detection (McAreavey et al. 2011), reasoning with spatial and temporal
information (Condotta, Raddaoui, and Salhi 2016), answer
set programming (Ulbricht, Thimm, and Brewka 2016), and
robotics (Costa and Martins 2016).
Numerous proposals for inconsistency measures have
been made (Grant 1978; Knight 2001; Hunter 2002;
Konieczny, Lang, and Marquis 2003; Hunter and Konieczny
2004; Grant and Hunter 2006; Hunter and Konieczny 2006;
Ma et al. 2007; Qi and Hunter 2007; Grant and Hunter 2008;
Zhou et al. 2009) and some inter-relationships established
(e.g. (Grant and Hunter 2011; Thimm 2016b)). Furthermore,
some axioms have been proposed for the minimal properties
of such measures (Hunter and Konieczny 2006; 2010), and

Preliminaries
We assume a propositional language L of formulas composed from a countable set of propositional variables
(atoms) P and the logical connectives ∧, ∨, ¬. We use φ
and ψ for arbitrary formulas and a, b, c, . . . for atoms. A
knowledgebase K is a ﬁnite set of formulas. We let  denote the classical consequence relation, and write K  ⊥ to
denote that K is inconsistent. We write R≥0 for the set of
≥0
∪ {∞}, K for the
nonnegative real numbers, R≥0
∞ for R
set of all knowledgebases (in some presumed language L),
and 2X for the set of all subsets (the power set) of any set
X.
For a knowledgebase K, MI(K) is the set of minimal
inconsistent subsets (MISs) of K, and MC(K) is the set
of maximal consistent subsets of K. Also, if MI(K) =
{M1 , ..., Mn } then Prob(K) = M1 ∪ ... ∪ Mn is the set of

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1803

