The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Parallel Algorithms for Operations
on Multi-Valued Decision Diagrams
Guillaume Perez

Jean-Charles Régin

Dept. of Computer Science
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850 USA
gdp35@cornell.edu

Universit Nice Sophia Antipolis, CNRS, I3S
UMR 7271, 06900 Sophia Antipolis, France
jcregin@gmail.com

constraints represented by MDDs correspond to operations
performed on MDDs. Conjunction of constraints is accomplished by intersecting MDDs and disjunction by union.
Recently, efﬁcient operators such as union, difference
negation, intersection, etc., have been designed (Perez and
Régin 2015; 2016). These are based on algorithms dealing
directly with the graph structure of the MDD instead of function decomposition, which requires reaching the leaves of
a branch as Shannon or Bryant did (Bryant 1986). By explicitly working on the structure, they dramatically accelerated the algorithm and observed a time reduction of several orders of magnitude in comparison to other existing algorithms. The design of efﬁcient algorithms has permitted
a new look at MDDs, because extremely large MDDs can
ﬁnally be manipulated now. One successful application of
these ideas is the modelling of the maxOrder problem proposed by Pachet in his ERC project Flow Machine (Pachet
2011). Perez and Régin (Perez and Régin 2015) solved the
problem by deﬁning two MDDs, computing their difference,
applying the result 16 times, and performing 16 intersections. The time to compute the ﬁnal MDD is equivalent to
that required for the algorithm of Pachet’s group, and 52GB
of memory was needed to represent it.
However, very large MDDs imply long times for performing operations even if these operations have a low complexity. For example, in a recent study, more than 2,000 seconds
are needed for performing only two intersections (Perez and
Régin 2017). Thus, parallelism seems the only one way to
reduce these times.
Using a parallel CP solver is not an adequate answer
because classical method, such as work-stealing (Jaffar et
al. 2004; Michel, See, and Hentenryck 2009; Chu, Schulte,
and Stuckey 2009) or embarrassingly parallel search (Régin,
Rezgui, and Malapert 2013) requires to duplicate some parts
of the problem which is not possible with MDDs requiring
tens of gigabytes of memory. Therefore, parallel versions
of the sequential algorithms implementing the operators are
needed.
In this paper, we propose to parallelize the sequential
algorithms implementing operations for MDDs. More precisely, we design parallel versions of the algorithms proposed in (Perez and Régin 2015), that is the reduction algorithm, which merge equivalent nodes, and the generic apply
algorithm from which the other operators are built.

Abstract
Multi-valued Decision Diagrams (MDDs) have been extensively studied in the last ten years. Recently, efﬁcient algorithms implementing operators such as reduction, union, intersection, difference, etc., have been designed. They directly
deal with the graph structure of the MDD and a time reduction
of several orders of magnitude in comparison to other existing
algorithms have been observed. These operators have permitted a new look at MDDs, because extremely large MDDs can
ﬁnally be manipulated as shown by the models used to solve
complex application in music generation. However, MDDs
become so large (50GB) that minutes are sometimes required
to perform some operations. In order to accelerate the manipulation of MDDs, parallel algorithms are required. In this paper, we introduce such algorithms. We carefully design them
in order to overcome inherent difﬁculties of the parallelization of sequential algorithms such as data dependencies, software lock-out, false sharing, or load balancing. As a result, we
observe a speed-up , i.e. ratio between parallel and sequential
runtimes, growing linearly with the number of cores.

Introduction
Multi-valued Decision Diagrams (MDDs) have been extensively studied in the last ten years, notably by the team of
J. Hooker, who recently published a book on this subject
(Bergman et al. 2016). They are a compressed representation of a set (Bryant 1986) and are used to model the set
of tuples of constraints. They are implemented in almost all
constraint programming solvers and have been increasingly
used to build models (Roy et al. 2016; Perez and Régin 2015;
Andersen et al. 2007; Hadzic et al. 2008; Hoda, van Hoeve,
and Hooker 2010; Bergman, van Hoeve, and Hooker 2011;
Gange, Stuckey, and Van Hentenryck 2013; Cheng and Yap
2010). They can be constructed in several ways, from tables,
automata, dynamic programming, etc.
MDDs have several advantages. They have a high compression efﬁciency. For instance, an MDD having 14,000
nodes and 600,000 arcs and representing 1090 tuples has
been used to solve a music synchronization problem (Roy
et al. 2016). Unlike other compressed representations, operations are performed directly on the compressed representation, i.e. without decompression. The combinations of
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6625

