The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Social Norms of Cooperation with Costly Reputation Building
Fernando P. Santos,1,4 Jorge M. Pacheco,2,3,4 Francisco C. Santos1,4
1

INESC-ID and Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, IST-Taguspark, 2744-016 Porto Salvo, Portugal
2
Centro de Biologia Molecular e Ambiental, Universidade do Minho, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal
3
Departamento de Matemática e Aplicações, Universidade do Minho, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal
4
ATP-group, P-2744-016 Porto Salvo, Portugal

phenomena emerging after the interaction of a large number
of agents (Wooldridge 2009). In the former case, norms directly constrain agents’ possible actions, constituting what
were named social laws (Shoham and Tennenholtz 1995).
In the second case, norms are conceived as globally adopted
behaviors, emerging due to local interactions of agents, and
constituting the so-called social conventions (Shoham and
Tennenholtz 1997). Often, however, norms that prevail in a
society only enforce behaviors indirectly, functioning as a
top-down mechanism that inﬂuences the bottom-up adherence (or not) to certain behaviors. This is particularly evident when systems of reputations are used to enforce social norms (Castelfranchi, Conte, and Paolucci 1998): acting
in a certain way may provide a reputation uplift/downgrade
whose tangible effect emerges in the future, as a form of reciprocation. In fact, enforcing behaviors indirectly, through
norms and reputations, underlies Indirect Reciprocity (IR),
known as a fundamental mechanism for the evolution of cooperation among humans (Nowak and Sigmund 2005).
Besides originating in the scope of evolutionary biology
and economics, IR is particularly relevant for AI: ﬁrst, it
allows studying incipient moral values and ethical principles in computational environments, providing clues for the
formalization of artiﬁcial ethics and morality (Greene et al.
2016); second, IR has been claimed as a cornerstone behind
the evolution of human language and intelligence (Nowak
and Sigmund 2005); third, reputation mechanisms play a
central role in multiagent systems (Pinyol and Sabater-Mir
2013) with special applications in present-day online platforms that sustain high rates of cooperation between its users
(Ho et al. 2012).
Despite promising, IR shares a fundamental challenge
with other reputation systems working as enforcement
mechanisms of social norms: they require observability
(Haynes et al. 2017), i.e., agents able to observe the behaviors of their peers. With rare exceptions (Suzuki and
Kimura 2013; Sasaki, Okada, and Nakai 2016), previous
models typically assume that observability is an exogenous
factor – for instance, an adjustable parameter that controls
the observability level in the system (Ohtsuki, Iwasa, and
Nowak 2015). In reality, however, accessing the information about a private interaction depends on the decision of
the agents involved that may share (or not) its outcome. As
an example, in e-commerce or p2p platforms, private in-

Abstract
Social norms regulate actions in artiﬁcial societies, steering
collective behavior towards desirable states. In real societies,
social norms can solve cooperation dilemmas, constituting a
key ingredient in systems of indirect reciprocity: reputations
of agents are assigned following social norms that identify
their actions as good or bad. This, in turn, implies that agents
can discriminate between the different actions of others and
that the behaviors of each agent are known to the population
at large. This is only possible if the agents report their interactions. Reporting constitutes, this way, a fundamental ingredient of indirect reciprocity, as in its absence cooperation
in a multiagent system may collapse. Yet, in most studies to
date, reporting is assumed to be cost-free, which collides with
many life situations, where reporting can easily incur a cost
(costly reputation building). Here we develop a new model
of indirect reciprocity that allows reputation building to be
costly. We show that only two norms can sustain cooperation
under costly reputation building, a feature that requires agents
to be able to anticipate the reporting intentions of their opponents, depending sensitively on both the cost of reporting and
the accuracy level of reporting anticipation.

Introduction
Social norms are a cornerstone of human societies, being a fundamental mechanism to solve coordination (Young
2015), cooperation (Fehr and Fischbacher 2004) and collective action problems (Nyborg et al. 2016). In general, social norms are public and establish an expected pattern of
behavior. When violated, they may lead to responses that
range from gossip to open censure, ostracism, or dishonor
for the transgressor (Bicchieri 2005). Examples range from
bargaining norms – determining the behavior of buyers and
sellers – to ancient practices such as foot binding in China
or dueling in Europe (Young 2015). In artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI), social norms have gathered special attention, constituting an appealing tool that can be used to efﬁciently steer
behaviors towards desirable states (Wooldridge 2009).
Research on social norms in artiﬁcial societies is usually
divided in a top-down approach – in which norms are designed ofﬂine and imposed in agents by a central authority
– or a bottom-up approach – in which norms are studied as
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4727

