The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Emphasizing 3D Properties in Recurrent
Multi-View Aggregation for 3D Shape Retrieval
Cheng Xu, Biao Leng,∗ Cheng Zhang, Xiaochen Zhou
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
{cxu, lengbiao, zcheng, zhouxiaochen}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-view based shape descriptors have achieved impressive
performance for 3D shape retrieval. The core of view-based
methods is to interpret 3D structures through 2D observations. However, most existing methods pay more attention to
discriminative models and none of them necessarily incorporate the 3D properties of the objects. To resolve this problem,
we propose an encoder-decoder recurrent feature aggregation
network (ERFA-Net) to emphasize the 3D properties of 3D
shapes in multi-view features aggregation. In our network, a
view sequence of the shape is trained to encode a discriminative shape embedding and estimate unseen rendered views
of any viewpoints. This generation task gives an effective supervision which makes the network exploit 3D properties of
shapes through various 2D images. During feature aggregation, a discriminative feature representation across multiple
views is effectively exploited based on LSTM network. The
proposed 3D representation has following advantages against
other state-of-the-art: 1) it performs robust discrimination under the existence of noise such as view missing and occlusion, because of the improvement brought by 3D properties.
2) it has strong generative capabilities, which is useful for
various 3D shape tasks. We evaluate ERFA-Net on two popular 3D shape datasets, ModelNet and ShapeNetCore55, and
ERFA-Net outperforms the state-of-the-art methods signiﬁcantly. Extensive experiments show the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed 3D representation.

Rendered
by OpenGL

Interpret
3D nature

3D representation

Viewpoint_1

Viewpoint_2

Encoder

Decoder
Viewpoint_3

Viewpoint_n

Multi-view aggregation

Unseen viewpoint estimation

Figure 1: We propose a method for multi-view based shape
descriptors through emphasizing 3D properties in multiview features aggregation. A 3D representation is encoded
with the view sequence of the 3D shape and trained to generate rendered images of unseen viewpoints.

several works have been conducted on discriminative 3D
representation such as MVCNN (Su et al. 2015), fusing discriminative information of each view into a compact feature
vector. These approaches, while effectively identifying different categories, have a major shortcoming: the learned representations do not signiﬁcantly integrate 3D properties of
shapes. Some local and crucial structures of 3D shapes like
the doorknob of a door object are difﬁcult to be captured
from some rendered images. In addition, though MVCNN
possesses the high discrimination power, the fact that the
model is supervised only for classiﬁcation tasks with 2D
rendered images hinders its performance seriously in some
cases such as view missing and occlusion. These cases pose
challenges to the view-based 3D representation learning.
Motivated by the recent line of work that learns to generate 3D shapes by using 3D CAD models (Dosovitskiy,
Springenberg, and Brox 2015; Kulkarni et al. 2015; Choy
et al. 2016; Yan et al. 2016), we introduce the generative
model into the multi-view features fusion process to address

Introduction
With the rapid development of 3D scene techniques and the
explosive growth of large-scale public 3D shape repositories
(Chang et al. 2015), 3D shape retrieval has become more
signiﬁcant than ever. Among the existing methods on datadriven shape descriptors for 3D shapes, feature learning over
multi-view image sequence of 3D shapes achieves the stateof-the-art performance on various 3D shape retrieval tasks
(Su et al. 2015; Qi et al. 2016). Recently, many researchers
have been devoted to learning a 3D representation based on
deep learning techniques (Qi et al. 2017; Yi et al. 2017; Liu,
Li, and Wang 2017).
Interpreting 3D structures through 2D observations of
shapes is the core of the view-based algorithms. Moreover,
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7428

