The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Automated Question Answering System
for Community-Based Questions
Chanin Pithyaachariyakul, Anagha Kulkarni
cpithyaa@mail.sfsu.edu, ak@sfsu.edu
San Francisco State University
1600 Holloway Ave, San Francisco, California, 94132

Abstract
The emergence of community question answering sites, such
as, Yahoo! Answer (Y!A), and Quora, indicate that for certain
information needs, users prefer receiving focused answers to
their questions, rather than a list of URLs from search results.
This trend has sparked a rich area of investigation at the intersection of Information Retrieval (IR), Natural Language Processing (NLP), and Machine Learning (ML) of Automated
Question Answering (QA). In this paper, we present our attempt at developing an efﬁcient QA system for both factoid
and non-factoid questions from any domain. Empirical evaluation of our system using multiple datasets demonstrates
that our system outperforms the best system from the TREC
LiveQA tracks, while keeping the response time to under less
than half a minute.

Figure 1: System’s Architecture

System Overview
Figure 1 illustrates the architecture of our system. Next we
describe the four modules of the system in details.

Introduction
Question Answering (QA) problem has been researched extensively by IR, NLP, and ML communities (Agichtein et
al. 2016). To accomplish the QA task, the following subproblems have to be addressed: (i) transforming free-text
questions into well-formed boolean queries (ii) compiling
sources of documents that may contain the answer, (iii)
extracting short units of texts as candidate answers from
the retrieved documents, and (iv) selecting the best answer
using effective ranking algorithms (Wang et al. 2015). To
solve each of these sub-problems, we designed our QA system, SF-State-QA, into four components: Question Formulation Module (QFM) applies effective tools to transform verbose questions into key-phrase queries; Document Retrieval
Module (DRM) searches knowledge-rich resources to obtain
answer-bearing web-pages; Candidate Answer Extraction
Module (CAEM) generates short passages from the webpages for candidate answers, and Answer Selection Module
(ASM) utilizes ML techniques to select the best answer. We
use TREC LiveQA datasets to evaluate our system performance with the ofﬁcial ranking metrics. The results demonstrate that our system outperforms the best systems from the
TREC LiveQA 2015 and 2016 competitions.

Query Formulation Module (QFM)
The QFM transforms the free-text questions to well-formed
boolean conjunctive queries that can be evaluated by search
engines. This is one of the most difﬁcult processes because
human-generated questions are often lengthy and ambiguous, containing many unnecessary connecting words for
human-friendly readers. However, the additional words create the long queries that mislead the main idea of the questions, or even do not return any search result. Thus, we need
to analysis the complex questions to generate the queries that
are precise for search engines to highly obtain relevant documents. In this research, we applied Stanford dependency
parser library (Chen and Manning 2014) to detect phrases in
order to generate the key-phrase queries based on grammatical rules. For instance, the question: “Why’s juice from orange peel supposed to be good for eyes?” is transformed to
a boolean query: “(orange peel) AND (good for eyes) AND
(juice).” This keyword-phrase query is more explicit than
single-word query because orange juice has more dominant
presence on the sites than orange peel juice. Consequently,
with the single-word query, documents about orange juice
have higher opportunities to be retrieved that is not relevant
to the question. Therefore, key-phrase queries are more unambiguous to obtain higher amount of accurate documents.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8131

