The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Facility Location Games with Fractional Preferences
Ken C.K. Fong,a Minming Li,a Pinyan Lu,b Taiki Todo,c Makoto Yokooc
a

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
b
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Shanghai, China.
c
Department of Informatics, Kyushu University, Motooka 744, Fukuoka, Japan.

agents are restricted so that well-known impossibility results
do not hold.
For example, in the traditional model of locating one facility on a continuous line, there exists a class of strategyproof and anonymous mechanisms called generalized median voter schemes (Moulin 1980), while in general voting situations any strategy-proof mechanism must be dictatorial, under some natural assumptions, by the GibbardSatterthwaite theorem (Gibbard 1973; Satterthwaite 1975).
By changing agents’ preferences on facilities as well as
the nature of facilities, the traditional facility location game
is extended to two facility location games, where researchers
have studied heterogeneous facilities or homogeneous facilities on a line. To the best of our knowledge, there does
not exist any studies of facility location games between heterogeneous and homogeneous versions. However, in reality
there are indeed facilities which are different but serving a
similar purpose, such as the supermarket along with the convenience store, the hospital along with the clinic, etc.
In order to capture this scenario, we introduce the fractional preference model in this paper. Besides only zero and
one on agents’ preferences, the fractional preference model
allows agents to report a fractional preference on both facilities to indicate how often they require for both facilities.
The fractional preference model complements the study
on two facility location games. We further formulate the
fractional preference model into three cases.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a fractional preference model for the
facility location game with two facilities that serve the similar
purpose on a line where each agent has his location information as well as fractional preference to indicate how well they
prefer the facilities. The preference for each facility is in the
range of [0, L] such that the sum of the preference for all facilities is equal to 1. The utility is measured by subtracting
the sum of the cost of both facilities from the total length L
where the cost of facilities is deﬁned as the multiplication of
the fractional preference and the distance between the agent
and the facilities.
We ﬁrst show that the lower bound for the objective of mini1
mizing total cost is at least Ω(n 3 ). Hence, we use the utility
function to analyze the agents’ satiﬁcation. Our objective is
to place two facilities on [0, L] to maximize the social utility
or the minimum utility. For each objective function, we propose deterministic strategy-proof mechanisms. For the objective of maximizing the social utility, we present an optimal
deterministic strategy-proof mechanism in the case where
agents can only misreport their locations. In the case where
agents can only misreport their preferences, we present a 2approximation deterministic strategy-proof mechanism. Finally, we present a 4-approximation deterministic strategyproof mechanism and a randomized strategy-proof mechanism with an approximation ratio of 2 where agents can misreport both the preference and location information. Moreover, we also give a lower-bound of 1.06. For the objective
of maximizing the minimum utility, we give a lower-bound
of 1.5 and present a 2-approximation deterministic strategyproof mechanism where agents can misreport both the preference and location.

1

• Case 1: the preference information is public whereas the
location information is private.
A university town is a community that the population is
dominated by university students. Within the university
town, it contains various facilities to support the daily
lives of university students. We can ﬁnd those famous university towns in Europe like Oxford in UK, Heidelberg in
Germany, Salamanca in Spain, etc. Suppose the university
plans to build one data-science laboratory and one multimedia laboratory in the university town. Students have

Introduction

In recent years, designing mechanisms to achieve desirable
properties under various constraints is a key research topic
in the literature of mechanism design and social choice theory. AI researchers and computer scientists are interested in
designing mechanisms for various mechanism design problems such as voting, auctions and matching.
The facility location game is known as a special case of
voting1 , where the location and preference information of

case of voting, but voting is usually assumed to be over a ﬁnite set
of alternatives whereas in facility location, that set in inﬁnite.
The work described in this paper was supported by a grant
from Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (Project No. CityU 11268616) and JSPS
KAKENHI (Grant No. JP17H00761).

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
It is generally true that the facility loation is known as a special

1039

