The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Sentient Ascend: AI-Based Massively
Multivariate Conversion Rate Optimization
Risto Miikkulainen,1,2 Neil Iscoe,1 Aaron Shagrin,1 Ryan Rapp,1
Sam Nazari,1 Patrick McGrath,1 Cory Schoolland,1 Elyas Achkar,1
Myles Brundage,1 Jeremy Miller,1 Jonathan Epstein,1 Gurmeet Lamba1
1

2

Sentient Technologies, Inc.
The University of Texas at Austin
compared and gradually improved. The A/B testing process
is difﬁcult and time-consuming: Only a very small fraction
of page designs can be tested in this way, and subtle interactions in the design are likely to go unnoticed and unutilized.
An alternative to A/B is multivariate testing, where all value
combinations of a few elements are tested at once. While this
process captures interactions between these elements, only a
very small number of elements is usually included (e.g. 2-3);
the rest of the design space remains unexplored.
This paper describes an AI-assisted technology for conversion optimization based on evolutionary computation.
This technology is implemented in Ascend, a conversion
optimization product by Sentient Technologies, deployed in
numerous e-commerce websites of paying customers since
September 2016 (Sentient Technologies 2017). Ascend uses
a customer-designed search space as a starting point. It consists of a list of elements on the web page that can be
changed, and their possible alternative values, such as a
header text, font, and color, background image, testimonial
text, and content order. Ascend then automatically generates
web-page candidates to be tested, and improves those candidates through evolutionary optimization.
Because e-commerce sites often have high volume of trafﬁc, ﬁtness evaluations can be done live with a large number
of real users in parallel. The evolutionary process in Ascend
can thus be seen as a massively parallel version of interactive evolution, making it possible to optimize web designs
in a few weeks. From the application point of view, Ascend
is a novel method for massively multivariate optimization of
web-page designs. Depending on the application, improvements of 20-200% over human design are routine using this
approach (Sentient Technologies 2017). These results are reliable across industries and search-space sizes.
This paper describes the technology underlying Ascend,
presents an example use case, summarizes the product status, and outlines future opportunities for evolutionary computation in optimizing e-commerce.

Abstract
Conversion rate optimization (CRO) means designing an ecommerce web interface so that as many users as possible
take a desired action such as registering for an account, requesting a contact, or making a purchase. Such design is usually done by hand, evaluating one change at a time through
A/B testing, or evaluating all combinations of two or three
variables through multivariate testing. Traditional CRO is
thus limited to a small fraction of the design space only. This
paper describes Sentient Ascend, an automatic CRO system
that uses evolutionary search to discover effective web interfaces given a human-designed search space. Design candidates are evaluated in parallel on line with real users, making
it possible to discover and utilize interactions between the design elements that are difﬁcult to identify otherwise. A commercial product since September 2016, Ascend has been applied to numerous web interfaces across industries and search
space sizes, with up to four-fold improvements over human
design. Ascend can therefore be seen as massively multivariate CRO made possible by AI.

Introduction
In e-commerce, designing web interfaces (i.e. web pages and
interactions) that convert as many users as possible from casual browsers to paying customers is an important goal (Ash,
Page, and Ginty 2012; Salehd and Shukairy 2011). While
there are some well-known design principles, including simplicity and consistency, there are often also unexpected interactions between elements of the page that determine how
well it converts. The same element, such as a headline, image, or testimonial, may work well in one context but not in
others—it is often hard to predict the result, and even harder
to decide how to improve a given page.
An entire subﬁeld of information technology has emerged
in this area, called conversion rate optimization, or conversion science. The standard method is A/B testing, i.e. designing two different versions of the same page, showing them
to different users, and collecting statistics on how well they
each convert (Kohavi and Longbotham 2016). This process
allows incorporating human knowledge about the domain
and conversion optimization into the design, and then testing
their effect. After observing the results, new designs can be

Background
With the explosive growth of e-commerce in recent years,
entirely new areas of study have emerged. One of the
main ones is conversion rate optimization, i.e. the study
of how web interfaces should be designed so that they
are as effective as possible in converting users from ca-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7696

