The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

POMDP-Based Decision Making
for Fast Event Handling in VANETs
Shuo Chen, Athirai A. Irissappane,† Jie Zhang
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
†
University of Washington, Washington, USA
chen1087@e.ntu.edu.sg, athirai@u.washington.edu, zhangj@ntu.edu.sg

fectively reason about driving decisions1 , e.g., whether to reroute or stay on the same route. These schemes use a simple
heuristic way and decide to re-route, if the belief about the
occurrence of an event (called event belief, hereon) exceeds
a given threshold. Often, thresholds are set to a larger value
for better decision-making. This requires exchanging more
messages, resulting in higher resource consumption (communication bandwidth, computation cost), as well as longer
information gathering period leading to delayed response,
which can add to the severity of the trafﬁc event.
To achieve fast response and reduce resource consumption without sacriﬁcing decision quality, we propose a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) based
approach. POMDP provides a natural framework for sequential decision making under uncertainty. Thus, it is an
ideal choice for VANETs to handle the uncertainty introduced due to unreliable information from malicious vehicles. Besides, POMDP effectively balances the trade-off between exploitation (deciding to re-route or not) and exploration (collecting more information about the event) (Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra 1998).
Our POMDP model maintains belief about the occurrence of a trafﬁc event and assists a vehicle agent to decide
whether to re-route or not based on its current belief. It gathers information about the event by querying neighboring vehicles (which can be trustworthy/untrustworthy in providing
information) and updates the event belief accordingly. Based
on the belief, the POMDP model balances the expected beneﬁt of re-routing and the delay/cost of querying more information, thereby maximizing the expected total utility for the
vehicle. The environmental parameters (observation, transition functions) for the POMDP model need to be learned.
In our scenario, learning is more complex as the observation function representing the behavior of neighboring vehicles changes over time. This is because of sophisticated
malicious attackers who can change their behavior periodically. We have addressed the above challenges and made the
following contributions in this paper: 1) To the best of our
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time POMDP is applied for the
problem; 2) While the POMDP model can effectively balance the trade-off between decision quality and delay/cost,

Abstract
Malicious vehicle agents broadcast fake information about
trafﬁc events and thereby undermine the beneﬁts of vehicleto-vehicle communication in vehicular ad-hoc networks
(VANETs). Trust management schemes addressing this issue do not focus on effective/fast decision making in reacting
to trafﬁc events. We propose a Partially Observable Markov
Decision Process (POMDP) based approach to balance the
trade-off between information gathering and exploiting actions resulting in faster responses. Our model copes with malicious behavior by maintaining it as part of a small state
space, thus is scalable for large VANETs. We also propose
an algorithm to learn model parameters in a dynamic behavior setting. Experimental results demonstrate that our model
can effectively balance the decision quality and response time
while still being robust to sophisticated malicious attacks.

Introduction
Nowadays people rely on map services such as Google Maps
for better driving experience. Map services are mostly centralized resulting in information update delay. Events affecting trafﬁc condition (e.g., car accidents, road construction) require fast information update to avoid trafﬁc congestion. Vehicular Ad-hoc Networks (VANETs) allow vehicle
(agents) to communicate directly with each other and support fast information exchange (Hartenstein and Laberteaux
2008). When a vehicle directly observes an event, it can
broadcast event alerts through vehicle-to-vehicle communication, based on which other vehicles can decide to respond.
Nevertheless, selﬁsh/malicious vehicles (Lin, Kraus, and
Shavitt 2007; Raya and Hubaux 2007) exist which share
fake/untrustworthy information to mislead other drivers.
Trust management schemes (Raya et al. 2008; Chang and
Kuo 2009; Li et al. 2012; Wei et al. 2014; Li and Song 2016)
address this issue by computing the trustworthiness of vehicles and thereby the trustworthiness of messages exchanged
about an event. Such information helps to create and update a vehicle’s belief, i.e., probability distribution about
whether the trafﬁc event occurred or not (more messages
about the event result in a higher belief). However, existing
trust schemes only focus on trust computation but do not efc 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
While there are many other driving decisions, we will use rerouting to explain our approach in this paper.

4646

