The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Accelerated Training for Massive
Classiﬁcation via Dynamic Class Selection
Xingcheng Zhang,1 Lei Yang,1 Junjie Yan,2 Dahua Lin1
1

Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SenseTime Group Limited
{zx016, yl016, dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, yanjunjie@sensetime.com

parameter size may go beyond the memory capacity, especially when the network is trained on GPUs with limited capacity. (2) The computational cost will be dramatically increased, even to a prohibitive level.
Existing efforts to tackle such difﬁculties (Mnih and Teh
2012; Jean et al. 2015; Wu et al. 2016) mostly originate from
natural language processing, where one often needs to deal
with large vocabularies. A common idea adopted by these
methods is to focus on frequent words, based on prior statistics collected from the training corpus. However, it is often
difﬁcult to extend these methods along to other domains, as
they require an essential condition to work, namely, the frequencies of different classes are highly imbalanced. This is
not the case for applications like face recognition.
We conduct an empirical study when exploring this problem (see Sec. 3). In this study, we have two important observations: (1) For most cases, the samples of a class can only
be confused with a small number of other classes. (2) When
a softmax loss is used, for each sample, the signals backpropgated from this small subset of classes dominate the
learning process. These observations suggest that for each
mini-batch of samples, it sufﬁces to perform the computation over a small fraction of classes, while excluding other
classes whose impact is negligible. Motivated by this study,
we explore a new approach to tackling the challenges of
massive classiﬁcation. Our basic idea is to develop a method
that can identify a small number of active classes that can
yield signiﬁcant signals for each mini batch of samples. This
method needs to be both accurate and efﬁcient. To be more
speciﬁc, it should be able to correctly identify those classes
that are truly correlated with the given samples, but would
not incur too much overhead. Satisfying both requirements
at the same time is nontrivial.
Our efforts towards this goal consist of two stages. First,
we derive an optimal class selector. Through experiments,
we show that with optimal selection of active classes, the
learned network can achieve the same level of performance
with only 1% of classes selected at each iteration. However, the optimal selection requires computing responses for
all classes, which in itself is overly expensive. Then in the
second stage, we develop an efﬁcient approximation of the
optimal selector based on dynamic class hierarchies. The
dynamic class hierarchies effectively capture the proximity
among classes, with which one can approximately identify

Abstract
Massive classiﬁcation, a classiﬁcation task deﬁned over a
vast number of classes (hundreds of thousands or even millions), has become an essential part of many real-world systems, such as face recognition. Existing methods, including
the deep networks that achieved remarkable success in recent years, were mostly devised for problems with a moderate
number of classes. They would meet with substantial difﬁculties, e.g. excessive memory demand and computational cost,
when applied to massive problems. We present a new method
to tackle this problem. This method can efﬁciently and accurately identify a small number of “active classes” for each
mini-batch, based on a set of dynamic class hierarchies constructed on the ﬂy. We also develop an adaptive allocation
scheme thereon, which leads to a better tradeoff between performance and cost. On several large-scale benchmarks, our
method signiﬁcantly reduces the training cost and memory
demand, while maintaining competitive performance.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a wave of breakthroughs in AI
areas (Shakirov 2016), thanks to the advances in deep learning and the explosive growth of datasets. Along with this
trend, massive classiﬁcation that involves an exceptionally
large number of classes emerges as an important task. Such
a task often arises in applications like face recognition (Sun,
Wang, and Tang 2014) or language modeling (Chen, Grangier, and Auli 2015), when industry-level datasets are used.
Massive classiﬁcation poses a number of new challenges,
among which, the computational difﬁculties in training are
perhaps the most prominent. Speciﬁcally, a contemporary
classiﬁer often adopts a deep network architecture, which
typically comprises a series of transformation layers for feature extraction and a softmax layer that connects the toplevel feature representation with per-class responses. The
parameter size of this softmax layer is proportional to the
number of classes. When training such a classiﬁer, for each
mini-batch of samples, the responses for all involved classes
will be computed by taking the dot products between the
class-speciﬁc weights and the extracted features. When there
is a huge number of classes, the algorithm as described
above will be faced with two signiﬁcant difﬁculties: (1) The
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7566

