The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Latent Semantic Aware Multi-View Multi-Label Classiﬁcation
Changqing Zhang,1 Ziwei Yu,1 Qinghua Hu,1 Pengfei Zhu,1 Xinwang Liu,2 Xiaobo Wang3
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, 300350
School of Computer National University of Defense Technology Changsha, China, 410073
3
Center for Biometrics and Security Research & National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100190
{zhangchangqing, yuziwei, huqinghua, zhupengfei}@tju.edu.cn
2

is one of classic and effective multi-label methods, which
builds a Bayesian model by using the k-nearest neighbour
method to obtain the prior and likelihood, and then utilizes the max posterior to assign labels for testing example. Some more recent methods focus on other issues in
multi-label classiﬁcation, e.g., label noise (Yu et al. 2014;
Yang, Jiang, and Zhou 2013).
Although diverse methods have been proposed in the literature, there still exist the following limitations. On one
hand, most existing multi-label learning methods only consider single view data, however, each individual view cannot
characterize different labels comprehensively since different
views encode different properties of data, which implies the
practical necessity of multi-view learning (Xu, Tao, and Xu
2013; Liu et al. 2017; Cao et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2015).
On the other hand, learning with plenty of unlabeled data
has shown its power in many real applications. However,
most existing multi-label classiﬁcation models are fully supervised thus they are unable to explore the unlabeled samples. Although a few semi-supervised multi-label learning
methods (Liu, Jin, and Yang 2006; Wang, Tu, and Tsotsos
2013) have been developed, these models are not speciﬁcally targeted on the multi-view semi-supervised multi-label
learning. The most recent and related method in (Liu et al.
2015) also utilizes matrix factorization and common representation. However, it has the following two limitations:
ﬁrstly, the common representation among multiple views is
learned without constraining the bases of different views,
which weakens the reasonability of the common representation; secondly, the common representation learning and
multi-label learning (label completion) are performed in two
separated steps, thus the prediction performance could not
be well guaranteed.
In this paper, we propose a new multi-view multi-label
learning approach termed as Latent Semantic Aware Multiview Multi-label Learning (LSA-MML). As shown in Figure
1, given the input data with multiple views, our method simultaneously seeks a predictive common representation of
multiple views and the corresponding projection model between the common representation and labels. The bases of
V different views, {B(v) }Vv=1 , can be considered as latent
semantic components. With the common representation P,
the j th bases of different views, i.e, {bvj }Vv=1 , encode the
same latent semantic, therefore, these bases across different

Abstract
For real-world applications, data are often associated with
multiple labels and represented with multiple views. Most
existing multi-label learning methods do not sufﬁciently consider the complementary information among multiple views,
leading to unsatisfying performance. To address this issue, we
propose a novel approach for multi-view multi-label learning based on matrix factorization to exploit complementarity among different views. Speciﬁcally, under the assumption that there exists a common representation across different views, the uncovered latent patterns are enforced to be
aligned across different views in kernel spaces. In this way,
the latent semantic patterns underlying in data could be well
uncovered and this enhances the reasonability of the common representation of multiple views. As a result, the consensus multi-view representation is obtained which encodes
the complementarity and consistence of different views in latent semantic space. We provide theoretical guarantee for the
strict convexity for our method by properly setting parameters. Empirical evidence shows the clear advantages of our
method over the state-of-the-art ones.

Introduction
Multi-label classiﬁcation, which assigns one example with
multiple classes, is of signiﬁcant interest due to its ubiquity in real-world applications. For example, in computer
vision, an image may simultaneously contain more than one
type of objects; in web page categorization, a news web
page may cover different topics, such as sports, business
and entertainment. For this problem, multi-label learning approaches (Boutell et al. 2004; Tsoumakas and Katakis 2006;
Zhang and Zhou 2007; Gong et al. 2016) have been proposed over the past decade, such as the early representative
methods: binary relevance (BR) (Tsoumakas and Katakis
2006) and label powerset (LP) (Boutell et al. 2004). By directly transforming the multi-label learning task into multiple binary classiﬁcation tasks, BR neglects the correlation among labels. LP regards each subset of multiple labels as a different class of single-label classiﬁcation. Although taking the label correlation into consideration, this
model lacks of mining the complex label correlation and
can not be applied for the task with large label set. Multilabel k-nearest neighbour (MLkNN) (Zhang and Zhou 2007)
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4414

