The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning from Semi-Supervised
Weak-Label Data∗
Hao-Chen Dong, Yu-Feng Li, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing, 210023, China
{donghc, liyf, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

for users due to the limited resources and thus the observed
relevant label of the image is even an empty set.
Label incompleteness signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the performance of multi-label learning (Zhou 2017). To alleviate it,
there are some previous work. Weak-label learning focuses
on the issue of partial relevant label set. Sun et al., (2010)
presented the WELL approach based on the assumption that
instance similarities are determined by a group of low-rank
similarity matrixes. Bucak et al., (2011) presented the MLRGL approach with the use of group lasso to regularize the
training errors. Semi-supervised multi-label learning tries to
handle the issue of empty relevant label set, where transductive multi-label learning methods (Liu, Jin, and Yang 2006;
Chen et al. 2008; Guo and Schuurmans 2012; Kong, Ng, and
Zhou 2013) that assume testing instances are from unlabeled
instances, whereas pure semi-supervised multi-label learning methods (Zhao and Guo 2015; Zhan and Zhang 2017)
try to make multi-label prediction for any unseen instance.
It is evident that neither weak-label learning nor semisupervised multi-label learning can tackle the problem concerned in the paper. For example, weak-label learning ignores the use of many unlabeled instances that could be very
useful; semi-supervised multi-label learning assumes that all
the relevant labels are available for labeled instances, which
is not the case in our situation. Note that the data scenario
studies in the paper is quite different from previous multilabel studies. We call this kind of multi-label problem as
semi-supervised weak-label learning. We illustrate the differences between the learning scenario in the paper and previous multi-label learning frameworks in Figure 1.
In this paper, we study semi-supervised weak-label learning problem and propose the SSWL (Semi-Supervised
Weak-Label) method. Our basic assumption is that both the
instance and label similarity are helpful for the complement
of missing labels. Moreover, ensemble of multiple models
usually performs more robust than a single model, when the
label information is insufﬁcient. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst construct a regularization term based on smoothness assumption, that is, similar instances should have similar concept
compositions within their label sets, which requires the ﬁnal prediction to be coherent to the smoothness of instance
and label similarity simultaneously. We build models for
labeled and unlabeled instances respectively, and then we
leverage the diverse models via the co-regularization frame-

Abstract
Multi-label learning deals with data objects associated with
multiple labels simultaneously. Previous studies typically assume that for each instance, the full set of relevant labels associated with each training instance is given. In many applications such as image annotation, however, it’s usually difﬁcult
to get the full label set for each instance and only a partial or
even empty set of relevant labels is available. We call this kind
of problem as ‘semi-supervised weak-label learning’ problem. In this work we propose the SSWL (Semi-Supervised
Weak-Label) method to address this problem. Both instance
similarity and label similarity are considered for the complement of missing labels. Ensemble of multiple models are
utilized to improve the robustness when label information is
insufﬁcient. We formulate the objective as a bi-convex optimization problem with an efﬁcient block coordinate descent
algorithm. Experiments validate the effectiveness of SSWL.

Introduction
Conventional supervised learning often assumes that each
instance is associated with a single label. However, in many
real-world tasks, one instance usually has more than one
labels. For example, in text categorization, a document on
Olympic Game belongs to business and sport simultaneously; in image annotation, an image on the scene of Paris is
associated with tower and sky simultaneously. Conventional
supervised learning based on one label per instance is out
of its capability to cope with this problem, and multi-label
learning (Zhang and Zhou 2014) that deals with instances
associated with a set of labels has received much attention.
In previous multi-label studies, a basic assumption for
training data is that all the relevant labels of every training
instance are known. However, in many applications, such
assumption is hard to hold because obtaining all relevant labels is difﬁcult, and generally only a partial or even empty
label set can be observed. For example, suppose a training
image is related to the concepts car, road, people and building. In real cases, the user may only tag car, road for the
training image while missing the label people and building.
What is worse, the training image may not be selected to tag
∗
This research was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (61333014, 61772262).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2926

