The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Zero-Shot Learning via Class-Conditioned Deep Generative Models
Wenlin Wang,1∗ Yunchen Pu,1 Vinay Kumar Verma,3 Kai Fan,2 Yizhe Zhang,2
Changyou Chen,4 Piyush Rai,3∗ Lawrence Carin1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University
2
Compuational Biology and Bioinformatics, Duke University
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kanpur, India
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, SUNY at Buffalo

{ww107, yp42, kf96, yz196, lcarin}@duke.edu, {vkverma, piyush}@cse.iitk.ac.in, cchangyou@gmail.com

representing semantic information about the classes, or in the
form of the similarities of the unseen classes with each of
the seen classes. The side information can then be leveraged
to design learning algorithms (Socher et al. 2013) that try to
transfer knowledge from the seen classes to unseen classes
(by linking corresponding attributes).
Although this approach has shown promise, it has several
limitations. For example, most of the existing ZSL methods
assume that each class is represented as a ﬁxed point (e.g.,
an embedding) in some semantic space, which does not adequately account for intra-class variability (Akata et al. 2015).
Another limitation of most existing methods is that they usually lack a proper generative model (Kingma et al. 2014b;
Rezende et al. 2014; Kingma et al. 2014a) of the data. Having a generative model has several advantages (Kingma et
al. 2014b; Rezende et al. 2014; Kingma et al. 2014a), such
as unraveling the complex structure in the data by learning
expressive feature representations and the ability to seamlessly integrate unlabeled data, leading to a transductive/semisupervised estimation procedure. This, in the context of ZSL,
may be especially useful when the amount of labeled data for
the seen classes is small, but otherwise there may be plenty
of unlabeled data from the seen/unseen classes.
Motivated by these desiderata, we design a deep generative model for the ZSL problem. Our model (summarized
in Figure 1) learns a set of attribute-speciﬁc latent space
distributions (modeled by Gaussians), whose parameters are
outputs of a trainable deep neural network (deﬁned by pψ
in Figure 1). The attribute vector is denoted as a, and is assumed given for each training image, and it is inferred for
test images. The class label is linked to the attributes, and
therefore by inferring attributes of a test image, there is an
opportunity to recognize classes at test time that were not
seen when training. These latent-space distributions serve
as a prior for a variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma et
al. 2014b) model (deﬁned by a decoder pθ and an encoder
qφ in Figure 1). This combination further helps the VAE to
learn discriminative feature representations for the inputs.
Moreover, the generative aspect also facilitates extending
our model to semi-supervised/transductive settings (omitted
in Figure 1 for brevity, but discussed in detail in the Transductive ZSL section) using a deep unsupervised learning
module. All the parameters deﬁning the model, including
the deep neural-network parameters ψ and the VAE decoder

Abstract
We present a deep generative model for Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL). Unlike most existing methods for this problem,
that represent each class as a point (via a semantic embedding), we represent each seen/unseen class using a classspeciﬁc latent-space distribution, conditioned on class attributes. We use these latent-space distributions as a prior
for a supervised variational autoencoder (VAE), which also facilitates learning highly discriminative feature representations
for the inputs. The entire framework is learned end-to-end
using only the seen-class training data. At test time, the label for an unseen-class test input is the class that maximizes
the VAE lower bound. We further extend the model to a (i)
semi-supervised/transductive setting by leveraging unlabeled
unseen-class data via an unsupervised learning module, and
(ii) few-shot learning where we also have a small number of
labeled inputs from the unseen classes. We compare our model
with several state-of-the-art methods through a comprehensive
set of experiments on a variety of benchmark data sets.

Introduction
A goal of autonomous learning systems is the ability to
learn new concepts even when the amount of supervision
for such concepts is scarce or non-existent. This is a task
that humans are able to perform effortlessly. Endowing machines with similar capability, however, has been challenging.
Although machine learning and deep learning algorithms
can learn reliable classiﬁcation rules when supplied with
abundant labeled training examples per class, their generalization ability remains poor for classes that are not wellrepresented (or not present) in the training data. This limitation has led to signiﬁcant recent interest in zero-shot learning
(ZSL) and one-shot/few-shot learning (Socher et al. 2013;
Lampert et al. 2014; Lake et al. 2015; Vinyals et al. 2016;
Ravi et al. 2017). We provide a more detailed overview of
existing work on these methods in the Related Work section.
In order to generalize to previously unseen classes with no
labeled training data, a common assumption is the availability
of side information about the classes. The side information
is usually provided in the form of class attributes (humanprovided or learned from external sources such as Wikipedia)
∗

Corresponding authors
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4211

