The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Lookine: Let the Blind Hear a Smile
1

Yaohua Bu,12 Jia Jia,1∗ Yuhan Tang,1 Xuan Zhang,1 Tianyu Gao1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList)
Key Laboratory of Pervasive Computing, Ministry of Education
2
Academy of Arts & Design, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
byh15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, jjia@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
It is believed that nonverbal visual information including facial expressions, facial micro-actions and head movements
plays a signiﬁcant role in fundamental social communication.
Unfortunately it is regretful that the blind can not achieve
such necessary information. Therefore, we propose a socialassistant system, Lookine, to help them to go beyond this
limitation. For Lookine, we apply the novel techniques including facial expression recognition, facial action recognition and head pose estimation, and obey “barrier-free” principles in our design. In experiments, the algorithm evaluation
and user study prove that our system has promising accuracy,
good real-time performance, and great user experience.

Figure 1: The working mechanism of Lookine

Introduction
A series of studies have suggested that nonverbal information plays a signiﬁcant role in many cases (Watanabe et al.
2013). For example, it is nonverbal communication referring
to facial micro-expression and body gestures that serves as a
primary means of not only organizing interpersonal interactions, but also conveying cultural values and building friendship. Unfortunately, for people who have lost their sight,
they can only depend on their hearings to get very limited
information, which leads to much more misunderstanding
or biased judgment in social communication.
According to our survey, only a few institutes start to pay
some attention to social-assistant for the blind, e.g., a newest
project called “Seeing AI” established by Microsoft. However, what they realize is just to take a photo of somebody
and then recognize several basic facial expressions, which is
not synchronously communication-required. Consequently,
we propose, “Lookine”, which is a social-assistant system
speciﬁcally for the blind (see Fig.1).
We combine novel techniques including facial expression
recognition (Valstar et al. 2017), facial action units recognition (Baltrušaitis, Robinson, and Morency 2016), and head
movement estimation (Yan et al. 2016) to make Lookine can
truly help users to obtain necessary nonverbal visual information in communication in real time. Furthermore, in the
design, we obey “barrier-free” principles to make sure that
Lookine can provide users with ﬂexible interaction styles,

e.g., people can freely select Voice-Feedback or VibrationFeedback when in use.
Main contributions of this work are summarized as follows: (1) Lookine is a tool which not only can help the blind
obtain necessary nonverbal visual information in social communication, but also is easy for users to use and adapt with
to develop nonverbal social skills in daily life. (2) In technical implementation, we establish Lookine as a online system
to guarantee promising real-time performance.

Technical Implementation
Feature Extraction
First, we use a simple CNN to detect a valid face in a
given picture. Once a valid face is successfully detected,
the network could also make the face aligned for the feature extraction. To reduce the dimensionality of features, we
use a PCA model, which leads to a reduced basis of 1391
dimensions. And these feature vectors will be used in facial action unit recognition. We use Conditional Local Neural Fields (CLNF) to implement facial landmark detection,
which uses advanced point distribution model to capture
landmark shape variations.

Facial Action Unit Recognition
Facial Action Coding System(FACS) is a system to taxonomize human facial movements by their appearance on faces
(Dimberg, Thunberg, and Elmehed 2000). In our work, we
train the model based on this to recognize facial movements

∗

Corresponding author: J.Jia (jjia@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn)
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8196

