The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Mars Target Encyclopedia:
Rock and Soil Composition Extracted from the Literature
1

Kiri L. Wagstaff,1 Raymond Francis,1 Thamme Gowda,1,2∗ You Lu,1
Ellen Riloff,3 Karanjeet Singh,1∗ Nina L. Lanza4

Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91109, {ﬁrstname.lastname}@jpl.nasa.gov
2
Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California, Marina Del Rey, CA 90292, tg@isi.edu
3
School of Computing, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, riloff@cs.utah.edu
4
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, nlanza@lanl.gov
In this paper, we describe the MTE system and its component technologies, the empirical performance of the system
on labeled data, and results from a large-scale evaluation on
∼6000 documents. The MTE is currently being integrated
into a public website called the PDS (Planetary Data System) Analyst’s Notebook for Mars scientists and the public
to access. The automated pipeline can be used to ingest and
analyze new publications as they become available.

Abstract
We have constructed an information extraction system called
the Mars Target Encyclopedia that takes in planetary science
publications and extracts scientiﬁc knowledge about target
compositions. The extracted knowledge is stored in a searchable database that can greatly accelerate the ability of scientists to compare new discoveries with what is already known.
To date, we have applied this system to ∼6000 documents
and achieved 41–56% precision in the extracted information.

Related Work

Introduction

A variety of text analysis methods exist for extracting information from text. Some methods focus on extracting
meta-data such as the document title, authors, and publication venue or analyzing and linking citations between papers (Ronzano and Saggion 2016). However, understanding
the content of a scientiﬁc publication requires a deeper analysis. Information extraction (IE) of this nature is generally
broken into two steps: (1) named entity recognition or concept extraction, to identify references to people, locations,
concepts, etc., and (2) relation extraction, to identify relationships between pairs of entities (Mooney and Bunescu
2005). Many of the recent advances in IE have been motivated by problems from the biomedical research world, such
as the desire to identify protein-protein interactions (Tikk et
al. 2010; Bui, Katrenko, and Sloot 2011) or chemical-protein
and chemical-disease relations (Krallinger et al. 2017). Tsutsui, Ding, and Meng (2016) used topic modeling and open
IE, which does not require the prior identiﬁcation of entities,
to build a knowledge database about Alzheimer’s disease.
To date, little such work has been done in the domain of
planetary science. The closest existing work is the geologybased GeoDeepDive project, which performs text data mining on scientiﬁc publications about (Earth) rock formations
and stratigraphy (Zhang et al. 2013). By applying and extending information extraction methods to planetary science publications, we have the opportunity to beneﬁt an entirely new population of scientists, researchers, and interested members of the public.

Scientists everywhere are overwhelmed by the stream of
new information that is published by their disciplines’ conferences, workshops, and journals. It is increasingly difﬁcult
to come up to speed in a new area and to stay current with the
latest discoveries. In planetary exploration, new discoveries
can occur each time new data is transmitted. For example,
our rovers on Mars have sent back compositional data for
thousands of individual targets (e.g., rocks, soils), and some
of those observations have transformed our understanding of
past environments on the planet (Grotzinger et al. 2014).
To interpret new observations correctly, it is necessary to
be able to compare them with what is already known. For example, if we observe high manganese content at a particular
location, we want to know whether it is consistent with previous observations or it indicates an anomalous new discovery. However, no central database exists in which planetary
scientists can quickly make that determination.
We have created a system called the Mars Target Encyclopedia (MTE) that uses information extraction methods to analyze planetary science publications and identify stated compositional relationships between Mars surface targets and elements or minerals. The extracted information is stored in a
searchable database that allows users to ask questions such
as “Which targets contain hematite?” or “What is known
about target Dillinger?” It also enables entirely new kinds of
information visualization, such as a map display of all locations where the Mars rover Curiosity has detected hematite.
Ultimately, the MTE may serve as a resource to inform decisions about the next steps in Mars exploration.

Machine Learning for Information Extraction

∗

This work was done when the authors were at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

The Mars Target Encyclopedia (MTE) is an information extraction system that takes in scientiﬁc publications in PDF
format and extracts knowledge that is useful to scientists

7861

