The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Counterfactual Multi-Agent Policy Gradients
Jakob N. Foerster∗

Gregory Farquhar†

University of Oxford, United Kingdom
jakob.foerster@cs.ox.ac.uk

University of Oxford, United Kingdom
gregory.farquhar@cs.ox.ac.uk

Triantafyllos Afouras

Nantas Nardelli

Shimon Whiteson

University of Oxford, UK
afourast@robots.ox.ac.uk

University of Oxford, UK
nantas@robots.ox.ac.uk

University of Oxford, UK
shimon.whiteson@cs.ox.ac.uk

the learning itself may also need to be decentralised. However, in many cases, learning can take place in a simulator
or a laboratory in which extra state information is available and agents can communicate freely. This centralised
training of decentralised policies is a standard paradigm for
multi-agent planning (Oliehoek, Spaan, and Vlassis 2008;
Kraemer and Banerjee 2016) and has recently been picked
up by the deep RL community (Foerster et al. 2016; Jorge,
Kågebäck, and Gustavsson 2016). However, the question of
how best to exploit the opportunity for centralised learning
remains open.
Another crucial challenge is multi-agent credit assignment (Chang, Ho, and Kaelbling 2003): in cooperative settings, joint actions typically generate only global rewards,
making it difﬁcult for each agent to deduce its own contribution to the team’s success. Sometimes it is possible to
design individual reward functions for each agent. However,
these rewards are not generally available in cooperative settings and often fail to encourage individual agents to sacriﬁce for the greater good. This often substantially impedes
multi-agent learning in challenging tasks, even with relatively small numbers of agents.
In this paper, we propose a new multi-agent RL method
called counterfactual multi-agent (COMA) policy gradients,
in order to address these issues. COMA takes an actor-critic
(Konda and Tsitsiklis 2000) approach, in which the actor,
i.e., the policy, is trained by following a gradient estimated
by a critic. COMA is based on three main ideas.
First, COMA uses a centralised critic. The critic is only
used during learning, while only the actor is needed during
execution. Since learning is centralised, we can therefore use
a centralised critic that conditions on the joint action and all
available state information, while each agent’s policy conditions only on its own action-observation history.
Second, COMA uses a counterfactual baseline. The idea
is inspired by difference rewards (Wolpert and Tumer 2002;
Tumer and Agogino 2007), in which each agent learns from
a shaped reward that compares the global reward to the reward received when that agent’s action is replaced with a
default action. While difference rewards are a powerful way
to perform multi-agent credit assignment, they require access to a simulator or estimated reward function, and in general it is unclear how to choose the default action. COMA
addresses this by using the centralised critic to compute an

Abstract
Many real-world problems, such as network packet routing
and the coordination of autonomous vehicles, are naturally
modelled as cooperative multi-agent systems. There is a great
need for new reinforcement learning methods that can efﬁciently learn decentralised policies for such systems. To
this end, we propose a new multi-agent actor-critic method
called counterfactual multi-agent (COMA) policy gradients.
COMA uses a centralised critic to estimate the Q-function
and decentralised actors to optimise the agents’ policies. In
addition, to address the challenges of multi-agent credit assignment, it uses a counterfactual baseline that marginalises
out a single agent’s action, while keeping the other agents’
actions ﬁxed. COMA also uses a critic representation that allows the counterfactual baseline to be computed efﬁciently in
a single forward pass. We evaluate COMA in the testbed of
StarCraft unit micromanagement, using a decentralised variant with signiﬁcant partial observability. COMA signiﬁcantly
improves average performance over other multi-agent actorcritic methods in this setting, and the best performing agents
are competitive with state-of-the-art centralised controllers
that get access to the full state.

1

Introduction

Many complex reinforcement learning (RL) problems such
as the coordination of autonomous vehicles (Cao et al.
2013), network packet delivery (Ye, Zhang, and Yang 2015),
and distributed logistics (Ying and Dayong 2005) are naturally modelled as cooperative multi-agent systems. However, RL methods designed for single agents typically fare
poorly on such tasks, since the joint action space of the
agents grows exponentially with the number of agents.
To cope with such complexity, it is often necessary to resort to decentralised policies, in which each agent selects its
own action conditioned only on its local action-observation
history. Furthermore, partial observability and communication constraints during execution may necessitate the use of
decentralised policies even when the joint action space is not
prohibitively large.
Hence, there is a great need for new RL methods that
can efﬁciently learn decentralised policies. In some settings,
∗

equal contribution
equal contribution
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

2974

