The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Gesture Annotation with a Visual Search Engine
for Multimodal Communication Research
Sergiy Turchyn,1 Inés Olza Moreno,2 Cristóbal Pagán Cánovas,2
Francis F. Steen,3 Mark Turner,4 Javier Valenzuela,5 Soumya Ray1
1

Department of EECS, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA
2
Institute for Culture and Society, University of Navarra, Spain
3
Department of Communication, University of California-Los Angeles, California, USA
4
Department of Cognitive Science, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA
5
Departamento de Filologı́a Inglesa, University of Murcia, Spain

to obtain and share in this case. Conversely, the full range
of communicative behavior must be recorded with resourceintensive audiovisual technologies. Naturalistic data can be
difﬁcult to obtain; artiﬁcial collections from lab recordings
take their place. Large-scale datasets are required for systematic study, yet no single researcher has the required time
or resources to create them. Further, even if such data are
collected, researchers in the humanities who study linguistics or communication may lack supporting computational
tools to help analyze the data.
An international academic collaboration, the Distributed
Little Red Hen Lab (http:// www.redhenlab.org) project, is
working to enable the transition of the study of multimodal human communication to large scale data-driven approaches. We are inspired by ﬁelds such as astronomy, genetics and neuroscience that have undergone a similar transformation. As part of this project, we collect data on naturalistic multimodal communication on a large scale, provide computational and storage tools to manage data and aid
in knowledge discovery, and provide means of iterative improvement through integrating the results and feedback of
researchers into the project.
Red Hen’s primary data sources for multimodal and multilingual communication are television recordings. Fortunately, section 108 of the U.S. Copyright Act authorizes libraries and archives to record and store any broadcast of
any audiovisual news program and to loan those data, within
some limits of due diligence, to researchers for the purpose
of research. The NewsScape Archive of International Television News (http:// newsscape.library.ucla.edu) is Red Hen’s
largest; as of August 2017, it included broadcasts from 51
networks, totaling 340,000 hours and occupying 120 terabytes. The collection dates back to 2005 and is growing
at around 5,000 shows a month. It is an ofﬁcial archive of
the UCLA Library. Under Red Hen, it has been expanded
to record television news in multiple countries around the
world, curated by local linguists participating in the Red Hen
project. The NewsScape archive now includes, in rough order of representation, broadcasts in English, Spanish, German, French, Norwegian, Swedish, Danish, Continental Portuguese, Brazilian Portuguese, Russian, Polish, Czech, Ital-

Abstract
Human communication is multimodal and includes elements
such as gesture and facial expression along with spoken language. Modern technology makes it feasible to capture all
such aspects of communication in natural settings. As a result, similar to ﬁelds such as genetics, astronomy and neuroscience, scholars in areas such as linguistics and communication studies are on the verge of a data-driven revolution
in their ﬁelds. These new approaches require analytical support from machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence to develop tools to help process the vast data repositories. The Distributed Little Red Hen Lab project is an international team of
interdisciplinary researchers building a large-scale infrastructure for data-driven multimodal communications research. In
this paper, we describe a machine learning system developed
to automatically annotate a large database of television program videos as part of this project. The annotations mark regions where people or speakers are on screen along with body
part motions including head, hand and shoulder motion. We
also annotate a speciﬁc class of gestures known as timeline
gestures. An existing gesture annotation tool, ELAN, can be
used with these annotations to quickly locate gestures of interest. Finally, we provide an update mechanism for the system based on human feedback. We empirically evaluate the
accuracy of the system as well as present data from pilot human studies to show its effectiveness at aiding gesture scholars in their work.

1

Introduction

Human communication has many different facets. People
communicate not just through spoken language, but through
gesture, facial expression, posture, tone of voice, pacing,
gaze direction and touch. We learn to communicate using
precisely timed movements, delicately modulated sounds,
interpreting the mental states of others from moment to
moment, dynamically coordinating with others, and maintaining a high level of contextual awareness (Clark 1996;
Duranti and Goodwin 1992). Still, the majority of research
into communication until now has focused on written language and speech. This is at least partly because data is easy
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7855

