The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Parallelizable Acceleration Framework
for Packing Linear Programs∗
Palma London

Shai Vardi

California Institute of Technology
plondon@caltech.edu

California Institute of Technology
svardi@caltech.edu

Adam Wierman

Hanling Yi

California Institute of Technology
adamw@caltech.edu

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
yh014@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
many other areas. In machine learning speciﬁcally, they
show up in an array of problems, e.g., in applications of
graphical models (Ravikumar, Agarwal, and Wainwright
2010), associative Markov networks (Taskar, Chatalbashev,
and Koller 2004), and in relaxations of maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation problems (Sanghavi, Malioutov, and
Willsky 2008), among others.
In all these settings, practical applications require LP
solvers to work at extreme scales and, despite decades of
work, commercial solvers such as Cplex and Gurobi do not
scale as desired in many cases. Thus, despite a large literature, the development of fast, parallelizable solvers for packing LPs is still an active direction.
Our focus in this paper is on a speciﬁc class of packing
LPs for which data is either very costly, or hard to obtain. In
these situations m  n; i.e., the number of data points m
available is much smaller than the number of variables, n.
Such instances are common in areas such as genetics, astronomy, and chemistry. There has been considerable research
focusing on this class of problems in recent years, in the context of LPs (Donoho and Tanner 2005; Bienstock and Iyengar 2006) and also more generally in convex optimization
and compressed sensing (Candes, Romberg, and Tao 2006;
Donoho 2006), low rank matrix recovery (Recht, Fazel, and
Parrilo 2010; Candes and Plan 2011), and graphical models
(Yuan and Lin 2007a; Mohan et al. 2014).

Abstract
This paper presents an acceleration framework for packing
linear programming problems where the amount of data available is limited, i.e., where the number of constraints m is
small compared to the variable dimension n. The framework
can be used as a black box to speed up linear programming
solvers dramatically, by two orders of magnitude in our experiments. We present worst-case guarantees on the quality
of the solution and the speedup provided by the algorithm,
showing that the framework provides an approximately optimal solution while running the original solver on a much
smaller problem. The framework can be used to accelerate
exact solvers, approximate solvers, and parallel/distributed
solvers. Further, it can be used for both linear programs and
integer linear programs.

1

Introduction

This paper proposes a black-box framework that can be used
to accelerate both exact and approximate linear programming (LP) solvers for packing problems while maintaining
high quality solutions.
LP solvers are at the core of many learning and inference
problems, and often the linear programs of interest fall into
the category of packing problems. Packing problems are linear programs of the following form:
n
(1a)
maximize
j=1 cj xj
n
i ∈ [m]
(1b)
subject to
j=1 aij xj ≤ bi
0 ≤ xj ≤ 1

j ∈ [n]

Contributions of this paper. We present a black-box acceleration framework for LP solvers. When given a packing
LP and an algorithm A, the framework works by sampling
an s -fraction of the variables and using A to solve LP (1)
restricted to these variables. Then, the dual solution to this
sampled LP is used to deﬁne a thresholding rule for the primal variables of the original LP; the variables are set to either 0 or 1 according to this rule. The framework has the
following key properties:

(1c)

n
where A ∈ [0, 1]m×n , b ∈ Rm
≥0 , c ∈ R≥0 .
Packing problems arise in a wide variety of settings, including max cut (Trevisan 1998), zero-sum matrix games
(Nesterov 2005), scheduling and graph embedding (Plotkin,
Shmoys, and Tardos 1995), ﬂow controls (Bartal, Byers, and
Raz 2004), auction mechanisms (Zurel and Nisan 2001),
wireless sensor networks (Byers and Nasser 2000), and

1. It can be used to accelerate exact or approximate LPsolvers (subject to some mild assumptions which we discuss below).

∗

This work was supported in part by NSF grants AitF-1637598,
CNS-1518941, CPS-154471, the Linde Institute, and the International Teochew Doctors Association Zheng Hanming Visiting
Scholar Award Scheme.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2. Since the original algorithm A is run only on a (much
smaller) LP with s -fraction of the variables, the framework provides a dramatic speedup.

3706

