The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Unity in Diversity: Learning Distributed Heterogeneous
Sentence Representation for Extractive Summarization
Abhishek Kumar Singh, Manish Gupta,∗ Vasudeva Varma
IIIT Hyderabad, India
abhishek.singh@research.iiit.ac.in, manish.gupta@iiit.ac.in, vv@iiit.ac.in

based approaches (e.g. (Erkan and Radev 2004)) and (3)
constraint optimization based approaches (e.g. (McDonald 2007)). These approaches rely mainly on a set of
features which were manually crafted. Recently, few efforts have been made towards data-driven learning approaches for extractive summarization using neural networks. Kågebäck et al. (2014) used recursive autoencoders
to summarize documents, achieving good performance on
the Opinosis (Ganesan, Zhai, and Han 2010) dataset. Cao et
al. (2015b) used convolution neural networks for addressing the problem of learning summary prior representation
for multi-document extractive summarization. Cheng and
Lapata (2016) introduced attention based neural encoderdecoder model for extractive single document summarization trained on a large corpus of news articles collected from
the Daily Mail. Their work focuses on sentence-level as
well as the word-level extractive summarization of individual documents using encoder-decoder architecture. Singh,
Gupta, and Varma (2017) proposed a combination of memory network and convolutional BLSTM (Bidirectional Long
Short Term Memory) network to learn better uniﬁed document representation which jointly captures n-gram features,
sentential information and the notion of the summary worthiness of sentences leading to better summary generation.
Most successful multi-document summarization systems
use extractive methods. Sentence extraction is a crucial
step in such a system. The idea is to ﬁnd a representative subset of sentences, which contains the information of
the entire set. Thus, sentence ranking is imperative in ﬁnding such an informative subset, which sets our focus to
sentence-level summarization. The performance of the summarization system using sentence ranking approach is profoundly determined by the feature engineering, irrespective
of the ranking models (Osborne 2002; Conroy et al. 2004;
Galley 2006; Li et al. 2007). Features are broadly classiﬁed as: (a) document-dependent features (e.g., position, term
frequency), and (b) document-independent features (e.g.,
length, stop-word ratio, word polarity). Document independent features often reveal the aspect that a sentence can be
considered summary worthy irrespective of which document
it is present in. Consider the following example.

Abstract
Automated multi-document extractive text summarization is
a widely studied research problem in the ﬁeld of natural language understanding. Such extractive mechanisms compute
in some form the worthiness of a sentence to be included
into the summary. While the conventional approaches rely on
human crafted document-independent features to generate a
summary, we develop a data-driven novel summary system
called HNet, which exploits the various semantic and compositional aspects latent in a sentence to capture document
independent features. The network learns sentence representation in a way that, salient sentences are closer in the vector
space than non-salient sentences. This semantic and compositional feature vector is then concatenated with the documentdependent features for sentence ranking. Experiments on the
DUC benchmark datasets (DUC-2001, DUC-2002 and DUC2004) indicate that our model shows signiﬁcant performance
gain of around 1.5-2 points in terms of ROUGE score compared with the state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

The rapid growth of online news over the web has generated
an epochal change in the way we retrieve, analyze and consume data. The readers now have access to a huge amount
of information on the web. For a human, understanding large
documents and assimilating crucial information out of it is
often a laborious and time-consuming task. Motivation to
make a concise representation of huge text while retaining
the core meaning of the original text has led to the development of various automated summarization systems. These
systems provide users ﬁltered, high-quality concise content
to work at unprecedented scale and speed. Summarization
methods are mainly classiﬁed into two categories: extractive and abstractive. Extractive methods aim to select salient
phrases, sentences or elements from the text while abstractive techniques focus on generating summaries from scratch
without the constraint of reusing phrases from the original
text.
The majority of literature on text summarization is dedicated to extractive summarization approach. Previous methods can be predominantly categorized as (1) greedy approaches (e.g. (Carbonell and Goldstein 1998)), (2) graph
∗

The author is also a Principal Applied Researcher at Microsoft.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1. Six killed, eight wounded in a shooting at Quebec City.
2. It was the shooting that killed six people and injured eight

5473

