The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multi-Entity Dependence Learning with Rich Context via
Conditional Variational Auto-Encoder
Luming Tang∗

Yexiang Xue∗

Tsinghua University, China
tlm14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Cornell University, USA
yexiang@cs.cornell.edu

Di Chen

Carla P. Gomes

Cornell University, USA
dc874@cornell.edu

Cornell University, USA
gomes@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract

Species

Multi-Entity Dependence Learning (MEDL) explores conditional correlations among multiple entities. The availability of rich contextual information requires a nimble learning scheme that tightly integrates with deep neural networks
and has the ability to capture correlation structures among exponentially many outcomes. We propose MEDL CVAE, which
encodes a conditional multivariate distribution as a generating process. As a result, the variational lower bound of
the joint likelihood can be optimized via a conditional variational auto-encoder and trained end-to-end on GPUs. Our
MEDL CVAE was motivated by two real-world applications in
computational sustainability: one studies the spatial correlation among multiple bird species using the eBird data and
the other models multi-dimensional landscape composition
and human footprint in the Amazon rainforest with satellite
images. We show that MEDL CVAE captures rich dependency
structures, scales better than previous methods, and further
improves on the joint likelihood taking advantage of very
large datasets that are beyond the capacity of previous methods.

Location

composition Cultivation

+ Water
+ Forest

Figure 1: Two computational sustainability related applications for MEDL CVAE. The ﬁrst application is to study the
interactions among bird species in the crowdsourced eBird
dataset and environmental covariates including those from
satellite images. The second application is to tag satellite images with a few potentially overlapping landscape categories
and track human footprint in the Amazon rainforest.

Introduction
Learning the dependencies among multiple entities is an important problem with many real-world applications. For example, in the sustainability domain, the spatial distribution
of one species depends on other species due to their interactions in the form of mutualism, commensalism, competition and predation (MacKenzie, Bailey, and Nichols 2004).
In natural language processing, the topics of an article are
often correlated (Nam et al. 2014). In computer vision, an
image may have multiple correlated tags (Wang et al. 2016).
The key challenge behind dependency learning is to capture correlation structures embedded among exponentially
many outcomes. One classic approach is the Conditional
Random Fields (CRF) (Lafferty, McCallum, and Pereira
2001). However, to handle the intractable partition function
resulting from multi-entity interactions, CRFs have to incorporate approximate inference techniques such as contrastive

divergence (Hinton 2002). In a related applicational domain
called multi-label classiﬁcation, the classiﬁer chains (CC)
approach (Read et al. 2009) decomposes the joint likelihood into a product of conditionals and reduces a multi-label
classiﬁcation problem to a series of binary prediction problems. However, as pointed out by (Dembczyński, Cheng,
and Hüllermeier 2010), ﬁnding the joint mode of CC is also
intractable, and to date only approximate search methods are
available (Dembczyński et al. 2012).
The availability of rich contextual information such as
millions of high-resolution satellite images as well as recent
developments in deep learning create both opportunities and
challenges for multi-entity dependence learning. In terms of
opportunities, rich contextual information creates the possibility of improving predictive performance, especially when
it is combined with highly ﬂexible deep neural networks.
The challenge, however, is to design a nimble scheme that
can both tightly integrate with deep neural networks and

∗
indicates equal contribution. The work was done when Tang,
L. was a visiting student at Cornell University.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

824

