The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Privacy Preserving Point-of-Interest Recommendation
Using Decentralized Matrix Factorization
Chaochao Chen, Ziqi Liu, Peilin Zhao,∗ Jun Zhou, Xiaolong Li
AI Department, Ant Financial Services Group, China
{chaochao.ccc, ziqiliu, peilin.zpl, jun.zhoujun, xl.li}@antﬁn.com

Abstract
Points of interest (POI) recommendation has been drawn
much attention recently due to the increasing popularity of
location-based networks, e.g., Foursquare and Yelp. Among
the existing approaches to POI recommendation, Matrix Factorization (MF) based techniques have proven to be effective. However, existing MF approaches suffer from two major problems: (1) Expensive computations and storages due
to the centralized model training mechanism: the centralized
learners have to maintain the whole user-item rating matrix,
and potentially huge low rank matrices. (2) Privacy issues:
the users’ preferences are at risk of leaking to malicious attackers via the centralized learner. To solve these, we present
a Decentralized MF (DMF) framework for POI recommendation. Speciﬁcally, instead of maintaining all the low rank
matrices and sensitive rating data for training, we propose a
random walk based decentralized training technique to train
MF models on each user’s end, e.g., cell phone and Pad. By
doing so, the ratings of each user are still kept on one’s own
hand, and moreover, decentralized learning can be taken as
distributed learning with multi-learners (users), and thus alleviates the computation and storage issue. Experimental results on two real-world datasets demonstrate that, comparing with the classic and state-of-the-art latent factor models,
DMF signiﬁcantly improvements the recommendation performance in terms of precision and recall.

Figure 1: Comparison between centralized learning and decentralized learning.

2013), and it has proven to be attractive in many recommendation applications (Koren et al. 2009; Chen et al. 2014;
Koenigstein, Dror, and Koren 2011; Chen et al. 2016).
However, existing MF approaches train the recommendation
model in a centralized way. That is, the recommender system, actually the organization who built it, ﬁrst needs to collect the action data of all the users on all the POIs, and then
trains a MF model. The shortcomings of this kind of centralized MF methods are mainly three-folds. (1) High cost
of resources. Centralized MF not only needs large storage
to store the collected user action data on POIs, but also requires huge computing resources to train the model, especially when datasets are large. (2) Low model training efﬁciency. Centralized MF model is trained on a single machine
or a cluster of machines. Thus, the model training efﬁciency
is restricted to the number of machines available. (3) Shallow user privacy protection. In recommender systems, user
privacy is an importance concern (Canny 2002), especially
in POI scenarios. Most people do not want to release their
activities on location based network, not only to other people, but also to the platforms, for privacy concerns. However, centralized MF trains model on the basis of having all
the users’ activities data. In fact, the safest way is that users’
data are kept in their own hand, without sending them to
anyone or any organization (platform).
To solve the above problems caused by centralized training of MF, we propose Decentralized MF (DMF) framework. That is, instead of training user and item latent factors in a centralized way by obtaining all the ratings, we

Introduction
Nowadays, location-based networks, e.g., Foursquare and
Yelp, are becoming more and more popular. These platforms
provide kinds of point of interests (POIs) such as hotels,
restaurants, and markets, which makes our lives much easier than before. Meanwhile, the problem of “where to go”
starts to bother people, since it is time-consuming for people to ﬁnd their desired places from so many POIs. POI recommendation appears to address such a problem by helping
users ﬁlter out uninteresting POIs and saving their decisionmaking time (Ye et al. 2011; Gao et al. 2015).
Among the existing research from POI recommendation
communities, Matrix Factorization (MF) techniques draws
a lot of attention (Cheng et al. 2011; 2012; Yang et al.
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

257

