The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

An Axiomatization of the
Eigenvector and Katz Centralities
Tomasz W ˛
as, Oskar Skibski
Institute of Informatics, University of Warsaw, Poland

the vertices with edges incoming to a vertex in question are
taken into account, and this proportionally to the weights of
such an edge. For instance, consider journal citation network
where vertices represent journals and weighted and directed
ties represent citations. Now, the Degree Centrality simply
counts the number of citations, i.e., sums the weights of incoming ties. On the other hand, the Eigenvector Centrality
counts each citation with the centrality of the journal which
this citation comes from. In result, one citation from a good
journal might be more important than a couple of citations
from a weak one.
Over the years, many extensions of the Eigenvector Centrality have been proposed. Two most prominent ones are
the Katz Centrality (Katz 1953) and the PageRank (Page
et al. 1999). In this paper, beside the original Eigenvector
Centrality, we study the former one. The Katz Centrality is
deﬁned as the sum of the predecessors’ importance shifted
by a constant value, b. While seemingly insigniﬁcant, this
change means that the importance of a vertex depends more
than previously on the number of neighbours and less on the
importance of the neighbours. Thus, the Katz Centrality can
be considered as a middle point between the Degree Centrality and the Eigenvector Centrality.
Despite their popularity, there is a striking lack of the theoretical analysis that captures and highlights the differences
between the feedback centralities. As noted by Brandes and
Erlebach (2005), “there are several approaches concerning
axiomatization, but up to now there is a lack of structure and
generality”. While there have been several attempts to axiomatize various feedback centralities, many problems still
remain (see the Related Work section for details).
To address this issue, in this paper we propose a novel axiomatization of both the Eigenvector Centrality and the Katz
Centrality. We begin with the axiomatization of the Eigenvector Centrality based on four requirements. The ﬁrst one,
namely Source Dependency, specify centrality in a simple
graph with only two vertices and two edges. The remaining
requirements – Endpoint Removal, Weak Set Locality and
Convex Combination – deﬁne several graph operations and
specify how they affect the centrality in the graph. Next, we
analyze the Katz Centrality and prove that replacing Source
Dependency and Weak Set Locality with two axioms – Compound Dependency and Set Locality uniquely characterize
the Katz Centrality.

Abstract
Feedback centralities are one of the key classes of centrality
measures. They assess the importance of a vertex recursively,
based on the importance of its neighbours. Feedback centralities includes the Eigenvector Centrality, as well as its variants,
such as the Katz Centrality or the PageRank, and are used
in various AI applications, such as ranking the importance
of websites on the Internet and most inﬂuential users in the
Twitter social network. In this paper, we study the theoretical underpinning of the feedback centralities. Speciﬁcally, we
propose a novel axiomatization of the Eigenvector Centrality and the Katz Centrality based on six simple requirements.
Our approach highlights the similarities and differences between both centralities which may help in choosing the right
centrality for a speciﬁc application.

Introduction
Feedback centralities are one of the key classes of centrality
measures (Koschützki et al. 2005). They assess the importance of a vertex recursively, based on the importance of its
neighbours. In the AI literature, such measures have been
popularized by PageRank (Page et al. 1999), which is used
by Google to rank the importance of websites on the Internet. Since then, feedback centralities have been widely used
in a number of AI applications, such as ﬁnding the most
inﬂuential users in the Twitter social network (Weng et al.
2010) and balancing energy consumption in wireless sensor
networks (Jain and Reddy 2015). The goal of this paper is to
study the theoretical underpinnings of feedback centralities.
Arguably, the most well-known feedback centrality is the
Eigenvector Centrality (Bonacich 1972). It is a natural extension of the Degree Centrality which simply counts the
number of ties that a vertex has. In result, in the Degree Centrality, each neighbour is treated equally regardless of its importance. The idea behind the Eigenvector Centrality is that
the important vertex has connections to other vertices that
are themselves important. In result, the Eigenvector Centrality of a vertex is proportional not to a number of neighbours,
but to the sum of their Eigenvector Centralities.
In our work we study weighted directed networks, where
the Degree and Eigenvector Centralities account for both
the directions of edges and their weights. In particular, only
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1258

