The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

From Common to Special: When Multi-Attribute
Learning Meets Personalized Opinions
Zhiyong Yang,1,2 Qianqian Xu,1 Xiaochun Cao,1,2 Qingming Huang 3,4 ∗
1

SKLOIS, Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, Beijing, China
{yangzhiyong, xuqianqian, caoxiaochun}@iie.ac.cn, qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn
Abstract

Visual attributes, which refer to human-labeled semantic annotations, have gained increasing popularity in a wide range
of real world applications. Generally, the existing attribute
learning methods fall into two categories: one focuses on
learning user-speciﬁc labels separately for different attributes,
while the other one focuses on learning crowd-sourced global
labels jointly for multiple attributes. However, both categories ignore the joint effect of the two mentioned factors:
the personal diversity with respect to the global consensus;
and the intrinsic correlation among multiple attributes. To
overcome this challenge, we propose a novel model to learn
user-speciﬁc predictors across multiple attributes. In our proposed model, the diversity of personalized opinions and the
intrinsic relationship among multiple attributes are uniﬁed
in a common-to-special manner. To this end, we adopt a
three-component decomposition. Speciﬁcally, our model integrates a common cognition factor, an attribute-speciﬁc bias
factor and a user-speciﬁc bias factor. Meanwhile Lasso and
group Lasso penalties are adopted to leverage efﬁcient feature selection. Furthermore, theoretical analysis is conducted
to show that our proposed method could reach reasonable performance. Eventually, the empirical study carried out in this
paper demonstrates the effectiveness of our proposed method.

Figure 1: Illustration of the three-component decomposition.
Here a1 , a2 and a3 are the three mentioned attributes: high
heeled, open and feminine. We assume that, for each attribute, there are two annotators who labeled the corresponding images. Note that we extend θ and P to match the size
of U .
and the majority of annotators have to recognize this “correct answer” simultaneously. However, different annotators
might very well have distinct preferences, such that participants of the crowdsourced experiments might vote under
different criteria or conditions. It might be misleading to
merely look at a global consensus while ignoring personal
diversity. On the other hand, practical visual applications often involve simultaneously learning multiple attributes together. In such a case, different attributes may intrinsically
share some common patterns. One reason is that these attributes convey similar semantic meaning. Another reason is
that they use common subsets of low level image features.
In that sense, training multiple attribute predictors independently might not be an appropriate protocol.
Based on the discussion above, our goal is to solve two
problems simultaneously in this paper: 1) learning userspeciﬁc attributes, 2) learning multiple attributes together
with their shared information.
For 1), (Kovashka and Grauman 2013) regard userspeciﬁc attribute learning as an adaption process. In this
work, a generate model is ﬁrst trained based on a large pool
of crowd-sourced labels. Then a small user-speciﬁc dataset
is employed to adapt the generic model to user-speciﬁc predictors. Meanwhile, (Kovashka and Grauman 2015) argue
that one attribute may ﬁt to different shades (interpretations)
for different groups of persons. Correspondingly, the authors
proposed an automatic shade discovery method to leverage

Introduction
Visual attributes, which describe human labeled properties
(like open, fashionable) for a given image, have shown its
great potential as a mid-level semantic cue to enhance a variety of applications including face veriﬁcation (Song, Tan,
and Chen 2014), person re-identiﬁcation(Su et al. 2016;
2017), and zero-shot learning (Ji et al. 2017; Wang et al.
2017; Zhang and Saligrama 2016), etc. Generally speaking,
there are two types of attributes: i) binary attributes express
whether a property is absent or present in a given image (like
A is/is not open); ii) relative attributes show the strength of
an attribute conveyed in one image with respect to another
image (like A is more/similarly/less open than B) (Parikh and
Grauman 2011).
On one hand, the attribute predictors are often trained with
the crowd-sourced global labels. The justiﬁcation of such
an approach is that there is only one unique ground truth
∗

The corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

515

