The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Bandit-Based Solar Panel Control
David Abel, Edward C. Williams, Stephen Brawner,
Emily Reif, Michael L. Littman
Brown University Computer Science Department
115 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
{david abel,edward c williams,stephen brawner,emily reif,michael littman}@brown.edu

Abstract
Solar panels sustainably harvest energy from the sun. To improve performance, panels are often equipped with a tracking mechanism that computes the sun’s position in the sky
throughout the day. Based on the tracker’s estimate of the
sun’s location, a controller orients the panel to minimize the
angle of incidence between solar radiant energy and the photovoltaic cells on the surface of the panel, increasing total energy harvested. Prior work has developed efﬁcient tracking
algorithms that accurately compute the sun’s location to facilitate solar tracking and control. However, always pointing
a panel directly at the sun does not account for diffuse irradiance in the sky, reﬂected irradiance from the ground and surrounding surfaces, power required to reorient the panel, shading effects from neighboring panels and foliage, or changing
weather conditions (such as clouds), all of which are contributing factors to the total energy harvested by a ﬂeet of
solar panels. In this work, we show that a bandit-based approach can increase the total energy harvested by solar panels by learning to dynamically account for such other factors.
Our contribution is threefold: (1) the development of a test
bed based on typical solar and irradiance models for experimenting with solar panel control using a variety of learning
methods, (2) simulated validation that bandit algorithms can
effectively learn to control solar panels, and (3) the design
and construction of an intelligent solar panel prototype that
learns to angle itself using bandit algorithms.

Figure 1: Our intelligent solar panel prototype.

Prior work has consistently demonstrated that panels using a tracking system increase the total energy by a substantial amount: Eke and Senturk (2012) report that a dual-axis
tracker yielded 71 kW/h, compared to a ﬁxed panel’s yield of
52 kW/h on the same day. They also report energy harvesting gains of dual-axis tracking systems over ﬁxed systems
varying from 15% to 40%, depending on the time of year.
Mousazadeh et al. (2009) report that gains from tracking
can vary between 0% and 100%, while Clifford and Eastwood (2004) report a gain of 23% due to tracking in simulation.
Recent work in solar tracking has focused on developing algorithms that are sufﬁciently accurate to inform control of panels, building on the early work of Spencer (1971)
and Michalsky (1988). The algorithm introduced by Reda
and Andreas (2004) computes the sun’s location in the sky
within ±0.0003◦ of accuracy, achieving the highest degree
of accuracy of any known algorithm, but is computationally
inefﬁcient to the point of impracticality. Grena (2008) overcomes these inefﬁciencies with a tracking algorithm that requires an order of magnitude fewer calculations while still
achieving 0.0027◦ of accuracy.
However, prior literature suggests that a variety of factors
contribute to the performance of a panel (King, Boyson, and
Kratochvil 2001), and thus, pointing a panel directly at the
sun is not always optimal behavior. Speciﬁcally, the total solar irradiance falling on a panel is a combination of direct,
reﬂective, and diffuse irradiance (Benghanem 2011). The

Introduction
Solar energy offers a pollution free and sustainable means of
harvesting energy from the sun. Considerable effort has been
directed toward maximizing the efﬁciency of end-to-end solar systems, including the design of photovoltaic cells (Li
2012), engineering new photovoltaic architectures and materials (Li et al. 2005), and solar tracking systems (Camacho
and Berenguel 2012). Solar tracking is especially important
for maximizing performance of solar panels (2008). Given
the proper hardware, a tracking algorithm can compute the
relative location of the sun in the sky throughout the day, and
a controller can orient the panel to point at the sun. Its goal
is to minimize the angle of incidence between incoming solar radiant energy and the grid of photovoltaic cells (King,
Boyson, and Kratochvil 2001; Kalogirou 1996).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7713

