The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Cascaded Inception of Inception Network with Attention
Modulated Feature Fusion for Human Pose Estimation
Wentao Liu,1,2 Jie Chen,2 Cheng Li,2 Chen Qian,2 Xiao Chu,3 Xiaolin Hu,1
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, liuwtwinter@gmail.com,xlhu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
2
SenseTime Group Limited, {chenjie, chengli, qianchen}@sensetime.com
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, xchu@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Accurate keypoint localization of human pose needs diversiﬁed features: the high level for contextual dependencies and
the low level for detailed reﬁnement of joints. However, the
importance of the two factors varies from case to case, but
how to efﬁciently use the features is still an open problem.
Existing methods have limitations in preserving low level features, adaptively adjusting the importance of different levels of features, and modeling the human perception process.
This paper presents three novel techniques step by step to efﬁciently utilize different levels of features for human pose
estimation. Firstly, an inception of inception (IOI) block is
designed to emphasize the low level features. Secondly, an
attention mechanism is proposed to adjust the importance
of individual levels according to the context. Thirdly, a cascaded network is proposed to sequentially localize the joints
to enforce message passing from joints of stand-alone parts
like head and torso to remote joints like wrist or ankle.
Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method
achieves the state-of-the-art performance on both MPII and
LSP benchmarks.

Figure 1: Results of our method on the MPII dataset. It is
shown that the method is able to handle non-standard poses
and resolve ambiguities when body parts are occluded.

region are required. Meanwhile, more details are required to
be preserved in order to correctly locate the left ankle which
is partially occluded.
Conventional human pose estimation approaches predict
all joints at the same time from the same features (Wei et al.
2016; Newell, Yang, and Deng 2016). However, as we observed, some joints are distinct and less frequently occluded
than others, which makes the estimation of them easier. So
estimating each joint progressively and using features that
rely on the predicted joints may simplify the learning task
and provide more robust prediction of the harder cases. This
cascaded framework has been adopted to deal with other visual tasks such as face alignment (Cao et al. 2014) and hand
model ﬁtting (Sun et al. 2015), but has not been used in human pose estimation yet.
According to the analysis above, in this work, we make
three efforts to improve pose estimation by more efﬁciently
capturing information from different scales. 1) Since the
deeper network only focuses on high level features, some
low level features are lost. We design an inception of inception(IOI) block to preserve scale diversity. As the network goes deeper, the scale diversity can be preserved in
each block. 2) The feature fusion is even dynamic in human pose estimation due to various appearance and occlusion. We upgrade IOI into an attention-modulated IOI(AIOI)
block, which employs attention module to adapt the weights
among features of different scales in each block. The adaptive feature scale makes it more robust to predict joints without structural context. 3) To enforce the message passing between joints, we construct a cascaded joint network to predict joints progressively. Our framework sequentially treats

Human pose estimation aims to localize human parts, e.g.,
head, shoulders, wrists, and ankles, which plays a key role in
analyzing human’s behavior from images or videos. Accurate and efﬁcient human pose estimation may facilitate varieties of applications such as video analysis (Zhang and Shah
2015), action recognition (Du, Wang, and Wang 2015) etc.
But localizing human’s joints is challenging due to deformation of human body, various appearances and occlusion.
To localize keypoints accurately, a model has to consider
features from multiple scales. The high level features, which
represent global position of human, indicate the contextual
relationship between joints. They reveal a rough but robust
pose especially in occluded cases, e.g. the left wrist of the
man in Figure 1. The low level features provide detailed information that is useful for reﬁning the positions of joints
like ankles and wrists, such as the partially occluded left ankle of the man (Figure 1).
The trade-off between low level and high level features
is always depending on the actual situations. In Figure 1, to
infer the position of the man’s left wrist, which is completely
occluded, high level features about the context of a larger
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7170

