The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Early Syntactic Bootstrapping in an
Incremental Memory-Limited Word Learner
Sepideh Sadeghi, Matthias Scheutz
Computer Science Department
Tufts University, Medford MA, USA
{sepideh.sadeghi,mscheutz}@tufts.edu

handle variable-length utterances. Alishahi and Fazly (2010)
showed that knowledge of lexical categories improves word
learning results. Yu and colleagues went further and showed
that imperfect knowledge of syntactic regularities learned
in parallel with word meaning improves word learning results (Yu 2006; Alishahi and Chrupała 2012). Abend et al.
(2017) recently went even further and proposed a truly joint
learner in which the learned meanings are used to reﬁne
the syntactic knowledge, an aspect missing in the previously proposed joint learners. However, all of these models studied the problem of joint acquisition in the context
of ideal learners, ignoring the possibility that the memory
and computational limitations of a learner (e.g., an embodied robot) can turn the positive effect of joint acquisition
into a negative effect by injecting noise to it. Furthermore,
they usually assume prior access to syntactic concepts such
as “subjecthood”, lexical categories or more advanced syntactic knowledge such as syntactic parses of the input sentences. Abend et al. (2017) use pairs of utterance and utterance semantic representation as input, and their semantic
representations mirror the syntactic parse representations of
the utterance using lambda calculus. For example, the semantic representation of the sentence “you get a ﬂy” would
be {λev.v|get(pro|you, det|a(e, n|f ly(e)), ev}.

Abstract
It has been suggested that early human word learning occurs
across learning situations and is bootstrapped by syntactic
regularities such as word order. Simulation results from ideal
learners and models assuming prior access to structured syntactic and semantic representations suggest that it is possible
to jointly acquire word order and meanings and that learning
is improved as each language capability bootstraps the other.
We ﬁrst present a probabilistic framework for early syntactic
bootstrapping in the absence of advanced structured representations, then we use our framework to study the utility of joint
acquisition of word order and word referent and its onset, in a
memory-limited incremental model. Comparing learning results in the presence and absence of joint acquisition of word
order in different ambiguous contexts, improvement in word
order results showed an immediate onset, starting in early trials while being affected by context ambiguity. Improvement
in word learning results on the other hand, was hindered in
early trials where the acquired word order was imperfect,
while being facilitated by word order learning in future trials as the acquired word order improved. Furthermore, our
results showed that joint acquisition of word order and word
referent facilitates one-shot learning of new words as well as
inferring intentions of the speaker in ambiguous contexts.

Introduction

This work explores the possibility of learning word order
before syntactic concepts such as subject, object, or lexical
categories or syntactic parse representations are available
to the learner. It also examines the utility of the acquired
word order in a joint learner where word order knowledge
constrains word learning (syntactic bootstrapping) and vice
versa. We propose that the transitional probabilities of the
thematic roles (in the order of their appearance in the utterance) of the referential words (words with action or event
participant referents) are an invaluable source of information for learning word order and that they can provide an
initial understanding of the notion of word order in early
stages of language acquisition in the absence of advanced
syntactic concepts or representations. We utilize an incremental and memory-limited learning algorithm as opposed
to batch learning algorithms, as we are interested in online
learning in embodied agents with computational limitations.
Our model adds the notion of syntax to the word learning generative story in (Sadeghi, Scheutz, and Krause 2017;
Frank, Goodman, and Tenenbaum 2009) but departs from

A hallmark of human word learning is the integration
of cross-situational information even though this information is not always reliable as inconsistencies in the wordreferent co-occurrence (e.g., when the referent is absent in a
scene or when distracting referents are present) inject noise
into cross-situational information. It has been suggested
that bootstrapping cross-situational word learning with the
learner’s belief about the referential intentions of the speaker
(Frank, Goodman, and Tenenbaum 2009) as well as bootstrapping it with learner’s belief about the syntactic regularities of language (Yu 2006; Maurits, Perfors, and Navarro
2009; Alishahi and Fazly 2010; Alishahi and Chrupała 2012;
Abend et al. 2017) allow for disambiguation and should
thus improve word learning. Maurits, Perfors, and Navarro
(2009) bootstrap word learning with the acquired knowledge
of word order in an ideal learner although their model cannot
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4905

