The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

WalkRanker: A Uniﬁed Pairwise Ranking Model
with Multiple Relations for Item Recommendation
Lu Yu,∗ Chuxu Zhang,+ Shichao Pei,∗ Guolei Sun,∗ Xiangliang Zhang∗
∗

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, 23955, SA
+
University of Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
Email: lu.yu,shichao.pei,guolei.sun,xiangliang.zhang@kaust.edu.sa, czhang11@nd.edu

Most of the pairwise learning approaches (Shi et al.
2012b; Rendle et al. 2009; Yu et al. 2016b; Zhang et al.
2013) separate items into positive or negative set according to the ﬁrst-order local structure, if representing observed
user-item interactions as a collaborative bipartite graph. It
means that only direct neighbors (i.e., items) connected to a
user u are allocated to a positive set, while all other items
(not connected to u) are negative samples. Several issues
might be raised by such a separation.
1. The ratio of negative samples to positive samples is seriously imbalanced, as users normally only have actions on
a small portion of items. Especially, for those cold-start
users, too few positive samples could lead to insufﬁciently
modeling their preferences over items.
2. Only observed user-item relations are taken into account
to construct pairwise samples, while those potentially useful but unobserved relations are ignored. These ignored
relations include i) unobserved but potentially helpful
user-item relations among users and items that are not
directly connected in the bipartite graph; and ii) highorder user-user, item-item relations. User-user similarity
and item-item similarity are essential for inferring user
preference in collaborative ﬁltering. However, the current
separation in pairwise models restrains the consideration
of high-order proximity.
Our goal in this work is to take multiple relations including
user-item, user-user and item-item relations, into the rank
learning model for improving top-N item recommendation.
To extract and measure multiple relations, we propose to
generalize the 0/1 user-item relations considered in standard pairwise models to probability-based user-item relations (called probability relevance). From a probability perspective, we enable unobserved user-item pairs to become
potentially positive samples if they can be connected indirectly in a bipartite graph. The introduction of probability
relevance drives us to revisit the deﬁnition of previous MAP
and MRR Loss for recommendation tasks where only binary
relevance is considered. To smooth the newly deﬁned loss
functions, we derive their lower bound and ﬁnd that new
MAP and MRR loss function have the same lower bound.
Therefore, we present a uniﬁed ranking model as an alternative optimization objective. To efﬁciently learn model
parameters, sequential samples induced from random walk
sequences are constructed as positive samples, and a rank-

Abstract
Top-N item recommendation techniques, e.g., pairwise models, learn the rank of users’ preferred items through separating items into positive samples if user-item interactions exist, and negative samples otherwise. This separation results in
an important issue: the extreme imbalance between positive
and negative samples, because the number of items with user
actions is much less than those without actions. The problem is even worse for “cold-start” users. In addition, existing
learning models only consider the observed user-item proximity, while neglecting other useful relations, such as the unobserved but potentially helpful user-item relations, and highorder proximity in user-user, item-item relations. In this paper, we aim at incorporating multiple types of user-item relations into a uniﬁed pairwise ranking model towards approximately optimizing ranking metrics mean average precision
(MAP), and mean reciprocal rank (MRR). Instead of taking
statical separation of positive and negative sets, we employ a
random walk approach to dynamically draw positive samples
from short random walk sequences, and a rank-aware negative sampling method to draw negative samples for efﬁciently
learning the proposed pairwise ranking model. The proposed
method is compared with several state-of-the-art baselines on
two large and sparse datasets. Experimental results show that
our proposed model outperforms the other baselines with average 4% at different top-N metrics, in particular for coldstart users with 6% on average.

Introduction
Providing personalized services to users still raises continuous challenges. Usually users’ preferences over items could
be encoded as explicit ratings like starring items or in the
case of implicit data of user-item interactions (e.g., “user A
clicks on or purchases item B”). Nowadays it’s widely acceptable to pay more attention on optimizing the rank of
items from implicit data, other than rating estimation (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009). This leads to a shift from rating estimation to rank optimization. Inspired by learning to
rank community, pairwise models towards rank optimization are among the most popular top-N item recommendation techniques, under the basic assumption that items without user actions (e.g., clicks) are of less interest than those
with user actions.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2596

