The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning to Extract Coherent Summary
via Deep Reinforcement Learning
Yuxiang Wu∗

Baotian Hu∗

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Hong Kong
ywubw@cse.ust.hk

University of Massachusetts Medical School
MA, USA
Baotian.Hu@umassmed.edu

with long documents. There is still a long way to go before
abstractive summarization becomes practicable.
In contrast, extracting sentences from documents to form
summaries, also named extractive summarization, is a more
practical approach, because it can guarantee the grammatical correctness of the produced summary and its semantic relevance with the corresponding document. Extractive
summarization has been studied for several decades. Traditional methods mainly focus on scoring sentences using
graph-based method (Erkan and Radev 2004), submodular
functions (Lin and Bilmes 2011) or integer linear programming (Berg-Kirkpatrick, Gillick, and Klein 2011), which
are coupled with handcrafted features. As the distributed
representation shows its outstanding capability in capturing semantic and syntactic information of text (Mikolov et
al. 2013; Hu et al. 2016), there is an emergence of works
that use the deep neural networks to extract salient sentences (Cheng and Lapata 2016; Nallapati, Zhai, and Zhou
2017). Although DNN-based methods can identify the important sentences from the documents, they still lack the
ability to ensure coherence of the summary. They may produce summaries with sentences that are semantically independent to each other, which would cause difﬁculty for readers to comprehend the story as a whole.
The coherence of a summary is essential for its readability
and clarity. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is
no work incorporating coherence into the neural extractive
model while extracting sentences. This task is challenging
because it is difﬁcult to include coherence into the objective
function of supervised learning models because the coherence also depends on sentences that are eventually extracted
when the inference is performed. In contrary, reinforcement
learning (RL) is suitable for this case. RL algorithms aim to
train an agent to maximize the reward by interacting with an
environment. It is often used in settings where the objective
is not differentiable with respect to the model parameters,
such as works done by (Paulus, Xiong, and Socher 2017;
Nguyen, Boyd-Graber, and Daume 2017).
In this paper, we focus on incorporating coherence into
neural extractive model via reinforcement learning. We need
a model that estimates coherence in the ﬁrst place. During
the past decades, works in coherence modeling mainly focus on topical coherence. One of the most popular methods is the entity grid model (Barzilay and Lapata 2008)

Abstract
Coherence plays a critical role in producing a high-quality
summary from a document. In recent years, neural extractive
summarization is becoming increasingly attractive. However,
most of them ignore the coherence of summaries when extracting sentences. As an effort towards extracting coherent
summaries, we propose a neural coherence model to capture
the cross-sentence semantic and syntactic coherence patterns.
The proposed neural coherence model obviates the need for
feature engineering and can be trained in an end-to-end fashion using unlabeled data. Empirical results show that the
proposed neural coherence model can efﬁciently capture the
cross-sentence coherence patterns. Using the combined output of the neural coherence model and ROUGE package as
the reward, we design a reinforcement learning method to
train a proposed neural extractive summarizer which is named
Reinforced Neural Extractive Summarization (RNES) model.
The RNES model learns to optimize coherence and informative importance of the summary simultaneously. The experimental results show that the proposed RNES outperforms existing baselines and achieves state-of-the-art performance in
term of ROUGE on CNN/Daily Mail dataset. The qualitative
evaluation indicates that summaries produced by RNES are
more coherent and readable.

Introduction
Although deep neural networks (DNN) have dominated almost every ﬁeld of natural language processing, such as sentiment classiﬁcation (Tang, Qin, and Liu 2015), machine
translation (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014) and question answering (Zhou et al. 2015), generating high-quality
summaries from long documents is still a very challenging
task. Most of the recent works on abstractive summarization focus on headline generation from one paragraph (Rush,
Chopra, and Weston 2015) or several sentences (Hu, Chen,
and Zhu 2015) by using sequence-to-sequence architectures
borrowed from neural machine translation. However, they
bypass the fundamental problems in summarization, namely
the representation of long documents and the generation of
multiple coherent sentences. These models fail to produce
readable, informative and coherent sentences when dealing
∗

The two authors contribute equally to this work.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5602

