The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multimodal Poisson Gamma Belief Network
Chaojie Wang, Bo Chen∗

Mingyuan Zhou∗

National Laboratory of Radar Signal Processing
Collaborative Innovation Center of
Information Sensing & Understanding
Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China

McCombs School of Business
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712, USA

as a probabilistic inference problem, which can be solved
with routine procedures.

Abstract
To learn a deep generative model of multimodal data, we propose a multimodal Poisson gamma belief network (mPGBN)
that tightly couple the data of different modalities at multiple hidden layers. The mPGBN unsupervisedly extracts a
nonnegative latent representation using an upward-downward
Gibbs sampler. It imposes sparse connections between different layers, making it simple to visualize the generative process and the relationships between the latent features of different modalities. Our experimental results on bi-modal data
consisting of images and tags show that the mPGBN can easily impute a missing modality and hence is useful for both
image annotation and retrieval. We further demonstrate that
the mPGBN achieves state-of-the-art results on unsupervisedly extracting latent features from multimodal data.

Another common approach to multimodal representation
learning is to build a deep neural network for each modality, and share the top hidden layer of the networks of all
modalities. For example, a deep autoencoder is used to learn
a joint representation for speech and vision, showing that using both modalities for representation learning outperforms
using only one modality (Ngiam et al. 2011). To infer a joint
representation for image-text pairs, the multimodal deep belief network (DBN) of Srivastava and Salakhutdinov (2012a)
uses a DBN for each modality and combine both DBNs by
sharing a restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM) as their top
hidden layer. The multimodal DBN is further generalized
to multimodal deep Boltzmann machine (DBM) by replacing the DBNs with DBMs (Srivastava and Salakhutdinov
2012b). Another successful example is the multimodal deep
recurrent neural network (MDRNN) of Sohn, Shang, and
Lee (2014), which uses a recurrent encoding function to predict the target modality given the input modality, achieving
state-of-the-art performance on the MIR-Flicker (Huiskes
and Lew 2008) after ﬁne-tuning the whole network.

Introduction
Data in the real world come through multiple input channels,
typically exhibiting multiple modalities that carry different
types of information. Different data modalities often have
distinct statistical properties. For example, natural images,
which are often represented with pixels or image descriptors,
can also be described with the associated text (e.g., user tags
or subtitles) and audio (e.g., human voice or natural sound).
To exploit the connections between different data modalities, there has been signiﬁcant recent interest in multimodal
learning. One of the leading approaches is using latent
Dirichlet allocation (LDA) of Blei, Ng, and Jordan (2003),
or other more sophisticated topic models. For example, to
discover the relationship between the images and their associated annotations, correspondence LDA (Corr-LDA) oneto-one maps the image and text topics (Blei and Jordan
2003). Multimodal LDA generalizes Corr-LDA by learning
a regression module relating the topics from different modalities (Putthividhy, Attias, and Nagarajan 2010). Besides annotated tags, the embedding of class labels can also help improve the discriminative power of the learned joint representation (Mcauliffe and Blei 2008). One appealing feature of
the topic modeling based approach is that the task of extracting latent representation from the data can be easily framed

Inspired by the success of both approaches for multimodal
representation learning, we propose a multimodal Poisson
gamma belief network (PGBN) that generalizes the PGBN
of Zhou, Cong, and Chen (2016) to infer a nonnegative latent representation of multimodal data in an unsupervised
manner. The PGBN is a Bayesian deep model that combines the interpretability of a topic model and the nonlinear modeling capability of a deep neural network. It can be
equivalently represented as deep LDA (Cong et al. 2017)
and is a deep generative model whose latent multilayer network structure can be easily interpreted. Before going into
the technical details, we show in Fig. 1 how an image-tags
pair is represented under the proposed multimodal PGBN
via a sparse set of non-negligibly weighted multimodal latent features, where the chosen image topics for generating image are highly correlated with the key words of the
corresponding text topic beneﬁting from our special model
structure. In addition to providing easily interpretable deep
multimodal latent representations, we show the multimodal
PGBN achieves state-of-the-art results in predicting a missing modality conditioning on the other observed ones.

∗
Correspondence to: Bo Chen (bchen@mail.xidian.edu.cn),
Mingyuan Zhou (mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2492

