The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Locality Preserving Projection Based on F-norm
Xiangjie Hu,2 Yanfeng Sun,1,2,∗ Junbin Gao,3 Yongli Hu,1,2 Baocai Yin4
1

Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Future Internet Technology
Faculty of Information Technology, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China
3
Discipline of Business Analytics. The University of Sydney Business School,
University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
4
Faculty of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
2

tion (LPP) (He and Niyogi 2003) are two other popular ways
of dimensionality reduction. As a supervised learning approach, LDA aims at learning a discriminant projection matrix by maximizing the ratio of the between-class distance
to the inter-class distance. LPP seeks for the low dimensional projection so that the locality structure of data can
be well preserved. This has been implemented by building
a graph neighborhood information of the data points, then
using the Laplacian of the graph to learn a projection matrix which maps the data points to a subspace where the
original locality structure is preserved. These methods have
been used in object recognition (Yanadume et al. 2004; Iosiﬁdis et al. 2012), face recognition (Turk and Pentland 1991;
Zhao and Phillips 1999; Xu et al. 2010) and image recognition (Feng et al. 2006).
However, these dimensionality reduction methods are
sensitive to outliers because they all rely on the squared
F-norm which magniﬁes the effect of outliers. It is wellknown that the l1 -norm is robust to outliers (Brooks, Dul,
and Boone 2013; Meng, Zhao, and Xu 2012). In order to alleviate this effect, Ke and Kanade (Ke and Kanade 2005)
proposed the robust PCA called PCA-L1, which uses l1 norm to minimize the reconstruction error. PCA-L1 achieves
robust results, however, it usually gets the local optimal solution due to the discontinuity of the objective function. Motivated by the advantage of using l1 -norm, Zhong and Zhang
(Zhong and Zhang 2013) proposed LDA-L1. It maximized
the l1 -norm based objective function and a greedy algorithm was suggested to learn a discriminant projection matrix. However, the model is not rotational invariant and the
solution seriously depends on the selection of initial point.
Yu et al (Yu et al. 2011) proposed an enhanced locality preserving projection (ELPP), and this model just focuses on
building robust graph structure, and is not really robust to
outliers. Recently, F-norm-based methods (Li et al. 2017;
Xu et al. 2017), which are derived from squared F-norm,
were proposed to be used as an alternative measure in objective functions. It is said that F-norm has less contribution to
outliers than the squared F-norm, meanwhile it overcomes
the shortcomings of l1 -norm with the rotational invariant.
Although some of the aforementioned methods are robust
to outliers, they are concerned with vectorial data. When we
have 2D or high-order data, a typical workaround is to vectorize 2D data, which may break their structure and discard

Abstract
Locality preserving projection (LPP) is a well-known method
for dimensionality reduction in which the neighborhood
graph structure of data is preserved. Traditional LPP employ
squared F-norm for distance measurement. This may exaggerate more distance errors, and result in a model being sensitive to outliers. In order to deal with this issue, we propose two novel F-norm-based models, termed as F-LPP and
F-2DLPP, which are developed for vector-based and matrixbased data, respectively. In F-LPP and F-2DLPP, the distance
of data projected to a low dimensional space is measured by
F-norm. Thus it is anticipated that both methods can reduce
the inﬂuence of outliers. To solve the F-norm-based models,
we propose an iterative optimization algorithm, and give the
convergence analysis of algorithm. The experimental results
on three public databases have demonstrated the effectiveness
of our proposed methods.

Introduction
High-dimensional data are widely acquired in modern image
process and computer vision research (Schadt et al. 2010).
The high-dimensionality of data not only increases computational complexity and memory requirements in algorithms, but also adversely affects their performance in real
applications. In many practical problems, one can conﬁrm
that the high dimensional data in general lie in or close to
a low dimensional space or manifold (Wang et al. 2017).
Thus how to effectively and properly ﬁnd low-dimensional
embedding of high dimensional data becomes a meaningful and urgent problem in the big data era. The past few
decades have witnessed great progress in the research on
dimensionality reduction algorithms and models (He et al.
2005; Yan et al. 2005; Xu, Caramanis, and Mannor 2013;
Wang, Q. Gao, and Nie 2017).
Principal component analysis (PCA) (Jolliffe 1986) is one
of classical dimensionality reduction methods and wide utilized in scientiﬁc research. PCA aims to learn a linear transformation by maximizing the variance of projected data or
equivalently minimizing the reconstruction error when recovering the data from their low dimensional counterpart.
Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) (Belhumeur, Hespanha, and Kriegman 1997) and locality preserving projecc 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1330

