The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Semi-Supervised AUC Optimization
without Guessing Labels of Unlabeled Data
Zheng Xie, Ming Li
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
Collaborative Innovation Center for Novel Software Technology and Industrialization
Nanjing 210023, China
Email: {xiez, lim}@lamda.nju.edu.cn
AUC (area under ROC curve) (Hanley and McNeil 1982),
which measures the probability of a randomly drawn positive instance being ranked before a randomly drawn negative instance, is a widely-used performance measure for a
learner, especially when the data distribution exhibits certain
imbalance. Directly optimizing the AUC during the learning
procedure usually lead to a better prediction performance.
Many studies are elaborated to show that AUC can be effectively and efﬁciently optimized (Herschtal and Raskutti
2004; Gao and Zhou 2015; Gao et al. 2013; Ying, Wen, and
Lyu 2016).
Some efforts have been devoted to AUC optimization
in semi-supervised settings (Amini, Truong, and Goutte
2008; Fujino and Ueda 2016). These methods rely on
the aforementioned distributional assumptions. However,
those assumptions may be violated in real-world applications and the learner may be biased when explicitly
or implicitly estimating the labels based on the violated
assumptions, resulting in poor performance or even performance degradation (Cozman and Cohen 2002). Sakai,
Niu, and Sugiyama (2017) proposed an unbiased semisupervised AUC optimization method based on positiveunlabeled learning. However, such a method requires an accurate estimation of the prior probability to reweight the unlabeled data, which is usually difﬁcult especially when the
number of labeled data is extremely small.
In this paper, we argue that in semi-supervised AUC optimization problem, it is unnecessary to guess the possible
labels of the unlabeled data or prior probability based on
any distributional assumptions. We theoretically show that
the AUC risk can be estimated unbiasedly by treating the
unlabeled data as both positive and negative without any distributional assumptions.
Such a theoretical ﬁnding enables us to address semisupervised AUC optimization problem by simply treating
the unlabeled data as both positive and negative data, without designing speciﬁc strategies to identify the possible labels of the unlabeled data. Based on this theoretical ﬁnding,
we propose two novel semi-supervised AUC optimization
methods: S AMULT, a straightforward unbiased method by
regarding the unlabeled data as both positive and negative
data, and S AMPURA, an ensemble method by random partitioning the unlabeled data into pseudo-positive and pseudonegative sets to train base classiﬁers. The experimental re-

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning, which aims to construct learners
that automatically exploit the large amount of unlabeled data
in addition to the limited labeled data, has been widely applied in many real-world applications. AUC is a well-known
performance measure for a learner, and directly optimizing
AUC may result in a better prediction performance. Thus,
semi-supervised AUC optimization has drawn much attention. Existing semi-supervised AUC optimization methods
exploit unlabeled data by explicitly or implicitly estimating
the possible labels of the unlabeled data based on various distributional assumptions. However, these assumptions may be
violated in many real-world applications, and estimating labels based on the violated assumption may lead to poor performance. In this paper, we argue that, in semi-supervised
AUC optimization, it is unnecessary to guess the possible
labels of the unlabeled data or prior probability based on
any distributional assumptions. We analytically show that the
AUC risk can be estimated unbiasedly by simply treating
the unlabeled data as both positive and negative. Based on
this ﬁnding, two semi-supervised AUC optimization methods
named S AMULT and S AMPURA are proposed. Experimental
results indicate that the proposed methods outperform the existing methods.

Introduction
In many real-world applications, collecting a large amount
of unlabeled data is relatively easy, while obtaining the labels for the collected data is rather expensive since much
human effort and expertise is required for labeling. Semisupervised learning (Chapelle, Schlkopf, and Zien 2006;
Zhu et al. 2009), aiming to construct learners that automatically exploit the large amount of unlabeled data in addition
to the limited labeled data in the purpose of improving the
learning performance, has drawn signiﬁcant attention. Many
semi-supervised learning methods have been proposed. To
effectively exploit the unlabeled data, almost all of these
methods elaborate to link the labeled data and the unlabeled
data based on certain distributional assumption (Chapelle,
Schlkopf, and Zien 2006), such as the cluster assumption,
the manifold assumption, etc., and construct the learner by
explicitly or implicitly estimating the labels of unlabeled instances.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4310

