The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

On the Complexity of Extended and Proportional Justiﬁed Representation
Haris Aziz

Edith Elkind

Shenwei Huang

Data61, CSIRO and UNSW
Sydney, Australia
haris.aziz@data61.csiro.com.au

University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
elkind@cs.ox.ac.uk

University of New South Wales
Sydney, Australia
dynamichuang@gmail.com

Martin Lackner

Luis Sánchez-Fernández

Piotr Skowron

TU Wien
Vienna, Austria
lackner@dbai.tuwien.ac.at

Universidad Carlos III
de Madrid, Spain
luiss@it.uc3m.es

TU Berlin
Berlin, Germany
p.k.skowron@gmail.com

Aziz et al. (2017) proposed a compelling representation axiom called justiﬁed representation (JR), as well as a
stronger version of this axiom called extended justiﬁed representation (EJR). Intuitively, the JR axiom says that every
sufﬁciently large group of voters who jointly approve at least
one candidate should be represented in a committee; EJR
additionally requires that very large groups whose preferences exhibit signiﬁcant agreement should be allocated several representatives. While EJR is a rather demanding axiom, every election admits a committee that provides EJR.

Abstract
We consider the problem of selecting a ﬁxed-size committee
based on approval ballots. It is desirable to have a committee
in which all voters are fairly represented. Aziz et al. (2015a;
2017) proposed an axiom called extended justiﬁed representation (EJR), which aims to capture this intuition; subsequently, Sánchez-Fernández et al. (2017) proposed a weaker
variant of this axiom called proportional justiﬁed representation (PJR). It was shown that it is coNP-complete to check
whether a given committee provides EJR, and it was conjectured that it is hard to ﬁnd a committee that provides EJR. In
contrast, there are polynomial-time computable voting rules
that output committees providing PJR, but the complexity
of checking whether a given committee provides PJR was
an open problem. In this paper, we answer open questions
from prior work by showing that EJR and PJR have the same
worst-case complexity: we provide two polynomial-time algorithms that output committees providing EJR, yet we show
that it is coNP-complete to decide whether a given committee provides PJR. We complement the latter result by ﬁxedparameter tractability results.

Aziz et al. (2017) show that it is easy to check if a
given committee provides JR, and to ﬁnd a committee with
this property; indeed, many common approval-based voting
rules are guaranteed to output committees that provide JR.
The EJR axiom is considerably more challenging from a
computational perspective: among the voting rules considered in the literature, there is only one rule, namely, Proportional Approval Voting (PAV) that satisﬁes EJR (in the
sense that every committee output by PAV provides EJR),
and computing the winners under this rule is NP-hard (Aziz
et al. 2015). Moreover, Aziz et al. (2017) show that it is
coNP-complete to check if a given committee provides EJR.

Introduction
Consider an election where voters have simple preferences:
each voter approves some of the candidates and disapproves
the remaining candidates; she is indifferent among the candidates in each group. Suppose that the goal is to select
a ﬁxed-size set of winners, or committee. This model captures a number of applications: the candidates could be potential members of a governing body, items to be shown
on a seller’s homepage, or tunes to be played at a wedding. Accordingly, there is a number of natural voting rules
that take approval ballots as their input and output a set of
committees that are tied for winning (Kilgour 2010; Brams
and Fishburn 2007; LeGrand, Markakis, and Mehta 2007;
Aziz et al. 2015; Skowron, Faliszewski, and Lang 2016;
Sánchez-Fernández, Fernández, and Fisteus 2016; Brill et al.
2017). Many of these voting rules attempt to ensure that all
groups of voters are fairly represented in the selected committee. However, it has been far from clear how to best capture the representation requirements.

Sánchez-Fernández et al. (2017) put forward an intermediate property called proportional justiﬁed representation
(PJR): every committee that provides EJR also provides
PJR, and every committee that provides PJR also provides
JR, but converse implications are not true. An attractive
property of PJR is that it is compatible with another important axiom called perfect representation, while for EJR this
is not the case. Sánchez-Fernández et al. (2017) argued that
two well-studied approval-based committee selection rules
satisfy PJR when the target committee size k divides the
number of voters n; one of these rules is polynomial-time
computable. Other authors identiﬁed two polynomial-time
computable rules that satisfy PJR for all values of k and n
(Brill et al. 2017; Sánchez-Fernández, Fernández, and Fisteus 2016). However, the complexity of checking whether a
given committee provides PJR remained open. Thus, the existing results seemed to suggest that, from a computational
perspective, PJR is more tractable than EJR.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

902

