The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Predicting Vehicular Travel Times by Modeling
Heterogeneous Inﬂuences between Arterial Roads
Avinash Achar, Venkatesh Sarangan
Rohith Regikumar

Anand Sivasubramaniam
Dept. of Comp. Sci & Eng.,
Pennsylvania State University,
State College, PA 16802, USA.

TCS Research, IIT – Madras Research Park
Chennai 600113, INDIA

times and congestions seen by such vehicles could be different from the (possibly average) values that are predicted
from crowd sourced applications. In such cases, customized
travel-time prediction techniques are necessary.
Types of prediction models: Travel time prediction models can be broadly categorized into two types: trafﬁc ﬂow
based and data-driven (Mori et al. 2015). The trafﬁc ﬂow
models attempt to capture the physics of the trafﬁc in varied
levels of detail. They however suffer from important issues
like need for calibration, being computationally expensive
and rendering inaccurate predictions.
Data-driven models: The data driven models typically
use statistical models which model trafﬁc behavior to the
extent required for the prediction at hand. They rely on
real world data feeds for learning the parameters of the
employed statistical model. A variety of data driven techniques to predict travel time have been proposed in the literature. Researchers have proposed techniques based on linear regression (Kwon, Coifman, and Bickel 2000; Nikovski
et al. 2005), time-series models (Ishak and Al-Deek 2003;
Vanajakshi, Subramanian, and Sivanandan 2009), neural
networks (Li and Rose 2011), regression trees (Kwon, Coifman, and Bickel 2000; Nikovski et al. 2005) and bayesian
networks (Hunter et al. 2009) to name a few.
Prediction in a freeway context (ﬂow, travel time etc.)
has been typically better studied compared to urban or arterial roads. This is because freeways are relatively well instrumented with sensors like loop detectors, AVI detectors
and cameras. On the other hand, urban/arterial roads have
been relatively less studied owing to complexities involved
in handling trafﬁc lights and intersections. Nevertheless,
spread of GPS ﬁxtures in vehicles/smart phones has rendered probe vehicle data a reasonable data source for arterial
trafﬁc (Liu, Yue, and Krishnan 2013; Aslam et al. 2012).
Recently, DBN based approaches have been proposed to
predict travel time on arterial roads based on sparse probe
vehicle data (Herring et al. 2010; Hoﬂeitner et al. 2012;
Hoﬂeitner, Herring, and Bayen 2012). Under real world
trafﬁc conditions, these various DBN techniques have been
shown to signiﬁcantly outperform other simpler methods
such as time-series models.
Gaps and contributions: Current DBN based modeling
approaches of congestion dependencies in road networks are
either too meticulous to be used in large networks or too

Abstract
Predicting travel times of vehicles in urban settings is a useful
and tangible quantity of interest in the context of intelligent
transportation systems. We address the problem of travel time
prediction in arterial roads using data sampled from probe
vehicles. There is only a limited literature on methods using
data input from probe vehicles. The spatio-temporal dependencies captured by existing data driven approaches are either too detailed or very simplistic. We strike a balance of
the existing data driven approaches to account for varying
degrees of inﬂuence a given road may experience from its
neighbors, while controlling the number of parameters to be
learnt. Speciﬁcally, we use a NoisyOR conditional probability
distribution (CPD) in conjunction with a dynamic Bayesian
network (DBN) to model state transitions of various roads.
We propose an efﬁcient algorithm to learn model parameters.
We also propose an algorithm for predicting travel times on
trips of arbitrary durations. Using synthetic and real world
data traces we demonstrate the superior performance of the
proposed method under different trafﬁc conditions.

1

Introduction

Travel-time prediction: Advances in affordable technologies for sensing and communication have allowed us to
gather data about large distributed infrastructures such as
road networks in real-time. The collected data is digested
to generate information that is useful for commuters as well
as the road network administrators. From the commuters’
perspective, travel time is perhaps the most useful information. Predicting travel time along various routes in advance
with good accuracy allows commuters to plan their trips
appropriately by identifying and avoiding congested roads.
This can also aid trafﬁc administrators to make crucial realtime decisions for mitigating prospective congestions, design infrastructure changes for better mobility and so on.
Crowd-sourcing based applications such as Google Maps allow commuters to predict their travel times along multiple
routes. While the prediction accuracy of such applications
is reasonable in many instances, they may not be helpful
for all vehicles. In certain countries, vehicles such as small
commercial trucks are restricted to speciﬁc lanes with their
own different (often lower) speed limit. Hence, the travel
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2063

