The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Estimating the Class Prior in Positive and
Unlabeled Data through Decision Tree Induction
Jessa Bekker, Jesse Davis
KU Leuven, Belgium
ﬁrstname.lastname@cs.kuleuven.be

classifying a user’s web page preferences could use bookmarked pages as positive examples and all other pages as
unlabeled ones.
Several approaches exist to deal with positive and unlabeled data. The most straightforward one is to assume that
all the unlabeled data are negative and simply apply standard machine learning techniques (Neelakantan, Roth, and
McCallum 2015). A second approach is to select some of
the unlabeled examples that are very different from the positively labeled ones and label them as negative. A classiﬁer
is then learned using the given positive examples and inferred negative examples (Liu et al. 2002; Li and Liu 2003;
Yu, Han, and Chang 2004; Yu 2005; Li et al. 2009; Nguyen,
Li, and Ng 2011). A third approach is to employ an evaluation metric that only uses positive, or positive and unlabeled data (Muggleton 1996; Lee and Liu 2003; Claesen et
al. 2015a). Using this metric, one can tune for the best class
weights or regularization settings (Lee and Liu 2003; Liu
et al. 2005; Mordelet and Vert 2014; Claesen et al. 2015c).
A ﬁnal approach is to explicitly consider the class prior. It
can be used to either adapt algorithms to incorporate this
information during learning (Denis 1998; Liu et al. 2003;
Zhang and Lee 2005; Denis, Gilleron, and Letouzey 2005;
Elkan and Noto 2008) or as a preprocessing step to assign
weights to the unlabeled examples (Elkan and Noto 2008).
Because the class prior is often not known, several methods were proposed in the last decade to estimate it from
the positive and unlabeled data (Elkan and Noto 2008; du
Plessis and Sugiyama 2014; du Plessis, Niu, and Sugiyama
2015; Jain, White, and Radivojac 2016; Jain et al. 2016;
Ramaswamy, Scott, and Tewari 2016)
This paper focusses on the last task and presents a novel
method for estimating the class prior. It exploits the “selected completely at random” assumption which says that
each positive example has a constant probability c to be selected to be labeled, c is referred to as the label frequency.
With this assumption, the label frequency functions as a
proxy for the class prior. Our method is based on two main
insights. First, the label frequency holds in subdomains of
the attributes and the probability for examples to be labeled
in a subdomain provides a lower bound for it. Second, subdomains with a higher probability of labeled examples yield
better estimates. This last insight suggests that ﬁnding discriminative partitions in the data will yield good estimates of

Abstract
For tasks such as medical diagnosis and knowledge base completion, a classiﬁer may only have access to positive and unlabeled examples, where the unlabeled data consists of both
positive and negative examples. One way that enables learning from this type of data is knowing the true class prior. In
this paper, we propose a simple yet effective method for estimating the class prior, by estimating the probability that a
positive example is selected to be labeled. Our key insight is
that subdomains of the data give a lower bound on this probability. This lower bound gets closer to the real probability as
the ratio of labeled examples increases. Finding such subsets
can naturally be done via top-down decision tree induction.
Experiments show that our method makes estimates which
are equivalently accurate as those of the state of the art methods, and is an order of magnitude faster.

Introduction
Traditional approaches to supervised learning for binary
classiﬁcation assume a fully labeled training set consisting
of positive and negative examples. In many applications, a
learner may only have access to positive examples and unlabeled examples, which may be either positive or negative.
This special case of semi-supervised learning is commonly
called positive and unlabeled (PU) learning.
The following are four illustrative examples of domains
where PU data may arise. First, medical records usually
only list the diagnosed diseases for each person and not
the diseases the person does not have. However, many diseases, such as diabetes, are often undiagnosed (Claesen et
al. 2015b). Therefore, the absence of a diagnosis does not
mean that the patient does not have a disease. Second, the
task of knowledge base (KB) completion is also inherently a
positive and unlabeled problem. Automatically constructed
KBs are necessarily incomplete and only contain true facts.
The truth values of the facts not included in the KB are
unknown and not necessarily false (Galárraga et al. 2015;
Neelakantan, Roth, and McCallum 2015). Third, similar to
the above scenario, there are many specialized but incomplete gene databases (Elkan and Noto 2008). Finally, text
classiﬁcation can also be characterized by positive and unlabeled data (Lee and Liu 2003; Liu et al. 2003). For example,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2712

