The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Compact Multi-Label Learning
Xiaobo Shen,‡∗ Weiwei Liu,∗ Ivor W. Tsang, Quan-Sen Sun,§† Yew-Soon Ong‡
‡

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
School of Computer Science and Engineering, The University of New South Wales

Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney
§
School of Computer and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
{njust.shenxiaobo, liuweiwei863}@gmail.com, ivor.tsang@uts.edu.au, sunquansen@njust.edu.cn, asysong@ntu.edu.sg


in the embedding space. To learn better embeddings, various embedding methods have since been developed, such as
canonical correlation analysis (CCA) (Zhang and Schneider
2011), maximum margin output coding (MMOC) (Zhang
and Schneider 2012). Such methods have achieved the impressive performance on small datasets. However, their decoding schemes often require solving a quadratic programming (QP) problem in a combinatorial space, which is very
computationally expensive.
To improve efﬁciency, large margin kNN (LM-kNN) (Liu
and Tsang 2015) for fast multi-label prediction has been recently proposed. LM-kNN learns a distance metric to discover the label dependency so that instances with very different multiple labels are moved further away. More importantly, LM-kNN is the ﬁrst approach to employ k-nearest
neighbor (kNN) search in the embedding space for prediction and it avoids an expensive decoding procedure. Another state-of-the-art method that also uses kNN search for
fast prediction is the recently proposed sparse local embedding for extreme classiﬁcation (SLEEC) (Bhatia et al. 2015).
SLEEC ﬁrst seeks the embedding of labels by preserving the
pairwise distances between a few nearest label neighbors,
and then learns the regressor in the embedding space. A gap
usually exists between the input and output in the multi-label
setting, and the performance of kNN decision rule for multilabel prediction signiﬁcantly depends on the alignment between the input and output. However, the above two methods fail to explore this correlation, thus their learned embeddings are not well aligned, leading to degradation in prediction performance. In addition, their prediction efﬁciency
relies on the speed of kNN search, which is slow for largescale application. How to further improve the prediction efﬁciency also remains less explored.
To address the aforementioned issues, this paper regards
the input and output as two distinct views, and provides
a new insight into multi-label learning from a cross-view
perspective (Quadrianto and Lampert 2011; Dhillon, Foster,
and Ungar 2011; Guo and Xiao 2012; Shen et al. 2017b),
which aims to integrate the complementary advantages of
the two views to accomplish multi-label prediction tasks.
Speciﬁcally, we propose Co-Hashing (CoH) to learn a common latent hamming space, where the input and output
are jointly embedded into compact binary codes and well
aligned. In the latent subspace, the correlation between in-

Abstract
Embedding methods have shown promising performance in
multi-label prediction, as they can discover the dependency
of labels. Most embedding methods cannot well align the
input and output, which leads to degradation in prediction
performance. Besides, they suffer from expensive prediction
computational costs when applied to large-scale datasets. To
address the above issues, this paper proposes a Co-Hashing
(CoH) method by formulating multi-label learning from the
perspective of cross-view learning. CoH ﬁrst regards the input and output as two views, and then aims to learn a common
latent hamming space, where input and output pairs are compressed into compact binary embeddings. CoH enjoys two
key beneﬁts: 1) the input and output can be well aligned, and
their correlations are explored; 2) the prediction is very efﬁcient using fast cross-view kNN search in the hamming space.
Moreover, we provide the generalization error bound for our
method. Extensive experiments on eight real-world datasets
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed CoH over the
state-of-the-art methods in terms of both prediction accuracy
and efﬁciency.

Introduction
In multi-label learning (Zhang and Zhou 2014; Liu, Tsang,
and Müller 2017), each instance is represented by a set of
labels. For example, a document can be associated with a
range of topics, such as sports, ﬁnance, and education; or
an image may be tagged with both beach and tree. The task
of multi-label learning is to learn a function that can predict
the proper label sets for unseen instances. Nowadays it is
becoming more and more relevant to a number of applications, ranging from document classiﬁcation to gene function
prediction and automatic image annotation.
Much of the literature (Chen and Lin 2012; Guo and
Schuurmans 2013; Zhang and Zhou 2014) has shown that
multi-label learning methods usually achieve better prediction performance by explicitly capturing label dependency.
To this end, (Hsu et al. 2009) are the ﬁrst to propose embedding the label vectors into a low-dimensional subspace using random projection, and then building a regression model
∗

indicates equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

4066

