The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Question-Answering with
Grammatically-Interpretable Representations
Hamid Palangi, Paul Smolensky, Xiaodong He, Li Deng
{hpalangi,psmo,xiaohe}@microsoft.com, l.deng@ieee.org
Deep Learning Group, Microsoft Research AI
Redmond, WA ∗

relations. This gap could in principle be reduced if deep
neural networks were to incorporate internal representations
that are directly interpretable as discrete structures; the categories and relations of these representations might then be
understandable conceptually.
In the work reported here, we describe how approximately
discrete, structured distributed representations can be embedded within deep networks, their categories and structuring relations being learned end-to-end through performance of a task. Applying this approach to a challenging
natural-language question-answering task, we show how the
learned representations can be understood as approximating syntactic and semantic categories and relations. In this
sense, the model we present learns signiﬁcant aspects of syntax/semantics, recognizable using the concepts of linguistic theory, after having been exposed solely to linguistically
unannotated text, questions, and answers: no prior linguistic knowledge is given to the model. What is built into the
model is a general capacity for distributed representation of
structures, and an inductive bias favoring discreteness in its
deployment.
Speciﬁcally, the task we address is question answering
for the SQuAD dataset (Rajpurkar et al. 2016), in which a
text passage and a question are presented as input, and the
model’s output identiﬁes a stretch within the passage that
contains the answer to the question. In our view, SQuAD
provides a sufﬁciently demanding QA task that showing interpretability of our proposed type of distributed structural
representation in a QA system that successfully addresses
SQuAD provides meaningful evidence of the potential of
such representations to enhance interpretability of largescale QA systems more generally.
The proposed capacity for distributed representation of
structure is provided by Tensor Product Representations,
TPRs, in which a discrete symbol structure is encoded as a
vector systematically built—through vector addition and the
tensor product—from vectors encoding symbols and vectors
encoding the roles each symbol plays in the structure as a
whole (Smolensky 1990; Smolensky and Legendre 2006;
Smolensky, Goldrick, and Mathis 2014). The new model
proposed here is built from the B I DAF model proposed
in (Seo et al. 2016) for question answering. We replace a
bidirectional RNN built from LSTM units (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997) with one built from TPR units; the ar-

Abstract
We introduce an architecture, the Tensor Product Recurrent Network (TPRN). In our application of TPRN, internal representations—learned by end-to-end optimization in a
deep neural network performing a textual question-answering
(QA) task—can be interpreted using basic concepts from linguistic theory. No performance penalty need be paid for this
increased interpretability: the proposed model performs comparably to a state-of-the-art system on the SQuAD QA task.
The internal representation which is interpreted is a Tensor
Product Representation: for each input word, the model selects a symbol to encode the word, and a role in which to place
the symbol, and binds the two together. The selection is via
soft attention. The overall interpretation is built from interpretations of the symbols, as recruited by the trained model, and
interpretations of the roles as used by the model. We ﬁnd support for our initial hypothesis that symbols can be interpreted
as lexical-semantic word meanings, while roles can be interpreted as approximations of grammatical roles (or categories)
such as subject, wh-word, determiner, etc. Fine-grained analysis reveals speciﬁc correspondences between the learned
roles and parts of speech as assigned by a standard tagger
(Toutanova et al. 2003), and ﬁnds several discrepancies in the
model’s favor. In this sense, the model learns signiﬁcant aspects of grammar, after having been exposed solely to linguistically unannotated text, questions, and answers: no prior
linguistic knowledge is given to the model. What is given is
the means to build representations using symbols and roles,
with an inductive bias favoring use of these in an approximately discrete manner.

1

Introduction: Minding the gap

The difﬁculty of explaining the operation of deep neural
networks begins with the difﬁculty of interpreting the internal representations learned by these networks. This problem fundamentally derives from the incommensurability between, on the one hand, the continuous, numerical representations and operations of these networks and, on the
other, meaningful interpretations—which are communicable in natural language through relatively discrete, nonnumerical conceptual categories structured by conceptual
∗
This work was carried out while PS was on leave from Johns
Hopkins University. LD is currently at Citadel.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5350

