The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Efﬁcient Multi-Dimensional Tensor
Sparse Coding Using t-Linear Combination
Fei Jiang,1 Xiao-Yang Liu,1,2 Hongtao Lu,1 Ruimin Shen1

1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China
2
Department of Electrical Engineering,
Columbia University, New York, NY10027, USA
Emails: jiangf@alumni.sjtu.edu.cn; xiaoyang@ee.columbia.edu; htlu@sjtu.edu.cn; rmshen@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

C21 +

ne

l: 3

spatial: m

=>

1

3

*

3

an

sp

ch

ati
al:
3

C11

In this paper, we propose two novel multi-dimensional tensor sparse coding (MDTSC) schemes using the t-linear combination. Based on the t-linear combination, the shifted versions of the bases are used for the data approximation, but
without need to store them. Therefore, the dictionaries of the
proposed schemes are more concise and the coefﬁcients have
richer physical explanations. Moreover, we propose an efﬁcient alternating minimization algorithm, including the tensor coefﬁcient learning and the tensor dictionary learning, to
solve the proposed problems. For the tensor coefﬁcient learning, we design a tensor-based fast iterative shrinkage algorithm. For the tensor dictionary learning, we ﬁrst divide the
problem into several nearly-independent subproblems in the
frequency domain, and then utilize the Lagrange dual to further reduce the number of optimization variables. Experimental results on multi-dimensional signals denoising and reconstruction (3DTSC, 4DTSC, 5DTSC) show that the proposed
algorithms are more efﬁcient and outperform the state-of-theart tensor-based sparse coding models.

1 1 <=>

(a) an order-3 basis (b) t-linear combination

C12

C22

+

+
C13+

C31

+

+

+

C32

+
C23

C33

(c) equivalent linear combination

Figure 1: Equivalence between the t-linear combination (one
basis) and the linear combination (9 bases). The bases on the
right are shifted versions of the left basis, including spatial
shifting and the channel shifting.
divided into two main categories. The ﬁrst category is based
on Tucker decomposition (Qi et al. 2016; Xie et al. 2017). In
this category, a series of separable dictionaries are utilized
to approximate the structures in each dimension, so that
correlations among the dimensions are not explicitly taken
into consideration. The second category is based on circular convolution operations, such as CSC (Wohlberg 2014;
Heide, Heidrich, and Wetzstein 2015), TCSC (Bibi and
Ghanem 2017), K-TSVD (Zhang and Aeron 2016), and
GTSC (Jiang et al. 2017). TCSC is an extension of CSC to
high-order tensors. Though TCSC can achieve similar results as standard CSC techniques with much fewer parameters, TCSC is computationally more expensive. K-TSVD
and GTSC are based on the t-linear combination (Kilmer
et al. 2013), where the dictionaries can capture the inherent
patterns of the MD inputs. However, K-TSVD and GTSC are
proposed for dealing with order-3 tensors, not for arbitrary
order tensors. Moreover, the algorithm of K-TSVD is of high
computational complexity and hard to extend to large-scale
high-order tensor applications (Zhang and Aeron 2016).
The basic idea that motivates us to address the abovementioned challenges of the traditional sparse coding lies
in two aspects: (i) tensor representation can preserve the intrinsic structures of the MD data; (ii) we exploit the t-linear
combination under the circulant algebraic framework, and
ﬁnd several distinctive properties compared with the linear
combination, including the small-size dictionary, shifting invariance and rich physical explanations of the tensor coefﬁcients. Figure 1 shows the equivalence between the t-linear
combination with one tensor basis and the linear combina-

Introduction
As a classical unsupervised feature extraction technique,
sparse coding has been successfully applied to numerous
ﬁelds across computer vision (Wright et al. 2010) and pattern recognition (Lu et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2017). Traditional sparse coding represents a vector-valued signal as a
linear combination of a few bases with large coefﬁcients
in an overcomplete dictionary. When dealing with multidimensional (MD) signals (e.g., images and videos), the
traditional SC ﬁrst converts the MD signals into a vector
space, and then utilize the vector-based operations. Two major drawbacks of this preprocessing are: (i) the vectorization
preprocess will break the intrinsic structures of the MD data
and reduce the reliability of further processing; (ii) such vectorization will incur high computational costs since a vectorized MD signal will be quite long and requires the large size
dictionary.
Recent research has demonstrated the superiorities of
tensor-based sparse coding schemes for MD signal analysis. By maintaining the original form of MD signals, tensorbased sparse coding schemes preserve the intrinsic structures. Existing tensor-based sparse coding algorithms can be
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3326

