The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

AJILE Movement Prediction: Multimodal Deep Learning
for Natural Human Neural Recordings and Video
Nancy X. R. Wang,1 Ali Farhadi,1,2 Rajesh P. N. Rao,1,4 Bingni W. Brunton3
1

3

Paul Allen School of Computer Science-University of Washington, 2 Allen Institute for AI,
Department of Biology-University of Washington, 4 Center for Sensorimotor Neural Engineering (CSNE)
{wangnxr, farhadi, rpnr, bbrunton}@uw.edu

et al. 2012; McMullen et al. 2014; Yanagisawa et al. 2011)).
Even so, these impressive demonstrations have relied on
ﬁnely tuned models trained on experimentally derived labeled
data acquired in well-controlled laboratory conditions. Thus,
the remarkable feats of neural decoding to mobilize patients
who have lost use of their limbs remain untested outside the
laboratory.
One key challenge is how neural decoding may be approached “in the wild,” where sources of behavioral and
recording variability are signiﬁcantly larger than what is
found in the lab. Further, neural responses are known to differ
between experimental and freely behaving conditions (Jackson, Mavoori, and Fetz 2007). A ﬂexible, scalable approach
to detect movement and to predict initiation of natural movement would critically enable technologies to foster seamless
collaborations between humans and machines.
In this paper, we present a multimodal deep learning approach that is able to detect whether a subject is initiating
a movement and to predict initiation of natural movements
in the future. This paper is the ﬁrst to develop a deep neural
network that models naturalistic ECoG signals. The main
contributions of the paper are:
• We introduce the AJILE dataset of long-term natural neural
recordings with corresponding labeled arm poses.
• Using the AJILE dataset, we show that our proposed multimodal deep neural network can predict the intention to
move a hand up to 800 msec before the initiation of the
movement in naturalistic data, a task never attempted before.
• Our experimental evaluations show the signiﬁcance of incorporating context provided by the video, using a deep
multimodal model to decode and predict movement intention.

Abstract
Developing useful interfaces between brains and machines is
a grand challenge of neuroengineering. An effective interface
has the capacity to not only interpret neural signals, but predict the intentions of the human to perform an action in the
near future; prediction is made even more challenging outside
well-controlled laboratory experiments. This paper describes
our approach to detect and to predict natural human arm
movements in the future, a key challenge in brain computer
interfacing that has never before been attempted. We introduce the novel Annotated Joints in Long-term ECoG (AJILE)
dataset; AJILE includes automatically annotated poses of 7
upper body joints for four human subjects over 670 total hours
(more than 72 million frames), along with the corresponding
simultaneously acquired intracranial neural recordings. The
size and scope of AJILE greatly exceeds all previous datasets
with movements and electrocorticography (ECoG), making it
possible to take a deep learning approach to movement prediction. We propose a multimodal model that combines deep
convolutional neural networks (CNN) with long short-term
memory (LSTM) blocks, leveraging both ECoG and video
modalities. We demonstrate that our models are able to detect
movements and predict future movements up to 800 msec before movement initiation. Further, our multimodal movement
prediction models exhibit resilience to simulated ablation of
input neural signals. We believe a multimodal approach to natural neural decoding that takes context into account is critical
in advancing bioelectronic technologies and human neuroscience.

Introduction
Scientists, engineers, and speculative ﬁction authors have
long imagined possible futures when people interact meaningfully with machines directly using thought. Technologies
that interpret brain signals to control robotic and virtual devices have tremendous potential to assist individuals with
physical and neurological disabilities, to augment engineered
systems integrating humans in the loop, and to enhance one’s
daily life in an increasingly information-rich world.
In recent years, research in brain-computer interfacing
(BCI) (Wolpaw and Wolpaw 2012; Rao 2013) has been very
successful in using decoded neural signals to control robotic
prostheses and computer software (for instance, (Hochberg

Related work
Human intracranial cortical recordings. Neural signals
used to monitor brain activity are acquired by a variety
of recording technologies that differ by invasiveness and
portability. One such technology known as electrocorticography (ECoG) for intracranial recordings is particularly attractive for studying naturalistic behavior because of its spatial
speciﬁcity, temporal resolution, and potential longevity of
implantation. ECoG offers measurements of temporal dynamics inaccessible by functional magnetic resonance imag-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2524

