The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

From Virtual Demonstration to Real-World
Manipulation Using LSTM and MDN
Rouhollah Rahmatizadeh, Pooya Abolghasemi,
Aman Behal, Ladislau Bölöni
Department of Computer Science
University of Central Florida, United States
rrahmati,pooya.abolghasemi,lboloni@cs.ucf.edu, abehal@ucf.edu
control, there are ongoing research efforts to make assistive robots more autonomous (Endres, Trinkle, and Burgard
2013; Miller et al. 2012; Bollini, Barry, and Rus 2011). One
of the challenges of assistive robotics is the uniqueness of
every home and the need to adapt to the preferences and
disabilities of the user. As the user is a non-programmer,
learning from demonstration (LfD) is a promising way to
adapt the robot behavior to the speciﬁc environment, objects
and preferences. However, collecting large numbers of physical demonstrations from a disabled user is challenging. For
instance, the manipulated objects and the environment can
be fragile and the wheelchair-bound users might have difﬁculty recovering from a failed manipulation task such as a
dropped cup. Similar considerations hinder from-the-scratch
reinforcement learning performed in a home environment.
In this paper we propose an approach where the users
demonstrate the tasks to be performed in a virtual environment. This allows the safe collection of sufﬁcient demonstrations to train a deep neural network based robot controller. The trained controller is then transferred to the physical robot. The general ﬂow is illustrated in Figure 1.
In the remainder of this paper we discuss related work,
describe the approach in detail, and through an experimental study validate the three contributions outlined in the abstract.

Abstract
Robots assisting the disabled or elderly must perform complex manipulation tasks and must adapt to the home environment and preferences of their user. Learning from demonstration is a promising choice, that would allow the non-technical
user to teach the robot different tasks. However, collecting
demonstrations in the home environment of a disabled user
is time consuming, disruptive to the comfort of the user, and
presents safety challenges. It would be desirable to perform
the demonstrations in a virtual environment.
In this paper we describe a solution to the challenging problem of behavior transfer from virtual demonstration to a physical robot. The virtual demonstrations are used to train a deep
neural network based controller, which is using a Long Short
Term Memory (LSTM) recurrent neural network to generate
trajectories. The training process uses a Mixture Density Network (MDN) to calculate an error signal suitable for the multimodal nature of demonstrations. The controller learned in
the virtual environment is transferred to a physical robot (a
Rethink Robotics Baxter). An off-the-shelf vision component
is used to substitute for geometric knowledge available in the
simulation and an inverse kinematics module is used to allow
the Baxter to enact the trajectory.
Our experimental studies validate the three contributions of
the paper: (1) the controller learned from virtual demonstrations can be used to successfully perform the manipulation
tasks on a physical robot, (2) the LSTM+MDN architectural
choice outperforms other choices, such as the use of feedforward networks and mean-squared error based training signals
and (3) allowing imperfect demonstrations in the training set
also allows the controller to learn how to correct its manipulation mistakes.

Related work
Virtual training to physical execution. The desirability of
transferring learning from a simulated robot to a physical
one had been recognized by many researchers. This need is
especially strong in the case of reinforcement learning-based
approaches, where the exploration phase can be very expensive on a physical robot. Unfortunately, policies learned in
simulation do not work well when transferred naı̈vely to a
physical robot. First, no simulation can be perfect, thus the
physical robot will inevitably have a suboptimal policy leaving to a slightly different state from the expected one. This
would be acceptable if the policy corrects the error, keeping the difference bounded. In practice, it was found that
if a policy was learned from demonstrations, initially small
differences between the simulation and the real world tend
to grow larger and larger as the state diverges farther and
farther from the settings in which the demonstrations took
place – an aggravated version of the problem that led to the

Introduction
Assistive robotics, whether in the form of wheelchair
mounted robotic arms or mobile robots with manipulators,
promises to improve the independence and quality of life
of the disabled and the elderly. Such robots can help users
to perform Activities of Daily Living (ADLs) such as selffeeding, dressing, grooming, personal hygiene and leisure
activities. Almost all ADLs involve some type of object
manipulation. While most current systems rely on remote
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6524

