The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Batting Order Setup in One Day International Cricket
Masoumeh Izadi, Simranjeet Narula
Television Content Analytics, 1 Changi North Street 1, Singapore 498789
masoumeh.izadi@tvconal.com, simran.narula@tvconal.com

erage are sometimes conflicting and can lead to different
batting order (Beaudoin and Swartz 2003). Therefore, captains and team managers sometimes struggle to find the
best place to assign players in the line-up, especially if the
players are new (from other formats). It is also hard to
evaluate the captain’s policy on the line up versus alternative strategies without a precise model.
Advances in technologies for data collection provide new
data sources that might be correlated with players’ performance and the game outcome. However, the analytics infrastructure which is instrumental in using these data to
support important decisions in cricket is still fragmented.
In this paper, we present a new AI application for enhancing experts’ intuitions on line-up configuration considering
different and possibly conflicting metrics with the aid of
learning algorithms and historical data. In this application,
we consider player’s portfolio as suggested in the literature
(Barr and Kantor), plus other parameters that might be important in batting performance.

Abstract
In the professional sport of cricket, batting order assignment
is of significant interest and importance to coaches, players,
and fans as an influencing parameter on the game outcome.
The impact of bat-ting order on scoring runs is widely
known and managers are often judged based on their perceived weakness or strength in setting the batting order. In
practice, a combination of experts’ intuitions plus a few descriptive and sometimes conflicting performance statistics
are used to assign an order to the batters in a team line-up
before the games and in player replacement due to injuries
during the games. In this paper, we propose the use of learning methods in automatic line-up order assignment based on
several measures of performance and historical data. We
discuss the importance of this problem in designing a winning strategy for cricket teams and the challenges this application introduces to the community and the currently existing approaches in AI.

Introduction
The main duty of a batsman is to score runs at a good rate
while conserving his position not to get dismissed. Crafting
an optimal batting line-up from a team squad that takes
advantage of every player’s potential in scoring runs is a
hard problem. In practice, a combination of expert intuition
and descriptive performance statistics such as batting average, high score, not outs, strike rate, and run rate are used
to form the team line-up for a match. Among these statistics, the most widely used one is the player’s batting average, which is computed as the total number of runs divided
by times dismissed. In test cricket, where there are practically unlimited overs, a batting average approximates expected runs. Therefore, in test cricket, it is some-what reasonable to use the batting average to assign bat-ting order.
However, in the One-Day International (ODI) format, as
the game progresses and the number of balls left decreases,
it is important to use batsmen who has higher run rate earlier in the line-up. In ODI cricket, the run rate and the av-

Background
Cricket has a long history and is the world’s second most
popular sport with an estimate of 2.5 billion fans. Cricket is
played between two teams of 11 players on a 22-yard-long
pitch. A game can last anywhere from one afternoon to 4
or 5 days. In one-day matches, each team bats only in one
innings with 50 overs. Each over has a set of six ball deliveries. Sometimes more than 300 balls may be delivered in
one ODI innings due to penalties. A coin flip prior to the
game decides which team has the option to bat first. Bowlers from the fielding side bowl balls with alternate overs
bowled by different bowlers from opposite ends. Batsmen
play in pairs, one on strike facing the bowler and one at the
bowler's end. After hitting the ball, a striker may score
from 0 to 6. A batsman can be dismissed in various ways.
A team’s innings ends when 10 batsmen are out or they
bat-ted for 50 overs. The batting team attempt to score
runs, while the bowling team tries to end the inning for the
bat-ting team through the process of taking wickets (dis-

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7882

