The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Semi-Distantly Supervised Neural Model for Generating
Compact Answers to Open-Domain Why Questions
Ryo Ishida, Kentaro Torisawa, Jong-Hoon Oh,
Ryu Iida, Canasai Kruengkrai, Julien Kloetzer
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology, Kyoto, 619-0289, Japan
{ishida.ryo, torisawa, rovellia, ryu.iida, canasai, julien}@nict.go.jp

Question: Why did Yubari City in Hokkaido prefecture go
bankrupt?
Answer Passage: The central government and the company
should have paid the costs of closing coal mines to save the
remaining inhabitants’ lives. But the central government and
Hokkaido’s inadequate ﬁnancial support caused an excessive
expense for Yubari’s city government, and the large remainder of municipal bonds due to this expense became the largest
cause of Yubari’s bankruptcy
Compact Answer: Because the costs of closing coal mines
caused an excessive expense of Yubari’s city government.
Question: Why does a non-rotating shot (in football) move unpredictably?
Answer Passage: A non-rotating shot is a shot that is kicked
without rotating the ball as much as possible, while keeping
the ball in a state where it is likely to receive strong air resistance. Since the trajectory of a non-rotating shot appears to
sway irregularly, it is called a swaying ball, and, because it is
unpredictable, it is the type of shots that goal keepers most hate
to encounter.
Compact Answer: Because the ball is likely to receive strong
air resistance.

Abstract
This paper proposes a neural network-based method for
generating compact answers to open-domain why-questions
(e.g., “Why was Mr. Trump elected as the president of the
US?”). Unlike factoid question answering methods that provide short text spans as answers, existing work for whyquestion answering have aimed at answering questions by
retrieving relatively long text passages, each of which often consists of several sentences, from a text archive. While
the actual answer to a why-question may be expressed over
several consecutive sentences, these often contain redundant
and/or unrelated parts. Such answers would not be suitable
for spoken dialog systems and smart speakers such as Amazon Echo, which receive much attention in these days. In this
work, we aim at generating non-redundant compact answers
to why-questions from answer passages retrieved from a very
large web data corpora (4 billion web pages) by an already
existing open-domain why-question answering system, using
a novel neural network obtained by extending existing summarization methods. We also automatically generate training
data using a large number of causal relations automatically
extracted from 4 billion web pages by an existing supervised
causality recognizer. The data is used to train our neural network, together with manually created training data. Through
a series of experiments, we show that both our novel neural
network and auto-generated training data improve the quality of the generated answers both in ROUGE score and in a
subjective evaluation.

1

Table 1: Examples of why-questions, answer passages and
compact answers

compact answers to Japanese open-domain why-questions
from given answer passages that are retrieved by an existing
web-based open-domain why-question answering system.
The answers should be short and comprehensible so that
they can be understood by users when read aloud as a question’s responses by spoken dialog systems and smart speakers. We limit our compact answers to single sentences that
end with the Japanese word “tame (because)”, which correspond to sentences that starts with “because” in English, like
the answer “Because the ocean’s water mass is displaced by
an earthquake” to the why-question “Why does a tsunami
occur?” To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst attempt to generate such compact answers to why-questions.
We developed a novel neural network based method and exploit automatically generated training data, which is generated with the help of a supervised causality recognizer,
in addition to manually created training data, to train the
network. Accordingly, our method can be characterized as
semi-distantly supervised neural network model. We created

Introduction

Answering non-factoid questions, to which sentences and
other long expressions are expected as answers, is a difﬁcult task. Why-questions (e.g., “Why was Mr. Trump elected
as the president of the US?”) form a relatively well-studied
class of non-factoid questions but the existing methods for
why-question answering (why-QA) simply retrieve from a
text archive relatively long text passages, each of which typically consists of several sentences as exempliﬁed in the answer passages in Table 1, as the answer. The retrieved answers usually contain redundant parts, which make them unsuitable as answers to be read aloud by spoken dialog systems and smart speakers such as Amazon Echo. The aim of
this work is to develop a method to generate non-redundant
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5803

