The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Imagination Machines:
A New Challenge for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Sridhar Mahadevan
sridhar.i.mahadevan@gmail.com
College of Information and Computer Sciences
140 Governor’s Drive
Amherst, MA 01003
Abstract
The aim of this paper is to propose a new overarching challenge for AI: the design of imagination machines. Imagination has been deﬁned as the capacity to mentally transcend
time, place, and/or circumstance. Much of the success of AI
currently comes from a revolution in data science, speciﬁcally the use of deep learning neural networks to extract structure from data. This paper argues for the development of a
new ﬁeld called imagination science, which extends data science beyond its current realm of learning probability distributions from samples. Numerous examples are given in the
paper to illustrate that human achievements in the arts, literature, poetry, and science may lie beyond the realm of data
science, because they require abilities that go beyond ﬁnding
correlations: for example, generating samples from a novel
probability distribution different from the one given during
training; causal reasoning to uncover interpretable explanations; or analogical reasoning to generalize to novel situations
(e.g., imagination in art, representing alien life in a distant
galaxy, understanding a story about talking animals, or inventing representations to model the large-scale structure of
the universe). We describe the key challenges in automating
imagination, discuss connections between ongoing research
and imagination, and outline why automation of imagination
provides a powerful launching pad for transforming AI.

Figure 1: Jean-Michel Basquiat’s untitled painting of a human skull sold recently at a New York auction for over 100
million dollars. Art is a paradigmatic example of the imaginative capacity of humans.

The Oxford Handbook of the Development of Imagination deﬁnes imagination as the capacity to mentally transcend time, place, and/or circumstance (Taylor 2013).
Einstein prized imagination because it enabled him to pose
hypothetical questions, such as “What would the world look
like if I rode a beam of light”, a question that led him to develop the revolutionary theory of special (and later, general)
relativity. Imagination is a hallmark of counterfactual and
causal reasoning (Pearl 2009). Imagination also provides the
foundational basis for art (see Figure 1). Basquiat’s painting
illustrates what is special about imagination in art: ﬁdelity to
the original is not the objective here, but rather the striking
use of colors and textures to signify an illusion.
In John Lennon’s famous song “Imagine”, he asks us
to contemplate a world without countries, an abstraction
of reality that is a hallmark of imaginative thinking. In
Beethoven’s Pastoral symphony, each of the ﬁve movements
portrays a particular aspect of nature, from the slow movement depicting the motion of a stream to the strenuous
fourth movement depicting the arrival of a storm and thunder. Imagination plays a central role in the lives of children

“Imagination is more important than knowledge.
Knowledge is limited. Imagination encircles the
world.” – Albert Einstein
‘Imagine there’s no countries. It isn’t hard to do. Nothing to kill or die for. And no religion too” – Song by
John Lennon
Artiﬁcial intelligence is poised to become the “electricity” of our age (Ng 2016), transforming industries across a
wide spectrum of areas, from autonomous driving to voiceactivated virtual personal assistants. However, these successes of AI, powered by data science (Murphy 2013) and
deep learning (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016),
may not be sufﬁcient for AI to be capable of matching human capabilities in the long run. This paper focuses specifically on one core capability – imagination – and discusses
why its automation may be fundamental to the continuing
success of AI in the coming decades.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7988

