The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multispectral Transfer Network:
Unsupervised Depth Estimation for All-Day Vision
Namil Kim,∗1,2 Yukyung Choi,∗1,3 Soonmin Hwang,1 In So Kweon1
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Korea
2
NAVER LABS Corp., Korea 3 Clova, NAVER Corp., Korea
http://multispectral.kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
To understand the real-world, it is essential to perceive in
all-day conditions including cases which are not suitable for
RGB sensors, especially at night. Beyond these limitations,
the innovation introduced here is a multispectral solution in
the form of depth estimation from a thermal sensor without an
additional depth sensor. Based on an analysis of multispectral
properties and the relevance to depth predictions, we propose
an efﬁcient and novel multi-task framework called the Multispectral Transfer Network (MTN) to estimate a depth image
from a single thermal image. By exploiting geometric priors
and chromaticity clues, our model can generate a pixel-wise
depth image in an unsupervised manner. Moreover, we propose a new type of multitask module called Interleaver as a
means of incorporating the chromaticity and ﬁne details of
skip-connections into the depth estimation framework without sharing feature layers. Lastly, we explain a novel technical means of stably training and covering large disparities and
extending thermal images to data-driven methods for all-day
conditions. In experiments, we demonstrate the better performance and generalization of depth estimation through the
proposed multispectral stereo dataset, including various driving conditions.

Figure 1: The result of an accurate depth estimation using
a Multispectral Transfer Network (MTN) in both day (top)
and night (bottom) conditions. From left to right: input thermal images, RGB stereo pairs, depths from RGB
stereo/Velodyne HDL-32E, and our results. The proposed
method can predict high-quality pixel-wise depths at night
compared to the depths from the RGB stereo/Velodyne.
such as nights or sunsets and sunrises. Hence, this led to the
question of how it would be possible to estimate dense and
accurate depth images all day.
We believe that the answer will rely on the use of alternatives to RGB sensors. Among the promising options,
the thermal sensor has a strong advantage if used to capture images in the world, as this type is less affected by
light changes under highly lit and dark conditions. Therefore, various thermal sensors have been increasingly used
in modern robotics and computer vision research on all-day
recognition. Recently, multispectral1 approaches (Hwang et
al. 2015; Choi et al. 2015; Jingjing et al. 2016; Treible et
al. 2017) have demonstrated some degree of correspondence
between RGB and thermal images as well as complementary information. Spectral images from both types of sensors share global contexts such as silhouettes, boundaries,
and structures regardless of the loss of ﬁne visual details in
the thermal images, even if their spectra are wholly different.
From these observations, we argue that thermal images can
be incorporated into RGB-based depth estimation methods.
There are two main challenges when estimating depths
from thermal images. The ﬁrst is the scarcity of large-scale
multispectral datasets for depth estimations. Therefore, we
created a new multispectral stereo dataset which includes co-

Introduction
Depth estimation from a single RGB image is a fundamental problem in computer vision. Many industrial (Google,
Tesla etc.) and academic approaches (Geiger et al. 2013;
Cordts et al. 2016) have utilized the depth entailing complementary sources of RGB images. In recent years, deep
learning-based approaches have advanced signiﬁcantly for
single-image depth estimations. Because these data-driven
approaches require large amounts of RGB-D data, supplementary depth sensors are typically used to capture the
ground truth accurately. In outdoor scenarios, a 3D laser
scanner is usually used to capture depth data. However, such
devices are limited in terms of the range and resolution and
usually fail when used with specular or transparent objects
such that depth measurements with them do not capture detailed variations in the images. Moreover, due to the physical limitation of RGB sensors, these measurements have yet
to be broadly applied to various or less well-lit conditions,
*Authors contributed equally, listed in alphabetical order
Copyright c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Denote thermal as Long Wavelength InfraRed (LWIR) and
multispectral as RGB and thermal spectrum.

6983

