The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Auto-Balanced Filter Pruning for
Efﬁcient Convolutional Neural Networks∗
Xiaohan Ding,1 Guiguang Ding,1 Jungong Han,2 Sheng Tang3
1

School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University, Lancaster, LA1 4YW, UK
3
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
dxh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn, jungonghan77@gmail.com, ts@ict.ac.cn
2

connection-wise pruning techniques. However, these methods make the parameter tensors of convolutional or fullyconnected layers just sparser, but no smaller, hence the compression may not transfer directly to acceleration without
support from specially designed hardware (Molchanov et al.
2016) (Han et al. 2016).
Some other works focus on ﬁlter-wise pruning approaches
and have made promising achievements, which can be divided into two categories. One category of works tends to
impose sparse constraints on the model and produce a compact network by training, where the representatives include
group sparsity regularizer (Lebedev and Lempitsky 2016),
group Lasso regularization (Wen et al. 2016) (Alvarez and
Salzmann 2016), tensor low rank constraints (Zhou, Alvarez, and Porikli 2016) and group sparse constraints (Zhou,
Alvarez, and Porikli 2016). Another category of works iteratively discards unimportant ﬁlters from a well-trained network and usually requires re-training to avoid severe accuracy drop. (Abbasi-Asl and Yu 2017) measures a ﬁlter’s importance by the classiﬁcation accuracy reduction of the network after pruning it, and eliminates one single ﬁlter at each
iteration based on this metric. (Molchanov et al. 2016) and
(Li et al. 2016) prune ﬁlters in a similar iterative way but
by different metrics. (Hu et al. 2016) evaluates a ﬁlter’s importance by its output on a subset of the training data and
prunes a fraction of the ﬁlters in several layers simultaneously at one single iteration.
In this paper, we aim to combine the advantages of the
two paradigms. On the one hand, we are inspired by the idea
that the network can be trained under a certain constraint to
introduce structured sparsity in the parameters. On the other
hand, a progressive approach consisting of alternate pruning and re-training is more suitable for pursuing the highest
compression rate, since we can easily roll back to a previous state when the network is irreversibly damaged. Taking
both points into account, we seek for an approach where we
ﬁne-tune a well-trained model to make it robust to pruning,
then alternately prune and re-train it to produce a signiﬁcantly smaller network. The rationale behind our idea is that
we can certainly pre-train the network as a prevention of the
structural damage at the very beginning, instead of making
up for the performance reduction after pruning.
There is thereby an urgent need but it is still a signiﬁcant
challenge to ﬁnd a powerful pre-training method before the

Abstract
In recent years considerable research efforts have been devoted to compression techniques of convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Many works so far have focused on CNN
connection pruning methods which produce sparse parameter tensors in convolutional or fully-connected layers. It has
been demonstrated in several studies that even simple methods can effectively eliminate connections of a CNN. However, since these methods make parameter tensors just sparser
but no smaller, the compression may not transfer directly to
acceleration without support from specially designed hardware. In this paper, we propose an iterative approach named
Auto-balanced Filter Pruning, where we pre-train the network
in an innovative auto-balanced way to transfer the representational capacity of its convolutional layers to a fraction of
the ﬁlters, prune the redundant ones, then re-train it to restore
the accuracy. In this way, a smaller version of the original network is learned and the ﬂoating-point operations (FLOPs) are
reduced. By applying this method on several common CNNs,
we show that a large portion of the ﬁlters can be discarded
without obvious accuracy drop, leading to signiﬁcant reduction of computational burdens. Concretely, we reduce the inference cost of LeNet-5 on MNIST, VGG-16 and ResNet-56
on CIFAR-10 by 95.1%, 79.7% and 60.9%, respectively.

Introduction
The past few years have witnessed rapid developments of
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in the areas of computer vision, natural language processing, etc. However,
due to their nature of computational intensity, as CNNs
grow wider and deeper, their computational burdens have
increased dramatically, making them difﬁcult to deploy on
embedded systems. Therefore, this research community is
soliciting the solutions that are able to simplify the CNNs
but without losing too much accuracy.
Recent researches on CNN compression methods have attracted much attention. Some excellent works, such as (Han
et al. 2015) and (Guo, Yao, and Chen 2016), have explored
∗
This research was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant No. 61571269) and the Royal Society Newton Mobility Grant (IE150997). Corresponding author:
Guiguang Ding.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6797

