The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Region-Based Quality Estimation Network
for Large-Scale Person Re-Identiﬁcation
Guanglu Song,1 Biao Leng,1∗ Yu Liu,2 Congrui Hetang,1 Shaofan Cai1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
1
{guanglusong, lengbiao, caishaofan, hetangcongrui}@buaa.edu.cn, 2 yuliu@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

Aggregation
By Average Pool

One of the major restrictions on the performance of videobased person re-id is partial noise caused by occlusion, blur
and illumination. Since different spatial regions of a single
frame have various quality, and the quality of the same region also varies across frames in a tracklet, a good way to
address the problem is to effectively aggregate complementary information from all frames in a sequence, using better
regions from other frames to compensate the inﬂuence of an
image region with poor quality. To achieve this, we propose
a novel Region-based Quality Estimation Network (RQEN),
in which an ingenious training mechanism enables the effective learning to extract the complementary region-based
information between different frames. Compared with other
feature extraction methods, we achieved comparable results
of 92.4%, 76.1% and 77.83% on the PRID 2011, iLIDS-VID
and MARS, respectively.
In addition, to alleviate the lack of clean large-scale person
re-id datasets for the community, this paper also contributes
a new high-quality dataset, named “Labeled Pedestrian in
the Wild (LPW)” which contains 7,694 tracklets with over
590,000 images. Despite its relatively large scale, the annotations also possess high cleanliness. Moreover, it’s more challenging in the following aspects: the age of characters varies
from childhood to elderhood; the postures of people are diverse, including running and cycling in addition to the normal
walking state.

Aggregation
By RQEN

Figure 1: Illustration of different aggregation methods. The
ﬁrst line is an image sequence of pedestrian and the second
line is the feature map extracted from the ﬁrst convolution
layer.
ric learning (You et al. 2016). Compared to a single image,
frames from a sequence provide richer information complementary to each other (Zheng et al. 2016). One intuitive
way to aggregate information from a sequence is to simply
take the average (Karanam, Li, and Radke 2015), but this
can draw undesired noise into the feature. As shown in Figure 1, some images in this sequence exemplify an occasion
of partial occlusion and using the simple average method
will cause recognition failure because the effective information is weakened by noise information. Recent work (Liu,
Yan, and Ouyang 2017) has proposed a novel model which
generates the adaptive score for each image in a sequence.
However, this score doesn’t specify which part causes major limitation, and possibly leads to the dumping of a frame
due to its small noisy part, causing the loss of valuable information from all other regions of that frame. Our proposed RQEN method can concentrate more attention on the
effective images’ regions in a sequence and aggregate the
complementary region-based information between different
frames.
Considering the factors above, to make our system robust
to partially occluded or noisy images and selectively use
complementary region-based information in the sequence,
we propose a more adaptive region-based quality Estimation network (RQEN) consisting of regional feature generation part and region-based quality predictor part. It aims to
weaken the inﬂuence of the images’ regions with poor quality and take advantage of the complementary information in
a sequence simultaneously. The method of jointly end-toend training these two parts enables the network to learn to

Introduction
The purpose of person re-identiﬁcation is to identify a person by comparing the similar images between the probe and
a gallery set. Previous works can be divided into two categories, one is to learn a better feature extractor and the
other is to design metric learning methods. Based on largescale training data, these two types of work can achieve good
performance on standard benchmarks through convolutional
neural networks and carefully designed optimization strategy but may be strongly affected by occlusion or signiﬁcant
body movement.
In recent methods, instead of one single image, the image
set of each person is used for feature extraction (McLaughlin, Martinez del Rincon, and Miller 2016)and distance met∗

Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7347

