The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Approximately Stable Matchings with Budget Constraints∗
Yasushi Kawase

Atsushi Iwasaki

Tokyo Institute of Technology and
RIKEN AIP Center, Tokyo, Japan.
kawase.y.ab@m.titech.ac.jp

University of Electro-Communications and
RIKEN AIP Center, Tokyo, Japan.
iwasaki@is.uec.ac.jp

ment; and so on. To establish our model and concepts, we
use doctor-hospital matching as a running example.
To date, most papers on matching with monetary transfers
assume that budgets are unrestricted, e.g., Kelso and Crawford (1982). When they are restricted, stable matchings may
fail to exist (Mongell and Roth 1986; Abizada 2016). There
are several other possibilities to circumvent the nonexistence
problem. Abizada (2016) modiﬁes the notion of stability in a
different way and proposes a variant of the Deferred Acceptance (DA) mechanism that produces a pairwise, instead of
coalitional, stable matching and is strategy-proof for doctors. Dean, Goemans, and Immorlica (2006) assume that
hospitals’ priorities are lexicographic to ensure the existence
of a stable matching. We instead allow each hospital to have
an additive utility, but the existence is not guaranteed yet.
Kawase and Iwasaki (2017) focus on near-feasible matchings that exceed each budget of the hospitals by a certain
amount. Their mechanisms ﬁnd a “nearby” instance with a
stable matching for each instance of a matching problem.
This paper focuses on approximately stable matchings
where the participants are willing to change the assignments only for a multiplicative improvement of a certain
amount (Arkin et al. 2009). This idea can be interpreted
as one in which a hospital in a blocking pair changes his
match as soon as his utility after the change increases by
any (arbitrarily small) amount. Arkin et al. (2009) examine
a stable roommate problem, which is a non-bipartite one-toone matching problem, while we examine a bipartite oneto-many matching problem. It is reasonable for a hospital
to change his assignment only in favor of a signiﬁcant improvement (the grass may be greener on the other side, but
it takes effort to cross the fence).
Furthermore, it must be emphasized that these studies, except the works of Abizada (2016) and Kawase and
Iwasaki (2017), discuss no strategic issue, that is, misreporting a doctor’s preference may be proﬁtable. The literature
on matching has found strategy-proofness for doctors, i.e.,
no doctor has an incentive to misreport her preference, to be
a key property in a wide variety of settings (Abdulkadiroğlu
and Sönmez 2003).
The contribution of this paper is twofold: First, we modify the generalized DA algorithm and devise a new property,
which we call α-approximation, on the matching with contract framework (Hatﬁeld and Milgrom 2005). This is be-

Abstract
This paper examines two-sided matching with budget constraints where one side (a ﬁrm or hospital) can make monetary transfers (offer wages) to the other (a worker or doctor).
In a standard model, while multiple doctors can be matched
to a single hospital, a hospital has a maximum quota; thus,
the number of doctors assigned to a hospital cannot exceed a
certain limit. In our model, in contrast, a hospital has a ﬁxed
budget; that is, the total amount of wages allocated by each
hospital to doctors is constrained. With budget constraints,
stable matchings may fail to exist and checking for the existence is hard. To deal with the nonexistence, we extend the
“matching with contracts” model of Hatﬁeld and Milgrom
so that it deals with approximately stable matchings where
each of the hospitals’ utilities after deviation can increase by
a factor up to a certain amount. We then propose two novel
mechanisms that efﬁciently return a stable matching that exactly satisﬁes the budget constraints. Speciﬁcally, by sacriﬁcing strategy-proofness, our ﬁrst mechanism achieves the best
possible bound. We also explore a special case on which a
simple mechanism is strategy-proof for doctors, while maintaining the best possible bound of the general case.

Introduction
This paper studies a two-sided, one-to-many matching
model when there are budget constraints on one side (a ﬁrm
or hospital), that is, the total amount of wages that it can pay
to the other side (a worker or doctor) is limited. The theory of two-sided matching has been extensively developed,
as illustrated by the comprehensive surveys of Roth and Sotomayor (1990) or Manlove (2013). Rather than ﬁxed budgets, maximum quotas limiting the total number of doctors
that each hospital can hire are typically used.
Some real-world examples are subject to matching with
such budget constraints: a college can offer stipends to recruit better students when the budget for admission is limited; a ﬁrm can offer wages to workers under the condition
that employment costs depend on earnings in the previous
accounting period; a public hospital can offer salaries to doctors when the total amount relies on funds from the govern∗

A full version can be found at http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.07359.
Supported in part by JST ACT-I and KAKENHI 26280081,
16K16005, and 17H01787.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1113

