The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Load Scheduling of Simple Temporal Networks
Under Dynamic Resource Pricing
T. K. Satish Kumar

Zhi Wang

Information Sciences Institute
University of Southern California
tkskwork@gmail.com

Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
zhiwang@usc.edu

Anoop Kumar, Craig Milo Rogers, Craig A. Knoblock
Information Sciences Institute
University of Southern California
{anoopk, rogers, knoblock}@isi.edu

Efﬁcient algorithms for temporal reasoning are critical for
a large number of real-world applications, including autonomous space exploration (Knight et al. 2001), domestic
activity management, and job scheduling on servers (Ji, He,
and Cheng 2007). Many formalisms have been proposed
and are currently used for reasoning with metric time and
resources (Smith and Cheng 1993; Kumar 2003; Muscettola
2004). Simple Temporal Networks (STNs) (Dechter, Meiri,
and Pearl 1991) are popularly used for efﬁciently reasoning
about difference constraints in scheduling problems.
Formally, An STN S is deﬁned by a directed graph X , E,
where X = {X0 , X1 , . . . , XN } is the set of nodes representing events and E is the set of directed edges between
them representing simple temporal constraints. A schedule τ for S is a function that maps each node to a time
instant at which the corresponding event should be executed. For any schedule τ , τ (X0 ) is set to 0 by convention to establish a frame of reference. Each directed edge
eij = Xi , Xj  ∈ E is annotated with a pair of real numbers

[LB(eij ), U B(eij )], representing the simple temporal constraint LB(eij ) ≤ τ (Xj ) − τ (Xi ) ≤ U B(eij ). A schedule
is said to be consistent if and only if it satisﬁes all constraints
given by the edges in E. Let Γ(S) be the set of all consistent
schedules of S.
Although their expressiveness is limited compared to
other formalisms, STNs are widely used as they can be
solved in polynomial time using shortest path computations on their distance graph representations. In the distance
graph representation, the constraint Xj − Xi ≤ ρ is represented as an edge from Xi to Xj annotated with ρ. The
absence of negative cost cycles in the distance graph characterizes the consistency of the temporal constraints in the
STN (Dechter, Meiri, and Pearl 1991). Since the distance
graph can have negative cost edges, shortest paths in the
distance graph are calculated using the common BellmanFord algorithm. Improved algorithms for solving STNs have
been developed by several authors (Xu and Choueiry 2003;
Planken, de Weerdt, and van der Krogt 2008).
In this paper, we use the STN framework to study important classes of load scheduling problems that involve metric
temporal constraints as well as costs of resources. Problems
that can be studied in this framework include those that arise
in the smart home (Qayyum et al. 2015) and smart grid domains (Sianaki, Hussain, and Tabesh 2010) as well as in high
performance computing (HPC) (Yang et al. 2013) and job
shop scheduling (Xiong, Sadeh, and Sycara 1992). Although
the STN framework can be extended to reason about the resource requirements of events (Kumar 2003), in this paper,
for simplicity of exposition, we reason about the resource
requirements of non-preemptible processes represented by a
pair of events that determine their starting and ending points.
Let PS = {P1 , P2 , . . . , PK } be a set of processes in the
STN S. We represent each Pi ∈ PS as a pair of events,
namely XPs i ∈ X for its starting time point and XPe i ∈ X
for its ending time point. An edge ẽPi = XPs i , XPe i  ∈ E
is annotated with the bounds [LB(ẽPi ), U B(ẽPi )] where
U B(ẽPi ) = LB(ẽPi ) ≥ 0. This edge represents the ﬁxed
duration of the process Pi .1 Of course, E can also contain

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
It is easy to extend our framework to processes having ﬂexible
durations; see (Nattaf, Artigues, and Lopez 2017) for richer models.

Abstract
We study load scheduling of simple temporal networks
(STNs) under dynamic pricing of resources. We are given
a set of processes and a set of simple temporal constraints
between their execution times, i.e., an STN. Each process uses a certain amount of resource for execution. The
unit price of the resource is a function of time, f (t). The
goal is to ﬁnd a schedule of a given STN that trades
off makespan minimization against cost minimization
within a user-speciﬁed suboptimality bound. We provide a polynomial-time algorithm for solving the load
scheduling problem when f (t) is piecewise constant.
This has important applications in many real-world domains including the smart home and smart grid domains.
We then study the dependency of the unit price of the
resource on time as well as the total demand at that
time. This leads to a further characterization of tractable,
NP-hard, and conjectured tractable cases.

Introduction and Problem Formulation

6227

