The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Exploring the Use of Shatter for AllSAT
Through Ramsey-Type Problems
David E. Narváez
Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences
Rochester Institute of Technology
Rochester, NY, USA 14623
den9562@rit.edu
of the edges of a graph into two sets. We say that a graph
F arrows the pair of graphs (G, H), written F → (G, H),
when any 2-coloring of the set of edges of a graph F yields a
monochromatic G in the ﬁrst color or a monochromatic H in
the second color. It is straightforward to see how 2-color arrowing problems can be encoded into Boolean satisﬁability
problems. In the case of ﬁnite Ramsey numbers, a didactic
description of this encoding appears in (Zhang 2009). Given
Shatter’s popularity, it may seem as a good tool to tackle
the generation of irredundant sets of colorings for Ramseytype problems. Nevertheless, in this paper we identify and
discuss some drawbacks of using this approach without caution. Our technical report (Narváez 2017) provides strategies
and additional tools to cope with the negative effects of using Shatter for A LL SAT.

Abstract
In the context of SAT solvers, Shatter is a popular tool
for symmetry breaking on CNF formulas. Nevertheless, little
has been said about its use in the context of A LL SAT problems. A LL SAT has gained much popularity in recent years
due to its many applications in domains like model checking,
data mining, etc. One example of a particularly transparent
application of A LL SAT to other ﬁelds of computer science
is computational Ramsey theory. In this paper we study the
effect of incorporating Shatter to the workﬂow of using
Boolean formulas to generate all possible edge colorings of
a graph avoiding prescribed monochromatic subgraphs. We
identify two drawbacks in the naı̈ve use of Shatter to break
the symmetries of Boolean formulas encoding Ramsey-type
problems for graphs.

1

Introduction

2

The A LL SAT problem is a variant of the SAT problem
where we are interested in ﬁnding all the models (satisfying
assignments) of the input formula. The survey by Toda and
Soh (2016) summarizes the state-of-the-art in techniques
used for solving A LL SAT problems. Many ideas from SAT
solvers are applicable to A LL SAT solvers with few adaptations. A technique that has proved effective in SAT solvers
and is of particular importance for A LL SAT problems is
symmetry breaking in Boolean formulas (Sakallah 2009).
The survey by Walsh (2012) provides a good overview of
the current approaches and techniques used to deal with this
problem. Shatter (Aloul, Sakallah, and Markov 2006) is
a tool that generates symmetry-breaking clauses as a preprocessing step to solve Boolean formulas in order to simplify
the search space for conventional SAT solvers. Shatter
has become a popular preprocessing tool since it can be used
on any CNF formula encoded in the popular DIMACS format and it has the desirable property that the size of the
symmetry-breaking clauses it adds to the formula is linear
in the number of variables of the original formula.
To study the effect of Shatter’s symmetry breaking approach in a clean application where symmetries can be formally deﬁned and studied, we look at symmetry breaking for
Ramsey-type problems in combinatorial computing. In this
paper we focus on graph 2-colorings, which are partitions

Background and Deﬁnitions

A fundamental construction in Shatter’s formulation of
symmetry breaking predicates is a graph that encodes the relationship between clauses and literals of the input formula.
The symmetry breaking predicates added by Shatter
come from the automorphisms of this graph. A bird’s eye
view of the process Shatter uses to break the symmetries
of a Boolean formula φ is as follows: (a) the graph Gφ is
generated as per the rules in (Aloul, Sakallah, and Markov
2006), (b) the group of automorphisms of Gφ is found, (c) a
subset of these automorphisms (in particular, Shatter
uses the generators of the group, following (Crawford et al.
1996)) is used to generate symmetry breaking clauses that
are added to φ .

2.1

Ramsey Colorings

Several Ramsey-type problems can be expressed in terms
of the arrowing property deﬁned in Section 1. In particular, the generalized Ramsey number R(G, H) can be deﬁned as the smallest natural number N such that KN arrows the pair (G, H). We deﬁne C(F ; G, H) as the set of
colorings witnessing F → (G, H). Clearly, C(F ; G, H) =
∅ ⇔ F → (G, H). We will call a set of colorings for parameters F , G and H complete if every isomorphism class
in C(F ; G, H) is represented in the set. To use A LL SAT
solvers to generate graph 2-colorings, we exploit the fact
that the Boolean domain contains two values ⊥ (false) and
 (true) and express the negation of the arrowing property

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8123

