The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Video-Based Person Re-Identiﬁcation via Self Paced Weighting
Wenjun Huang,2,3 Chao Liang,1,2,3∗ Yi Yu,4 Zheng Wang,2,3 Weijian Ruan,2,3 Ruimin Hu1,2,3
1

State Key Laboratory of Software Engineering, Wuhan University, China
2
Collaborative Innovation Center of Geospatial Technology, China
3
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Wuhan University, China
4
Digital Content and Media Sciences Research Division, National Institute of Informatics, Japan
Email: {2011huang,cliang,wangzwhu,rweij,hrm}@whu.edu.cn yiyu@nii.ac.jp
Karanam, Li, and Radke 2015a; Liu et al. 2015; Zhu et
al. 2016; You et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2016a; Zheng et al.
2016). In this scenario, each person object, in every camera’s
view ﬁeld, is described by a long sequence of video images.
Hence, more complete and abundant visual information can
be utilized for accurate feature representation (Wang et al.
2014; Karanam, Li, and Radke 2015a; Liu et al. 2015;
Gao et al. 2016; Liu, Chen, and Wang 2016) and discriminative distance measure (Karanam, Li, and Radke 2015a;
Zhu et al. 2016; You et al. 2016; Ye et al. 2017).
However, most video based person re-id methods equally
treat all images in each sequence, losing sight of their quality discrepancy caused by object motions and occlusions.
Take iLID-VID dataset (Wang et al. 2014) in Fig. 1 as an
example, person images are ﬂooded with various object occlusions or background clutters, resulting in highly noisy unregulated sequences. On our preliminary comparative experiment conducted on 199-pair unregulated person sequences
of iLID-VID dataset, average matching accuracy on original
unregulated video sequences is only 7%, 10 percents lower
than that obtained on ﬁltered clean video sequences.
Wang et al. (Wang et al. 2016a; 2014) ﬁrst noticed the
impact of unregulated sequences, and raised an optical ﬂow
based algorithm to detect walking cycles to divide a video
sequence into different sub fragments. Then, a ranking
model was proposed to select and match aligned video fragment pairs from candidates pool. However, the method is
hard to obtain a reliable optical ﬂow estimation under serious noise interference (Ayvaci, Raptis, and Soatto 2010).
Furthermore, it exploits all video fragments in candidates
pool to select and match fragment pairs without considering the interference of noisy video fragments, resulting in a
signiﬁcant performance degradation.
To address the above problem, we propose a novel videobased person re-id method by self paced weighting (SPW).
In our work, two key issues need to be addressed. (1) the
algorithm is expected to decompose a video sequence into
a series of sub sequences so that images in the same sub
sequence have uniﬁed state (i.e., either noisy or clean). (2)
the algorithm should be able to measure the noisy condition of each sub sequence and make a robust distance
metric. For the ﬁrst issue, we deﬁne a Sequence Stability Measure (SSM) to break down automatically unregulated video sequences into multiple fragments with re-

Abstract
Person re-identiﬁcation (re-id) is a fundamental technique
to associate various person images, captured by different
surveillance cameras, to the same person. Compared to the
single image based person re-id methods, video-based person re-id has attracted widespread attentions because extra
space-time information and more appearance cues that can be
used to greatly improve the matching performance. However,
most existing video-based person re-id methods equally treat
all video frames, ignoring their quality discrepancy caused
by object occlusion and motions, which is a common phenomenon in real surveillance scenario. Based on this ﬁnding, we propose a novel video-based person re-id method
via self paced weighting (SPW). Firstly, we propose a self
paced outlier detection method to evaluate the noise degree
of video sub sequences. Thereafter, a weighted multi-pair distance metric learning approach is adopted to measure the distance of two person image sequences. Experimental results
on two public datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method over current state-of-the-art work.

Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation, which aims at identifying a person
of interest among different cameras, has become increasingly popular in the research community due to its critical
role in many surveillance, security and multimedia applications (Auguste, Martinet, and Tirilly 2015; Loy, Xiang,
and Gong 2009; Ye et al. 2016). Currently, major efforts towards this problem focus on still images, in which each person has only one or few images per camera view (BedagkarGala and Shah 2014). Many methods have been developed
for accurate person re-identiﬁcation (Wang et al. 2016b;
2017; Matsukawa et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2016c; Liang et
al. 2015). However, the real-world re-id performance is still
hindered by limited information extracted from still images,
and these methods usually failed to capture complete and
robust appearance features in complex scenarios because of
ignoring key temporal information among successive image
frames (You et al. 2016).
Recently, many research efforts have been devoted into
video-based person re-id problem (Wang et al. 2014;
∗

Chao Liang is the corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2273

