The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Reinforcement Learning for Relation Classiﬁcation from Noisy Data
§

Jun Feng,§ Minlie Huang,§∗ Li Zhao,‡ Yang Yang,† Xiaoyan Zhu§
State Key Lab. of Intelligent Technology and Systems, National Lab. for Information Science and Technology
Dept. of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, PR China
‡
Microsoft Research Asia
†
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
feng-j13@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn , aihuang@tsinghua.edu.cn, lizo@microsoft.com
yangya@zju.edu.cn, zxy-dcs@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

Relation

Barack_Obama, United_States
Obama was born in the United States.

Existing relation classiﬁcation methods that rely on distant
supervision assume that a bag of sentences mentioning an
entity pair are all describing a relation for the entity pair.
Such methods, performing classiﬁcation at the bag level, cannot identify the mapping between a relation and a sentence,
and largely suffers from the noisy labeling problem. In this
paper, we propose a novel model for relation classiﬁcation
at the sentence level from noisy data. The model has two
modules: an instance selector and a relation classiﬁer. The
instance selector chooses high-quality sentences with reinforcement learning and feeds the selected sentences into the
relation classiﬁer, and the relation classiﬁer makes sentencelevel prediction and provides rewards to the instance selector.
The two modules are trained jointly to optimize the instance
selection and relation classiﬁcation processes. Experiment results show that our model can deal with the noise of data effectively and obtains better performance for relation classiﬁcation at the sentence level.

Barack Obama is the 44th President of the United States

EmployedBy
BornIn

Bag-Level
Relation

Barack_Obama, United_States
Obama was born in the United States.
Barack Obama is the 44th President of the United States

EmployedBy
BornIn

Sentence-Level

Figure 1: Bag-level: Relations are mapped to a bag of
sentences, each of which contains the same entity pair;
Sentence-level: Each sentence is mapped to a speciﬁc relation.
assigned to this sentence, although the sentence does not describe the relation BornIn at all.
To address the issue of noisy labeling, previous studies
adopt multi-instance learning to consider the noises of instances (Riedel, Yao, and McCallum 2010; Hoffmann et al.
2011; Surdeanu et al. 2012; Zeng et al. 2015; Lin et al. 2016;
Ji et al. 2017). In these studies, the training and test process is proceeded at the bag level, where a bag contains
noisy sentences mentioning the same entity pair but possibly not describing the same relation. As a result, previous
studies suffer from two limitations: 1) Unable to handle the
sentence-level prediction; 2) Sensitive to the bags with all
noisy sentences which do not describe a relation at all.
To better explain the ﬁrst limitation, we show an example in Figure 1. Bag-level prediction can ﬁnd the two relations “EmployedBy” and “BornIn” between the entity pair
“Barack Obama” and “United States”. However, sentencelevel prediction is able to further map each relation to the
corresponding sentences. As for the second limitation, for
each bag, previous bag-level methods retain at least one sentence, even if all the sentences in a given bag are noisy (not
describing the relation). Such bags, produced by distant supervision, are quite common. For instance, our investigation
on a widely used dataset1 shows that 53% out of 100 sample bags have no sentences that describe the relation. Such
noisy bags will deﬁnitely decrease the performance of relation classiﬁcation.

Introduction
Relation classiﬁcation, aiming to categorize semantic relations between two entities given a plain text, is an important problem in natural language processing, particularly for
knowledge graph completion and question answering. Most
existing works for relation classiﬁcation adopt supervised
learning approaches, either based on traditional handcrafted
features (Mooney and Bunescu 2005; Zhou et al. 2005) or
based on the features automatically generated by deep neural networks (Zeng et al. 2014; dos Santos, Xiang, and Zhou
2015), but all require high-quality annotated data.
In order to obtain large-scale training data, distant supervision (Mintz et al. 2009) was proposed by assuming that if
two entities have a relation in a given knowledge base, all
sentences that contain the two entities will mention that relation. Although distant supervision is effective to label data
automatically, it suffers from the noisy labeling problem.
Taking the triple (Barack Obama, BornIn, United States) as
an example, the noisy sentence “Barack Obamba is the 44th
president of the United State” will be regarded as a positive instance by distant supervision and a BornIn relation is
∗
Corresponding author: Minlie Huang, aihuang@tsinghua.edu
.cn
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

5779

http://iesl.cs.umass.edu/riedel/ecml/

