The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Training L1 -Regularized Models with
Orthant-Wise Passive Descent Algorithms
Jianqiao Wangni
Tencent AI Lab
Shenzhen, China
zjnqha@gmail.com

and only yields a sublinear convergence rate. Recently,
some variance-reduced stochastic algorithms, such as SVRG
(Johnson and Zhang 2013) and SAGA (Defazio, Bach, and
Lacoste-Julien 2014), can converge without decreasing stepsizes and achieve linear convergence rates on smooth and
strongly-convex problems; they can converge at similar rates
on L1 -regularized problems if combined with proximal algorithms (Shalev-Shwartz and Zhang 2014)(Xiao and Zhang
2014)(Reddi et al. 2016).
Another promising line of research is about the (quasi)
Newton algorithm, which has been popular for decades.
It captures more curvature information than ﬁrst-order algorithms do. It is theoretically guaranteed and practically
proved to converge faster, especially when the data dimension is relatively low (Nocedal and Wright 1999). L-BFGS
(Liu and Nocedal 1989) circumvents the inversion of Hessian matrices by matrix-vector multiplications, consuming
less memory, ﬁtting well with high dimensional data.
Due to the non-differentiability, the L1 -regularized sparse
models can not directly beneﬁt from the fast convergence of
quasi-Newton algorithms. A representative adaptation of LBFGS for the problem is the orthant-wise limited memory
quasi-Newton method (OWL-QN)(Andrew and Gao 2007).
OWL-QN ﬁts this problem uniquely by generalizing LBFGS and adopting three gradient alignment steps, which
make the parameters remain in the same orthant after updates, and defeated other major algorithms on solving L1 regularized logistic regression, in comparisons conducted
by (Yu et al. 2010). Later improved OWL-QN algorithms
(Gong and Ye 2015a)(Gong and Ye 2015b) take a hybrid approach of OWL-QN updates and proximal gradient descent
steps, proving a theoretical convergence for a family of nonconvex models with nonconvex regularizations.
The success of SGD has led to some progresses toward stochastic quasi-Newton algorithms (SQN) that employ subsampled gradients as initializations (Schraudolph
et al. 2007). The regularized SQN (Mokhtari and Ribeiro
2014) further added an identity matrix to the inverse Hessian matrix to guarantee the positive-deﬁniteness. (Moritz,
Nishihara, and Jordan 2016) proposed a linear convergent
SQN with SVRG initializing descent directions.
Inspired by the aforementioned research, in this paper,
we proposed an efﬁcient but simple algorithm for L1 regularized problems. We propose a generalization of the

Abstract
The L1 -regularized models are widely used for sparse regression or classiﬁcation tasks. In this paper, we propose the
orthant-wise passive descent algorithm (OPDA) for optimizing L1 -regularized models, as an improved substitute of proximal algorithms, which are the standard tools for optimizing the models nowadays. OPDA uses a stochastic variancereduced gradient (SVRG) to initialize the descent direction,
then apply a novel alignment operator to encourage each element keeping the same sign after one iteration of update,
so the parameter remains in the same orthant as before. It
also explicitly suppresses the magnitude of each element to
impose sparsity. The quasi-Newton update can be utilized to
incorporate curvature information and accelerate the speed.
We prove a linear convergence rate for OPDA on general
smooth and strongly-convex loss functions. By conducting
experiments on L1 -regularized logistic regression and convolutional neural networks, we show that OPDA outperforms
state-of-the-art stochastic proximal algorithms, implying a
wide range of applications in training sparse models.

Introduction
The machine learning community has been favouring L1 regularized models like logistic regression and linear regression to build robust applications with high dimensional data
(Friedman, Hastie, and Tibshirani 2001)(Candes and Tao
2007)(Bach et al. 2012)(Bühlmann and Van De Geer 2011).
To process the rapidly increasing scale of internet data, many
algorithms were proposed to speed up the training process
(Efron et al. 2004)(Zhang 2011)(Nesterov 2013). One of
most representative optimization method is the proximal algorithm (Parikh, Boyd, and others 2014), which sequentially
takes a gradient descent step and then solves a proximal
problem on the current parameter.
When the data number is very large, the stochastic
gradient descent algorithm (SGD) (Zhang 2004)(Bottou
2010)(Shamir and Zhang 2013), as opposed to batch algorithms, updates parameters by processing data mini-batches
with a higher frequency and minimizes the loss function
in expectation, being especially suitable for problems with
large condition numbers. However, SGD generally needs
a decreasing stepsize to reduce the variance of gradients,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4268

