The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Interactively Learning a Blend of
Goal-Based and Procedural Tasks
Aaron Mininger, John E. Laird
University of Michigan
2260 Hayward Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2121
{mininger, laird}@umich.edu
principles to the area of mixed-initiative situated interactive instruction, where the human instructor and the robotic
agent collaborate together and engage in a joint conversation
with the purpose of having the robot learn a new task ‘from
scratch’ (with no initial knowledge about the task). This allows the agent to learn while it is performing the task and
ask questions as problems arise. It also allows the instructor
to provide knowledge, corrections, and feedback.
Task learning includes learning how to actually perform
the task – what actions or subtasks the agent needs to execute
to complete the task. One way is to represent the goal of a
task, then use a state-based policy, which is a mapping from
each state to the appropriate action, to reach the goal. This
policy can be learned, such as through reinforcement learning, or the agent can use planning capabilities to identify
the next action the agent should take. Mohan et al. (2014)
use this formulation along with Explanation-Based Learning (EBL; DeJong and Mooney 1986) to learn goal-oriented
hierarchical tasks. This EBL approach relies on the insight
that “it is possible to form a justiﬁed generalization of a single positive training example, provided the learning system
is endowed with some explanatory capabilities” (Mitchell,
Keller, and Kedar-Cabelli 1986). In order to learn new goaloriented tasks via EBL, the agent must have sufﬁcient domain knowledge so that it can explain why the actions it executed led it to the goal. Some of the beneﬁts of this approach
are that it works over relational representations, which allows the agent to reason over complex task structures and
their connection to language, and it can exploit rich domain
knowledge to learn from relatively few examples (Mohan
and Laird 2014). In addition, this approach can learn diverse
types of task knowledge, including task parameters, availability conditions, subtasks, policy information, termination
conditions, and action models.
Another way of learning to perform a task is to learn
a procedure, which directly represents the steps needed to
accomplish the task. This procedure can include complex
control ﬂow, including loops, conditional, and enumeration
constructs. One such example is the work of Meriçli et al.
(2014), whose agent can learn procedural tasks in an ofﬁce
environment by learning an Instruction Graph. This graph
represents the actions and the control ﬂow between them.
However, without knowing the goal, an agent with only a
procedure has difﬁculty adjusting if something goes wrong,

Abstract
Agents that can learn new tasks through interactive instruction can utilize goal information to search for and
learn ﬂexible policies. This approach can be resilient to
variations in initial conditions or issues that arise during execution. However, if a task is not easily formulated as achieving a goal or if the agent lacks sufﬁcient
domain knowledge for planning, other methods are required. We present a hybrid approach to interactive task
learning that can learn both goal-oriented and procedural tasks, and mixtures of the two, from human natural language instruction. We describe this approach, go
through two examples of learning tasks, and outline the
space of tasks that the system can learn. We show that
our approach can learn a variety of goal-oriented and
procedural tasks from a single example and is robust to
different amounts of domain knowledge.

Introduction
As robotic and AI technologies advance, interactive autonomous agents are becoming ever more prevalent in our
everyday lives. We can assign tasks to these agents, whether
it’s setting an alarm on a phone, answering a question, or
driving a car. As these agents become more capable and
general-purpose, it will be impossible to fully anticipate and
implement every possible task in advance. It will be crucial to extend, customize, and correct the tasks that an agent
can perform in easy and natural ways. This is the goal of
research in the recently identiﬁed AI challenge problem of
Interactive Task Learning (ITL; Laird et al. 2017). Research
in ITL covers a range of domains (such as robots and artiﬁcial personal assistants) and forms of interaction (such as
speech, language, demonstrations, or kinesthetic training).
Laird et al. (2017) identify a set of desired characteristics
of Interactive Task Learning. It should be general, so that
the agent can learn a diverse set of tasks that involve diverse
concepts, procedures, and goals. The task learning should be
effective; allowing the agent to learn all aspects of the task
through interaction and generalize what is learned to perform the task in the future. Finally, the learning should be efﬁcient; requiring few examples. We focus on applying these
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1487

