The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

When Will You Arrive? Estimating Travel Time Based on Deep Neural Networks
1

Dong Wang,1 Junbo Zhang,2 Wei Cao,3 Jian Li,3 Yu Zheng2,4,5

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University, NC, USA
2
Urban Computing Group, Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
3
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, China
5
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
dong.wang363@duke.edu, junbo.zhang@microsoft.com, {cao-w13@mails, lijian83@mail}.tsinghua.edu.cn, msyuzheng@outlook.com

ments (or local paths), and then estimates the travel time
for each local path, ﬁnally sums over them to get the total travel time. b) Collective TTE that directly estimates
the travel time of the entire path. Although individual TTE
methods (Yang, Guo, and Jensen 2013; Wang et al. 2016c;
Pan, Demiryurek, and Shahabi 2012; Wang, Zheng, and Xue
2014) can estimate accurate travel time for each road segment, it cannot model complex trafﬁc conditions within the
entire path, including road intersections, trafﬁc lights, and
direction turns. Besides, local errors may accumulate if there
are many road segments in the given path. Collective TTE
methods (e.g. (Jenelius and Koutsopoulos 2013)) are able
to capture the aforementioned trafﬁc conditions implicitly.
However, as the length of a path increases, the number of
trajectories traveling on the path decreases, which reduces
the conﬁdence of the travel time (derived from few drivers),
pointing out that longer path is harder to estimate. Moreover,
in many cases, there is no trajectory passing the entire path.
2) Diverse complex factors: the trafﬁc is affected by spatial
correlations, temporal dependencies, and external factors.
Spatial correlations are various, even complex, as shown in
Fig. 1. With three consecutive GPS points, it depicts different
driving situations, showing the driver may go straight, turn
right, turn around, drive into the main road or ramp road.
Explicitly extracting these features are time-consuming, even
infeasible because the driving situations are more complex
in the real-world. We need to consider them implicitly in
the method. In addition, these spatial correlations are timevarying. Taking Fig. 1 (b) as an example, in the evening rush
hour, there are many vehicles the main road, drivers have to
drive into the main road from the ramp road one after another
slowly, but driving out of the main road may be very quick.
But in the non-rush hour, driving into the main road is fast.
Furthermore, trafﬁc is affected by many external factors, like
weather, driver habit, day of the week.
To address the above challenges, in this paper, we propose
an end-to-end framework for Travel Time Estimation, called
DeepTTE. The primary contributions of this paper can be
summarized as follows:

Abstract
Estimating the travel time of any path (denoted by a sequence
of connected road segments) in a city is of great importance
to trafﬁc monitoring, route planning, ridesharing, taxi/Uber
dispatching, etc. However, it is a very challenging problem,
affected by diverse complex factors, including spatial correlations, temporal dependencies, external conditions (e.g.
weather, trafﬁc lights). Prior work usually focuses on estimating the travel times of individual road segments or sub-paths
and then summing up these times, which leads to an inaccurate estimation because such approaches do not consider road
intersections/trafﬁc lights, and local errors may accumulate.
To address these issues, we propose an end-to-end Deep learning framework for Travel Time Estimation (called DeepTTE)
that estimates the travel time of the whole path directly. More
speciﬁcally, we present a geo-convolution operation by integrating the geographic information into the classical convolution, capable of capturing spatial correlations. By stacking
recurrent unit on the geo-convoluton layer, our DeepTTE can
capture the temporal dependencies as well. A multi-task learning component is given on the top of DeepTTE, that learns
to estimate the travel time of both the entire path and each
local path simultaneously during the training phase. Extensive
experiments on two trajectory datasets show our DeepTTE
signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Estimating the travel time for a given path, which is denoted
by a sequence of connected sub-paths, is a fundamental problem in route planning, navigation, and trafﬁc dispatching.
When users are searching for candidate routes, accurate travel
time estimations help them better planning routes and avoiding congested roads, which in turn helps to alleviate trafﬁc
congestion. Almost all electronic maps and online car-hailing
services provide the travel time estimation (TTE) in their
apps, such as Google Map, Uber and Didi. The quality of the
estimation is critical to the user experience of these apps.
Although the problem has been widely studied in the past,
providing an accurate travel time is still very challenging,
affected by the following aspects:
1) Individual vs. Collective: There mainly exist two approaches to estimate the travel time of a path: a) Individual TTE that ﬁrstly splits a path into several road seg-

• We propose a spatio-temporal component to learn the
spatial and temporal dependencies from the raw GPS sequence. In detail, the spatio-temporal component consists
of two parts: a) a geo-based convolutional layer that transforms the raw GPS sequence to a series of feature maps,

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2500

