The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Neural Character-Level Dependency Parsing for Chinese
1

2

Haonan Li,1,2 Zhisong Zhang,1,2 Yuqi Ju,1,2 Hai Zhao1,2,∗

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Key Laboratory of Shanghai Education Commission for Intelligent Interaction and Cognitive Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China
nathan l@163.com, {zzs2011, tongkong}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhaohai@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

of Chinese word segmentation standards have been proposed. Until Bakeoff-4 (Jin and Chen 2008), there were
seven kinds of word segmentation conventions. On the other
hand, whether a Chinese character sequence should be divided and the segmentation granularity are both blurred.

Abstract
This paper presents a truly full character-level neural dependency parser together with a newly released character-level
dependency treebank for Chinese, which has suffered a lot
from the dilemma of deﬁning word or not to model character interactions. Integrating full character-level dependencies
with character embedding and human annotated characterlevel part-of-speech and dependency labels for the ﬁrst time,
we show an extra performance enhancement from the evaluation on Chinese Penn Treebank and SJTU (Shanghai Jiao
Tong University) Chinese Character Dependency Treebank
and the potential of better understanding deeper structure of
Chinese sentences.

（a）中西医 / 结合
Chinese and Western medicine / integration
（b）中 / 西医
Chinese / Western medicine

Introduction
（c）中 / 西 / 医
Chinese / Western /medicine

Chinese language processing suffers from an obvious writing inconvenience: there is no clear separator between Chinese words while it is written in consecutive character
sequence. People have to do a key character-level preprocessing before word-level parsing, i.e., word segmentation. Since (Zhao 2009) pointed out that Chinese parsing
also receives the consequence of vague word deﬁnition, a series of work have considered character-level parsing (Zhao,
Kit, and Song 2009; Li and Zhou 2012; Zhang et al. 2014).
Character-level dependency parsing, which was proposed
as an alternative to word-level dependency parsing, has two
beneﬁts: 1) using character-level trees circumvents the issue
that no universal standard exists for Chinese word segmentation. 2) in-depth structure inside word offers additional information for deeper level processing and better understanding of the whole sentence.
For the ﬁrst beneﬁt, it demonstrates in many aspects. On
one hand, linguistic views about Chinese word standard diverge. Since the ﬁrst SIGHAN Bakeoff shared task for Chinese word segmentation (Sproat and Emerson 2003), a lot

Figure 1: Example of segmentation choice.
Figure 1 illustrates a word segmentation case. Figure 1(a)
shows that three-character segment “zhongxiyi” is as being
a noun phrase in a sentence. Figure 1(b) gives an intuitive
segmentation for the last two characters which are indeed a
true word that means Western medicine. Figure 1(c) gives
another segmentation (still unsatisfactory and problematic)
in which each character is a single-character word. However,
neither of the above segmentations are semantically proper,
as the character sequence “zhongxiyi” actually means Chinese medicine and Western medicine and either the ﬁrst character (meaning: Chinese) or the second (meaning: Western)
is a modiﬁer of the third one (meaning: medicine) just as
shown as arcs in Figure 1(c). The above example shows
that word segmentation decisions are not so easy in Chinese. In addition, all these problematic segmentations must
confuse later syntactic parsing as word segmentation has
a root position for all processing pipeline. Though in recent years, Chinese word segmentation as a sequence learning task has been made a success including our previous
work (Zhao et al. 2010; Zhao 2011; Cai and Zhao 2016;
Cai et al. 2017), the linguistic difﬁculties keep existing.
For the second beneﬁt, as (Zhao 2009; Zhang et al. 2013)
raised, a lot of Chinese words have internal structures which
have been ignored ever since before. A Chinese word is de-

†
Corresponding author. This paper was partially supported by
National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61170114, No.
61672343 and No. 61733011), National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2017YFB0304100), Major Basic
Research Program of Shanghai Science and Technology Committee (No. 15JC1400103), Art and Science Interdisciplinary Funds
of Shanghai Jiao Tong University (No. 14JCRZ04), Key Project of
National Society Science Foundation of China (No. 15-ZDA041).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5205

