The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Noisy Derivative-Free Optimization
with Value Suppression∗
Hong Wang, Hong Qian, Yang Yu
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China
waghon@outlook.com, {qianh,yuy}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

noise-free environments (i.e., solution evaluations are accurate), derivative-free optimization methods have achieved
desirable and impressive performance. However, many realworld environments are noisy and we can only access noisy
objective function f N (x) instead of true objective function
f (x). For example, every prototype is evaluated by simulations in industrial design such as VLSI design (Guo et al.
2014). The result is inaccurate due to the simulation error.
And the evaluation of a prediction model in machine learning can be inaccurate because of the limited amount of data
it uses (Qian, Yu, and Zhou 2015b). Inaccurate solution evaluations resulting from noise can badly injure derivative-free
optimization methods, since it may make a worse solution
looks better and mislead the search process.
There are two popular mechanisms to handle noise in
derivative-free optimization: sampling and threshold selection equipped with re-evaluation. Sampling is a straightforward way to reduce noise (Arnold and Beyer 2006). It independently evaluates a given solution multiple times, and then
uses the average of noisy function values to approximate
the true function value. In order to achieve relatively accurate estimate of true function value, more sample size (i.e.,
times of function evaluations) is needed. Since in derivativefree optimization function evaluation often requires expensive computational and time cost (He and Yao 2001; Yu and
Zhou 2008), thus, the time and computational cost of sampling is high. Another popular mechanism to handle noise is
threshold selection equipped with re-evaluation (Markon et
al. 2001; Beielstein and Markon 2002; Jin and Branke 2005;
Goh and Tan 2007; Gießen and Kötzing 2016). It independently reevaluates solutions whenever the comparison
among solutions occurs, and replaces an old solution only
when the value of a new solution is smaller than that of
the old one by at least a ﬁxed or dynamic threshold value.
This mechanism delays the noise handling to the comparison time, and has been shown to be helpful for derivativefree optimization (Qian, Yu, and Zhou 2015a). Compared
with sampling, due to the delay of noise handling, threshold
selection equipped with re-evaluation requires less computational and time cost and seems to be more efﬁcient.
In this paper, we further delay the noise handling in
derivative-free optimization process, and propose a generic,
simple yet efﬁcient noise handling mechanism called value
suppression. This mechanism can cooperate with most

Abstract
Derivative-free optimization has shown advantage in solving
sophisticated problems such as policy search, when the environment is noise-free. Many real-world environments are
noisy, where solution evaluations are inaccurate due to the
noise. Noisy evaluation can badly injure derivative-free optimization, as it may make a worse solution looks better. Sampling is a straightforward way to reduce noise, while previous
studies have shown that delay the noise handling to the comparison time point (i.e., threshold selection) can be helpful
for derivative-free optimization. This work further delays the
noise handling, and proposes a simple noise handling mechanism, i.e., value suppression. By value suppression, we do
nothing about noise until the best-so-far solution has not been
improved for a period, and then suppress the value of the
best-so-far solution and continue the optimization. On synthetic problems as well as reinforcement learning tasks, experiments verify that value suppression can be signiﬁcantly
more effective than the previous methods.

Introduction
Solving sophisticated and complex optimization tasks plays
a crucial role in artiﬁcial intelligence. Let f : X ⊆ Rn → R
be an objective function and we assume that a global minimum value x∗ always exists. An optimization task can
be formulized as x∗ = argminx∈X f (x). This paper regards f as a black-box function and focuses on derivativefree optimization methods. Namely, f can be evaluated
point-wisely, and optimization methods are performed only
on the basis of the function values f (x) and the sampled solutions x. Because derivative-free methods do not
rely on derivatives, they are especially suitable for sophisticated optimization problems which have many local optima and are non-differentiable. Successful examples include hyper-parameter tuning in machine learning, direct
policy search in reinforcement learning, and scientiﬁc experiments (Snoek, Larochelle, and Adams 2012; Hu, Qian, and
Yu 2017; Parkinson, Mukherjee, and Liddle 2006). Under
∗
This research was supported by National Key Research and
Development Program (2017YFB1001903), NSFC (61422304),
Jiangsu SF (BK20170013), and Collaborative Innovation Center
of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1447

