The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Action Recognition with Coarse-to-Fine
Deep Feature Integration and Asynchronous Fusion
Weiyao Lin,1∗ Yang Mi,1 Jianxin Wu,2 Ke Lu,3 Hongkai Xiong1
1

Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{wylin, deyangmiyang, xionghongkai}@sjtu.edu.cn, wujx2001@nju.edu.cn, luk@ucas.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Action recognition is an important yet challenging task in
computer vision. In this paper, we propose a novel deepbased framework for action recognition, which improves the
recognition accuracy by: 1) deriving more precise features
for representing actions, and 2) reducing the asynchrony between different information streams. We ﬁrst introduce a
coarse-to-ﬁne network which extracts shared deep features
at different action class granularities and progressively integrates them to obtain a more accurate feature representation
for input actions. We further introduce an asynchronous fusion network. It fuses information from different streams by
asynchronously integrating stream-wise features at different
time points, hence better leveraging the complementary information in different streams. Experimental results on action recognition benchmarks demonstrate that our approach
achieves the state-of-the-art performance.

1

(a)

Introduction
(b)

Action recognition, which aims at identifying the action
class label for an input action video, has attracted much attention due to its importance in many applications. Although
the recent advances in deep convolutional networks (ConvNets) have brought some improvements on action recognition (Tran et al. 2015; Zhu et al. 2016), it remains challenging due to the large variation of video scenarios and the interferences from noisy contents unrelated to the video topic.
In this paper, we focus on two key issues for improving
the performance over the existing ConvNet frameworks: (1)
deriving more precise features to better represent actions,
(2) reducing the asynchrony among information streams to
better leverage the stream-wise complementary information.
First, good features are crucial to reliable action recognition. Although features automatically learned from ConvNets have shown big improvements in many domains (Liu
et al. 2016; Deng et al. 2009; Song et al. 2017), they make

Figure 1: (a) Illustration of different action class granularity.
(b) Illustration of the asynchronous pattern between streams:
The appearance stream is most indicative about “fall down”
after the object has lied down, while the motion stream
shows the strongest “fall down” pattern when the object is
in the process of going down. (Best viewed in color)
less progress in action recognition due to the high complexity of video data. Some recent studies attempted to improve the deep feature representation of an action by including additional information sources (Duta et al. 2017;
Shi et al. 2017; Kataoka et al. 2016), selecting spatialtemporal attention parts (Kar et al. 2017; Sharma, Kiros,
and Salakhutdinov 2015; Zhu et al. 2016), or incorporating more proper temporal information (Wang et al. 2016b;
Cherian et al. 2017). However, since most of them focus on
learning features to directly describe actions’ individual action classes, they have limitations in precisely differentiating
the ambiguity among action classes due to the large intraclass variations and subtle inter-class differences of actions.
In this paper, we introduce the idea of action class granularity where a coarser action class granularity includes more

∗

This work is supported in part by National Key Research
and Development Program of China (2017YFB1002203), NSFC
(61471235, 61571297, 61572316, 61720106001), Shanghai ‘The
Belt and Road’ Young Scholar Exchange Grant (17510740100),
and Tencent research grant. Corresponding author is Weiyao Lin.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7130

