The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Kill Two Birds with One Stone: Weakly-Supervised
Neural Network for Image Annotation and Tag Reﬁnement
1

Junjie Zhang,1,2 Qi Wu,3 Jian Zhang,1 Chunhua Shen,3 Jianfeng Lu2

Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
School of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
3
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision, University of Adelaide, Australia
{junjie.zhang@student., jian.zhang@}uts.edu.au {qi.wu01, chunhua.shen}@adelaide.edu.au lujf@njust.edu.cn
2

Abstract

User-Provided Tags:
pink gerber gerbera daisies
green gift athankyou project365
nikond70s 365days

The number of social images has exploded by the wide adoption of social networks, and people like to share their comments about them. These comments can be a description of
the image, or some objects, attributes, scenes in it, which
are normally used as the user-provided tags. However, it is
well-known that user-provided tags are incomplete and imprecise to some extent. Directly using them can damage the
performance of related applications, such as the image annotation and retrieval. In this paper, we propose to learn an
image annotation model and reﬁne the user-provided tags simultaneously in a weakly-supervised manner. The deep neural network is utilized as the image feature learning and backbone annotation model, while visual consistency, semantic
dependency, and user-error sparsity are introduced as the constraints at the batch level to alleviate the tag noise. Therefore,
our model is highly ﬂexible and stable to handle large-scale
image sets. Experimental results on two benchmark datasets
indicate that our proposed model achieves the best performance compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

Our model:
color daisy flower petal green pink

Figure 1: An example image from the Mirﬂickr dataset.
Compare to our model’s predictions, the user-provided tags
are inaccurate, incomplete and some are meaningless for
visual understanding, such as ‘gerber,’ ‘project365’, and
‘nikond70s’.

labeling process can be intensive and expensive. It is unrealistic for the human to continuously label the large-scale
images that pop into the social networks every day, to obtain
high-quality training samples.
Sometimes, people spontaneously assign tags to some
images when uploading them, and more tags are attached
along with the spread. Despite the fact that these tags provide semantic illustrations of the images to some extent,
they are always incomplete, imprecise, and biased toward
the individual perspectives (Li et al. 2016). See Fig.1 as
an example. To alleviate the existing tag noise for further retrieval and training annotation model, some previous works are (Zhu, Ngo, and Jiang 2012; Liu et al. 2009;
Li, Snoek, and Worring 2009; Li and Snoek 2013; Zhu, Yan,
and Ma 2010) conducted on the tag relevance analysis and
reﬁnement. These works explore the tag relevance from different perspectives including the semantic similarities between tags, the visual similarities among image neighbors
and the properties of the tagging matrix. The user-provided
tag is further reﬁned based on its relevance. The most relevant works are conducted in (Zhu, Yan, and Ma 2010;
Li and Tang 2017b; 2017a). However, they intend to focus
on the low-rank property of the tagging matrix, which neither can connect the image feature to the reﬁned results nor
enable the image feature learning. Therefore, these methods
are less ﬂexible and stable when facing the large-scale image
sets.
To address the above issues, in this paper, we propose

Introduction
As the imaging technology tends to be perfect and the
wide usage of social networks, a large number of images
are shared through the Internet every day, including the
landscape photos, selﬁes, snapshots and so on. However,
a signiﬁcant amount of them is unlabeled or weakly labeled. To better understand and efﬁciently retrieval these
images, it is essential to develop an automatic annotation
method. Traditional methods on the image annotation focus on using human-labeled images as training data to uncover the relationships between image visual content and
tags (Guillaumin et al. 2009; Makadia, Pavlovic, and Kumar
2010). In recent years, the deep neural network (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014)
has achieved superior performance on image feature learning and been widely used in the image classiﬁcation and
related vision tasks (Wei et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2016).
However, these deep models are purely based on the supervised learning and require a signiﬁcant amount of welllabeled training samples to obtain satisfactory results. The
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7550

