The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

PVL: A Framework for Navigating the Precision-Variety
Trade-Off in Automated Animation of Smiles
Nicholas Sohre,1∗ Moses Adeagbo,1 Nathaniel Helwig,2,3∗
Soﬁa Lyford-Pike,4∗ Stephen J. Guy1∗
1

University of Minnesota
Department of Computer Science 2 Department of Psychology 3 School of Statistics 4 Department of Otolaryngcology
*sohre@cs.umn.edu, helwig@umn.edu, lyfor009@umn.edu, sjguy@umn.edu
engaging, dynamic experiences that respond to the user’s
actions in real time.
For procedurally animated virtual characters to meet their
goal of emotionally engaging the users, there are two important qualities the procedural animations must maintain.
Firstly, it is important that their expressions are as high quality and natural in appearance as possible. If the generated
motion is halting, confusing, or otherwise unrealistic in its
execution, the users will be distracted from the intended
emotional content of the expression. Secondly, the procedural generation system must be able to create a variety
of motions that is reﬂective of the full diversity real people have in showing the same basic expression. In fact, the
importance of variety in character animations has been established through multiple users studies (McDonnell et al. 2008;
O’Sullivan 2009) and has been highlighted as an important
challenge in PCG (Preuss, Liapis, and Togelius 2014).
Unfortunately, these dual goals of generating high quality
content and generating a diverse variety of content are often
in direct conﬂict. Algorithms that focus too much on the
quality of their content often do so by sacriﬁcing the variety
of their output. In this paper, we examine this trade-off in the
context of procedural systems for creating mouth movements
for virtual characters to form smiles of different intensity
(e.g., slight, full, none), and propose new methods to produce
a broad diversity of smiles that accurately display the target
intensity level. Our work presents three main contributions:

Abstract
Animating digital characters has an important role in computer
assisted experiences, from video games to movies to interactive robotics. A critical challenge in the ﬁeld is to generate
animations which accurately reﬂect the state of the animated
characters, without looking repetitive or unnatural. In this
work, we investigate the problem of procedurally generating
a diverse variety of facial animations that express a given semantic quality (e.g., very happy). To that end, we introduce
a new learning heuristic called Precision Variety Learning
(PVL) which actively identiﬁes and exploits the fundamental
trade-off between precision (how accurate positive labels are)
and variety (how diverse the set of positive labels is). We both
identify conditions where important theoretical properties can
be guaranteed, and show good empirical performance in variety of conditions. Lastly, we apply our PVL heuristic to our
motivating problem of generating smile animations, and perform several user studies to validate the ability of our method
to produce a perceptually diverse variety of smiles for different
target intensities.

Introduction
Virtual humans are increasingly a part of our games and other
digital media. They appear in movies as animated actors,
video games as interactive non-player characters, personal
avatars in games, virtual reality and social media, and are
even used to control human-like robots. A critical component
of creating compelling interactions with digital characters
is the animation of the human face. Humans use and expect
faces to produce a variety of cues for nonverbal communication such as intonation and emotion. Understanding the full
variety of movements that control and effect these cues is important both to ﬁelds that study real humans (e.g., medicine
and psychology) as well as those which seek to create realistic
virtual characters (e.g., games and movies).
Our goal in this work is to create algorithms that can automatically generate a variety realistic animations for virtual
characters, a problem which is closely related to a ﬁeld of AI
known as Procedural Content Generation (PCG). PCG is especially relevant in the realm of games and interactive digital
entertainment where is it important to present the user with

• Formalization and analysis of quality-variety trade-off :
We formally deﬁne the notions of quality and variety for
a certain class of content generation models (constraintbased optimization formulations), and explore the theoretical basis of the inherent trade-offs between the two.
• Precision Variety Learning heuristic (PVL): We introduce
a framework for a constraint-based optimization formulations of PCG which allows a user to tune the level of precision needed for a speciﬁc application, and automatically
maximize its variety of procedurally generated content for
a given level of precision.
• Variety-Enhanced, Data-driven Facial Animation System: We apply our PVL generation approach to a nonparametric classiﬁer trained on a recently published set of
smile animation data (Helwig et al. 2017) in order to create
a system capable of producing a large variety of smiles

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

884

