The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

CD-CNN: A Partially Supervised Cross-Domain
Deep Learning Model for Urban Resident Recognition
1

Jingyuan Wang,1 Xu He,1 Ze Wang,1 Junjie Wu,2∗
Nicholas Jing Yuan,3 Xing Xie,4 Zhang Xiong1,5

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Economics and Management, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Microsoft Corporation 4 Microsoft Research
5
Research Institute of Beihang University in Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
Email: {jywang, xuhe, ze.w, wujj, xiongz}@buaa.edu.cn, {nicholas.yuan, xing.xie}@microsoft.com,
The pretty high penetration rate of mobile phones in urban
cities brings forward another way of think. Mobile phone
signaling data could be used as an effective information
source for demographics and urban migrants behavior analysis (Dong et al. 2014). Along this line, in this paper, we
propose a deep learning based cross-domain knowledge fusion framework, named Cross-Domain Convolutional Neural
Network (CD-CNN), to recognize native/migrant attribute
of an urban resident from mobile phone signaling data. The
CD-CNN model is concerned with three core problems in
mobile data-driven resident recognition:

Abstract
Driven by the wave of urbanization in recent decades, the
research topic about migrant behavior analysis draws great attention from both academia and the government. Nevertheless,
subject to the cost of data collection and the lack of modeling
methods, most of existing studies use only questionnaire surveys with sparse samples and non-individual level statistical
data to achieve coarse-grained studies of migrant behaviors.
In this paper, a partially supervised cross-domain deep learning model named CD-CNN is proposed for migrant/native
recognition using mobile phone signaling data as behavioral
features and questionnaire survey data as incomplete labels.
Speciﬁcally, CD-CNN features in decomposing the mobile
data into location domain and communication domain, and
adopts a joint learning framework that combines two convolutional neural networks with a feature balancing scheme.
Moreover, CD-CNN employs a three-step algorithm for training, in which the co-training step is of great value to partially
supervised cross-domain learning. Comparative experiments
on the city Wuxi demonstrate the high predictive power of
CD-CNN. Two interesting applications further highlight the
ability of CD-CNN for in-depth migrant behavioral analysis.

• How to extract users’ behavioral features from mobile
phone data. We decompose the mobile phone signaling
records into two domains: the location domain and the
communication domain. Convolutional neural networks
are adopted to extract behavioral features from highdimensional raw data of both domains.
• How to fuse knowledge from multiple domains. For heterogeneous and severely imbalanced features generated
by CNNs in the location and communication domains,
respectively, we introduce a carefully designed dimensionality balancing mechanism for knowledge fusion, which is
crucial for the success of classiﬁcation.

Introduction

• How to handle incomplete label information of data sets.
In our study, only a very small part of mobile phone
users are labeled by volunteer questionnaire surveys. To
deal with this, we plug a co-training scheme into the pretraining/ﬁne-turning framework of deep learning, which
solves the cross-domain learning and partially supervised
learning problems simultaneously.

The continuous growth of megalopolises offer a broad range
of job opportunities, which attracts a large number of migrants to seek living in the cities outside of their hometowns.
According to the report of the World Bank1 , in the last two
decades, the urban population rate increased from 44% to
more than 53%, implying about 5.4 hundred million people
migrate from rural to cities. Driven by this urbanization wave,
tremendous efforts have been dedicated to analyze and deal
with social issues that caused by migration. However, limited
by the channels and costs of data collection, most of existing
works focus on coarse-grained migration behavior analysis on
sparsely sampled questionnaire surveys and/or non-individual
level statistical data (De Hoon and Van Tubergen 2014;
Rathelot and Saﬁ 2014; Milewski and Kulu 2014).

The proposed model offers a valuable reference to similar cross-domain data fusion scenarios, where the data have
heterogeneous views, in high-dimensionality, and with incomplete label information. Comparative experimental studies on the Wuxi city with various baselines demonstrate the
excellent performance of the proposed model. In particular,
two interesting applications on ﬁne-grained population census and hometown returning prediction further highlight the
ability of the CD-CNN model for real-life human behavior
analysis.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We

∗
Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://data.worldbank.org/

192

