The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Early Detection of Fake News on Social Media Through Propagation Path
Classiﬁcation with Recurrent and Convolutional Networks
Yang Liu, Yi-Fang Brook Wu
New Jersey Institute of Technology
323 Dr Martin Luther King Jr Blvd
Newark, NJ

Existing studies on automatically detecting fake news utilize machine learning algorithms that incorporate a variety
of news characteristics on social media environments, e.g.,
text content, user characteristics, user comments, and propagation paths/trees or networks. A straightforward approach
is to detect fake news based on its text content (Castillo,
Mendoza, and Poblete 2011; Qazvinian et al. 2011; Takahashi and Igata 2012; Gupta et al. 2014; Popat 2017). However, these approaches have the following limitations. First,
messages on popular social media sites, e.g., Twitter1 and
Sina Weibo2 are short. Thus, the linguistic features extracted
from them are often inadequate for machine learning algorithms to make accurate predictions. Second, these approaches can not be used to detect fake news that contains no
text content but only a photo or a video. Another track of existing studies detect fake news through the characteristics of
source users, i.e., users who ﬁrst tweet the concerned news
story on social media (Castillo, Mendoza, and Poblete 2011;
Yang et al. 2012). However, these approaches ignore the
characteristics of news spreaders, i.e., users who retweet the
concerned news story, which can also be a discriminate clue
about the truthfulness of the news story.
Recent studies have explored using temporal-linguistic
features extracted from user comments (Zhao, Resnick, and
Mei 2015; Ma et al. 2016; Ma, Gao, and Wong 2017)
or temporal-structural features extracted from propagation
paths/trees or networks (Jin et al. 2013; Wu, Yang, and Zhu
2015; Ma, Gao, and Wong 2017; Kwon, Cha, and Jung
2017) to detect fake news. Although these approaches are
more effective at fake news detection than preliminary approaches that only adopt text content or source user characteristics, they have a signiﬁcant limitation on efﬁciency,
since temporal-linguistic and temporal-structural features
are often unavailable or inadequate in the early stage of
news propagation. For example, we observed that in the
early stage of news propagation, most social media users
tend to retweet the news story without adding any comment, and most users directly retweet the source tweet instead of retweeting someone else’s retweet. As a result,
both the temporal-linguistic and temporal-structural features
are shallow which leads to a low accuracy of early detec-

Abstract
In the midst of today’s pervasive inﬂuence of social media,
automatically detecting fake news is drawing signiﬁcant attention from both the academic communities and the general
public. Existing detection approaches rely on machine learning algorithms with a variety of news characteristics to detect
fake news. However, such approaches have a major limitation
on detecting fake news early, i.e., the information required for
detecting fake news is often unavailable or inadequate at the
early stage of news propagation. As a result, the accuracy of
early detection of fake news is low. To address this limitation,
in this paper, we propose a novel model for early detection
of fake news on social media through classifying news propagation paths. We ﬁrst model the propagation path of each
news story as a multivariate time series in which each tuple is
a numerical vector representing characteristics of a user who
engaged in spreading the news. Then, we build a time series
classiﬁer that incorporates both recurrent and convolutional
networks which capture the global and local variations of
user characteristics along the propagation path respectively,
to detect fake news. Experimental results on three real-world
datasets demonstrate that our proposed model can detect fake
news with accuracy 85% and 92% on Twitter and Sina Weibo
respectively in 5 minutes after it starts to spread, which is
signiﬁcantly faster than state-of-the-art baselines.

Introduction
With the ever-increasing popularity of social media sites,
user-generated messages can quickly reach a broad audience. Thus, social media has become an ideal place for fake
news propagation. Fake news reaching a broad audience can
cause elevated societal harm and economic damages and
can also manipulate the outcome of political events. For
example, during 2016 U.S. presidental election, the most
discussed fake news stories tended to favor Donald Trump
over Hillary Clinton (Silverman 2016). Thus, some commentators have suggested that Donald Trump would not
have been elected president were it not for the inﬂuence of
fake news (Allcott and Gentzkow 2017). Therefore, detecting fake news circulated on social media early in its propagation before it reaches a broad audience is highly desirable
and socially beneﬁcial.

1

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

354

https://twitter.com
https://weibo.com

