The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Dynamic Pricing for Reusable Resources
in Competitive Market with Stochastic Demand
1

Jiang Rong,1 Tao Qin,2 Bo An3

The Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, ICT, CAS
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
rongjiang13@mails.ucas.ac.cn
2
Microsoft Research, Beijing 100080, China
taoqin@microsoft.com
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798
boan@ntu.edu.sg
1

over time, which leads to dynamic inventories of providers;
and 2) providers that offer similar services need to compete
against each other. However, existing works have partially
neglected or treated these characteristics in an inadequate
way and thus their pricing policies might lead to poor performance in the realistic market. Against this background,
this paper investigates dynamic pricing to match demand
with inventory in order to maximize providers’ long-term
revenues in the competitive market, which gives solid theoretical and experimental analyses and makes three key contributions.
First, we propose a comprehensive model to describe the
real-world applications with multiple providers and stochastic user demand, where a product can be reused, e.g., resources in a cloud platform. Existing works ignore either
the competition or the dynamic feature. Demand forecast
is studied in (Geraghty and Johnson 1997; Weatherford
and Kimes 2003) and the most widely-used model to describe users’ dynamic demand is the Poisson process (Elmaghraby and Keskinocak 2003; Gallego and Van Ryzin
1994; Paschalidis and Tsitsiklis 2000; Xu and Li 2012).
However, those works do not consider the market competition. Xu and Hopp (2006) assume that customers’ arrival
rates follow the geometric Brownian motion and the perfect Bayesian equilibrium is used to model providers’ behaviors. Levin et al. (2009) consider strategic users and propose the subgame-perfect equilibrium. However, they focus on the one-shot inventory replenishment problem with
dynamic pricing, which cannot describe the market with
reusable products. In this paper, we consider both stochastic user demand and competition from providers. Following
the common practice in the literature, the demand is also
described by the Poisson process, based on which we formulate the dynamic and competitive market as continuoustime Markov chains (Gopalratnam, Kautz, and Weld 2005;
Norris 1998; Simmons and Younes 2004).
Since each provider aims to maximize his/her expected
revenue, the optimal policy is supposed to be a Nash Equilibrium (NE)1 . We show that it is difﬁcult for providers to
reach the NE in real world because a provider does not have
the full information of others and his/her revenue cannot be

Abstract
The market for selling reusable products (e.g., car rental,
cloud services and network access resources) is growing
rapidly over the last few years, where service providers maximize their revenues through setting optimal prices. While
there has been lots of research on pricing optimization, existing works often ignore dynamic property of demand and
the competition among providers. Thus, existing pricing solutions might be far from optimal in realistic markets. This
paper provides the ﬁrst study of service providers’ dynamic
pricing in consideration of market competition and makes
three key contributions along this line. First, we propose a
comprehensive model that takes into account the dynamic demand and interaction among providers, and formulate the optimal pricing policy in the competitive market as an equilibrium. Second, we propose an approximate Nash equilibrium
to describe providers’ behaviors, and design an efﬁcient algorithm to compute the equilibrium which is guaranteed to converge. Third, we derive many properties of the model without
any further constraints on demand functions, which can reduce the search space of policies in the algorithm. Finally, we
conduct extensive experiments with different parameter settings, showing that the approximate equilibrium is very close
to the Nash equilibrium and our proposed pricing policy outperforms existing strategies.

1

Introduction

In many real-world applications, the service providers’ resources are reusable and the number of available products
changes over time because of the arrival and departure of
customers’ demand. Dynamic pricing policy plays an important role in making proﬁts from price-sensitive users, which
has shown great success in industries, e.g., the car rentals
(Geraghty and Johnson 1997), hotel reservations (Choi and
Mattila 2004; Weatherford and Kimes 2003), network services (Paschalidis and Tsitsiklis 2000), and the cloud computing (Kantere et al. 2011; Xu and Li 2012), and has attracted lots of research attention (Şen 2013; Elmaghraby
and Keskinocak 2003; Levin, McGill, and Nediak 2009;
Wang et al. 2015; Xu et al. 2015). There are two important properties for the market: 1) users’ demand is stochastic
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

4718

In this paper, the NE refers to pure strategy Nash Equilibrium.

