The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Nonconvex Sparse Spectral Clustering by Alternating Direction
Method of Multipliers and Its Convergence Analysis
1

Canyi Lu,1 Jiashi Feng,1 Zhouchen Lin,2,3∗ Shuicheng Yan4,1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
3
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
360 AI Institute
canyilu@gmail.com, elefjia@nus.edu.sg, zlin@pku.edu.cn, eleyans@nus.edu.sg

2

Assume that we are given n data points X =
[x1 , · · · , xn ] = [X1 , · · · , Xk ] ∈ Rd×n , where Xj ∈ Rd×nj
k
denotes the j-th group with nj points, j=1 nj = n and
k is the number of clusters. SC (Ng et al. 2002) partitions these n points into k clusters by the following procedures: First, compute an afﬁnity matrix W ∈ Rn×n
with its element wij measuring the similarity between xi
and xj . Second, construct the normalized Laplacian matrix
1
1
is a diagonal matrix with
L = I − D− 2 W D− 2 , where
D
n
each diagonal element dii = j=1 wij and I is the identity
matrix. Third, compute U ∈ Rn×k by solving

Abstract
Spectral Clustering (SC) is a widely used data clustering
method which ﬁrst learns a low-dimensional embedding U of
data by computing the eigenvectors of the normalized Laplacian matrix, and then performs k-means on U  to get the ﬁnal clustering result. The Sparse Spectral Clustering (SSC)
method extends SC with a sparse regularization on U U 
by using the block diagonal structure prior of U U  in the
ideal case. However, encouraging U U  to be sparse leads to
a heavily nonconvex problem which is challenging to solve
and the work (Lu, Yan, and Lin 2016) proposes a convex relaxation in the pursuit of this aim indirectly. However, the
convex relaxation generally leads to a loose approximation
and the quality of the solution is not clear. This work instead
considers to solve the nonconvex formulation of SSC which
directly encourages U U  to be sparse. We propose an efﬁcient Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM)
to solve the nonconvex SSC and provide the convergence
guarantee. In particular, we prove that the sequences generated by ADMM always exist a limit point and any limit point
is a stationary point. Our analysis does not impose any assumptions on the iterates and thus is practical. Our proposed
ADMM for nonconvex problems allows the stepsize to be increasing but upper bounded, and this makes it very efﬁcient
in practice. Experimental analysis on several real data sets
veriﬁes the effectiveness of our method.

min U U  , L, s.t. U  U = I.

U ∈Rn×k

(1)

Finally, compute Û ∈ Rn×k by normalizing each row of U
to have unit Euclidean length, treat the rows of Û as data
points in Rk , and cluster them into k groups by k-means.
Due to the signiﬁcance of SC, many variants of SC have
been proposed based on different ways of afﬁnity matrix W
construction and different normalizations of the Laplacian
matrix L (Shi and Malik 2000; Von Luxburg 2007).
A recent work (Lu, Yan, and Lin 2016) proposes the
Sparse Spectral Clustering (SSC) method which computes
the low-dimensional embedding U in a different way:




L, U U  + β U U  0 , s.t. U  U = I, (2)
min
U ∈Rn×k

Introduction

where β > 0 and ·0 is the 0 -norm which encourages
U U  to be sparse. The motivation for such a sparse regularizer is that U U  is block diagonal (thus sparse) when W
is block diagonal in the ideal case. Consider the ideal case
that the afﬁnity matrix W is block diagonal, i.e., wij = 0
if xi and xj are from different clusters. Let C ∈ Rn×k
denotes the indicator matrix whose row entries indicate to
which group the points belong. That is, if xi belongs to the
group l, cil = 1 and cij = 0 for all j = l. Then, for any
orthogonal matrix R ∈ Rk×k , we have Û = CR. In this
case, Û Û  is block diagonal, i.e.,
⎡
⎤
1n1 1
0
···
0
n1
⎢ 0
1n2 1
···
0 ⎥
n2
⎢
⎥
Û Û  = CC  = ⎢ .
.
.. ⎥ ,
..
..
⎣ ..
.
. ⎦

Data clustering is one of the most fundamental topics in unsupervised learning and has been widely applied in computer vision, data mining and many others. Clustering aims
to divide the unlabeled data set into groups which consist
of similar data points. Many clustering methods have been
proposed up to now, e.g. k-means, spectral clustering (Ng et
al. 2002; Shi and Malik 2000) and nonnegative matrix factorization (Lee and Seung 2001). The Spectral Clustering
(SC) is one of the most widely used methods and it has a lot
of applications in computer vision and signal analysis, e.g.,
image segmentation (Shi and Malik 2000), motion segmentation (Lu et al. 2012), and co-clustering problems of words
and documents (Dhillon 2001).
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

0

3714

0

···

1nk 1
nk

