The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Constraints from Examples
Luc De Raedt

Andrea Passerini

Stefano Teso

Dept. of Computer Science
KU Leuven, box 2402
BE-3001 Heverlee, Belgium
luc.deraedt@cs.kuleuven.be

University of Trento
Via Sommarive 9
Povo Trento, Italy
andrea.passerini@unitn.it

Dept. of Computer Science
KU Leuven, box 2402
BE-3001 Heverlee, Belgium
stefano.teso@cs.kuleuven.be

Constraint Learning

Abstract

From one perspective, constraint learning can be formalized
as a concept-learning problem (Mitchell 1997).

While constraints are ubiquitous in artiﬁcial intelligence and
constraints are also commonly used in machine learning and
data mining, the problem of learning constraints from examples has received less attention. In this paper, we discuss the
problem of constraint learning in detail, indicate some subtle
differences with standard machine learning problems, sketch
some applications and summarize the state-of-the-art.

Given
• a space of possible instances X; typically instances are
(partial or complete) assignments to a set of variables V
belonging to the unknown constraint theory, i.e., logical
interpretations;
• a space of possible constraints C;
• an unknown target constraint theory T ⊆ C;
• a set of training instances E; positive instances satisfy T ,
while negatives do not;
Find a constraint theory H (H ⊆ C) such that all positive instances in E are satisﬁed (or satisﬁable in the case of
partial assignments) in H; and none of the negatives.
As usual, several variations on this deﬁnition can be considered such as ﬁnding the best constraint theory w.r.t. a loss
function as well as learning a soft constraint theory rather
than a hard one, cf. below.
To illustrate this deﬁnition, let us consider the prototypical example of a constraint theory: a boolean theory. The
space of possible constraints could then be the set of all
clauses over the set of variables V and the instances could
then be complete assignments to the variables. This formulation actually corresponds to the setting introduced by Leslie
Valiant in his seminal paper on PAC-learning (probably approximately correct learning) (Valiant 1984).
From a machine learning perspective, the above formulation of learning constraint theories is in line with those of
concept learning, where the aim is to learn a classiﬁer that
allows one to distinguish members of the concept from those
that are not. However, while in concept-learning one induces
a binary function, the learned theories in constraint learning typically allow also for other uses. A constraint theory
cannot only be used to distinguish satisﬁable from unsatisﬁable instances but it can also be used to complete partial
assignments. After all, constraint theories are typically used
in this way. Given particular values for some of the variables
Ev ⊆ V , one can infer which values may still be assigned to
the other variables V \Ev. When considering constraint optimization, one wants to infer what is the best such assignment, possibly accounting for weights associated with soft

Introduction
Constraints are ubiquitous in artiﬁcial intelligence and operations research, they appear in purely logical problems such
as propositional satisﬁability, constraint satisfaction problems, and full-ﬂedged constraint optimization.
The term constraint learning, as used in this paper, refers
to the problem of ﬁnding a set of constraints, a constraint
theory, that satisﬁes a given dataset. This use of the term
constraint learning differs from that used in solver technology, where clause learning or constraint learning refers to
the process of adding clauses to improve the efﬁciency of
the solver when inconsistencies are found. This is actually a
deductive procedure. In contrast, we refer to inductive learning, that is, to learning a constraint theory from examples.
In recent years there has been a signiﬁcant interest in
the relationship between machine learning and data mining
on the one hand, and constraint satisfaction and programming on the other hand (Passerini, Tack, and Guns 2017;
Bessiere et al. 2016b; 2017a). The use of constraints in
data mining and machine learning is now a mainstream
topic in constraint programming and artiﬁcial intelligence
(cf. (Davidson, Guns, and Nijssen 2017)). While constraints
are extremely popular from a modeling and solving perspective, also in machine learning and data mining, there are today only relatively few approaches to learning constraints
from data. This paper wants to not only survey these developments but also to position constraint learning in a broader
machine learning context. We will argue that there are some
subtle differences with standard “function” learning in machine learning, and we will also point out some challenges
and possible applications.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7965

