The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Cooperative Learning of Energy-Based Model
and Latent Variable Model via MCMC Teaching
Jianwen Xie,1,2 Yang Lu,1,3 Ruiqi Gao,1 Ying Nian Wu1
1

Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles, USA
2
Hikvision Research America
3
Amazon RSML (Retail System Machine Learning) Group

and Brox, 2015). This is the well-known generator network
(Goodfellow et al. 2014). In the energy-based model, the
energy function is parametrized by a bottom-up ConvNet
that maps the signal to the energy (Ngiam et al. 2011), (Xie
et al. 2016). For ease of reference, we call it the descriptor
network, following the terminology of (Zhu 2003).
Bottom-up ConvNet
Top-down ConvNet
energy
latent variables
⇑
⇓
(1)
signal
signal
(a) Descriptor Net
(b) Generator Net
(teacher)
(student)
The likelihoods of both models involve intractable integrals, and the gradients of both log-likelihoods involve intractable expectations that have to be approximated by expensive Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). We notice that the
maximum likelihood algorithms for learning the two models
can be interwoven into a cooperative learning algorithm in order to speed up the learning of both models. Each iteration of
the cooperative learning algorithm consists of the following
two steps: (1) Modiﬁed contrastive divergence for energybased model (descriptor): The learning of the energy-based
model is based on the contrastive divergence (Hinton 2002),
but the ﬁnite-step MCMC sampling of the model is initialized from the synthesized examples generated by the latent
variable model instead of being initialized from the observed
examples. Within each iteration of the modiﬁed contrastive
divergence, the latent variable model supplies a fresh and
independent batch of synthesized examples to initialize the
MCMC sampling of the energy-based model. (2) MCMC
teaching of the latent variable model (generator): The learning of the latent variable model is based on how the MCMC
in (1) changes the initial synthesized examples generated by
the latent variable model. That is, the energy-based model
(teacher) distills its knowledge to the latent variable model
(student) via MCMC, and we call it MCMC teaching. In
MCMC teaching, the latent variables that generate the initial
synthesized examples are known so that the learning is essentially supervised. Our experiments show that the cooperative
learning algorithm can learn realistic models of images.

Abstract
This paper proposes a cooperative learning algorithm to train
both the undirected energy-based model and the directed latent
variable model jointly. The learning algorithm interweaves the
maximum likelihood algorithms for learning the two models,
and each iteration consists of the following two steps: (1)
Modiﬁed contrastive divergence for energy-based model: The
learning of the energy-based model is based on the contrastive
divergence, but the ﬁnite-step MCMC sampling of the model
is initialized from the synthesized examples generated by the
latent variable model instead of being initialized from the
observed examples. (2) MCMC teaching of the latent variable
model: The learning of the latent variable model is based
on how the MCMC in (1) changes the initial synthesized
examples generated by the latent variable model, where the
latent variables that generate the initial synthesized examples
are known so that the learning is essentially supervised. Our
experiments show that the cooperative learning algorithm can
learn realistic models of images.

1
1.1

Introduction

Student and teacher nets

We begin with an analogy. A student writes up an initial draft
of a paper. Her advisor then revises it. After that they submit
the revised paper for review. The student then learns from her
advisor’s revision, while the advisor learns from the outside
review. In this analogy, the advisor guides the student, but
the student does most of the work.
This paper is about cooperative learning of two probabilistic generative models of signals such as images. These two
models play the roles of student and teacher as described
above. The ﬁrst model is an energy-based model (LeCun et
al. 2006) or undirected graphical model or Markov random
ﬁeld model (Zhu, Wu, and Mumford 1997) that plays the role
of the teacher. The second model is a latent variable model
or directed graphical model that plays the role of the student.
In this paper, we focus on models that are parametrized by
convolutional neural networks (ConvNets or CNNs)(LeCun
et al., 1998; Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton, 2012), as
illustrated by (1). Speciﬁcally, in the latent variable model,
the mapping from the latent variables to the signal is parameterized by a top-down ConvNet (Dosovitskiy, Springenberg,

1.2

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Motivations, advantages and contributions

The main motivation for our work is that we ﬁnd it very
challenging to learn the two models separately, when the

4292

