The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Preventing Infectious Disease in
Dynamic Populations Under Uncertainty
1

Bryan Wilder,13 Sze-Chuan Suen,23 Milind Tambe13

Department of Computer Science 2 Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering
3
Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Society
University of Southern California
{bwilder, ssuen, tambe}@usc.edu
existing algorithms for disease control, which often consider disease spread between nodes on a static graph (Saha
et al. 2015; Borgs et al. 2010). This is a sensible model of
short term disease spread but is less suitable for long-term
planning in diseases such as TB or gonorrhea, where people
are born, die, age, and move (Luke and Stamatakis 2012).
Accounting for changes in the underlying agents is particularly salient for a policymaker who must divide resources
between demographic groups over many years to maximize
societal long-term health. For instance, India produces 5
year plans to combat TB (RNTCP 2016). Our approach also
contrasts with previous work on agent-based disease models
(Jindal and Rao 2017; Lee et al. 2010). Such models may
include realistic behaviors, but their complexity usually precludes algorithmic approaches to ﬁnding the optimal policy
in an entire feasible set.
An additional challenge, largely unexplored in previous
algorithmic work, is that of uncertainty. Data is always limited; policymakers are never sure of exactly how many people are infected in each group, or of the contact patterns between them. In order to impact real world policy, algorithms
for resource allocation must account for such uncertainties.
We introduce a model which both captures underlying
agent dynamics and can be solved using an algorithmic approach in a stochastic setting. We make four main contributions. First, we present the MCF-SIS model (Multiagent
Continuous Flow-SIS) where disease spreads in a multiagent
system with birth, death, and movement. The system evolves
according to SIS (susceptible-infected-susceptible) dynamics and is stratiﬁed across age groups. This introduces a new
problem in multiagent systems: computing the optimal resource allocation under MFS-SIS, as in the case where an
outreach campaign must decide how to divide limited advertising dollars (or rupees) between the groups.
MCF-SIS introduces a continuous, nonconvex, highly
nonlinear optimization problem which cannot be solved by
existing methods. Many factors must be accounted for. E.g.,
between-group disease transmission makes focusing on the
groups with the most infected agents suboptimal. Moreover,
agents in a targeted group are not cured instantaneously, so,
e.g., to reduce prevalence in age group 30, we may need
to start targeting resources at age 27. Lastly, we consider a
stochastic setting where parts of the model (contact patterns
between agents, the number of infected agents in each group,

Abstract
Treatable infectious diseases are a critical challenge for public health. Outreach campaigns can encourage undiagnosed
patients to seek treatment but must be carefully targeted to
make the most efﬁcient use of limited resources. We present
an algorithm to optimally allocate limited outreach resources
among demographic groups in the population. The algorithm
uses a novel multiagent model of disease spread which both
captures the underlying population dynamics and is amenable
to optimization. Our algorithm extends, with provable guarantees, to a stochastic setting where we have only a distribution over parameters such as the contact pattern between
agents. We evaluate our algorithm on two instances where
this distribution is inferred from real world data: tuberculosis
in India and gonorrhea in the United States. Our algorithm
produces a policy which is predicted to avert an average of
least 8,000 person-years of tuberculosis and 20,000 personyears of gonorrhea annually compared to current policy.

Introduction
Treatable infectious diseases cause hundreds of thousands
of cases of disability and death worldwide. Often, this burden is caused by long-term diseases which are continuously
present in the population, as opposed to short-term epidemics like inﬂuenza. For instance, tuberculosis (TB) deaths
in India numbered over 480,000 in 2014 (WHO 2015b), and
even developed nations like the U.S. have observed over
395,000 cases of gonorrhea in 2015 (CDC 2015). In both
cases, many individuals remain undiagnosed although treatment is available. Outreach efforts to increase screening can
lower disease burden; e.g., the Indian government conducts
advertising campaigns for TB awareness. Limited resources
require these campaigns to be carefully targeted at the most
effective groups for reducing disease. Targeting is complicated by changing population dynamics, as individuals age
and migrate over time, as well as by uncertainty around disease transmission rates. Ofﬁcials currently make such decisions by hand as no algorithmic assistance is available.
To remedy this situation, we design an algorithm to divide
a limited outreach budget between demographic groups in
order to minimize long term disease prevalence under uncertain population dynamics. Our approach contrasts with
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

841

