The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

On Multi-Relational Link Prediction with Bilinear Models
Yanjie Wang

Rainer Gemulla

Hui Li

University of Mannheim, Germany
ywang@uni-mannheim.de

University of Mannheim, Germany
rgemulla@uni-mannheim.de

The University of Hong Kong
hli2@cs.hku.hk

The perhaps most basic class of embedding models is
given by bilinear models. Such models predict a “score” for
each fact R(e1 , e2 ) by computing a weighted sum—where
the weights depend on R—of the pairwise interactions of the
entity embeddings of e1 and e2 . The scores are used to rank
(pairs of) entities according to their predicted truthfulness.
Bilinear models are comparably efﬁcient to train and use and
they can provide good prediction performance (Trouillon and
Nickel 2017).
A large number of bilinear models has been proposed in
the literature, including RESCAL (Nickel, Tresp, and Kriegel
2011), TransE (Bordes et al. 2013), DISTMULT (Yang et al.
2014), HolE (Nickel, Rosasco, and Poggio 2016), and ComplEx (Trouillon et al. 2016a). There is, however, little work
on the expressiveness of and the connections between various
bilinear models. In this paper, we argue that all of the aforementioned models can be seen as bilinear models subject to
certain constraints. We study whether and under which conditions each model is universal in that it can represent every
possible set of relation instances (or, more precisely, entity
rankings). We also explore the size of the embeddings needed
for universality and derive upper bounds for the embedding
size needed to obtain embeddings consistent with a given
dataset. We establish a number of subsumption relationships
between various models by giving explicit constructions on
how to transform instances of one model to instances of another model (sometimes with a different embedding size). A
summary of our results is given in Tab. 1.
We report on an independent experimental study that
compared various bilinear models on standard datasets in
a common experimental setup. We found that the relative
performance among the models is highly relation-dependent.
We thus propose a simple relation-level ensemble of multiple bilinear models, which—according to our experiments—
signiﬁcantly and consistently improved prediction performance over individual models. In fact, we found that the
ensemble performed competitively to the state-of-the-art embedding approaches, whether or not they are bilinear.

Abstract
We study bilinear embedding models for the task of multirelational link prediction and knowledge graph completion.
Bilinear models belong to the most basic models for this task,
they are comparably efﬁcient to train and use, and they can
provide good prediction performance. The main goal of this
paper is to explore the expressiveness of and the connections
between various bilinear models proposed in the literature.
In particular, a substantial number of models can be represented as bilinear models with certain additional constraints
enforced on the embeddings. We explore whether or not these
constraints lead to universal models, which can in principle
represent every set of relations, and whether or not there are
subsumption relationships between various models. We report
results of an independent experimental study that evaluates
recent bilinear models in a common experimental setup. Finally, we provide evidence that relation-level ensembles of
multiple bilinear models can achieve state-of-the art prediction
performance.

1

Introduction

Multi-relational link prediction is the task of predicting missing links in an edge-labeled graph. We focus and use the terminology of knowledge base completion throughout. Largescale knowledge bases (KB) such as DBPedia (Lehmann et
al. 2015) or YAGO (Rebele et al. 2016) contain millions of
entities and facts, but they are nevertheless far from being
complete (Nickel et al. 2016). Given a set of entities (vertices) and relations (edge labels) that hold between these
entities, the goal of multi-relational link prediction (Bordes
et al. 2013) is to determine whether or not some entity e1
links to some entity e2 via a relation R, i.e., whether the fact
R(e1 , e2 ) is true.
Embedding models have recently received considerable
attention for knowledge base completion tasks (Bordes et
al. 2013; Nickel, Rosasco, and Poggio 2016; Trouillon et
al. 2016a). Such models embed both entities and relations
in a low-dimensional latent space such that the structure of
the knowledge base is (largely) maintained. The embeddings
are subsequently used to predict missing facts or to detect
erroneous facts.

2

Multi-Relational Link Prediction

Let E and R be a set of entities and relation names. A knowledge base K ⊆ E × R × E is a collection of triples (i, k, j)
where i, j, and k refer to subject, object and relation, resp.
We denote by K = |R| ≥ 1 and N = |E| ≥ 2 the number

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4227

