The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Incentive-Compatible Forecasting Competitions
Jens Witkowski

Rupert Freeman

Jennifer Wortman Vaughan

ETH Zurich
jensw@inf.ethz.ch

Duke University
rupert@cs.duke.edu

Microsoft Research
jenn@microsoft.com

David M. Pennock

Andreas Krause

Microsoft Research
dpennock@microsoft.com

ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch
and Gardner 2015), which (on top of bragging rights) gave
them full travel reimbursement to a superforecaster conference. On ProbabilitySports,1 participants predict the outcomes of NFL games, competing for prizes that are awarded
to the highest-scoring forecaster in a given week or month.
In play-money prediction markets, forecasters often compete for a place at the top of a leaderboard (e. g., ServanSchreiber et al. 2004). And the same phenomenon holds
for algorithmic forecasters; Netﬂix offered $1,000,000 to
the team whose machine learning algorithm could best predict how users would rate movies based on their past preferences,2 and the machine learning competitions run by Kaggle3 rank submitted algorithms based on how well they predict the labels of data points from an undisclosed test set.
One of Kaggle’s main uses today is for recruiters to hire the
developers of the best-performing algorithms (Harris 2013).
Unless they are designed with care, these winner-take-all
competitions can distort incentives, encouraging forecasters
to take big risks as opposed to truthfully reporting their beliefs. Lichtendahl and Winkler (2007) study a strategic game
between two forecasters reporting on a single event. In their
model, each forecaster wishes to maximize her utility, which
is assumed to be a mixture of a proper scoring rule payment and an (explicit or implicit) bonus for being the best
forecaster, with a parameter trading off these two components. They show that when forecasters optimize for their
relative rank, they typically want to report more extreme
probabilities than those corresponding to their true beliefs.
Even putting truthfulness aside, we show that awarding a
prize to the forecaster with highest score does not guarantee
that high-accuracy forecasters are likely to win, and in fact
can lead to situations in which a perfect forecaster has zero
probability of winning.
In this paper, we present the Event-Lotteries Forecaster
Selection Mechanism (ELF). ELF borrows a trick from the
competitive scoring rule of Kilgour and Gerchak (2004), a
self-ﬁnanced betting mechanism that truthfully elicits probabilistic forecasts for single events. Under Kilgour and Gerchak’s mechanism, a forecaster’s payment depends on her
relative performance (measured by a proper scoring rule)

Abstract
We consider the design of forecasting competitions in which
multiple forecasters make predictions about one or more independent events and compete for a single prize. We have two
objectives: (1) to award the prize to the most accurate forecaster, and (2) to incentivize forecasters to report truthfully, so
that forecasts are informative and forecasters need not spend
any cognitive effort strategizing about reports. Proper scoring
rules incentivize truthful reporting if all forecasters are paid
according to their scores. However, incentives become distorted if only the best-scoring forecaster wins a prize, since
forecasters can often increase their probability of having the
highest score by reporting extreme beliefs. Even if forecasters
do report truthfully, awarding the prize to the forecaster with
highest score does not guarantee that high-accuracy forecasters are likely to win; in extreme cases, it can result in a perfect forecaster having zero probability of winning. In this paper, we introduce a truthful forecaster selection mechanism.
We lower-bound the probability that our mechanism selects
the most accurate forecaster, and give rates for how quickly
this bound approaches 1 as the number of events grows. Our
techniques can be generalized to the related problems of outputting a ranking over forecasters and hiring a forecaster with
high accuracy on future events.

1

Introduction

The study of probabilistic forecasting dates back to the
1950s when meteorologists developed proper scoring rules
as a way to both incentivize truthful predictions about future events and compare the relative accuracy of different forecasters (Brier 1950; Good 1952). Brier’s original
quadratic scoring rule is still widely used to motivate and
measure forecasting accuracy (e. g., Atanasov et al. 2016).
When forecasters are paid proportional to their quadratic
scores, they maximize expected payment by truthfully reporting their beliefs.
However, in typical forecasting competitions, forecasters care not about maximizing expected score, but about
whether their forecasts are judged to be better than others’. For example, in the Good Judgment Project, a recent
geopolitical forecasting tournament, the top 2% of forecasters were awarded so-called “superforecaster” status (Tetlock

1

www.probabilitysports.com
www.netﬂixprize.com
3
www.kaggle.com
2

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1282

