The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Differential Performance Debugging
with Discriminant Regression Trees∗
Saeid Tizpaz-Niari, Pavol Černý,
Bor-Yuh Evan Chang, Ashutosh Trivedi
University of Colorado Boulder

as well as dynamic analysis techniques. Static analysis commonly target logical correctness properties (and not the performance), and are not as scalable as techniques based on
machine learning. On the other hand, dynamic analysis techniques such as proﬁling, focus on individual traces, whereas
for the differential performance problem, we need to compare the performance on different traces.
We propose a technique called differential performance
debugging, based on inference of discriminant regression
trees (DRTs). DRTs are regression trees where the goal is to
classify input data. In contrast, the objective of standard regression tree learning is to predict the output for a previously
unseen input. The input to the differential performance problem is a set of program traces. Each trace is represented as
follows. We have input variables (such as the size of the user
input), auxiliary variables (such as the functions called), and
the output variable (such as the running time). The output to
the differential performance problem is the DRT. The internal nodes of the tree has predicates on auxiliary variables.
The leaf nodes model the output variable as a function of input variables. The leaf nodes represent the performance for
different classes of inputs capturing asymptotically different
performance behaviors.
In accordance with Occam’s razor, we are interested in
ﬁnding a DRT with a small number of clusters, while minimizing the modeling error. Furthermore, the DRT should
be a human readable explanation, which also suggests that
smaller number of clusters is preferable. There are two major steps in our algorithm. First, we project the data into the
input and output variables and cluster the data in this domain. Second, we consider the auxiliary variables only and
identify what separates the clusters in terms of these variables. We use an off-the-shelf decision tree learning algorithm for the second step. The ﬁrst, clustering, step thus reduces the regression tree inference problem to the decision
tree inference problem.
For our approach, we need a clustering algorithm that
produces functional clusters, that is, clusters that represent
functions from input variables to the output variable. We
adapt two classical clustering algorithms. First, we extend
the K-means algorithm to produce linear functional clusters. This is done by generalizing the notion of the cluster
centroid from a point to a linear function. Second, we adapt
the spectral clustering algorithm by deﬁning a new notion

Abstract
Differential performance debugging is a technique to ﬁnd performance problems. It applies in situations where the performance of a program is (unexpectedly) different for varying classes of inputs. The task is to explain the differences
in asymptotic performance among various input classes in
terms of program internals. We propose a data-driven technique based on discriminant regression tree (DRT) learning
problem where the goal is to discriminate among different
classes of inputs. We propose a new algorithm for DRT learning that ﬁrst clusters the data into functional clusters, capturing different asymptotic performance classes, and then invokes off-the-shelf decision tree learning algorithms to explain these clusters. We focus on linear functional clusters and
adapt classical clustering algorithms (K-means and spectral)
to produce them. For the K-means algorithm, we generalize
the notion of the cluster centroid from a point to a linear function. We adapt spectral clustering by deﬁning a novel kernel
function to capture the notion of “linear” similarity between
two data points. We evaluate our approach on benchmarks
consisting of Java programs where we are interested in debugging performance. We show that our algorithm outperforms other well-known regression tree learning algorithms
in terms of running time and accuracy of classiﬁcation.

1

Introduction

Developers often face the problem of ﬁnding and ﬁxing
performance problem in their programs. Performance bugs
manifest themselves only on certain pathological inputs. For
instance, there can be two inputs of the same size on which
the performance is unexpectedly different in an otherwise
functionally correct program.
We study the differential performance problem, where the
goal is to explain the difference in performance between
two classes of inputs in terms of program internals, such as
which functions were called and how many times were they
called. This information is useful, as it allows a programmer
or an analyst to better assess whether the performance difference is inherent to the problem, or is a result of a coding
inadequacy. The problem is hard for both traditional static
∗
This research was supported in part by DARPA under agreement FA8750-15-2-0096.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2468

