The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

AI Challenges in Synthetic Biology Engineering
Fusun Yaman, Aaron Adler, Jacob Beal
fusun.yaman@raytheon.com, aaronadler@alum.mit.edu, jakebeal@ieee.org
BBN Technologies, 10 Moulton Street, Cambridge, MA 02138

Abstract
A wide variety of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) techniques, from
expert systems to machine learning to robotics, are needed
in the ﬁeld of synthetic biology. This paper describes the
design-build-test engineering cycle and lists some challenges
in which AI can help.

  

Introduction

 
    

  
  
          

Figure 1: Abstract network illustrating sense-control-actuate
paradigm for synthetic genetic networks.

Engineering the behavior of cells by modiﬁcation of their
genetic machinery holds the potential for revolutionary advances in many important application areas, including medical therapies, vaccination, manufacturing of proteins and
other organic compounds, and environmental remediation.
As capabilities and potential applications grow, the complexity and cross-disciplinary knowledge required to employ
them is also growing rapidly. Managing the complexity of
biological engineering is thus a problem of increasing importance. The rapid pace of advancement makes it important
to have good methods for integration of new knowledge and
procedures into organism engineering workﬂows.
Synthetic biology, the systematic design and engineering
of biological systems, is not the ﬁrst ﬁeld facing the challenge of managing engineering complexity. In areas as disparate as the engineering of software, electronics, and mechanical systems, the common response has been to use artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) techniques to capture human expert
knowledge and embed it into assistive tools. (The AI foundation of successful work may be forgotten, e.g., programming
languages are the distilled result of AI research into “automatic programming.”) This paper refers to AI in the sense of
knowledge-based computing systems, including the representation of knowledge (e.g., semantic networks, frame representations), the acquisition of knowledge (e.g., machine
learning, hypothesis generation), its employment in planning and decision making (e.g., expert systems, constraintbased reasoning, planning under uncertainty), and also in automated action (e.g., robotics).
Although biological organisms are complex and not entirely understood, there are many opportunities for AI techniques to make a major difference in the efﬁcacy of organism engineering (an impact that has already begun). As it

has in other ﬁelds, AI is likely to have transformative impact
not through the construction of a single dramatic system, but
through the deployment of a wide variety of AI-based tools.

Organism Engineering
Rather than attempting to cover the whole ﬁeld, we will narrow the focus of discussion for this paper to one important
and widely addressed class of synthetic biology systems—
genetic regulatory networks. Many synthetic biology systems can be viewed as three components: 1) sensing of environmental or cell state, 2) a control system that processes
the signals from these sensors to determine appropriate cellular behavior, and 3) actuators that convert the control signals into actions such as enzymatic pathway regulation or
reporter expression (Figure 1).
A typical synthetic biology workﬂow for organism engineering may be viewed as a cycle of three stages: design
maps a behavior speciﬁcation to a nucleic acid sequence
intended to realize this behavior; build draws on synthesis and/or assembly protocols to fabricate said nucleic acid
sequence; and test assays (measures) the behavior of cells
modiﬁed to include the sequence, feeding this information
back into the design step completing the cycle (Figure 2).
We discuss each of these steps emphasizing opportunities
for improvements in the typical current workﬂow.
Design At the most abstract level, the engineer must determine the arrangement of sensors, actuators, regulatory
relationships, and/or enzymatic pathways that will be used
to implement a desired behavior. An arrangement is then
mapped onto the set of DNA or RNA components that are
available, or new components are engineered with the desired speciﬁcations while ensuring that there are not con-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7884

