The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning with Incomplete Labels
Yingming Li† , Zenglin Xu‡ , and Zhongfei Zhang†

‡

†
College of Information Science & Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
yingming@zju.edu.cn, zenglin@gmail.com, zhongfei@zju.edu.cn

very important inﬂuence to the generalization performance
of learned predictors.
Given training data with incomplete tags, a common strategy in several recent efforts is to handle the missing label problem via label space reduction (Tai and Lin 2012;
Kapoor, Viswanathan, and Jain 2012). The key idea lies in
reducing the dimensionality of label space via projection
matrices. Consequently, predictions are ﬁrst made on these
reduced label spaces and then the original labels are recovered by back projection. Further, (Yu et al. 2014) takes a
more direct approach by formulating the incomplete tagging
problem as learning a low-rank regression matrix. However,
such strategies focus on learning the local patterns of label
correlation by separating labels into different clusters, where
the labels within a cluster are strongly related to each other
and irrelevant to the rest, and ignore the global dependency
between labels. This is inappropriate since global label dependency also helps recover the useful label information.
On the other hand, certain literature, for example (Chen,
Zheng, and Weinberger 2013), also considers learning with
global label correlations to mitigate the inﬂuence of incomplete training label set. It is assumed that the given label
set is incomplete and a label relationship matrix based on
marginalized denoising autoencoder is learned to exploit the
global label dependency. Consequently, the given label set
is enriched with this label relationship matrix to tackle with
the incomplete tagging problem. Theses proposed methods
may achieve remarkably prediction performance. However,
they mainly consider the global label relationship, but the
correlations among labels can be complex and have local
depedency.
Further, though the above enrichment with the help of label relationship would reduce the effect of incomplete label
set, one cannot expect to accurately obtain a perfect correlation matrix for the given labels. For example, since the learning of label correlation usually relies on statistical modeling
and requires an adequate supply of well-labeled samples,
its accuracy would be affected by the limited data samples
in real-world applications. Consequently, outliers (abnormal
label values) would be produced in the process of label enrichment. This has adverse effect on learning robust predictors as the traditional machine learning methods are usually
sensitive to outliers (Cabral et al. 2015).
To cope with the problem of incomplete tagging, it is nec-

Abstract
For many real-world tagging problems, training labels are
usually obtained through social tagging and are notoriously
incomplete. Consequently, handling data with incomplete labels has become a difﬁcult challenge, which usually leads to
a degenerated performance on label prediction. To improve
the generalization performance, in this paper, we ﬁrst propose
the Improved Cross-View learning (referred as ICVL) model,
which considers both global and local patterns of label relationship to enrich the original label set. Further, by extending the ICVL model with an outlier detection mechanism,
we introduce the Improved Cross-View learning with Outlier
Detection (referred as ICVL-OD) model to remove the abnormal tags resulting from label enrichment. Extensive evaluations on three benchmark datasets demonstrate that ICVL
and ICVL-OD outstand with superior performances in comparison with the competing methods.

Introduction
With the rapid development of web applications such as social commerce sites and resource sharing systems, tagging
has attracted much attention due to its capability of helping describe an item and allowing it to be found speedily by
browsing or searching. Since the amount of data to be tagged
increases explosively, it is very time-consuming and laborintensive for manually labeling data. Consequently, automatic tagging techniques have become an effective alternative. Recent decades have witnessed the increasing applications of tagging techniques in many ﬁelds (Elisseeff and Weston 2001; Yu, Yu, and Tresp 2005; Liu, Jin, and Yang 2006;
Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Liu and Tsang
2015; Gao et al. 2016). Many different tagging approaches
have been proposed based on different requirements from
different areas (Zhang and Zhou 2014). However, most existing tagging methods assume that the given training labels
are complete, i.e., the given training labels describe all the
details of a document. In contrast, for many real-world tagging problems, training labels are usually obtained through
social tagging and are notoriously incomplete, leaving typically many parts of the document content with no description at all. Therefore, handling data with incomplete training
labels has become a challenge for tagging methods and has
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3588

