The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Neural Link Prediction Over Aligned Networks
Xuezhi Cao, Haokun Chen, Xuejian Wang, Weinan Zhang,∗ Yong Yu
APEX Data & Knowledge Management Lab
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
cxz,chenhaokun,xjwang,wnzhang,yyu@apex.sjtu.edu.cn

?

?

Link prediction is a fundamental problem with a wide range
of applications in various domains, which predicts the links
that are not yet observed or the links that may appear in the
future. Most existing works in this ﬁeld only focus on modeling a single network, while real-world networks are actually
aligned with each other. Network alignments contain valuable additional information for understanding the networks,
and provide a new direction for addressing data insufﬁciency
and alleviating cold start problem. However, there are rare
works leveraging network alignments for better link prediction. Besides, neural network is widely employed in various
domains while its capability of capturing high-level patterns
and correlations for link prediction problem has not been adequately researched yet. Hence, in this paper we target at link
prediction over aligned networks using neural networks. The
major challenge is the heterogeneousness of the considered
networks, as the networks may have different characteristics,
link purposes, etc. To overcome this, we propose a novel
multi-neural-network framework MNN, where we have one
individual neural network for each heterogeneous target or
feature while the vertex representations are shared. We further
discuss training methods for the multi-neural-network framework. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MNN outperforms the state-of-the-art methods and achieves 3% to 5%
relative improvement of AUC score across different settings,
particularly over 8% for cold start scenarios.

đĎČēĒĊēę

Abstract
ĊęĜĔėĐ
?
?

ĊęĜĔėĐ

?

Figure 1: Link Prediction over Aligned Networks

ing the target network itself. One major limitation is the cold
start problem, i.e. the performance is usually poor when a
target vertex is rather new (Leroy, Cambazoglu, and Bonchi
2010). Interview process is proposed in order to alleviate
this problem (Rashid et al. 2002). However, it can only
be applied in certain scenarios thus has limited effect. Another limitation is the lack of comprehensiveness. Each network only reveals the partial information of the vertices, e.g.
professional relations in LinkedIn, social ties in Facebook,
movie preferences in IMDb, etc. We cannot tell if Alice actually likes the movie “Fast & Furious 8” or just because her
boss likes it, using only the partial information revealed in
movie rating network without knowing their professional relations. Therefore, researchers are still seeking out solutions
to alleviate the data insufﬁciency problem.
A novel direction for data enrichment is to take advantage of aligned networks (illustrated in Figure 1). Networks
are actually alignable in most scenarios. For example, online social networks can be naturally aligned through users,
i.e. two accounts in different networks are held by a same
user. Online platforms now encourage users to sign in with
cross-platform accounts to directly form the alignments. Besides, there also arise literatures on automatically revealing
the underlying alignments between social networks (Liu et
al. 2014), biology networks (Neyshabur et al. 2013), device
networks (Anand and Renov 2015), etc., providing prerequisite alignments for cross-network researches and analysis.
Network alignments provide valuable information for
subsequent researches in various domains. Using aligned social networks, researchers propose joint user modeling to
improve the quality of online personalized services (Cao and
Yu 2016b). In biology, aligned protein-protein interaction
networks contribute to the discovery of aging related com-

Introduction
Link prediction is a fundamental problem in the area of complex network and data mining (Lü and Zhou 2011). It helps
conduct network completion for partially observed networks
(Kim and Leskovec 2011) and understand how networks
evolve across time (Barabâsi et al. 2002). As network data
widely exists in various domains, link prediction contributes
to numerous important applications. For example, we can
employ link prediction to recommend friends in social networks (Aiello et al. 2012), explore gene expressions in biology networks (Almansoori et al. 2012), etc. Hence, link
prediction draws plenty of research attention.
Almost all existing link prediction methods suffer from
data insufﬁciency problems since they only focus on model∗

Correspondence to Weinan Zhang.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

249

