The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Weighted Multi-View Spectral Clustering Based on Spectral Perturbation
Linlin Zong, Xianchao Zhang, Xinyue Liu, Hong Yu
School of Software, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
Key Laboratory for Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning Province, Dalian, China
llzong@dlut.edu.cn, xczhang@dlut.edu.cn, xyliu@dlut.edu.cn, hongyu@dlut.edu.cn

matrices into a single one. These algorithms are under the
framework of multi-kernel learning which is different from
(though related with) multi-view clustering. Anyway, the existing weighting schemes do not simultaneously consider the
characteristic of multi-view clustering and the characteristic
of related single-view clustering.
In this paper, we focus on one speciﬁc clustering task,
i.e., multi-view spectral clustering which has a consensus
Laplacian matrix among all the views. For spectral clustering, small perturbations in the entries of the Laplacian matrix may lead to large perturbations in the eigenvectors. The
Euclidean distance between two sets of eigenvectors can be
large while the subspaces spanned by the eigenvectors is preserved (Hunter and Strohmer 2010). In this case, the difference in clustering results is not captured by the Euclidean
distance between the eigenvectors but by the closeness of
the subspaces spanned by the eigenvectors. According to the
spectral perturbation theory, the closeness of the subspaces
spanned by the eigenvectors is deﬁned by the largest canonical angle between these subspaces.
Considering the spectral perturbation of spectral clustering, we propose a Weighted Multi-view Spectral Clustering
algorithm (WMSC) based on spectral perturbation theory.
We model the differences among multiple views following
two basic principles: 1) the clustering results on each view
should be close to the consensus clustering result, and 2)
views with similar clustering results should be assigned similar weights. When realizing the two principles, the Laplacian matrix of each view is regarded as a perturbation of
the consensus Laplacian matrix and the consensus Laplacian
matrix is approximated by the weighted combination of multiple Laplacian matrices, then we use the largest canonical
angle to measure the difference between spectral clustering
results. Thus, the ﬁrst principle is realized by minimizing
the largest canonical angle between the subspace spanned
by each view’s eigenvectors and the one spanned by consensus eigenvectors; the second principle is realized by using a smoothness function to make the difference in weight
proportional to the largest canonical angle. In this way, the
weighting scheme is formulated into a standard quadratic
programming problem. Experimental results show that the
proposed algorithm outperforms typical unweighted multiview spectral clustering algorithms and weighted multi-view
spectral clustering algorithms.

Abstract
Considering the diversity of the views, assigning the multiviews with different weights is important to multi-view clustering. Several multi-view clustering algorithms have been
proposed to assign different weights to the views. However, the existing weighting schemes do not simultaneously
consider the characteristic of multi-view clustering and the
characteristic of related single-view clustering. In this paper,
based on the spectral perturbation theory of spectral clustering, we propose a weighted multi-view spectral clustering algorithm which employs the spectral perturbation to model the
weights of the views. The proposed weighting scheme follows the two basic principles: 1) the clustering results on each
view should be close to the consensus clustering result, and 2)
views with similar clustering results should be assigned similar weights. According to spectral perturbation theory, the
largest canonical angle is used to measure the difference between spectral clustering results. In this way, the weighting
scheme can be formulated into a standard quadratic programming problem. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of the proposed algorithm.

Introduction
Multi-view clustering (Zhou and Burges 2007) (Kumar, Rai,
and Daume 2011) (Lee and Liu 2016), which exploits complementary information among multiple views, has been a
hot topic since the past decade. Considering the diversity of
the views, the ability of different views characterizing the
data is different. It is challenging to ﬁnd a suitable way of
simultaneously exploiting the complementary information
of all the views in order to derive a satisfactory partition
(Tzortzis and Likas 2012).
Recently, several clustering algorithms combined the
multiple views through weighted combination and used the
weights to characterize the importance of the views. The
work in (Tzortzis and Likas 2012) (Cai, Nie, and Huang
2013) (Guo et al. 2014) (Zhao, Ding, and Fu 2017) used
algebraic method to minimize the objective function of all
the views, however, the minimum objective function value
does not indicate the optimal clustering result. The work
in (Huang, Chuang, and Chen 2012a) (Li et al. 2016) (Liu
et al. 2016) (Zong et al. 2016) aggregated multiple afﬁnity
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4621

