The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Hypergraph Learning with Cost Interval Optimization
Xibin Zhao, Nan Wang, Heyuan Shi, Hai Wan,∗ Jin Huang, Yue Gao∗
Key Laboratory for Information System Security, Ministry of Education
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology
School of Software, Tsinghua University, China.
{n-wang16,shi}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{zxb,wanhai,huangjin,gaoyue}@tsinghua.edu.cn
* indicates corresponding authors
In recent years, cost-sensitive learning has attracted more
attention (Wang et al. 2012; Kai 2002; Liu, Jun, and Ghosh
2009) from both the academia and industry. Although these
works concentrate on the cost related issue, these costs for
different categories are predeﬁned and usually determined
by experts or obtained among a set of candidate values. We
note that in most cases, even with the deep domain knowledge, it is still very challenging to determine an precise ﬁxed
cost value for different categories. However, compared with
the precise cost, cost interval is more easier to obtain. The
cost intervals are estimated as ranges of cost and concluded
by the opinions from experts, transforming from conﬁdence
intervals and the natural bounds (Liu and Zhou 2010). In addition, another challenging problem is that the correlations
among data are difﬁcult to describe. Traditional relationship
formulations, such as graph structure linking two points at
one time, is difﬁcult to explore the high-order correlations
among the data. To construct a robust classiﬁer, a more powerful data formulation should be employed to describe the
complex relationships.
To tackle these issues, in this paper, we propose a hypergraph learning method with cost interval optimization
(CIHL). The main framework of our method is demonstrated in Figure 1. In our method, the hypergraph structure is used to describe the high-order correlations among
training data. Comparing with traditional graph whose edge
can only links two points, the hyperedge in a hypergraph
can link more than two points, which can lead to a degreefree connections among the data. Nowadays, hypergraph has
been widely used in many applications due to its superiority
on high-order correlations description. With this structure,
we conduct learning to estimate the labels for the testing
data. More speciﬁcally, the cost information is incorporated
in the data, and instead of determining a set of ﬁxed costs,
we employ cost intervals to optimize the cost information
for improving accuracy of the classiﬁcation results. We have
conducted experiments on two types of datasets, i.e., NASA
dataset and UCI dataset. Experimental results and comparisons with state-of-the-art methods show the superiority of
the proposed CIHL method.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Following
we brieﬂy review related work. Then we introduce hypergraph learning and its applications. Experiments, comparison and discussions are provided in the following part and

Abstract
In many classiﬁcation tasks, the misclassiﬁcation costs of
different categories usually vary signiﬁcantly. Under such
circumstances, it is essential to identify the importance of
different categories and thus assign different misclassiﬁcation losses in many applications, such as medical diagnosis, saliency detection and software defect prediction. However, we note that it is infeasible to determine the accurate
cost value without great domain knowledge. In most common
cases, we may just have the information that which category
is more important than the other categories, i.e., the identiﬁcation of defect-prone softwares is more important than that of
defect-free. To tackle these issues, in this paper, we propose a
hypergraph learning method with cost interval optimization,
which is able to handle cost interval when data is formulated
using the high-order relationships. In this way, data correlations are modeled by a hypergraph structure, which has the
merit to exploit the underlying relationships behind the data.
With a cost-sensitive hypergraph structure, in order to improve the performance of the classiﬁer without precise cost
value, we further introduce cost interval optimization to hypergraph learning. In this process, the optimization on cost
interval achieves better performance instead of choosing uncertain ﬁxed cost in the learning process. To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method, we have conducted experiments on two groups of dataset, i.e., the NASA Metrics
Data Program (NASA) dataset and UCI Machine Learning
Repository (UCI) dataset. Experimental results and comparisons with state-of-the-art methods have exhibited better performance of our proposed method.

Introduction
In most real-world applications, different misclassiﬁcations
may lead to different losses. For example, misdiagnosing a
patient with deadly disease as a health case may cause more
serious losses than misdiagnosing a patient without disease
as an illness case. Another example is in the software defect
prediction ﬁeld, where misclassifying a defect-prone software module may destroy the software system and lead to
disaster consequences. However, more and more classiﬁcation works mainly focus on minimizing the number of errors
rather than the total cost.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4522

