The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

SPINE: SParse Interpretable Neural Embeddings
Anant Subramanian,* Danish Pruthi,* Harsh Jhamtani,*
Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, Eduard Hovy
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
{anant,danish,jharsh,tberg,hovy}@cmu.edu ∗

requires each dimension to denote a semantic concept —
resonates with post-hoc interpretability, introduced and discussed in (Lipton 2016).
We argue that this notion of interpretability can help in
gaining better understanding of neural representations and
models. Interpretability in a general neural network pipeline
would not just help us reason about the outcomes that they
predict, but would also provide us cues to make them more
efﬁcient and robust. In various feature norming studies (Garrard et al. 2001; McRae et al. 2005; Vinson and Vigliocco
2008), where participants were asked to list the properties of
several words and concepts, it was observed that they typically used few sparse characteristic properties to describe
the words, with limited overlap between different words.
For instance, to describe the city of Pittsburgh, one might
talk about phenomena typical of the city, like erratic weather
and large bridges. It is redundant and inefﬁcient to list negative properties, like the absence of the Statue of Liberty.
Thus, sparsity and non-negativity are desirable characteristics of representations, that make them interpretable. Many
recent studies back this hypothesis (Lee and Seung 1999;
Murphy, Talukdar, and Mitchell 2012; Fyshe et al. 2014;
2015; Faruqui et al. 2015; Danish, Dahiya, and Talukdar
2016). This raises the following question:
How does one transform word representations to a new
space where they are more interpretable?
To address the question, in this paper, we make following
contributions:
• We employ a denoising k-sparse autoencoder to obtain SParse Interpretable Neural Embeddings (SPINE),
a transformation of input word embeddings.
We train the autoencoder using a novel learning objective
and activation function to attain interpretable and efﬁcient
representations.
• We evaluate SPINE using a large scale, crowdsourced, intrusion detection test, along with a battery of downstream
tasks. We note that SPINE is more interpretable and efﬁcient than existing state-of-the-art baseline embeddings.
The outline of the rest of the paper is as follows. First, we
describe prior work that is closely related to our approach,
and highlight the key differences between our approach and
existing methods. Next, we provide a mathematical formulation of our proposed method. Thereafter, we describe model

Abstract
Prediction without justiﬁcation has limited utility. Much of
the success of neural models can be attributed to their ability to learn rich, dense and expressive representations. While
these representations capture the underlying complexity and
latent trends in the data, they are far from being interpretable. We propose a novel variant of denoising k-sparse
autoencoders that generates highly efﬁcient and interpretable
distributed word representations (word embeddings), beginning with existing word representations from state-of-the-art
methods like GloVe and word2vec. Through large scale human evaluation, we report that our resulting word embedddings are much more interpretable than the original GloVe
and word2vec embeddings. Moreover, our embeddings outperform existing popular word embeddings on a diverse suite
of benchmark downstream tasks1 .

Introduction
Distributed representations map words to vectors of real
numbers in a continuous space. These word vectors have
been exploited to obtain state-of-the-art results in NLP tasks,
such as parsing (Bansal, Gimpel, and Livescu 2014), named
entity recognition (Guo et al. 2014), and sentiment analysis (Socher et al. 2013). However, word vectors have dense
representations that humans ﬁnd difﬁcult to interpret. For instance, we are often clueless as to what a “high” value along
a given dimension of a vector signiﬁes when compared to a
“low” value. To demonstrate this, we analyze embeddings
of few randomly selected words (see Table 1). For these
randomly picked words, we examine top participating dimensions (Top participating dimensions are the dimensions
that have highest absolute values for that word). For each
of these selected top dimensions, we note the words that
have the highest absolute values in that dimension. We observe that for embeddings from state-of-the-art word models like GloVe (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014)
and word2vec (Mikolov et al. 2013) are not ‘interpretable’,
i.e. the top participating words do not form a semantically
coherent group. This notion of interpretability — one that
∗

AS, DP and HJ contributed equally to this paper.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Our code and generated word vectors are publicly available at
https://github.com/harsh19/SPINE

4921

