The Twenty-Third AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium

FgER: Fine-Grained Entity Recognition
Abhishek
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati
Assam, India 781039
abhishek.abhishek@iitg.ernet.in

Introduction

sources. First, a recently introduced data programming (Ratner et al. 2016) paradigm, where the objective is to quickly
generate a noisy training dataset and have a learning model
that is noise-aware. Second, the work of transfer learning
(Pan and Yang 2010), where the objective is to transfer the
knowledge learned in one domain into the new domain.

Fine-grained Entity Recognition (FgER) is the task of detecting and classifying entity mentions into more than 100
types. The type set can span various domains including
biomedical (e.g., disease, gene), sport (e.g., sports event,
sports player), religion and mythology (e.g., religion, god)
and entertainment (e.g., movies, music). Most of the existing literature for Entity Recognition (ER) focuses on coarsegrained entity recognition (CgER), i.e., recognition of entities belonging to few types such as person, location and organization. In the past two decades, several manually annotated datasets spanning different genre of texts were created
to facilitate the development and evaluation of CgER systems (Nadeau and Sekine 2007). The state-of-the-art CgER
systems use supervised statistical learning models trained on
manually annotated datasets (Ma and Hovy 2016).
In contrast, FgER systems are yet to match the performance level of CgER systems. There are two major challenges associated with failure of FgER systems. First, manually annotating a large-scale multi-genre training data for
FgER task is expensive, time-consuming and error-prone.
Note that, a human-annotator will have to choose a subset
of types from a large set of types and types for the same entity might differ in sentences based on the contextual information. Second, supervised statistical learning models when
trained on automatically generated noisy training data ﬁts to
noise, impacting the model’s performance.
The objective of my thesis is to create a FgER system
by exploring an off the beaten path which can eliminate the
need for manually annotating large-scale multi-genre training dataset. The path includes: (1) automatically generating
a large-scale single-genre training dataset, (2) noise-aware
learning models that learn better in noisy datasets, and (3)
use of knowledge transfer approaches to adapt FgER system
to different genres of text.
Once realized the proposed work will have a twofold impact. First, FgER system will be beneﬁcial for a plethora of
NLP applications where entity recognition is a crucial component. Second, the proposed research path can be applied
to several research areas which pose similar challenges.
Our motivation for the proposed direction is from two

Proposed Approach
Current Research
Automatic dataset generation The objective is to automatically generate a large-scale training dataset with low
noise and no direct human intervention. The annotation
quality should be adequate, i.e., the noise present in annotations should be within a permissible limit. The underlying
hypothesis is that if the annotation noise is not high, a noiseaware model trained on noisy dataset might perform as good
as a supervised learning model trained on a gold dataset.
In this work, we built a dataset creation pipeline which
combines heuristics and distant supervision process to generate a large-scale training dataset for the FgER task. Our approach uses Wikipedia and a knowledge base (Freebase1 ) as
information sources with no direct human intervention. The
pipeline tries to link all entities mentioned in the Wikipedia
sentences to Freebase, which then provides the types. The
generated dataset contains 31 million annotated sentences
with entity mentions assigned types from a type set of size
118. By analyzing a random sample that covers the complete type set of the training dataset, we estimated that in
the training dataset around 85% of marked entities are correct and among the correct entities, the dataset captured 89%
of them. Compared with existing training dataset (Ling and
Weld 2012), our dataset has approx 33% more coverage
at similar precision. In addition to automatically generated
training dataset, we manually annotated 982 sentences with
ﬁne-grained entity types for the sole purpose of evaluating
FgER systems. Our dataset will provide a better assessment
of FgER systems as it covers almost all the types (99%)
in contrast to earlier evaluation data (Ling and Weld 2012)
which covers only 38% of types present in the training data.
We observed that the skewness in existing dataset leads to a
biased evaluation of FgER systems. We are currently in the
process to conclude this work and make the dataset public.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

8008

https://developers.google.com/freebase/

