The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

The Role of Data-Driven Priors in
Multi-Agent Crowd Trajectory Estimation
Gang Qiao,1 Sejong Yoon,2 Mubbasir Kapadia,1 Vladimir Pavlovic1
1

Rutgers University, 2 The College of New Jersey
{gq19, mk1353, vladimir}@cs.rutgers.edu, yoons@tcnj.edu

but short trajectories, of other moving agents. The tracklets
of speciﬁc agents are then linked together by applying tracklet similarity measurements and re-identiﬁcation algorithms
(e.g., min-cost ﬂow). Next, a trajectory interpolation algorithm is applied to ﬁll in the gaps between the linked tracklets, in a way that the ﬁlled portions present desired realistic properties such as containing few potential collisions and
saving energy. Finally, trajectory extrapolation could be applied to the reconstructed trajectories so that the observing
agent can further plan its own motion.
While several trajectory interpolation approaches have
been proposed to-date (Rodriguez et al. 2011; Sharma,
Huang, and Nevatia 2012; Bera and Manocha 2014), few
have proven to work robustly in a general setting, often
exhibiting slow performance and inability to tackle complex scenarios. In practice, many real-time tracking systems typically trade-off accuracy largely for speed (Bera and
Manocha 2014). In addition, few approaches attempt to integrate realistic data-driven priors into the estimation framework except for few very recent attempts in simulation and
content generation community (Bera, Kim, and Manocha
2016), resulting in interpolated trajectories that fail to match
typical realistic crowd behaviors.
The main contribution of our work is a decentralized
framework for multi-agent trajectory estimation that yields
realistic trajectory estimates and exhibits reduced computational complexity. To that end, the proposed framework is
composed of a data-driven prior (either local, global or the
combination thereof) and an optimization algorithm. The
data prior implicitly encodes the movement dependencies
of multiple agents and thus eliminates the satisfaction of
costly pairwise collision constraints and decouples individual agent trajectories, yielding reduced computational complexity while maintaining or improving the quality of estimation. We evaluate different combinations of prior representations in simulated experiments and demonstrate the
essential role of these priors to accomplish low-complexity,
high-accuracy multi-agent trajectory estimation.

Abstract
Trajectory interpolation, the process of ﬁlling-in the gaps and
removing noise from observed agent trajectories, is an essential task for the motion inference in a multi-agent setting. A
desired trajectory interpolation method should be robust to
noise, changes in environments or agent densities, while also
being able to yield realistic group movement behaviors. Such
realistic behaviors are, however, challenging to model as they
require avoidance of agent-agent or agent-environment collisions and, at the same time, demand computational efﬁciency.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework composed of
data-driven priors (local, global or combined) and an efﬁcient
optimization strategy for multi-agent trajectory interpolation.
The data-driven priors implicitly encode the dependencies
of movements of multiple agents and the collision-avoiding
desiderata, enabling elimination of costly pairwise collision
constraints, resulting in reduced computational complexity
and often improved estimation. Various combinations of priors and optimization algorithms are evaluated in comprehensive simulated experiments. Our experimental results reveal
important insights, including the signiﬁcance of the global
ﬂow prior and the lesser-than-expected inﬂuence of datadriven collision priors.

Introduction
In a multi-agent scenario, a tracking system deployed on
an observing, moving or stationary agent (camera), needs
to estimate complete trajectories of other moving agents
(people, robots, crowds) c.f., (Bera and Manocha 2014;
Bera, Kim, and Manocha 2015). However, direct tracker output of the observing agent is often insufﬁcient to reconstruct
accurate trajectories because of factors such as noise, the
environmental conﬁguration, density of agents in a crowd,
or hardware failures. For instance, during the movement of
multiple agents in a complex scenario, there are inevitable
inter-agent and agent-obstacle occlusions from the perspective of the observing agent, resulting in observed trajectories
that are both noisy and incomplete.
To obtain high-quality complete trajectories, tracking systems typically adopt a multi-step strategy. First, the sensor
deployed on the observing agent detects and tracks objects
in its neighboring area to obtain local tracklets, continuous

Prior Work
Modeling, simulation and analysis of crowd motion
have attracted signiﬁcant interest in research community
over the past years, e.g. (Jacques Junior, Raupp Musse,
and Jung 2010; Ali et al. 2013; Kapadia, Pelechano,

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4710

