The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Top-Down Feedback for Crowd Counting
Convolutional Neural Network
Deepak Babu Sam, R. Venkatesh Babu
Video Analytics Lab, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore 560012, INDIA
{deepaksam, venky}@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
Counting people in dense crowds is a demanding task even
for humans. This is primarily due to the large variability in
appearance of people. Often people are only seen as a bunch
of blobs. Occlusions, pose variations and background clutter further compound the difﬁculty. In this scenario, identifying a person requires larger spatial context and semantics of
the scene. But the current state-of-the-art CNN regressors for
crowd counting are feedforward and use only limited spatial
context to detect people. They look for local crowd patterns
to regress the crowd density map, resulting in false predictions. Hence, we propose top-down feedback to correct the
initial prediction of the CNN. Our architecture consists of a
bottom-up CNN along with a separate top-down CNN to generate feedback. The bottom-up network, which regresses the
crowd density map, has two columns of CNN with different
receptive ﬁelds. Features from various layers of the bottomup CNN are fed to the top-down network. The feedback, thus
generated, is applied on the lower layers of the bottom-up
network in the form of multiplicative gating. This masking
weighs activations of the bottom-up network at spatial as well
as feature levels to correct the density prediction. We evaluate the performance of our model on all major crowd datasets
and show the effectiveness of top-down feedback.

Figure 1: Density maps predicted by a typical CNN regressor (bottom row) have a lot of false detections. Many crowd
like patterns are identiﬁed as humans. Top row displays the
input scene and middle row holds the ground truth density
map.

Introduction
From busy streets to massive gatherings, crowd count often serves as a metric of great practical importance. Increasingly it is infeasible to employ humans to do crowd analysis,
boosting the case for building automated systems. Crowd
counting in Computer Vision sense, is an instance recognition task that estimates the number of people in an image. However, in extremely dense crowds, people occupy
only few pixels, making it difﬁcult to individually detect and
count people. Many times people are seen as bunch of blobs,
which requires some level of reasoning about the scene to
conclude the presence of humans. Severe occlusion, pose
changes, view-point variations and illumination conditions
further complicate the task. Some typical crowd scenes are
displayed in Figure 1.
Hence crowd counting problem is often relaxed to a regression task which is nowadays been done by Convolu-

tional Neural Networks (CNN). Given an image, counting CNNs are trained to regress spatial crowd density, i.e.
number of people per unit area. They are forced to learn
a hierarchy of ﬁlters speciﬁc to crowd features as opposed
to individual human features. For example, these CNNs
model edges to detect head-shoulder pair as they appear
in a crowded scene, rather than facial features like eyes or
nose. As a result, many crowd like patterns in the image created by leaves of trees, buildings, cluttered backgrounds etc.
are misclassiﬁed as people. This causes lot of false predictions as shown in Figure 1. Some high level context information would have indicated that these are irrelevant patterns.
This is a general problem with any feedforward bottom-up
systems, where the low-level feature detectors do not have

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7323

