The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Curve-Structure Segmentation from Depth Maps: A CNN-Based
Approach and Its Application to Exploring Cultural Heritage Objects
Yuhang Lu,2 Jun Zhou,2 Jing Wang,2 Jun Chen,2 Karen Smith,3 Colin Wilder,4 Song Wang1, 2,

∗

1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC
3
South Carolina Institute of Archaeology and Anthropology, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC
4
Center for Digital Humanities, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC
2

Abstract
(a)

Motivated by the important archaeological application of
exploring cultural heritage objects, in this paper we study
the challenging problem of automatically segmenting curve
structures that are very weakly stamped or carved on an object surface in the form of a highly noisy depth map. Different
from most classical low-level image segmentation methods
that are known to be very sensitive to the noise and occlusions, we propose a new supervised learning algorithm based
on Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to implicitly learn
and utilize more curve geometry and pattern information for
addressing this challenging problem. More speciﬁcally, we
ﬁrst propose a Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) to estimate the skeleton of curve structures and at each skeleton
pixel, a scale value is estimated to reﬂect the local curve
width. Then we propose a dense prediction network to reﬁne the estimated curve skeletons. Based on the estimated
scale values, we ﬁnally develop an adaptive thresholding algorithm to achieve the ﬁnal segmentation of curve structures.
In the experiment, we validate the performance of the proposed method on a dataset of depth images scanned from
unearthed pottery sherds dating to the Woodland period of
Southeastern North America.

(b)

Figure 1: Five unearthed pottery sherds dating to the Woodland period of Southeastern North America. (a) RGB images. (b) Depth images where intensity indicates the depth.

thousands of such fragmented culture heritage objects stored
in museums, which calls for more intelligent and automatic
tools to explore them.
Clearly, accurately segmenting the curve structures
stamped on the surface is the ﬁrst step to explore these
cultural heritage objects. In most cases, these curve structures do not bear distinctive colors and it is very difﬁcult,
if not impossible, to segment them from an RGB image of
the sherd, e.g., Figure 1(a), taken by traditional cameras. In
archeology, 3D scanners are usually utilized to produce a
depth image of the object surface – with paddle stamping,
the locations of curves exhibit a larger depth than the noncurve portion of surface, as shown in Figure 1(b).
However, three complexities may lead to very weak curve
structures on the obtained depth map and make the curvestructure segmentation a very challenging problem. First, the
carved paddles used for stamping are usually ﬂat while the
object surfaces are usually not. As a result, the paddle typically does not well ﬁt the object surface, which leads to shallow curves at many locations. Second, purposeful smoothing
of the stamped surface during vessel manufacture or weathering and erosion after vessel discard can lead to subtle depth
differences between the curve and the non-curve portions of
the surface. Third, erosion and weathering make the object
surface highly rough, which is equivalent to adding random
noise to the depth map of the initial object surface. With
these three complexities, it is difﬁcult to use a low-level
image segmentation algorithm to accurately segment these
depth images for curve structures, as shown by an example
in Figure 2.

Introduction
Embellished designs on the surface of cultural heritage objects, such as pottery, shell, stone and wood contain important information for archaeologists (Zhou et al. 2017). These
designs, if successfully identiﬁed and correlated, can be used
to build chronologies and track trade networks of a region
thousands of years ago. In archeology, most of these designs
are found to be curve patterns stamped or carved by their
makers. Therefore, it is of great interest to archaeologists
to accurately segment the curve structures on the surface of
unearthed fragments of cultural heritage objects and identify their underlying designs (Kampel and Sablatnig 2007;
Halir 1999). Figure 1 shows several unearthed pottery sherds
dating to the Woodland period of Southeastern North America. The curve structures on their surfaces reﬂect a portion
of the curve pattern carved into wooden paddles and applied
onto hand-built clay vessels designed by southeastern Native
Americans around 2000 years ago. There are hundreds of
∗

Corresponding author: songwang@cec.sc.edu
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7235

