The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

No Modes Left Behind: Capturing the
Data Distribution Effectively Using GANs
Shashank Sharma, Vinay P. Namboodiri
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) while being very
versatile in realistic image synthesis, still are sensitive to the
input distribution. Given a set of data that has an imbalance
in the distribution, the networks are susceptible to missing
modes and not capturing the data distribution. While various methods have been tried to improve training of GANs,
these have not addressed the challenges of covering the full
data distribution. Speciﬁcally, a generator is not penalized for
missing a mode. We show that these are therefore still susceptible to not capturing the full data distribution.
In this paper, we propose a simple approach that combines
an encoder based objective with novel loss functions for generator and discriminator that improves the solution in terms
of capturing missing modes. We validate that the proposed
method results in substantial improvements through its detailed analysis on toy and real datasets. The quantitative and
qualitative results demonstrate that the proposed method improves the solution for the problem of missing modes and
improves training of GANs.

1

Figure 1: Shows how the Discriminator follows the local
gradients to lose the smaller mode M2 without any penalty

fewer number of samples. This problem is illustrated in the
ﬁgure 1 that shows how a discriminator is attracted towards
its dominant mode and misses out on the smaller mode.
There have been works to encourage diversity in the generations, (Ghosh et al. 2017), but none to our knowledge exist that attempt to tackle the problem directly. Using the approach mentioned in BIGAN (Donahue, Krhenbhl, and Darrell 2016) as our base objective, we propose a modiﬁcation
that addresses the mentioned problem in a much better way.
We test our model extensively against natural images from
popular datasets like Cifar10 (Krizhevsky 2009), CelebA
(Liu et al. 2015); and an unusual dataset, frames from a
surveillance video, (Varadarajan and Odobez 2009). Since
the background remains the same in all the frames, the
dataset is highly clustered and encourages mode collapse.
While the vanilla objective fails and collapses to a single
mode, our method is able to train fairly well on it. Showing
that unless the objective is not modeled for mode capturing,
it fails.

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (Goodfellow et al. 2014)
aim to learn complex data distributions by learning a mapping from a noise distribution (Uniform/Gaussian) to a distribution that is based on an unsupervised set of samples.
This task, while challenging has recently seen a number of
successes. The method learns to solve this problem by using a pair of networks a Generator G(z) and a Discriminator
D(x), that are simultaneously trained by playing a minimax
game. The Discriminator tries to differentiate between the
real and the generated samples, and the Generator tries to
fool the Discriminator by generating samples that are close
to the real data. The training continues till G and D attain
a Nash Equilibrium. Initially, GANs used to be notoriously
hard to train but recent developments, (Salimans et al. 2016;
Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017; Gulrajani et al. 2017;
Nowozin, Cseke, and Tomioka 2016; Metz et al. 2016;
Poole et al. 2016) have proposed modiﬁcations to the vanilla
method that have resulted in more stable training methods.
However, the methods still have limitations in terms of missing modes of data that are hard to capture as they may have a

2
2.1

Background

Encoder

Recently the use of a complementary network, an encoder,
has become popular. It is usually trained to give the best latent representation of the data point, or inverting the genera-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4042

