The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Dilated FCN for Multi-Agent
2D/3D Medical Image Registration
Shun Miao,1∗ Sebastien Piat,1 Peter Fischer,2 Ahmet Tuysuzoglu,1
Philip Mewes2 Tommaso Mansi,1 Rui Liao1
1

Siemens Healthineers, Medical Imaging Technologies, Princeton, NJ, USA
2
Siemens Healthineers, Forchheim, Germany

actively researched for decades (Markelj et al. 2012), it remains a very challenging and unsolved problem, especially
in the complex environment of hybrid operating rooms.
A Markov Decision Process (MDP) formulation for
3D/3D image registration was recently introduced and resulted in a signiﬁcant robustness improvement (Liao et al.
2017). The original formulation however has three major
limitations that make it ineffective for 2D/3D registration in
a clinical setup. First, it requires the rough location and size
of the target object to be registered as a prior, in order to extract a local region around the target as the agent’s observation. However, in 2D/3D registration, the location and size of
the target object can vary signiﬁcantly in 2D X-ray images,
due to variations in C-arm geometry and imaging protocols
such as collimation factors. Second, there could be various
artifacts / interference coming from medical devices in 2D
X-ray images and simulation of all of them in the training
samples is not practical. Therefore an auto attention mechanism is needed in order to be able to inherently detect the
regions with more reliable visual cues to drive registration,
and this mechanism is not provided in (Liao et al. 2017).
Third, training data need to be sampled extensively from the
registration environment with a high DoF (i.e., environmental DoFs include location of agent’s observation and pose
of the 3D volume), which is associated with an high computational cost. In fact, ﬁve million samples are needed as
reported in (Liao et al. 2017), even after using location prior
knowledge to reduce the DoF by 3. Since data sampling
grows exponentially with the DoF, without the location prior
knowledge, computational cost would be prohibitively high
for our 2D/3D registration problem.
In this paper, we propose a multi-agent system with an
auto attention mechanism to address the above three limitations of agent-based registration, and apply it to a challenging 2D/3D registration application for minimally invasive
spine surgery. In particular, multiple agents are employed to
observe multiple regions of the image, and the system adaptively favors proposals from regions with more distinct visual cues for registration. We furthermore propose a policy
network architecture with separate encoding of the ﬁxed and
moving images, and a dilated Fully Convolutional Network

Abstract
2D/3D image registration to align a 3D volume and 2D X-ray
images is a challenging problem due to its ill-posed nature
and various artifacts presented in 2D X-ray images. In this
paper, we propose a multi-agent system with an auto attention
mechanism for robust and efﬁcient 2D/3D image registration.
Speciﬁcally, an individual agent is trained with dilated Fully
Convolutional Network (FCN) to perform registration in a
Markov Decision Process (MDP) by observing a local region,
and the ﬁnal action is then taken based on the proposals from
multiple agents and weighted by their corresponding conﬁdence levels. The contributions of this paper are threefold.
First, we formulate 2D/3D registration as a MDP with observations, actions, and rewards properly deﬁned with respect to
X-ray imaging systems. Second, to handle various artifacts
in 2D X-ray images, multiple local agents are employed efﬁciently via FCN-based structures, and an auto attention mechanism is proposed to favor the proposals from regions with
more reliable visual cues. Third, a dilated FCN-based training mechanism is proposed to signiﬁcantly reduce the Degree
of Freedom in the simulation of registration environment, and
drastically improve training efﬁciency by an order of magnitude compared to standard CNN-based training method. We
demonstrate that the proposed method achieves high robustness on both spine cone beam Computed Tomography data
with a low signal-to-noise ratio and data from minimally invasive spine surgery where severe image artifacts and occlusions are presented due to metal screws and guide wires, outperforming other state-of-the-art methods (single agent-based
and optimization-based) by a large margin.

Introduction
The goal of 2D/3D medical image registration is to ﬁnd
the 6 Degree of Freedom (DoF) pose of a 3D volume (e.g.
Computed Tomography (CT), Mangnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) etc), to align its projections with given 2D Xray images. Reliable 2D/3D registration is a key enabler for
image-guided surgeries in modern operating rooms. It brings
measurement and plannings done on the pre-operative data
into the operating room, and fuse it with intra-operative live
2D X-ray images. It can be used to provide augmented reality image guidance for the surgery, or provide navigation
for robotic surgery. Despite that 2D/3D registration has been

Disclaimer: This feature is based on research, and is not commercially available. Due to regulatory reasons its future availability
cannot be guaranteed.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4694

