The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Optimal Spot-Checking for Improving
Evaluation Accuracy of Peer Grading Systems
1

2

Wanyuan Wang,1†∗ Bo An,2‡ Yichuan Jiang1,§

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
†,§
{wywang, yjiang}@seu.edu.cn, ‡ boan@ntu.edu.sg

paying a reward to a peer if his (belief) report is predicted
to be correct based on other peers’ reports. However, most
of these incentive mechanisms are vulnerable to peer collusion, where peers could have a motivation to report the uninformative grade by a pre-agreed grading rule (Gao, Wright,
and Leyton-Brown 2016).
Spot-checking (SC) mechanisms can prevent the peer
collusion issue (Jurca and Faltings 2005; Carbonara et al.
2015). In SC, the instructor checks some assignments by
himself and offers a reward to a peer who grades diligently.
Existing SC researches have shown that under the special
setting where peers are homogeneous with the same grading
reliability and cost, a simple SC mechanism, such as random (Wright, Thornton, and Leyton-Brown 2015) or uniform (Gao, Wright, and Leyton-Brown 2016), is efﬁcient
to motivate peers to be diligent. However, in practice, peers
often have heterogeneous grading reliability and cost (Dasgupta and Ghosh 2013; Agarwal et al. 2017), for example, in
an empirical online peer grading test (Kulkarni et al. 2013),
peers with suitable backgrounds have 25% disagreements in
average, and varied by peers, about 75% grading is completed in 9.5 minutes to 17.3 minutes. Under such a general
setting, randomized SC mechanisms might perform poorly
(as we show in this paper) on maximizing assignments’ evaluation accuracy. The focus of this paper is ﬁnding the optimal SC mechanism to maximize assignments’ evaluation
accuracy in a practical setting with heterogeneous peers.
The ﬁrst contribution of this paper is a general SC model
for peer grading systems with strategic and heterogeneous
peers. We assume that the instructor has a spot-checking
budget, denoting the maximum number of assignments he
is capable of checking. Given budget K, the instructor’s objective is maximizing assignments’ evaluation accuracy aggregated from peers, which can be formulated as a bilevel
optimal SC (OptSC) problem. In the upper level, the instructor determines the probability each assignment needs
to be checked, and in the lower level, peers are strategic that
choose the optimal grading strategies to maximize their own
utility. We prove it is NP-hard to solve OptSC. To address
the NP-hardness, our second contribution is formulating a
single level relaxation to approximate the bilevel OptSC. We
show that, compared to OptSC, the relaxation loses very limited accuracy. By further exploiting the structural properties
of the relaxed problem, our third contribution is to propose

Abstract
Peer grading, allowing students/peers to evaluate others’ assignments, offers a promising solution for scaling evaluation
and learning to large-scale educational systems. A key challenge in peer grading is motivating peers to grade diligently.
While existing spot-checking (SC) mechanisms can prevent
peer collusion where peers coordinate to report the uninformative grade, they unrealistically assume that peers have the
same grading reliability and cost. This paper studies the general Optimal Spot-Checking (OptSC) problem of determining the probability each assignment needs to be checked to
maximize assignments’ evaluation accuracy aggregated from
peers, and takes into consideration 1) peers’ heterogeneous
characteristics, and 2) peers’ strategic grading behaviors to
maximize their own utility. We prove that the bilevel OptSC
is NP-hard to solve. By exploiting peers’ grading behaviors,
we ﬁrst formulate a single level relaxation to approximate
OptSC. By further exploiting structural properties of the relaxed problem, we propose an efﬁcient algorithm to that relaxation, which also gives a good approximation of the original OptSC. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real
datasets show signiﬁcant advantages of the proposed algorithm over existing approaches.

Introduction
Peer grading, allowing students/peers to evaluate others’
assignments, not only helps the instructor bring qualiﬁed
feedbacks to classrooms but also helps students self-study
using other peers’ solutions (Raman and Joachims 2014;
Caragiannis, Krimpas, and Voudouris 2015). Besides its direct application to educational systems (e.g., Coursera and
EdX), peer grading is also useful in reputation and crowdsourcing systems where it is difﬁcult to evaluate peers’ contributions (Witkowski et al. 2013; Ho, Frongillo, and Chen
2016). One of the key challenges in peer grading is how
to motivate students to grade assignments diligently (Sadler
and Good 2006; Liu and Chen 2016; Shnayder et al. 2016).
Well-known Peer Prediction (Miller, Resnick, and Zeckhauser 2005; Radanovic and Faltings 2015; Kong, Ligett,
and Schoenebeck 2016) and Bayesian Truth Serum (Prelec
2004; Witkowski and Parkes 2012) mechanisms work by
∗
This work was done when the ﬁrst author was a Research Fellow in Nanyang Technological University.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

833

