The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Tree-Structured Neural Machine
for Linguistics-Aware Sentence Generation
Ganbin Zhou,1,2 Ping Luo,1,2 Rongyu Cao,1,2 Yijun Xiao,3 Fen Lin,4 Bo Chen,4 Qing He1,2
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China.{zhouganbin, luop, heqing}@ict.ac.cn
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
3
Department of Computer Science, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA.
4
WeChat Search Application Department, Tencent, China.
ones. RNN models, such as LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) and GRU (Cho et al. 2014), are developed in
demand of capturing both the short and long-distance dependency over the chain structure.
Our work improves upon these studies by incorporating
the results from linguistic analysis into the decoder. Specifically, we leverage a dependency parser to transform each
response sentence into a dependency tree, containing more
local dependency information. The proposed model learns
to map a sentence into a canonicalized tree, which is then
ﬂattened as the ﬁnal output. Consider the intermediate task
for automatic conversation generation. Instead of generating
the response to a given input post directly, we aim to generate the dependency parse tree of the corresponding response
in top-down fashion. Additionally, a tree canonicalization
method is proposed, aiming at transforming trees with different numbers of children nodes into their equivalent form,
namely full ternary trees, in order to accelerate training and
simplify model implementation on GPU. Then, a postprocessing step converts the dependency tree into a sequence as
the ﬁnal response. We also theoretically prove that ternary
tree is the “best” choice for model complexity.
Some models also process trees in a bottom-up fashion. Socher et al. (2011) proposed a max-margin structure prediction architecture based on recursive neural networks, and demonstrated that it successfully parses sentences and understands scene images. Tai et al. (2015) and
Zhu et al. (2015) extended the chain-structured LSTM to
tree-structured LSTM, which is shown to be more effective
in representing a tree structure as a latent vector. All these
models process trees in a bottom-up fashion, where children
nodes are recursively merged into parent nodes until the root
is generated.
However, bottom-up models require all the leaf nodes in
the predicted tree given in advance. For example, to generate the constituency parse tree for a sentence (shown in
Fig. 1(a)), tokens appeared in the given sentence are used as
leaf nodes in this tree. Similarly, to parse natural scene images (Socher et al. 2011), an image is ﬁrst divided into segments, each of which corresponds to one leaf node in output
tree. With these given leaves bottom-up process recursively
processes the internal nodes until the root is built.
Here, we argue that the bottom-up generative models may
not work well when the leaf nodes are not speciﬁed ahead of

Abstract
Different from other sequential data, sentences in natural language are structured by linguistic grammars. Previous generative conversational models with chain-structured decoder
ignore this structure in human language and might generate
plausible responses with less satisfactory relevance and ﬂuency. In this study, we aim to incorporate the results from
linguistic analysis into the process of sentence generation for
high-quality conversation generation. Speciﬁcally, we use a
dependency parser to transform each response sentence into
a dependency tree and construct a training corpus of sentencetree pairs. A tree-structured decoder is developed to learn the
mapping from a sentence to its tree, where different types
of hidden states are used to depict the local dependencies
from an internal tree node to its children. For training acceleration, we propose a tree canonicalization method, which
transforms trees into equivalent ternary trees. Then, with a
proposed tree-structured search method, the model is able
to generate the most probable responses in the form of dependency trees, which are ﬁnally ﬂattened into sequences as
the system output. Experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed X2T REE framework outperforms baseline methods
over 11.15% increase of acceptance ratio.

Introduction
Many natural language processing tasks can be formulated
as sequence to sequence problems. Given a sequence of tokens, this task is to generate another sequence of tokens of
equal or non-equal length. For example, machine translation
models try to ﬁnd a sequence of words in the target language,
expressing the identical meaning to a source sentence; conversational models respond to a post utterance with a semantically coherent and grammatically correct sentence. Neural models were applied to these tasks and achieved stateof-the-art performances in recent years (Cho et al. 2014;
Shang, Lu, and Li 2015; Vinyals and Le 2015; Sordoni et al.
2015; Serban et al. 2015).
These neural models in essence use a chain-structured decoder to sequentially generate tokens given a context vector encoded from an input sequence. We notice that this decoding process is mostly linear, meaning that tokens are obtained in the order of their appearances. It basically considers the dependency between any word and all its preceding
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5722

