The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Partial Truthfulness in Minimal Peer Prediction
Mechanisms with Limited Knowledge
Goran Radanovic

Boi Faltings

Harvard University
Cambridge, USA
gradanovic@g.harvard.edu

EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
boi.faltings@epﬂ.ch

and Zeckhauser 2005) and the Bayesian truth serum (Prelec 2004). While there are different ways of classifying
peer prediction mechanisms, the most relevant one for this
work distinguishes two categories of mechanisms by: 1) the
amount of additional information they elicit from agents; 2)
the knowledge they have about agents’ beliefs.
The ﬁrst category includes minimal mechanisms that elicit
only desired private information, but have some additional
information that enables truthful elicitation. For instance, the
classical peer prediction (Miller, Resnick, and Zeckhauser
2005) assumes knowledge about how an agent forms her
beliefs regarding the private information of other agents,
while other mechanisms (e.g., see (Jurca and Faltings 2011;
Witkowski 2014)) relax the amount of knowledge they need
by imposing different restrictions on the agents’ belief structures. Mechanisms from the second category elicit additional information to compensate for the lack of knowledge about agents’ beliefs. For example, the Bayesian truth
serum (Prelec 2004), and its extensions (Witkowski and
Parkes 2012b; Radanovic and Faltings 2013; 2014; Kong
and Schoenebeck 2016), elicit agents’ posterior beliefs.
The mentioned mechanisms are designed for a singletask elicitation scenario in which an agent’s private information can be modeled as a sample from an unknown distribution. In a basic elicitation setting, agents share a common belief system regarding the parameters of the setting
(Miller, Resnick, and Zeckhauser 2005; Prelec 2004). While
the mechanisms typically allow some deviations from this
assumption (Frongillo and Witkowski 2016; Radanovic and
Faltings 2014), these deviations can be quite constrained, especially when private information has a complex structure.2
We also mention mechanisms that operate in more specialized settings that allow agents to have more heterogeneous beliefs. Peer prediction without a common prior
(Witkowski and Parkes 2012a) is designed for a setting
in which a mechanism can clearly separate a period prior
to agents acquiring their private information from the period after the acquisition. It elicits additional information
from agents which corresponds to their prior beliefs. More
recently, many mechanisms have been developed for a

Abstract
We study minimal single-task peer prediction mechanisms
that have limited knowledge about agents’ beliefs. Without
knowing what agents’ beliefs are or eliciting additional information, it is not possible to design a truthful mechanism in a
Bayesian-Nash sense. We go beyond truthfulness and explore
equilibrium strategy proﬁles that are only partially truthful.
Using the results from the multi-armed bandit literature, we
give a characterization of how inefﬁcient these equilibria are
comparing to truthful reporting. We measure the inefﬁciency
of such strategies by counting the number of dishonest reports
that any minimal knowledge-bounded mechanism must have.
We show that the order of this number is Θ(log n), where
n is the number of agents, and we provide a peer prediction
mechanism that achieves this bound in expectation.

Introduction
One of the crucial prerequisites for a good decision making
procedure is the availability of accurate information, which
is often distributed among many individuals. Hence, elicitation of distributed information represents a key component
in many systems that are based on informative decision making. Typically, such an information elicitation scenario is
modeled by representing individuals as rational agents who
are willing to report their private information in return for
(monetary) rewards.
We study a setting in which reports cannot be directly
veriﬁed, as it is the case when eliciting opinions regarding
the outcome of a hypothetical question (Garcin and Faltings
2014). Other examples include: product reviewing, where
the reported information can describe ones taste, which is
inherently subjective1 ; peer grading, where a rater needs to
grade an essay; or eliciting information that is highly distributed, as in community sensing.
Since a data collector cannot directly verify the reported
information, it can score submitted reports only by examining consistency among them. Such an approach is adopted in
peer prediction mechanisms, out of which the most known
examples are the peer prediction method (Miller, Resnick,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
As, for example, in rating a restaurant or a hotel on TripAdvisor (www.tripadvisor.com).

2

For example, (Radanovic and Faltings 2014) show that one
cannot easily relax the common prior condition when agents’ private information is real-valued.

1595

