The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Enhancing RNN Based OCR by Transductive
Transfer Learning from Text to Images
Yang He, Jingling Yuan, Lin Li
Wuhan University of Technology
yanghe@whut.edu.cn, yjl@whut.edu.cn, cathylilin@whut.edu.cn

In addition, there lies a passive relationship between the
volume of training data and the length of latent period.
While trained on a huge dataset, the latent period has suppressed by the overwhelming amount of data. With the
decrease of training data, the latent period lags and model's
accuracy wanes. When it comes to a small dataset whose
training data are smaller than its test data, DL model will
fall into underfitting, and its accuracy fluctuates round a
low level.
To efface two problems mentioned above, we build a
model based on transductive transfer learning, called TTL
model for short. Our hypothesis of this idea is that, the
image is a counterpart of corresponding text in high dimensional space, namely image is an embodiment presentation of text in 2-dimension and text is a projection of
image towards a lower dimension. Like dimensionality
reduction, no matter what dimension data will be projected
to, the relationship between data remains constant. In OCR,
the relationship is character sequential relationship, an order probability between continuous characters. With transfer learning, the shared relationship can be transferred from
text to images.
In this paper, we consider to combine these two problems together, as they are both resulted from the capacity
of dataset. We design a novel approach to eradicate the two
problems mentioned above. Our main contributions are:
1) Acceleration of training phase.
2) Avoiding underfitting in a small dataset.

Abstract
This paper presents a novel approach for optical character
recognition (OCR) on acceleration and to avoid underfitting
by text. Previously proposed OCR models typically take
much time in the training phase and require large amount of
labelled data to avoid underfitting. In contrast, our method
does not require such condition. This is a challenging task
related to transferring the character sequential relationship
from text to OCR. We build a model based on transductive
transfer learning to achieve domain adaptation from text to
image. We thoroughly evaluate our approach on different
datasets, including a general one and a relatively small one.
We also compare the performance of our model with the
general OCR model on different circumstances. We show
that (1) our approach accelerates the training phase 20-30%
on time cost; and (2) our approach can avoid underfitting
while model is trained on a small dataset

Introduction
As a major application of pattern recognition and machine
learning, optical character recognition (OCR) is widely
used for converting text from visual documents into digitally text to facilitate document management for search and
information retrieval. In this work, we concentrate on a
basic sequence-to-sequence OCR model (Breuel et al.
2013), called DL model for short, aiming at designing a
method that generalizes well to different model structures.
Although existing advanced approaches about DL model
has been incessantly come up with, the gist of these models
remain constant, because additional networks just change
the size of data DL model handles.
In this model, there is a typical phenomenon in training.
Before the accuracy of OCR model rapidly increases, there
lies a period, we called it the latent period, at the beginning
of training that model’s accuracy stays nearly constant,
occupying much time.

Our approach
Our approach follows the combination architecture of a
teacher network, matrix extension and a student network.
In the teacher network, given an input sequence of sentences, the corresponding sequence of one-hot encoding is
fed as the input of the teacher network with the output of
probability matrix over characters. Then we extend these
probability matrices to the same size of images by the rule
of repeating tensors of matrix for certain times, being fed

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8083

