The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Lifted Generalized Dual Decomposition
Nicholas Gallo

Alexander Ihler

University of California Irvine
Irvine, CA 92637-3435
ngallo1@uci.edu

University of California Irvine
Irvine, CA 92637-3435
ihler@ics.uci.edu

these works take a well established variational approximation and identify exact problem symmetries either algorithmically (e.g., redundant message computations of loopy belief propagation (LBP) (Singla and Domingos 2008; Kersting, Ahmadi, and Natarajan 2009)) or via graph theoretic notions of symmetry (Bui, Huynh, and Riedel 2012; Mladenov,
Ahmadi, and Kersting 2012; Mladenov and Kersting 2015;
Bui, Huynh, and Sontag 2014; Mladenov, Globerson, and
Kersting 2014).
These methods, however, often have signiﬁcant trouble
dealing with models possessing highly symmetric substructures, but few exact symmetries. Some works (Venugopal
and Gogate 2014; Van den Broeck and Darwiche 2013) address this by generating a symmetric approximation to an
MLN (Richardson and Domingos 2006) with evidence, but
offer no guarantees on the quality of the approximation.
(Broeck and Niepert 2014) correct this “biasedness” problem by using an over-symmetric approximation to construct
a proposal distribution for a Metropolis-Hastings chain,
which guarantees convergence to the true marginals, but
gives no guarantees on mixing time. Other works approximate lifted BP by grouping messages with similar values
(Kersting et al. 2010) or satisfying a desired structural property (Singla, Nath, and Domingos 2014). (Singla, Nath, and
Domingos 2014) analyzes errors the approximation induces
on the true BP messages, but like BP, offers no guarantees
on solution quality or convergence.
Similar in spirit to our work is (Habeeb et al. 2017) which
sequentially solves a set of relaxed MAP inference problems
for computer vision tasks. Their method operates in a coarse
to ﬁne manner solving, at each level, a MAP problem where
groups of pixels are restricted to have the same value. This
pixel grouping is relaxed and the ﬁner MAP problem is initialized with the solution to the coarser problem, guaranteeing monotonic improvement of the solution.
Our paper provides a framework for exploiting approximate model symmetries, based on a lifted variant of GenDD
(Ping, Liu, and Ihler 2015). In contrast to works that create
an over-symmetric model approximation, our method imposes a set of over-symmetric restrictions on the variational
cost-shifting updates (messages) associated with the GenDD
problem. Guided by a measure of solution quality, these constraints are gradually relaxed, producing a sequence of problems of increasing accuracy, but increasing cost. Our experi-

Abstract
Many real-world problems, such as Markov Logic Networks
(MLNs) with evidence, can be represented as a highly symmetric graphical model perturbed by additional potentials. In
these models, variational inference approaches that exploit
exact model symmetries are often forced to ground the entire problem, while methods that exploit approximate symmetries (such as by constructing an over-symmetric approximate
model) offer no guarantees on solution quality. In this paper,
we present a method based on a lifted variant of the generalized dual decomposition (GenDD) for marginal MAP inference which provides a principled way to exploit symmetric
sub-structures in a graphical model. We develop a coarse-toﬁne inference procedure that provides any-time upper bounds
on the objective. The upper bound property of GenDD provides a principled way to guide the reﬁnement process, providing good any-time performance and eventually arriving at
the ground optimal solution.

Introduction
A central task in many application domains (Wainwright and
Jordan 2008) is computing likelihoods and marginal probabilities over distributions deﬁned by a graphical model.
These tasks are, in general, intractable, and this has motivated the development of many approximate inference techniques. Of signiﬁcant theoretical and practical interest are
variational techniques which formulate the inference problem as a constrained optimization problem. Within this class,
methods that provide upper bounds on the partition function
and give rise to convex optimization problems are particularly attractive since convergence can be guaranteed and the
quality of two bounds can be easily compared. This class
contains the tree-reweighted bounds (Wainwright, Jaakkola,
and Willsky 2005) and primal variants such as GenDD
(Ping, Liu, and Ihler 2015), which we study here.
Recently, there has been a growing interest in the development of lifted inference techniques, both exact (Bui,
Huynh, and de Salvo Braz 2012; Poole 2003) and approximate (Bui, Huynh, and Riedel 2012; Mladenov, Ahmadi, and Kersting 2012; Mladenov and Kersting 2015;
Bui, Huynh, and Sontag 2014; Mladenov, Globerson, and
Kersting 2014), which exploit model symmetries. Most of
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6351

