The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

SAGA: A Submodular Greedy Algorithm for Group Recommendation
Shameem A Puthiya Parambath

Nishant Vijayakumar

Sanjay Chawla

QCRI, HBKU, Doha, Qatar
spparambath@hbku.edu.qa

Apptopia Inc., Boston, USA
nishant.vijayakumar@gmail.com

QCRI, HBKU, Doha, Qatar
schawla@hbku.edu.qa

and Boutilier 2011; Skowron, Faliszewski, and Jerome Lang
2015).
In recommender systems, items are assumed to have intrinsic preference scores for each user, which represent the
level of afﬁnity of the user to the item. We assume the preference scores to be on an ordinal scale, typically in the range
of 1-5, with higher values indicating stronger preference. A
simple and straightforward approach to group recommendation is to aggregate the preference scores i.e combine the
preference scores of individual group members for an item
to form a joint ranking of the items and select the top-k items
(Masthoff 2011; Baltrunas, Makcinskas, and Ricci 2010).
Most commonly used aggregation functions are (i) average
misery; recommending items with highest average preference scores among the group members, (ii) least misery;
recommending items that maximize the minimum preference scores among users and (iii) plurarility; recommending items that maximize the number of “highest preference
scores” (Masthoff 2011; Amer-Yahia et al. 2009). But such
score aggregation strategies completely disregard the user
disagreement or the individual user satisfaction for individual items as discussed in Amer-Yahia et al. (2009). To get
a more balanced recommendation, it is important to consider the disagreements between users of the group for the
same item. Thus the problem can be reformulated as a biobjective optimization problem where one objective corresponds to the agreement (relevance) of the item to the users
and the other objective corresponds to the disagreement between the users for the item. The general procedure to solve
a multi-objective optimization problem is to take the convex combination of the objectives and perform homotopy
continuation, also referred as scalarization or weighted-sum
approach (Ehrgott and Gandibleux 2002). Similar to aggregation strategies, scalarization based algorithms assume that
preference scores for the test items are available, but in practice one has to run a baseline recommender system as a ﬁrst
step to generate the preference scores.
Inspired by the recent work on personalized diverse recommendations (Puthiya Parambath, Usunier, and Grandvalet 2016), in this paper we propose a general framework
for algorithms for group recommendations. We propose a
generic objective function by framing the problem as a relevant group interest coverage in an afﬁnity graph deﬁned
over the item features. The crux of our approach is that the

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a uniﬁed framework and an algorithm for the problem of group recommendation where a ﬁxed
number of items or alternatives can be recommended to a
group of users. The problem of group recommendation arises
naturally in many real world contexts, and is closely related
to the budgeted social choice problem studied in economics.
We frame the group recommendation problem as choosing a
subgraph with the largest group consensus score in a completely connected graph deﬁned over the item afﬁnity matrix.
We propose a fast greedy algorithm with strong theoretical
guarantees, and show that the proposed algorithm compares
favorably to the state-of-the-art group recommendation algorithms according to commonly used relevance and coverage
performance measures on benchmark dataset.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems can be regarded as a particular instance of a personalized information retrieval system where
the explicitly or implicitly learned user proﬁles/features
serve the purpose of a ‘query’ in the traditional IR system.
Recommender systems provide effective information exploration by proposing a set of relevant items/alternatives to
users. Many efﬁcient and scalable algorithms exist for personalized recommender systems, carefully tailored for many
desirable properties of the recommendation set like relevance, diversity, coverage etc (Ekstrand, Riedl, and Konstan
2011; Steck 2011; Puthiya Parambath, Usunier, and Grandvalet 2016). In contrast to personalized recommender systems, a group recommender (GR) system has to provide recommendations for a set of users jointly, returning a set of
items in consensus with diverse user preferences. The user
interests might be often conﬂicting in nature. A number of
real world applications can be formulated within the framework of choosing a subset of items from a given item set
to appeal to a group of users. For example, group discount
vendors have to choose a set of items that best appeals to the
set of diverse users in a given city; similarly ﬂight operators
have to choose a set of movies to play in a plane’s entertainment system. The problem is also closely related to the
budgeted social choice problem studied in economics (Lu
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3900

