The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Preallocation and Planning
Under Stochastic Resource Constraints
Frits de Nijs, Matthijs T. J. Spaan, Mathijs M. de Weerdt
{f.denijs, m.t.j.spaan, m.m.deweerdt}@tudelft.nl
Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands

agent’s consumption itself is stochastic (Mausam et al. 2005;
Schaffer, Clement, and Chien 2005). Nevertheless, no earlier
work has addressed multi-agent planning for such stochastic
resources.
In several application domains where multiple constrained
agents must coordinate their actions, there may be known
ﬁxed periods where communication between them is impossible (such as with non-geostationary satellites), unadvisable
(such as in warfare), or too uncertain (as in hazardous environments). In other domains the required response time for
actors maybe so short that planning and coordination needs
to be done a priori, such as in robot soccer, high-frequency
trading in multiple stock markets, or protection control in
electricity distribution networks. In all of these situations, an
approach is needed where coordinated policies are computed
for a number of sequential decisions that are taken without
further communication. Therefore, in this work we focus
on preallocation algorithms, which compute policies for a
given plan horizon by allocating resources to agents a priori,
thereby effectively decoupling the agents’ policies so that
they can be computed and executed independently.
Decoupling necessarily introduces an error, as agents cannot respond to non-local realizations of uncertain transitions.
In this work, however, we show how to permit effective
decoupling even in the case of a tight and stochastic coupling constraint. We extend Multi-agent Markov Decision
Processes (MMDPs) by a model of the resource constraint
realizations in a separate, orthogonal part of the state space.
This enables us to formulate novel approaches based on two
state-of-the-art planning algorithms that can deal with deterministic resource constraints. These algorithms represent
different solution categories: an optimal preallocation mixedinteger linear program (Wu and Durfee 2010) which restricts
worst-case consumption, and the constraint relaxation approach Constrained Markov Decision Process (Altman 1999)
restricting average consumption.
We evaluate the beneﬁt of planning for stochastic resource
constraints for both approaches by comparing to the state of
the art—i.e., planning for the mean constraint level—on a coordinated search-and-rescue domain, demonstrating the need
to handle stochastic resource constraints. Subsequently, we
use a heater planning domain to demonstrate the scalability
of the approximations and their reduced resource violation
frequency in larger problems. We show that agents taking

Abstract
Resource constraints frequently complicate multi-agent planning problems. Existing algorithms for resource-constrained,
multi-agent planning problems rely on the assumption that the
constraints are deterministic. However, frequently resource
constraints are themselves subject to uncertainty from external
inﬂuences. Uncertainty about constraints is especially challenging when agents must execute in an environment where
communication is unreliable, making on-line coordination
difﬁcult. In those cases, it is a signiﬁcant challenge to ﬁnd
coordinated allocations at plan time depending on availability at run time. To address these limitations, we propose to
extend algorithms for constrained multi-agent planning problems to handle stochastic resource constraints. We show how
to factorize resource limit uncertainty and use this to develop
novel algorithms to plan policies for stochastic constraints. We
evaluate the algorithms on a search-and-rescue problem and
on a power-constrained planning domain where the resource
constraints are decided by nature. We show that plans taking
into account all potential realizations of the constraint obtain
signiﬁcantly better utility than planning for the expectation,
while causing fewer constraint violations.

Introduction
Planning for future uncertainties is an effective tool to increase the utility of a system of multiple agents. Particularly
when the actions of agents are restricted by scarce resources,
planning for resource usage is an important challenge that
many authors have addressed (Adelman and Mersereau 2008;
Agrawal, Varakantham, and Yeoh 2016; De Nijs, Spaan, and
De Weerdt 2015; Gordon et al. 2012; Meuleau et al. 1998;
Wu and Durfee 2010; Yoo, Fitch, and Sukkarieh 2012). These
approaches have in common that they consider uncertainty in
state transitions, while assuming full knowledge about future
resource constraints.
However, resource capacity may itself be subject to uncertainty. For example, the amount of power produced from
renewable sources such as wind turbines is a stochastic
quantity (Klöckl, Papaefthymiou, and Pinson 2008). Similarly, when only a subset of agents participate in a trafﬁc
congestion control system, the non-participants contribute
to congestion stochastically (De Weerdt et al. 2013). Another source of resource uncertainty may occur when an
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4662

