The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Cross-View Person Identification by Matching Human
Poses Estimated with Confidence on Each Body Joint
Guoqiang Liang,1, 2 Xuguang Lan,1 Kang Zheng,2 Song Wang,2, 3 Nanning Zheng1
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, 710049
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA, 29208
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, 30072
gqliang@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {xglan, nnzheng}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, zheng37@email.sc.edu, songwang@cec.sc.edu

2

ers to better capture the scene of interest. For example, in a
sport game or a protest event, multiple policemen can wear
cameras to record videos at different locations and from
different view angles, which can facilitate the detection of
abnormal persons and activities.
One fundamental problem in analyzing these multiple
videos taken by wearable cameras is cross-view person
identification (CVPI) – identifying the same person from
these multiple videos (Zheng et al. 2017). As in (Zheng et
al. 2017), we assume all the videos are temporally synchronized, which can be achieved by sharing clock across
all the cameras. Given the temporal synchronization, if the
corresponding frames across multiple videos cover the
same person, this person must bear a unique pose and motion in 3D space. As a result, we can estimate 3D pose and
motion on each video and match them across these videos
to achieve CVPI. As in many person re-identification
methods, appearance feature matching can also be used for
CVPI (Zheng et al. 2017), although the extracted 2D appearance features may vary under different views.
Previous work (Zheng et al. 2017) has shown the effectiveness of using appearance and motion features for CVPI,
especially when using the view-invariant motion features
extracted by supervised deep learning. It also showed that
the appearance features and motion features can complement each other to improve the CVPI performance. However, the use of pose features for CVPI (Zheng et al. 2016)
is not very successful due to the high inaccuracy of the 3D
human pose estimation (HPE) on videos/images collected
in the wild. For example, for the body joints in 3D HPE,
the mean Euclidean distance between the ground-truth 3D
locations and the estimations of Pavlakos et al. (2017) is
71.90 mm, which is about 1/7 of the length of human torso
in Human 3.6M dataset (Ionescu et al. 2014), which is collected in a highly-controlled lab environment with very
simple background. In outdoor environments, with more

Abstract
Cross-view person identification (CVPI) from multiple
temporally synchronized videos taken by multiple wearable cameras from different, varying views is a very challenging but important problem, which has attracted more interests recently. Current state-of-the-art performance of
CVPI is achieved by matching appearance and motion features across videos, while the matching of pose features
does not work effectively given the high inaccuracy of the
3D human pose estimation on videos/images collected in the
wild. In this paper, we introduce a new metric of confidence
to the 3D human pose estimation and show that the combination of the inaccurately estimated human pose and the inferred confidence metric can be used to boost the CVPI performance –the estimated pose information can be integrated
to the appearance and motion features to achieve the new
state-of-the-art CVPI performance. More specifically, the
estimated confidence metric is measured at each humanbody joint and the joints with higher confidence are
weighted more in the pose matching for CVPI. In the experiments, we validate the proposed method on three wearablecamera video datasets and compare the performance against
several other existing CVPI methods.

Introduction
Video-based surveillance has been widely used in many
security, civil, and military applications. Traditional surveillance videos are captured by multi-camera network,
where all the cameras are installed at fixed locations. Since
they cannot move freely, they can only cover limited areas
from pre-fixed view angles. In recent years, wearable cameras, like Google Glass and GoPro, have been introduced
to many applications to expand the video coverage. Compared with fixed cameras, wearable cameras are mounted
over the head of the wearers and can move with the wearCopyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7089

