The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Adversarial Goal Generation for Intrinsic Motivation
Ishan Durugkar, Peter Stone
University of Texas at Austin
2317 Speedway, Stop D9500, Austin, TX 78712
Phone: 512.471.7316
ishand, pstone @cs.utexas.edu

In this project, we propose to learn a goal generator that
will select or generate goals (reward signals) for the RL
agent to learn to achieve. This generator will learn to generate goals that the agent will learn from most. Instead of
using these intrinsic motivations to learn separate options,
we propose to use Universal Value Function Approximators
(Schaul et al. 2015), which are function approximators designed to generalize across states and goals.
There has been recent work in using UVFAs to generalize
across goals (Held et al. 2017; Andrychowicz et al. 2017;
Cabi et al. 2017) and for automatic curriculum learning
(Graves et al. 2017; Matiisen et al. 2017; Sukhbaatar et al.
2017). We believe this area is a novel and interesting one
with a lot more issues to explore.

Abstract
Generally in Reinforcement Learning the goal, or reward signal, is given by the environment and cannot be controlled
by the agent. We propose to introduce an intrinsic motivation module that will select a reward function for the agent
to learn to achieve. We will use a Universal Value Function
Approximator (Schaul et al. 2015), that takes as input both
the state and the parameters of this reward function as the
goal to predict the value function (or action-value function)
to generalize across these goals. This module will be trained
to generate goals such that the agent’s learning is maximized.
Thus, this is also a method for automatic curriculum learning.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (Sutton and Barto 1998) is widely
studied as a method to train an agent by interaction with
it’s environment. There have been a wide variety of successes of this paradigm in robotics (Stone, Sutton, and
Kuhlmann 2005), computer systems, board games (Tesauro
1995), video games (Mnih et al. 2015), online web services,
etc.
An RL agent learns by trying to maximize a scalar reward
function that the environment provides it. In most cases, a
human has to hand-engineer a suitable reward signal for the
agent to maximize, or the application itself needs to have an
intuitive reward signal (the score in video games, for example). However, it is hard for an agent to learn a meaningful
policy if this reward signal is sparse, or non-existent. This
is evidenced by games that are difﬁcult even for recent Deep
Learning augmented systems to learn, like Montezuma’s Revenge (Mnih et al. 2015).
Intrinsic Motivation (Barto and Simsek 2005) in Reinforcement Learning is a method to allow an agent to generate
its own reward function. Such an intrinsic reward is a generated reward signal that is designed to facilitate learning a
wide variety of problems, rather than learning to optimize a
single one. If designed appropriately, such intrinsic rewards
can act as a curriculum for an agent to bootstrap itself and
learn faster. It can also be used to learn skills or options (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999) that can then be used to learn
any task of interest in that environment faster (Chentanez,
Barto, and Singh 2005).

Background
A Markov Decision Process is a tuple S, A, T, R0 , γ,
where S is the set of states, A is the set of available actions, T (st+1 |st , at ) is the state transition probability for
st , st+1 ∈ S, at ∈ A, γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discounting factor
and R0 (st , at , st+1 ) is a scalar reward function.
A policy π(a|s) is deﬁned as the probability of taking an
action a in state s. The value of a state s given a reward
function is deﬁned as
∞


.
i−t
γ R0 (si , ai , si+1 )
(1)
Vπ (st ) = E
i=t

where the actions are taken according to policy π and the
next state is drawn from T (st+1 |st , at ). The corresponding
action value is deﬁned as:
.

Q(st , at ) = E[R0 (st , at , st+1 ) + γVπ (st+1 )]


(2)

We redeﬁne reward R(s, a, s , g) as a function over state
s ∼ S, action a ∼ π(s), next state s ∼ T (s |s, a) and goal
g ∼ P (G). Here, G can be the set of states S for single
goal systems or a set of all possible goals, where a viable
goal would be any subset of S. The value and action-value
functions correspondingly change to reﬂect the dependence
on the goal.
We will restrict ourselves right now to goals that are directly comparable to states. R(s, a, s , g) can then be deﬁned
either as a sparse reward signal, which checks if s = g, or

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8073

