The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Deeper Insights into Graph Convolutional
Networks for Semi-Supervised Learning
Qimai Li,1 Zhichao Han,1,2 Xiao-Ming Wu1∗
1

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
ETH Zurich
csqmli@comp.polyu.edu.hk, zhhan@student.ethz.ch, xiao-ming.wu@polyu.edu.hk

amount of unlabeled data can be utilized to train with typically a small amount of labeled data.
Many researches have shown that leveraging unlabeled
data in training can improve learning accuracy signiﬁcantly
if used properly (Zhu and Goldberg 2009). The key issue is
to maximize the effective utilization of structural and feature information of unlabeled data. Due to the powerful feature extraction capability and recent success of deep neural networks, there have been some successful attempts to
revisit semi-supervised learning with neural-network-based
models, including ladder network (Rasmus et al. 2015),
semi-supervised embedding (Weston et al. 2008), planetoid
(Yang, Cohen, and Salakhutdinov 2016), and graph convolutional networks (Kipf and Welling 2017).
The recently developed graph convolutional neural networks (GCNNs) (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst
2016) is a successful attempt of generalizing the powerful
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in dealing with Euclidean data to modeling graph-structured data. In their pilot work (Kipf and Welling 2017), Kipf and Welling proposed a simpliﬁed type of GCNNs, called graph convolutional networks (GCNs), and applied it to semi-supervised
classiﬁcation. The GCN model naturally integrates the connectivity patterns and feature attributes of graph-structured
data, and outperforms many state-of-the-art methods significantly on some benchmarks. Nevertheless, it suffers from
similar problems faced by other neural-network-based models. The working mechanisms of the GCN model for semisupervised learning are not clear, and the training of GCNs
still requires considerable amount of labeled data for parameter tuning and model selection, which defeats the purpose
for semi-supervised learning.
In this paper, we demystify the GCN model for semisupervised learning. In particular, we show that the graph
convolution of the GCN model is simply a special form of
Laplacian smoothing, which mixes the features of a vertex
and its nearby neighbors. The smoothing operation makes
the features of vertices in the same cluster similar, thus
greatly easing the classiﬁcation task, which is the key reason why GCNs work so well. However, it also brings potential concerns of over-smoothing. If a GCN is deep with
many convolutional layers, the output features may be oversmoothed and vertices from different clusters may become
indistinguishable. The mixing happens quickly on small

Abstract
Many interesting problems in machine learning are being revisited with new deep learning tools. For graph-based semisupervised learning, a recent important development is graph
convolutional networks (GCNs), which nicely integrate local
vertex features and graph topology in the convolutional layers. Although the GCN model compares favorably with other
state-of-the-art methods, its mechanisms are not clear and it
still requires considerable amount of labeled data for validation and model selection.
In this paper, we develop deeper insights into the GCN model
and address its fundamental limits. First, we show that the
graph convolution of the GCN model is actually a special
form of Laplacian smoothing, which is the key reason why
GCNs work, but it also brings potential concerns of oversmoothing with many convolutional layers. Second, to overcome the limits of the GCN model with shallow architectures,
we propose both co-training and self-training approaches to
train GCNs. Our approaches signiﬁcantly improve GCNs in
learning with very few labels, and exempt them from requiring additional labels for validation. Extensive experiments on
benchmarks have veriﬁed our theory and proposals.

1

Introduction

The breakthroughs in deep learning have led to a paradigm
shift in artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning. On the
one hand, numerous old problems have been revisited with
deep neural networks and huge progress has been made in
many tasks previously seemed out of reach, such as machine translation and computer vision. On the other hand,
new techniques such as geometric deep learning (Bronstein
et al. 2017) are being developed to generalize deep neural
models to new or non-traditional domains.
It is well known that training a deep neural model typically requires a large amount of labeled data, which cannot
be satisﬁed in many scenarios due to the high cost of labeling
training data. To reduce the amount of data needed for training, a recent surge of research interest has focused on fewshot learning (Lake, Salakhutdinov, and Tenenbaum 2015;
Rezende et al. 2016) – to learn a classiﬁcation model with
very few examples from each class. Closely related to fewshot learning is semi-supervised learning, where a large
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3538

