The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

On Convergence of Epanechnikov Mean Shift
Kejun Huang

Xiao Fu

Nicholas D. Sidiropoulos

University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55414
huang663@umn.edu

Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97331
xiao.fu@oregonstate.edu

University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22904
nikos@virginia.edu

abilistic generative model. Based on the Gaussian mixture model (GMM), instead of applying Lloyd’s algorithm
or Expectation-Maximization (Dempster, Laird, and Rubin
1977), this line of work devises sophisticated and somewhat conceptual methods that guarantee correct estimation
of the GMM parameters under additional conditions. The
ﬁrst of this genre, to the best of our knowledge, is the
work in (Dasgupta 1999), which shows that if the Gaussian components are almost disjoint, then the deﬂation-type
method in (Dasgupta 1999) correctly clusters the data with
high probability. A more practical approach is later proposed
in (Dasgupta and Schulman 2000) with the same performance guarantee, which is a two-round variant of the EM
algorithm. A number of follow-up works try to further improve the bound on how close the Gaussian components
can be (Arora and Kannan 2001; Vempala and Wang 2004;
Brubaker and Vempala 2008; Moitra and Valianty 2010;
Belkin and Sinha 2010), but most of them focus on theoretical guarantees but not practical implementations.
On the other hand, there is a simple and effective method
for clustering called Mean Shift (Fukunaga and Hostetler
1975; Cheng 1995; Comaniciu and Meer 2002) that has been
popular in the ﬁeld of computer vision. Two main versions
of Mean Shift are the Epanechnikov Mean Shift and Gaussian Mean Shift, and the details will be explained in the
next section. Compared to K-means and Gaussian mixture
model, fewer theoretical results have been presented regarding Mean Shift. Compared to Gaussian Mean Shift, even less
analysis exists for Epanechnikov Mean Shift, partly due to
its non-smoothness nature, despite its simplicity and effectiveness.
The main contribution of this paper is the establishment of
convergence for Epanechnikov Mean Shift. There have been
many convergence studies on different variants and approximations to the original Epanechnikov Mean Shift. However,
to the best of our knowledge, there is no analysis that directly addresses the original Epanechnikov Mean Shift, partially because non-smoothness of the kernel employed in the
method poses a hard analytical problem. Nevertheless, analyzing the convergence behavior of the original Epanechnikov Mean Shift is of great interest since it is based on
the ‘optimal’ kernel in density estimation. In this work, we
provide detailed functional analysis and rigorous proof for
Epanechnikov Mean Shift. We ﬁrst show that the method in-

Abstract
Epanechnikov Mean Shift is a simple yet empirically very
effective algorithm for clustering. It localizes the centroids
of data clusters via estimating modes of the probability distribution that generates the data points, using the ‘optimal’
Epanechnikov kernel density estimator. However, since the
procedure involves non-smooth kernel density functions, the
convergence behavior of Epanechnikov mean shift lacks theoretical support as of this writing—most of the existing analyses are based on smooth functions and thus cannot be applied to Epanechnikov Mean Shift. In this work, we ﬁrst show
that the original Epanechnikov Mean Shift may indeed terminate at a non-critical point, due to the non-smoothness nature. Based on our analysis, we propose a simple remedy to
ﬁx it. The modiﬁed Epanechnikov Mean Shift is guaranteed
to terminate at a local maximum of the estimated density,
which corresponds to a cluster centroid, within a ﬁnite number of iterations. We also propose a way to avoid running the
Mean Shift iterates from every data point, while maintaining
good clustering accuracies under non-overlapping spherical
Gaussian mixture models. This further pushes Epanechnikov
Mean Shift to handle very large and high-dimensional data
sets. Experiments show surprisingly good performance compared to the Lloyd’s K-means algorithm and the EM algorithm.

Introduction
Clustering is a fundamental problem in artiﬁcial intelligence
and statistics (Jain, Murty, and Flynn 1999). The simplest
form is arguably the K-means clustering, in which a set of
d
data points {xm }M
m=1 ⊆ R is given, and the objective is
to separate them into K clusters, such that the sum of the
cluster variances is minimized. It has been shown that Kmeans clustering is NP-hard in general (Aloise et al. 2009;
Dasgupta and Freund 2009), even though Lloyd’s algorithm
usually gives reasonably good approximate solutions (Lloyd
1982) when d is small. In fact, it has been used as a standard
sub-routine for more complicated clustering tasks like spectral clustering (Ng, Jordan, and Weiss 2001) and subspace
clustering (Elhamifar and Vidal 2013), despite the fact that
it is not guaranteed to give the global optimal solution.
Several attempts have been made to quantify cases under which we can provably cluster the data under a probCopyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3263

