The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Meta Multi-Task Learning for Sequence Modeling
Junkun Chen, Xipeng Qiu,∗ Pengfei Liu, Xuanjing Huang
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
825 Zhangheng Road, Shanghai, China
{jkchen16, xpqiu, pﬂiu14, xjhuang}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Semantic composition functions have been playing a pivotal
role in neural representation learning of text sequences. In
spite of their success, most existing models suffer from the
underﬁtting problem: they use the same shared compositional
function on all the positions in the sequence, thereby lacking expressive power due to incapacity to capture the richness of compositionality. Besides, the composition functions
of different tasks are independent and learned from scratch.
In this paper, we propose a new sharing scheme of composition function across multiple tasks. Speciﬁcally, we use a
shared meta-network to capture the meta-knowledge of semantic composition and generate the parameters of the taskspeciﬁc semantic composition models. We conduct extensive
experiments on two types of tasks, text classiﬁcation and sequence tagging, which demonstrate the beneﬁts of our approach. Besides, we show that the shared meta-knowledge
learned by our proposed model can be regarded as off-theshelf knowledge and easily transferred to new tasks.

(a) feature-level

(b) function-level

Figure 1: Two different sharing schemes. θ denotes the parameters of task-speciﬁc composition function. xt , yt , ht
and ĥt are the input, output, shared and private hidden
states at step t. (a) The generic feature-level sharing scheme,
in which the shared features will be taken as inputs for
task-speciﬁc layers. (b) Our proposed function-level sharing
scheme, in which a shared Meta-LSTM controls the parameters θt of task-speciﬁc composition function.

Introduction
Deep learning models have been widely used in many natural language processing (NLP) tasks. A major challenge is
how to design and learn the semantic composition function
while modeling a text sequence. The typical composition
models involve sequential (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014;
Chung et al. 2014), convolutional (Collobert et al. 2011;
Kalchbrenner, Grefenstette, and Blunsom 2014; Kim 2014)
and syntactic (Socher et al. 2013; Tai, Socher, and Manning
2015; Zhu, Sobihani, and Guo 2015) compositional models.
In spite of their success, these models have two major limitations. First, they usually use a shared composition function for all kinds of semantic compositions, even though the
compositions have different characteristics in nature. For example, the composition of the adjective and the noun differs signiﬁcantly from the composition of the verb and the
noun. Second, different composition functions are learned
from scratch in different tasks. However, given a certain natural language, its composition functions should be the same
(on meta-knowledge level at least), even if the tasks are different.

To address these problems, we need to design a dynamic
composition function which can vary with different positions and contexts in a sequence, and share it across the
different tasks. To share some meta-knowledge of composition function, we can adopt the multi-task learning (Caruana 1997). However, the sharing scheme of most neural
multi-task learning methods is feature-level sharing, where
a subspace of the feature space is shared across all the
tasks. Although these sharing schemes are successfully used
in various NLP tasks (Collobert and Weston 2008; Luong
et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2015; Liu, Qiu, and Huang 2016;
Hashimoto et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2017), they are not suitable to share the composition function.
In this paper, inspired by recent work on dynamic parameter generation (De Brabandere et al. 2016; Bertinetto et al.
2016; Ha, Dai, and Le 2016), we propose a function-level
sharing scheme for multi-task learning, in which a shared
meta-network is used to learn the meta-knowledge of semantic composition among the different tasks. The task-speciﬁc
semantic composition function is generated by the metanetwork. Then the task-speciﬁc composition function is used
to obtain the task-speciﬁc representation of a text sequence.

∗

Corresponding Author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5070

