The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multi-Step Reinforcement Learning:
A Unifying Algorithm
Kristopher De Asis,1 J. Fernando Hernandez-Garcia,1
G. Zacharias Holland,1 Richard S. Sutton
Reinforcement Learning and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory, University of Alberta
{kldeasis,jfhernan,gholland,rsutton}@ualberta.ca

1992) is arguably the most popular, and is considered an offpolicy method because the policy generating the behaviour
(the behaviour policy), and the policy that is being learned
(the target policy) are different. Sarsa (Rummery and Niranjan 1994; Sutton 1996) is the classical on-policy control method, where the behaviour and target policies are the
same. However, Sarsa can be extended to learn off-policy
with the use of importance sampling (Precup, Sutton, and
Singh 2000). Expected Sarsa is an extension of Sarsa that,
instead of using the action-value of the next state to update
the value of the current state, uses the expectation of all the
subsequent action-values of the current state with respect
to the target policy. Expected Sarsa has been studied as a
strictly on-policy method (van Seijen et al. 2009), but in this
paper we present a more general version that can be used
for both on- and off-policy learning and that also subsumes
Q-learning. All of these methods are often described in the
simple one-step case, but they can also be extended across
multiple time steps.
The TD(λ) algorithm uniﬁes one-step TD learning with
Monte Carlo methods (Sutton 1988). Through the use of eligibility traces, and the trace-decay parameter, λ ∈ [0, 1], a
spectrum of algorithms is created. At one end, λ = 1, exists
Monte Carlo methods, and at the other, λ = 0, exists onestep TD learning. In the middle of the spectrum are intermediate methods which can perform better than the methods
at either extreme (Sutton and Barto 1998). The concept of
eligibility traces can also be applied to TD control methods
such as Sarsa and Q-learning, which can create more efﬁcient learning and produce better performance (Rummery
1995).
Multi-step TD methods are usually thought of in terms of
an average of many multi-step returns of differing lengths
and are often associated with eligibility traces, as is the case
with TD(λ). However, it is also natural to think of them
in terms of individual n-step returns with their associated
n-step backup (Sutton and Barto 1998). We refer to each
of these individual backups as atomic backups, whereas the
combination of several atomic backups of different lengths
creates a compound backup.
In the existing literature, it is not clear how best to extend one-step Expected Sarsa to a multi-step algorithm. The
Tree-backup algorithm was originally presented as a method
to perform off-policy evaluation when the behaviour policy

Abstract
Unifying seemingly disparate algorithmic ideas to produce
better performing algorithms has been a longstanding goal
in reinforcement learning. As a primary example, TD(λ) elegantly uniﬁes one-step TD prediction with Monte Carlo
methods through the use of eligibility traces and the tracedecay parameter λ. Currently, there are a multitude of algorithms that can be used to perform TD control, including Sarsa, Q-learning, and Expected Sarsa. These methods
are often studied in the one-step case, but they can be extended across multiple time steps to achieve better performance. Each of these algorithms is seemingly distinct, and no
one dominates the others for all problems. In this paper, we
study a new multi-step action-value algorithm called Q(σ)
that uniﬁes and generalizes these existing algorithms, while
subsuming them as special cases. A new parameter, σ, is introduced to allow the degree of sampling performed by the
algorithm at each step during its backup to be continuously
varied, with Sarsa existing at one extreme (full sampling),
and Expected Sarsa existing at the other (pure expectation).
Q(σ) is generally applicable to both on- and off-policy learning, but in this work we focus on experiments in the on-policy
case. Our results show that an intermediate value of σ, which
results in a mixture of the existing algorithms, performs better
than either extreme. The mixture can also be varied dynamically which can result in even greater performance.

The Landscape of TD Algorithms
Temporal-difference (TD) methods (Sutton and Barto 1998)
are an important concept in reinforcement learning (RL) that
combines ideas from Monte Carlo and dynamic programming methods. TD methods allow learning to occur directly
from raw experience in the absence of a model of the environment’s dynamics, like with Monte Carlo methods, while
also allowing estimates to be updated based on other learned
estimates without waiting for a ﬁnal result, like with dynamic programming. The core concepts of TD methods provide a ﬂexible framework for creating a variety of powerful
algorithms that can be used for both prediction and control.
There are a number of TD control methods that have been
proposed. Q-learning (Watkins 1989; Watkins and Dayan
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Authors contributed equally, and are listed alphabetically.

2902

