The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Deep Cascade Network for
Unaligned Face Attribute Classiﬁcation
Hui Ding,1 Hao Zhou,2 Shaohua Kevin Zhou,3 Rama Chellappa4
1,2,4

3

University of Maryland, College Park
Siemens Healthineers, New Jersey

may require information from the whole face region. Most
current studies do not pay special attention to this problem.
They either detect facial landmarks and extract hand-crafted
features from patches around them (Kumar et al. 2009; Berg
and Belhumeur 2013) or train a deep network to classify the
attributes by taking a whole face as input (Liu et al. 2015;
Wang, Cheng, and Schmidt Feris 2016; Rudd, Günther, and
Boult 2016; Hand and Chellappa 2017).
In this paper, we propose a learning-based method that
dynamically selects different face regions for unaligned face
attribute prediction. It integrates two networks using a cascade: a face region localization (FRL) network followed by
an attribute classiﬁcation network. The localization network
detects face areas speciﬁc to attributes, especially those that
have local spatial support. The classiﬁcation network selectively leverages information from these face regions to make
the ﬁnal prediction.
For accurate face region detection, our localization network is constructed under a multi-task learning framework.
The lower layers which are used to extract low level features
are shared by all the tasks while the high-level semantics are
learned separately. Moreover, a global average pooling is applied to force the network to learn location-sensitive information (Lin, Chen, and Yan 2014). Although the network is
trained in a weakly-supervised manner with attribute labels
only, the detected face regions are consistent with what one
may expect. As a result, face alignment algorithms which
are usually sensitive to occlusion, variations of pose and illumination are not needed.
For each face region (also called a part) detected by our
localization network, we train a separate attribute classiﬁcation network, called a part-based subnet. The localized
face parts may not contain enough contextual information
for predicting global attributes. Thus, a whole-image-based
subnet is also trained. To combine the information from
the part-based and whole-image-based subnets, a two-layer
fully-connected classiﬁer is built on top of the output attribute scores. The ﬁrst layer is used to select the relevant
subnet for predicting each attribute, while the second layer
is designed to model the rich attribute relations. The integrated system is called the parts and whole (PaW) network.
Since the face region localization network is supervised
by attribute labels, it is appealing to adapt its weights to initialize the subnets in PaW. However, features from the local-

Abstract
Humans focus attention on different face regions when recognizing face attributes. Most existing face attribute classiﬁcation methods use the whole image as input. Moreover, some
of these methods rely on ﬁducial landmarks to provide deﬁned face parts. In this paper, we propose a cascade network
that simultaneously learns to localize face regions speciﬁc to
attributes and performs attribute classiﬁcation without alignment. First, a weakly-supervised face region localization network is designed to automatically detect regions (or parts)
speciﬁc to attributes. Then multiple part-based networks and
a whole-image-based network are separately constructed and
combined together by the region switch layer and attribute relation layer for ﬁnal attribute classiﬁcation. A multi-net learning method and hint-based model compression is further proposed to get an effective localization model and a compact
classiﬁcation model, respectively. Our approach achieves signiﬁcantly better performance than state-of-the-art methods on
unaligned CelebA dataset, reducing the classiﬁcation error by
30.9%.

Introduction
Face attributes describe the characteristics observed from
a face image. They were ﬁrst introduced by Kumar et
al. (2009) as mid-level features for face veriﬁcation (Kumar et al. 2011) and since then have attracted much attention. The last few years have witnessed their successful applications in hashing (Li et al. 2015), face retrieval (Siddiquie, Feris, and Davis 2011), and one-shot face recognition (Jadhav, Namboodiri, and Venkatesh 2016). Recently,
researchers have begun to investigate the possibility of synthesizing face images based on face attributes (Radford,
Metz, and Chintala 2015; Yan et al. 2016).
Despite their wide applications, face attribute recognition
is not an easy task. One reason is that recognizing different
face attributes may require attentions to different regions of
the face (Moran and Desimone 1985; Posner and Petersen
1990). For example, local attributes like Mustache could
be recognized by just checking the region containing the
mouth. Rest of the face region does not provide useful information and may even hamper this particular attribute recognition. However, recognizing global attributes like Pale Skin
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6789

