The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Data-Dependent Learning of Symmetric/Antisymmetric
Relations for Knowledge Base Completion
Hitoshi Manabe

Katsuhiko Hayashi

Masashi Shimbo

Nara Institute of Science and Technology NTT Communication Laboratories Nara Institute of Science and Technology
Ikoma, Nara 630 0192, Japan
Seika-cho, Kyoto 619 0237, Japan
Ikoma, Nara 630 0192, Japan
manabe.hitoshi.me0@is.naist.jp
hayashi.katsuhiko@lab.ntt.co.jp
shimbo@is.naist.jp

holds but not (e2 , r, e1 ). This reﬂects the fact that the subject
and object in a relation are not interchangeable in general
(e.g., parent of ).
However, the degree of symmetry differs from relation to
relation. In particular, a non-negligible number of symmetric
relations exist in knowledge bases (e.g., sibling of ). Moreover, many non-symmetric relations in knowledge base are
actually antisymmetric, in the sense that for every distinct
pair e1 , e2 of entities, if (e1 , r, e2 ) holds, then (e2 , r, e1 )
never holds.1 For relations that show certain regularities
such as above, the expressiveness of models to capture general relations might be superﬂuous, and a model with less
parameters might be preferable.
It thus seems desirable to encourage the scoring function
to produce sparser models, if the observed data suggests a
relation being symmetric or antisymmetric. As we do not
assume any background knowledge about individual relations, the choice between these contrasting properties must
be made solely from the observed data. Further, we do not
want the model to sacriﬁce the expressiveness to cope with
relations that are neither purely symmetric or antisymmetric.
Complex Embeddings (ComplEx) (Trouillon et al. 2016b)
are one of the state-of-the-art methods for KBC. ComplEx
represents entities and relations as complex vectors, and it
can model general non-symmetric relations thanks to the
scoring function deﬁned by the Hermitian inner product of
these vectors. However, for symmetric relations, the imaginary parts in relation vectors are redundant parameters since
they only contribute to non-symmetry of the scoring function. ComplEx is thus not exempt from the issue we mentioned above: the lack of symmetry/antisymmetry consideration for individual relations. Our experimental results show
that this issue indeed impairs the performance of ComplEx.
In this paper, we propose a technique for training ComplEx relation vectors adaptively to the degree of symmetry/antisymmetry observed in the data. Our method is based
on L1 regularization, but not in the standard way; the goal
here is not to make a sparse, succinct model but to adjust
the degree of symmetry/antisymmetry on the relation-byrelation basis, in a data-driven fashion. In our model, L1
regularization is imposed on the products of coupled param-

Abstract
Embedding-based methods for knowledge base completion
(KBC) learn representations of entities and relations in a vector space, along with the scoring function to estimate the
likelihood of relations between entities. The learnable class
of scoring functions is designed to be expressive enough
to cover a variety of real-world relations, but this expressive comes at the cost of an increased number of parameters. In particular, parameters in these methods are superﬂuous for relations that are either symmetric or antisymmetric. To mitigate this problem, we propose a new L1 regularizer for Complex Embeddings, which is one of the state-ofthe-art embedding-based methods for KBC. This regularizer
promotes symmetry or antisymmetry of the scoring function
on a relation-by-relation basis, in accordance with the observed data. Our empirical evaluation shows that the proposed
method outperforms the original Complex Embeddings and
other baseline methods on the FB15k dataset.

Introduction
Large-scale knowledge bases, such as YAGO (Suchanek,
Kasneci, and Weikum 2007), Freebase (Bollacker et al.
2008), and WordNet (Fellbaum 1998) are utilized in
knowledge-oriented applications such as question answering and dialog systems. Facts are stored in these knowledge bases as triplets of form (subject entity, relation,
object entity).
Although a knowledge base may contain more than a million facts, many facts are still missing (Nickel et al. 2016).
Knowledge base completion (KBC) aims to ﬁnd such missing facts automatically. In recent years, vector embedding
of knowledge bases has been actively pursued as a promising approach to KBC. In this approach, entities and relations are embedded into a vector space as their representations, in most cases as vectors and sometimes as matrices.
A variety of methods have been proposed, each of which
computes the likeliness score of given triplets using different
vector/matrix operations over the representations of entities
and relations involved.
In most of the previous methods, the scoring function is
designed to cover general non-symmetric relations, i.e., relations r such that for some entities e1 and e2 , triplet (e1 , r, e2 )
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Note that even if a relation is antisymmetric in the above sense,
its truth-value matrix may not be antisymmetric.

3754

