The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Zero-Shot Learning with Attribute Selection∗
Yuchen Guo,† Guiguang Ding,† Jungong Han,‡ Sheng Tang§
†

School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University, Lancaster, LA1 4YW, UK
§
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China
{yuchen.w.guo,jungonghan77}@gmail.com, dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn, ts@ict.ac.cn

‡

Abstract

7UDLQLQJ6HW
SRODUEHDU

Zero-shot learning (ZSL) is regarded as an effective way to
construct classiﬁcation models for target classes which have no
labeled samples available. The basic framework is to transfer
knowledge from (different) auxiliary source classes having
sufﬁcient labeled samples with some attributes shared by target
and source classes as bridge. Attributes play an important
role in ZSL but they have not gained sufﬁcient attention in
recent years. Previous works mostly assume attributes are
perfect and treat each attribute equally. However, as shown
in this paper, different attributes have different properties,
such as their class distribution, variance, and entropy, which
may have considerable impact on ZSL accuracy if treated
equally. Based on this observation, in this paper we propose
to use a subset of attributes, instead of the whole set, for
building ZSL models. The attribute selection is conducted by
considering the information amount and predictability under a
novel joint optimization framework. To our knowledge, this is
the ﬁrst work that notices the inﬂuence of attributes themselves
and proposes to use a reﬁned attribute set for ZSL. Since
our approach focuses on selecting good attributes for ZSL, it
can be combined to any attribute based ZSL approaches so
as to augment their performance. Experiments on four ZSL
benchmarks demonstrate that our approach can improve zeroshot classiﬁcation accuracy and yield state-of-the-art results.

5HFRJQL]H

EODFNQR
ZKLOH\HV
VWULSHVQR
ZDWHU\HV
HDWVILVK\HV

$WWULEXWH5HFRJQL]HU

7UDLQ

]HEUD
EODFN\HV
ZKLOH\HV
VWULSHV\HV
ZDWHUQR
HDWVILVKQR

EODFN\HV
ZKLOHQR
VWULSHV\HV
ZDWHUQR
HDWVILVKQR

EODFN"

ZKLWH" VWULSHV"

ZDWHU"
5HFRJQL]H

HDWVILVK"
EODFN\HV
ZKLOHQR
VWULSHVQR
ZDWHU\HV
HDWVILVK\HV

0DWFK

7DUJHW&ODVVHV

WLJHU

EODFN\HV
ZKLOH\HV
VWULSHV\HV
ZDWHUQR
HDWVILVKQR

7LJHU
2WWHU

RWWHU

7LJHU
2WWHU

EODFN\HV
ZKLOHQR
VWULSHVQR
ZDWHU\HV
HDWVILVK\HV
0DWFK

Figure 1: The basic framework for attribute-based ZSL.
for each category. A large number of labeled samples are
easy to collect for common categories. However, as Lampert,
Nickisch, and Harmeling (2014) have pointed out, there are
at least tens of thousands of basic object categories in the
world, and much more ﬁne-grained ones. In reality, the object
categories follow a long-tail distribution, where most of them
occur infrequently such that it is expensive to collect a large
number of labeled samples for them. Moreover, new concepts, such as a new type of electronic device like iPhone8,
may occur in the Web everyday. It is also difﬁcult to ﬁnd
sufﬁcient exemplars for these new concepts. Therefore, how
to train classiﬁcation models for these uncommon or new
categories which have very limited labeled samples, and no
samples in the extreme case, is a practical problem and has
attracted considerable research interest (Farhadi et al. 2009;
Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2014; Al-Halah, Tapaswi,
and Stiefelhagen 2016; Guo et al. 2017a).
To address this problem, zero-shot learning (ZSL) has been
introduced as a promising solution (Farhadi et al. 2009). It
is observed that although the labeled sample for some target classes is not given, there are always a large number of
different auxiliary classes having sufﬁcient labeled samples.
So the key is to ﬁnd a bridge to transfer supervised knowledge from auxiliary classes to target classes. One widely used
way is class attributes which deﬁne the properties of the corresponding class and are shared between source and target
classes, which is brieﬂy illustrated in Figure 1. For example,
we can deﬁne attributes like “stripes”, “four legs”, and “water”
for animals. Then we can train attribute recognizers (classiﬁcation or regression models) using images and attribute
information from auxiliary classes which are different but
related to target classes. Then given a test image from a target

Introduction
Image classiﬁcation, whose goal is to identify the category of instances in an image, is an active research topic
in machine learning and computer vision communities. Recently, beneﬁting from the fast development of deep learning techniques (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; He et al. 2016; Huang et
al. 2016), the image classiﬁcation accuracy on many benchmarks, including the large-scale ImageNet (Russakovsky et
al. 2015), has been improved tremendously and even surpassed human-level performance. It should be noticed that
the progress in image classiﬁcation relies heavily on a largescale training set which provides sufﬁcient labeled samples
∗
This research was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant No. 61571269) and the Royal Society Newton Mobility Grant (IE150997). Corresponding author:
Guiguang Ding.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6870

