The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Constructing Domain-Speciﬁc
Search Engines with No Programming
Mayank Kejriwal, Pedro Szekely
Information Sciences Institute
USC Viterbi School of Engineering
4676 Admiralty Way 1001
Marina Del Rey, California 90292
{kejriwal,pszekely}@isi.edu
that were developed over years of research, and is already
being transitioned to combat important problems like fraud
and human trafﬁcking.

Abstract
We propose a demonstration of myDIG (my Domain-speciﬁc
Insight Graphs), a system that allows non-technical domain
experts, including those with no programming experience, to
construct a domain-speciﬁc search engine over a raw corpus
of webpages. myDIG has been developed and reﬁned over
multiple years under the DARPA MEMEX program, and has
undergone rigorous user testing with actual domain experts
from investigative agencies like the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC). All components of myDIG are opensource, and the product of fundamental research.

High-level Architecture
At a high level, the myDIG architecture operates in two
high-level phases. In the ﬁrst domain setup phase, users construct and iteratively reﬁne a knowledge graph and vocabulary from the raw corpus of webpages. Users can try multiple
options on a sampled subset of the corpus, and decide where
they want to invest more effort. Users can also customize the
appearance (icons, colors) and algorithmic elements of the
search GUI without actual programming, including deciding
aspects such as the importance of an attribute for search, and
whether a given attribute is textual or entity-centric. Users
can also input their glossaries to seed knowledge graph construction for certain attributes. For example, one could input
a glossary of stock ticker symbols to seed the extractions for
an attribute ‘Stock Tickers’.
In the second domain exploration phase, domain experts
use the search engine for gaining further insight into domain properties and characteristics, and in the case of investigative domains, both generating and investigating leads.
Search in myDIG can be both ﬁne-grained and coarsegrained, depending on user preferences. For example, myDIG supports basic keyword search, but also supports ﬁltering on ﬁelds and facets, and ‘form-based’ querying. Many
of our users tend to start their explorations with keyword
search, followed by more sophisticated explorations once
they have located an item of interest. In some cases, however, users already have a ‘lead’ and commence search with
the sophisticated options available to them. myDIG provides
users with options to guide the search in customized ways.

Introduction
As engineering complex systems, especially those based on
machine learning, becomes ever more complicated, there is
a need to build interactive systems with powerful capabilities that can be accessed and used by non-technical domain
experts. Such capabilities are especially useful on crawled
Web data, since many interesting phenomena worthy of social or investigative interest (like fraud), have a signiﬁcant
Web presence. We propose a demonstration of myDIG, a
system that ingests a corpus of webpages stored in a distributed ﬁle system, and allows a user to construct a domainspeciﬁc knowledge graph and search engine without any
programming. A high-level architectural description of myDIG is provided in the next section, along with details on
the actual demonstration. We provide screenshots and visualizations of myDIG in the slides accompanying this demonstration proposal. myDIG is currently in a relatively mature
stage, having already been evaluated by DARPA in multiple domains with enormous investigative potential, including securities and penny stock fraud, illegal weapons sales,
counterfeit electronics, narcotics and mail shipment fraud.
Signiﬁcance. To the best of our knowledge, myDIG is
among the ﬁrst systems (and the ﬁrst open-source system1 )
to allow non-programmers to set up, and search, a domain
expressed in raw, heterogeneous Web documents using an
interactive interface. Attendees of the demonstration will be
able to explore this capability ﬁrst-hand. myDIG contains
state-of-the-art interacting components (see Related Work)

Demo
In the exhibit, we will take our users through important, representative steps in a workﬂow that will involve constructing
a domain and a domain-speciﬁc search engine in a matter
of minutes on a small, but interesting (and real-world) corpus of webpages describing penny stocks. Users will also be
given a chance to explore the search capabilities of myDIG
on a much larger dataset that was crawled over the Open
Web and has been evaluated by the SEC for its potential in
pinpointing evidence of securities fraud.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/usc-isi-i2/dig-etl-engine

8204

