The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Emotional Chatting Machine: Emotional Conversation
Generation with Internal and External Memory
Hao Zhou,† Minlie Huang,†∗ Tianyang Zhang,† Xiaoyan Zhu,† Bing Liu‡
†

State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems,
National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology,
Dept. of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, PR China
‡
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA
tuxchow@gmail.com, aihuang@tsinghua.edu.cn,
keavilzhangzty@gmail.com, zxy-dcs@tsinghua.edu.cn, liub@cs.uic.edu

behaviors to suit users’ emotional states (Polzin and Waibel
2000), and on generating responses to users’ utterances at
both the content- and affect-related levels (Skowron 2010).
However, these studies, mostly inspired by psychology
ﬁndings, are either rule-based or limited to small-scale
data. Recently, neural models trained on large-scale data
have advanced open-domain conversation generation signiﬁcantly (Ritter, Cherry, and Dolan 2011; Vinyals and Le
2015; Shang, Lu, and Li 2015; Serban et al. 2016). Most
of these models aim to improve the content quality of
conversation generation (Gu et al. 2016; Li et al. 2016a;
Xing et al. 2017; Mou et al. 2016; Li et al. 2016b). To the
best of our knowledge, the emotion factor has not been addressed in existing neural models for conversation generation. Table 1 shows some examples with/without considering emotions. We can see that our ECM model is emotionally involved and more empathetic.

Abstract
Perception and expression of emotion are key factors to the
success of dialogue systems or conversational agents. However, this problem has not been studied in large-scale conversation generation so far. In this paper, we propose Emotional
Chatting Machine (ECM) that can generate appropriate responses not only in content (relevant and grammatical) but
also in emotion (emotionally consistent). To the best of our
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work that addresses the emotion
factor in large-scale conversation generation. ECM addresses
the factor using three new mechanisms that respectively (1)
models the high-level abstraction of emotion expressions by
embedding emotion categories, (2) captures the change of
implicit internal emotion states, and (3) uses explicit emotion expressions with an external emotion vocabulary. Experiments show that the proposed model can generate responses
appropriate not only in content but also in emotion.

Introduction

User: Worst day ever. I arrived late because of the trafﬁc.
Basic Seq2Seq: You were late.
ECM (Like): I am always here to support you.
ECM (Happy): Keep smiling! Things will get better.
ECM (Sad): It’s depressing.
ECM (Disgust): Sometimes life just sucks.
ECM (Angry): The trafﬁc is too bad!

As a vital part of human intelligence, emotional intelligence is deﬁned as the ability to perceive, integrate, understand, and regulate emotions (Mayer and Salovey 1997;
Mayer, Roberts, and Barsade 2008). It has been a long-term
goal of artiﬁcial intelligence to enable a machine to understand affect and emotion (Picard and Picard 1997). To create a chatbot capable of communicating with a user at the
human level, it is necessary to equip the machine with the
ability of perceiving and expressing emotions.
Existing studies show that addressing affect and emotion in dialogue systems or conversational agents can enhance user satisfaction (Prendinger, Mori, and Ishizuka
2005), contribute to a more positive perception of the interaction (Prendinger and Ishizuka 2005), and lead to fewer
breakdowns in dialogues (Martinovski and Traum 2003).
Some initial work has also been done on adjusting dialogue

Table 1: Conversations with/without considering emotion.
There are several challenges in addressing the emotion
factor in large-scale conversation generation. First, highquality emotion-labeled data are difﬁcult to obtain in a largescale corpus, as emotion annotation is a fairly subjective task
and emotion classiﬁcation is also challenging. Second, it is
difﬁcult to consider emotions in a natural and coherent way
because we need to balance grammaticality and expressions
of emotions, as argued in (Ghosh et al. 2017). Last, simply embedding emotion information in existing neural models, as shown in our experiments, cannot produce desirable
emotional responses but just hard-to-perceive general ex-

∗
Corresponding author: Minlie Huang, aihuang@tsinghua.edu
.cn
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

730

