The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Multi-View Fusion Neural Network for Answer Selection
Lei Sha,∗ Xiaodong Zhang,∗ Feng Qian, Baobao Chang, Zhifang Sui
∗ Contributed equally
Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Ministry of Education
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University
{shalei, zxdcs, nickqian, chbb, szf}@pku.edu.cn

Question
Answer I

Abstract
Community question answering aims at choosing the most
appropriate answer for a given question, which is important
in many NLP applications. Previous neural network-based
methods consider several different aspects of information
through calculating attentions. These different kinds of attentions are always simply summed up and can be seen as a
“single view”, causing severe information loss. To overcome
this problem, we propose a Multi-View Fusion Neural Network, where each attention component generates a “view” of
the QA pair and a fusion RNN integrates the generated views
to form a more holistic representation. In this fusion RNN
method, a ﬁlter gate collects important information of input
and directly adds it to the output, which borrows the idea of
residual networks. Experimental results on the WikiQA and
SemEval-2016 CQA datasets demonstrate that our proposed
model outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

Answer II

What causes heart disease?
Cardiovascular disease refers to any
disease that affects the cardiovascular system, principally cardiac disease, vascular diseases of the brain
and kidney, and peripheral arterial
disease. (×)
The causes of cardiovascular disease
are diverse but atherosclerosis and/or
hypertension
are the most common.
√
( )

Table 1: An example question and candidate answers. (The
second answer is correct.)

networks (RNNs) can automatically learn features for answer selection. Attention mechanisms have also been introduced to enhance interaction between questions and answers
(Wang, Liu, and Zhao 2016; Zhang et al. 2017).
Previous attention-based models roughly collect all useful
information from network hidden states and squeeze them
to generate one attention vector (namely, a single view),
which fails to capture various ﬁne-grained aspects between
the question and candidate answers.
Take the question in Table 1 for example. On one hand,
as we analyze the question content, a good answer should
contain the “cause” of heart disease. From another view to
parse the question type, an ideal answer seems to be related
to “what”, rather than “who” or “where”. A single attention
vector, used in existing approaches, may not be sufﬁcient
to capture various different aspects of viewing a question,
resulting in inaccurate answers.
In this paper, we propose a Multi-View Fusion Neural
Network (MVFNN), which targets at better modeling on
multiple question aspects like question type, question main
verb, question semantics, etc. We focus four views in this
study: inquiry type view, inquiry main verb view and inquiry
semantic view, co-attention view. Then our model integrates
all views into a holistic representation by a fusion recurrent
network. In our proposed fusion RNN, we record the important parts of each time step and store them into an external
memory, which is added to the output of the RNN. Based
on the idea of deep residual networks (He et al. 2016), this

Introduction
In question answering (QA), answer selection aims to
choose the most appropriate answer from a pre-selected candidate set (Yao et al. 2013), which could be important to
various NLP tasks. In human-computer dialog systems, for
example, the dialog agent needs to respond to questions issued by the user. Fortunately, a large number of QA pairs
exist in community question answering (CQA) forums, such
as Quora1 and Stack Overﬂow.2 It should be more convenient for a dialog agent to directly retrieve the most appropriate answer from these forums, rather than generating a
new one by itself from scratch. Table 1 illustrates a simpliﬁed example for the answer selection task, where Answer I
is less related to the query content “cause” and Answer II
better matches the question.
Traditional methods are typically based on lexical and
syntactic features, e.g., the edit distance between parse trees
(Heilman and Smith 2010). Such methods require extensive human efforts on feature engineering. Recently, deep
learning models have been adapted in many applications
for natural language processing. Neural networks such as
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and recurrent neural
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.quora.com/
2
http://www.stackoverﬂow.com/

5422

