The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

GraphGAN: Graph Representation Learning
with Generative Adversarial Nets
Hongwei Wang,1,2 Jia Wang,3 Jialin Wang,4,3 Miao Zhao,3
Weinan Zhang,1 Fuzheng Zhang,2 Xing Xie,2 Minyi Guo1∗

1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, wanghongwei55@gmail.com, {wnzhang, myguo}@sjtu.edu.cn
2
Microsoft Research Asia, {fuzzhang, xing.xie}@microsoft.com
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, {csjiawang, csmiaozhao}@comp.polyu.edu.hk
4
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, wangjialin@hust.edu.cn
examined applying representation learning methods to various types of graphs, such as weighted graphs (Grover and
Leskovec 2016), directed graphs (Zhou et al. 2017), signed
graphs (Wang et al. 2017b), heterogeneous graphs (Wang et
al. 2018), and attributed graphs (Huang, Li, and Hu 2017).
In addition, several prior works also try to preserve speciﬁc properties during the learning process, such as global
structures (Wang, Cui, and Zhu 2016), community structures
(Wang et al. 2017c), group information (Chen, Zhang, and
Huang 2016), and asymmetric transitivity (Ou et al. 2016).
Arguably, most existing methods of graph representation
learning can be classiﬁed into two categories. The ﬁrst is
generative graph representation learning model (Perozzi,
Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014; Grover and Leskovec 2016;
Zhou et al. 2017; Dong, Chawla, and Swami 2017; Li et al.
2017a). Similar to classic generative models such as Gaussian Mixture Model (Lindsay 1995) or Latent Dirichlet Allocation (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003), generative graph representation learning models assume that, for each vertex
vc , there exists an underlying true connectivity distribution
ptrue (v|vc ), which implies vc ’s connectivity preference (or
relevance distribution) over all other vertices in the graph.
The edges in the graph can thus be viewed as observed samples generated by these conditional distributions, and these
generative models learn vertex embeddings by maximizing
the likelihood of edges in the graph. For example, DeepWalk
(Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014) uses random walk to
sample “context” vertices for each vertex, and tries to maximize the log-likelihood of observing context vertices for the
given vertex. Node2vec (Grover and Leskovec 2016) further
extends the idea by proposing a biased random walk procedure, which provides more ﬂexibility when generating the
context for a given vertex.
The second kind of graph representation learning method
is the discriminative model (Wang et al. 2018; Cao, Lu, and
Xu 2016; Wang, Cui, and Zhu 2016; Li et al. 2017b). Different from generative models, discriminative graph representation learning models do not treat edges as generated from
an underlying conditional distribution, but aim to learn a
classiﬁer for predicting the existence of edges directly. Typically, discriminative models consider two vertices vi and vj
jointly as features, and predict the
probability of an 
edge ex
isting between the two vertices, i.e., p edge|(vi , vj ) , based
on the training data in the graph. For instance, SDNE (Wang,

Abstract
The goal of graph representation learning is to embed each
vertex in a graph into a low-dimensional vector space. Existing graph representation learning methods can be classiﬁed
into two categories: generative models that learn the underlying connectivity distribution in the graph, and discriminative models that predict the probability of edge existence between a pair of vertices. In this paper, we propose GraphGAN, an innovative graph representation learning framework
unifying above two classes of methods, in which the generative model and discriminative model play a game-theoretical
minimax game. Speciﬁcally, for a given vertex, the generative model tries to ﬁt its underlying true connectivity distribution over all other vertices and produces “fake” samples to
fool the discriminative model, while the discriminative model
tries to detect whether the sampled vertex is from ground truth
or generated by the generative model. With the competition
between these two models, both of them can alternately and
iteratively boost their performance. Moreover, when considering the implementation of generative model, we propose
a novel graph softmax to overcome the limitations of traditional softmax function, which can be proven satisfying desirable properties of normalization, graph structure awareness, and computational efﬁciency. Through extensive experiments on real-world datasets, we demonstrate that GraphGAN achieves substantial gains in a variety of applications,
including link prediction, node classiﬁcation, and recommendation, over state-of-the-art baselines.

Introduction
Graph representation learning, also known as network embedding, aims to represent each vertex in a graph (network)
as a low-dimensional vector, which could facilitate tasks
of network analysis and prediction over vertices and edges.
Learned embeddings are capable to beneﬁt a wide range of
real-world applications such as link prediction (Gao, Denoyer, and Gallinari 2011), node classiﬁcation (Tang, Aggarwal, and Liu 2016), recommendation (Yu et al. 2014),
visualization (Maaten and Hinton 2008), knowledge graph
representation (Lin et al. 2015), clustering (Tian et al. 2014),
text embedding (Tang, Qu, and Mei 2015), and social network analysis (Liu et al. 2016). Recently, researchers have
∗

M. Guo is the corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2508

