The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Few Shot Transfer Learning Between Word Relatedness
and Similarity Tasks Using a Gated Recurrent Siamese Network
James O’ Neill, Paul Buitelaar
Insight Centre for Data Analytics
National University of Ireland, Galway
{james.oneill, paul.buitelaar}@insight-centre.org

and Lim 2007; Hughes and Ramage 2007) and distributional
semantic models (DSMs) for distance and similarity estimation (Bollegala, Matsuo, and Ishizuka 2007) by manually
constructing a semantic network (i.e humanly annotated resources) for how humans might perceive concepts to be related or similar, akin to selectivity of neurons in the same
regions of the Visual Word Form Area (VWFA) given a particular task (e.g association or similarity). Likewise, this paper begins with an evaluation of both lexical and embedding similarity features across eight (one similarity-based
and seven relatedness-based) datasets on ten best performing regressors as a baseline. We then select the top performing models and propose a method for transferring instances,
parameters and features from one task to another, within the
same domain and across domains only using few instances
from the target task. Secondly, a Gated Recurrent Siamese
Network (GRU-SN) for pairwise learning of word deﬁnitions
is presented. In addition, the more generalizable 1st hidden
layer is transferred across the GRU-SN’s between the related
domains, while the second layer is tuned but constrained
to the weight distribution of the source task, Ts . All results
are compared against the SoTA for each dataset, while also
proposing a new baseline for transfer learning (TL) on these
benchmark datasets.

Abstract
Word similarity and word relatedness are fundamental to natural language processing and more generally, understanding
how humans relate concepts in semantic memory. A growing
number of datasets are being proposed as evaluation benchmarks, however, the heterogeneity and focus of each respective dataset makes it difﬁcult to draw plausible conclusions
as to how a uniﬁed semantic model would perform. Additionally, we want to identify the transferability of knowledge
obtained from one task to another, within the same domain
and across domains. Hence, this paper ﬁrst presents an evaluation and comparison of eight chosen datasets tested using
the best performing regression models. As a baseline, we
present regression models that incorporate both lexical features and word embeddings to produce consistent and competitive results compared to the state of the art. We present our
main contribution, the best performing model across seven
of the eight datasets - a Gated Recurrent Siamese Network
that learns relationships between lexical word deﬁnitions.
A parameter transfer learning strategy is employed for the
Siamese Network. Subsequently, we present a secondary contribution which is the best performing non-sequential model:
an Inductive and Transductive Transfer Learning strategy for
transferring decision trees within a Random Forest to a target
task that is learned from only few instances. The method involves measuring semantic distance between hidden factored
matrix representations of decision tree traversal matrices.

Dataset Descriptions
Introduction

Recently, a number of datasets have been established as gold
standard evaluations for association/relatedness and similarity. However, many of these datasets focus on varying aspects of similarity and relatedness e.g different distributions
of part of speech (PoS), concept concreteness, and task focus (i.e relatedness, similarity or both). We start with a brief
overview of these datasets, splitting both the descriptions
into subsections based on relatedness/association and true
similarity.

The task of measuring word similarity and word association/relatedness is a fundamental natural language task that
has direct impact on upstream challenges such as information extraction, taxonomy generation, natural language understanding and generation etc. The distinction between association and similarity has been highlighted and well studied in previous work (Hill, Reichart, and Korhonen 2016). It
is also an active area of research in neuroscience and cognitive science (Patterson, Nestor, and Rogers 2007), studying
the complex relationships between concept representations
in semantic distributed neural networks and how action selectivity in neuron activity occurs for different symbolic relationships in the frontal cortex. This phenomena has been
modeled from text by utilizing lexical resources (Alvarez

Relatedness/Association Based Datasets
SimVerb is a verb similarity dataset that was created by
Gerz et al. (Kipper et al. 2008) by leveraging VerbNet and
its verb class extensions, consisting of a test set of 3000
pairs and a development set of 500 verb pairs. There are 827
unique verbs (by lemma) from 29 VerbNet Levin classes.
Verb lemmas are split into 4 categories based on frequency

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5342

