The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Average-Case Approximation Ratio
of Scheduling without Payments
Jie Zhang
Electronics and Computer Science
University of Southampton, United Kingdom
jie.zhang@soton.ac.uk

agents follow; on the other hand, the aim is to optimize
a speciﬁc objective function that measures the quality of
the outcome, subject to a polynomial-time implementability constraint. However, these objectives are usually incompatible. Therefore, often we need to trade one objective to
achieve the other. One standard approach is to maintain the
truthfulness property of the mechanism, and approximately
optimize the speciﬁc objective function (e.g., social welfare
maximization, revenue maximization, or cost minimization).
The approximation ratio is the canonical measure for evaluating the performance of a truthful mechanism towards this
goal. It compares the performance of the truthful mechanism against the optimal mechanism which is not necessarily truthful, over all possible inputs.
The approximation ratio is deﬁned in the worst-case sense
which resembles the worst-case time complexity of the algorithms. These are strong but very pessimistic measures.
On the one hand, if it is possible to obtain a small worstcase ratio, then it is a very solid guarantee on the performance of the mechanism no matter what input is provided.
On the other hand, if it turns out to be a large value, then
one can hardly judge the performance of the mechanism as
it may perform well on most inputs and perform poorly on
only a few inputs. To address this issue, Deng, Gao, and
Zhang (2017) propose an alternative measure, the averagecase approximation ratio, that compares the performance of
the truthful mechanism against the optimal mechanism, averaged over all possible inputs when they follow a certain
distribution. Although average-case analysis is usually more
complex than the worst-case analysis, it provides a different
measure.
In this paper, we study the problem of scheduling unrelated machines without money. Scheduling is one of the
primary problems in algorithmic mechanism design. In the
general setting, the problem is to schedule a set of tasks
to n unrelated machines with private processing times, in
order to minimize the makespan. The machines (alternatively, speaking of the agents in game theoretical settings)
are rational and want to minimize their execution time. They
may achieve this by misreporting their processing times to
the mechanism. No monetary payments are allowed in this
problem. The objective is to design truthful mechanisms
with good approximation ratio. One important version of the
problem is studied by (Koutsoupias 2014) in which the ma-

Abstract
Apart from the principles and methodologies inherited from
Economics and Game Theory, the studies in Algorithmic
Mechanism Design typically employ the worst-case analysis and approximation schemes of Theoretical Computer
Science. For instance, the approximation ratio, which is
the canonical measure of evaluating how well an incentivecompatible mechanism approximately optimizes the objective, is deﬁned in the worst-case sense. It compares the performance of the optimal mechanism against the performance
of a truthful mechanism, for all possible inputs.
In this paper, we take the average-case analysis approach,
and tackle one of the primary motivating problems in Algorithmic Mechanism Design – the scheduling problem (Nisan
and Ronen 1999). One version of this problem which includes
a veriﬁcation component is studied by Koutsoupias (2014). It
was shown that the problem has a tight approximation ratio
bound of (n + 1)/2 for the single-task setting, where n is
the number of machines. We show, however, when the costs
of the machines to executing the task follow any independent and identical distribution, the average-case approximation ratio of the mechanism given in (Koutsoupias 2014) is
upper bounded by a constant. This positive result asymptotically separates the average-case ratio from the worst-case ratio, and indicates that the optimal mechanism for the problem
actually works well on average, although in the worst-case
the expected cost of the mechanism is Θ(n) times that of the
optimal cost.

Introduction
The ﬁeld of Algorithmic Mechanism Design (Nisan and Ronen 1999; Nisan et al. 2007; Procaccia and Tennenholtz
2009) focuses on optimization problems where the input
is provided by self-interested agents that participate in the
mechanism by reporting their private information. These
agents are utility maximizers so they may misreport their
private information to the mechanism, if that results in a
more favorable outcome to them. Given the reports from
the agents as input, a mechanism is a function that maps
the input to allocations and payments if monetary transfers
are allowed. The goal of the mechanism designer is twofold.
On the one hand, the objective is to motivate agents to always report truthfully, regardless of what strategies the other
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1298

