The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Improving Review Representations with User Attention
and Product Attention for Sentiment Classiﬁcation
Zhen Wu, Xin-Yu Dai,∗ Cunyan Yin, Shujian Huang, Jiajun Chen
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing, 210023, China
wuz@nlp.nju.edu.cn, {daixinyu,yincy,huangsj,chenjj}@nju.edu.cn

Lee, and Vaithyanathan 2002; Qu, Ifrim, and Weikum 2010)
or additional sentiment lexicons (Ding, Liu, and Yu 2008;
Taboada et al. 2011; Kiritchenko, Zhu, and Mohammad
2014). Motivated by the great success of deep learning in
computer vision (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012),
speech recognition (Dahl et al. 2012) and natural language
processing (Bengio et al. 2003), more recent methods use
neural networks to learn low-dimensional and continuous
text representations without any feature engineering (Glorot,
Bordes, and Bengio 2011; Socher et al. 2011; 2012; 2013;
Kim 2014). These models achieve very competitive performances in sentiment classiﬁcation.
Despite neural network based approaches have been quite
effective for sentiment classiﬁcation (Johnson and Zhang
2015; Tang, Qin, and Liu 2015a), they typically only focus on the text content while ignoring the crucial inﬂuences
of users and products. It is a common sense that the user’s
preference and product’s characteristic make a signiﬁcant
effect on the ratings. For different users, same word might
express different emotional intensity. For example, a lenient
user may use “good” to evaluate an ordinary product while
a critical user might use “good” to express an excellent attitude. Similarly, product’s characteristic also have an effect
on review ratings. Reviews of high-quality products tend
to receive higher ratings compared to those of low-quality
products.
In order to incorporate user and product information into
sentiment classiﬁcation, Tang, Qin, and Liu (2015b) introduce a word-level preference matrix and a representation
vector for each user and product into CNN sentiment classiﬁer. The model achieves some improvements, but suffers from high model complexity and only considers wordlevel user and product information rather than semanticlevel. Chen et al. (2016a) consider user and product information together and incorporate them into one review representation via attention mechanism (Bahdanau, Cho, and
Bengio 2015). However, in reviews, we observe that some
words or sentences show strong user’s preference, and some
others tend to indicate product’s characteristic. For example,
for the review “the bar area is deﬁnitely good ‘people watching’ and i love the modern contemporary décor.”, the word
“good”, “modern” and “contemporary” describe the characteristic of product, and the “love” shows strong user’s sentiment. Opinions are more related to products and emotions

Abstract
Neural network methods have achieved great success in
reviews sentiment classiﬁcation. Recently, some works
achieved improvement by incorporating user and product information to generate a review representation. However, in reviews, we observe that some words or sentences show strong
user’s preference, and some others tend to indicate product’s
characteristic. The two kinds of information play different
roles in determining the sentiment label of a review. Therefore, it is not reasonable to encode user and product information together into one representation. In this paper, we propose a novel framework to encode user and product information. Firstly, we apply two individual hierarchical neural
networks to generate two representations, with user attention
or with product attention. Then, we design a combined strategy to make full use of the two representations for training
and ﬁnal prediction. The experimental results show that our
model obviously outperforms other state-of-the-art methods
on IMDB and Yelp datasets. Through the visualization of attention over words related to user or product, we validate our
observation mentioned above.

Introduction
Sentiment analysis aims to determine people’s attitudes towards some topic or the overall polarity to a document, interaction, or event. In recent years, sentiment analysis draws
increasing attention of researchers and industries because of
the rapid growth of online review sites such as Amazon, Yelp
and IMDB. In this work, we focus on the task of documentlevel review sentiment classiﬁcation, which is a fundamental task in the ﬁeld of sentiment analysis and opinion mining (Pang and Lee 2008). The task aims to infer the overall
sentiment intensity (e.g. 1-5 stars on the review site Yelp) of
review documents written by users for products.
Dominating studies follow (Pang and Lee 2005; Pang,
Lee, and Vaithyanathan 2002) and take sentiment classiﬁcation as a special case of text classiﬁcation problem. They
usually regard user-marked sentiment polarities or ratings as
labels and use machine learning algorithms to build sentiment classiﬁers with text features. Following the idea, many
works devote to designing effective features from text (Pang,
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5989

