The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Effective Heuristics for Committee Scoring Rules
Piotr Faliszewski

Martin Lackner

AGH University
Krakow, Poland
faliszew@agh.edu.pl

TU Wien
Vienna, Austria
lackner@dbai.tuwien.ac.at

Dominik Peters

Nimrod Talmon

University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
dominik.peters@cs.ox.ac.uk

Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot, Israel
nimrodtalmon77@gmail.com
Lu and Boutilier 2011; Skowron, Faliszewski, and Lang 2016;
Aziz et al. 2015; Faliszewski et al. 2016b; 2017a) and,
thus, one has to resort to exact algorithms with superpolynomial running times (e.g., parameterized algorithms,
Betzler, Slinko, and Uhlmann 2013) or to polynomial-time
algorithms and heuristics that produce approximate results.
While approximately optimal committees may not be acceptable in political scenarios, they may still be useful in
business-related settings (see the discussion provided by Faliszewski et al. 2016c).
The goal of this paper is to experimentally evaluate several
heuristic algorithms for computing committee scoring rules.
As we identify certain ﬂaws with two main heuristics that
appear in the literature (the classic greedy algorithm and
simulated annealing), we develop two novel heuristics. One
of these is based on viewing a given election as a cooperative
game and using game-theoretic solution concepts.

Abstract
Committee scoring rules form an important class of multiwinner voting rules. As computing winning committees under
such rules is generally intractable, in this paper we investigate
efﬁcient heuristics for this task. We design two novel heuristics
for computing approximate results of multiwinner elections
under arbitrary committee scoring rules; notably, one of these
heuristics uses concepts from cooperative game theory. We
then provide an experimental evaluation of our heuristics (and
two others, known from the literature): we compare the scores
of the committees output by our algorithms to the scores of
the optimal committees, and also use the two-dimensional
Euclidean domain to compare the visual representations of the
outputs of our algorithms.

Introduction
The goal of a multiwinner election is to choose a ﬁxed-size
subset of items (a committee of candidates) based on the
preferences of a group of agents (the voters). Multiwinner elections are a natural model for various tasks, ranging from shortlisting (Barberà and Coelho 2008), through
numerous business applications (Lu and Boutilier 2011;
2015; Skowron, Faliszewski, and Lang 2016; Faliszewski
et al. 2016a), to tasks involving proportional representation, such as parliamentary elections (Aziz et al. 2017;
Brill, Laslier, and Skowron 2017).
While different applications call for different multiwinner
voting rules with speciﬁc properties, the class of committee
scoring rules—multiwinner analogues of single-winner scoring rules (introduced by Elkind et al. 2017b)—appears to
be rich enough to contain suitable rules for essentially all
the settings considered so far in the literature: Faliszewski et
al. (2016a; 2016b) map the internal structure of that class and
show how to design speciﬁc rules for particular applications.
Brieﬂy put, under a committee scoring rule each voter assigns a score to each committee (based on the positions of the
committee members in that voter’s preference order), and a
winning committee is one with the maximum total score, computed as the sum of individual voters’ scores. Unfortunately,
for almost all committee scoring rules it is NP-hard to ﬁnd a
winning committee (Procaccia, Rosenschein, and Zohar 2008;

Motivation. There are two main heuristics presented in the
literature for computing approximate winning committees
under various committee scoring rules: the classic greedy algorithm (Lu and Boutilier 2011; Faliszewski et al. 2016a) and
simulated annealing (Faliszewski et al. 2017a).1 The greedy
algorithm starts with an empty committee and then adds
candidates one-by-one, greedily maximizing the committee
score at each step, until k candidates are selected (where k
is the desired committee size). Simulated annealing starts
by selecting a random initial committee and then proceeds
by randomly replacing committee members, keeping a new
committee either if it has a higher score than the current one,
or with a probability decaying with the algorithm’s progress.
Unfortunately, both of these heuristics are somewhat problematic. The main issue with simulated annealing is that it
is inherently randomized. While it performs very well in
practice (as conﬁrmed by our work), it would be difﬁcult
to use it in settings where candidates are competing agents
with a preference for being selected. For example, consider a
funding agency that has to choose k research proposals (the
candidates) to be funded, based on the opinions of a group
of experts (the voters). If the agency used a randomized algo1

These references regard committee scoring rules. The greedy
algorithm was already analyzed by Nemhauser et al. (1978) and
simulated annealing was proposed by Kirkpatrick et al. (1983).

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1023

