The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Efﬁcient Architecture Search
by Network Transformation
Han Cai,1 Tianyao Chen,1 Weinan Zhang,1∗ Yong Yu,1 Jun Wang2
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 University College London
{hcai,tychen,wnzhang,yyu}@apex.sjtu.edu.cn, j.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk

(Zoph and Le 2017; Real et al. 2017). Despite the promising
results as reported, their success is based on vast computational resources (e.g. hundreds of GPUs), making them difﬁcult to be used in practice for individual researchers, small
sized companies, or university research teams. Another key
drawback is that they still design and train each network
from scratch during exploring the architecture space without
any leverage of previously explored networks, which results
in high computational resources waste.
In fact, during the architecture design process, many
slightly different networks are trained for the same task.
Apart from their ﬁnal validation performances that are used
to guide exploration, we should also have access to their
architectures, weights, training curves etc., which contain
abundant knowledge and can be leveraged to accelerate the
architecture design process just like human experts (Chen,
Goodfellow, and Shlens 2015; Klein et al. 2017). Furthermore, there are typically many well-designed architectures,
by human or automatic architecture designing methods, that
have achieved good performances at the target task. Under
restricted computational resources limits, instead of totally
neglecting these existing networks and exploring the architecture space from scratch (which does not guarantee to result in better performance architectures), a more economical
and efﬁcient alternative could be exploring the architecture
space based on these successful networks and reusing their
weights.
In this paper, we propose a new framework, called EAS,
Efﬁcient Architecture Search, where the meta-controller explores the architecture space by network transformation operations such as widening a certain layer (more units or ﬁlters), inserting a layer, adding skip-connections etc., given
an existing network trained on the same task. To reuse
weights, we consider the class of function-preserving transformations (Chen, Goodfellow, and Shlens 2015) that allow
to initialize the new network to represent the same function
as the given network but use different parameterization to
be further trained to improve the performance, which can
signiﬁcantly accelerate the training of the new network especially for large networks. Furthermore, we combine our
framework with recent advances of reinforcement learning (RL) based automatic architecture designing methods
(Baker et al. 2017; Zoph and Le 2017), and employ a RL
based agent as the meta-controller.

Abstract
Techniques for automatically designing deep neural network architectures such as reinforcement learning based approaches have recently shown promising results. However,
their success is based on vast computational resources (e.g.
hundreds of GPUs), making them difﬁcult to be widely used.
A noticeable limitation is that they still design and train each
network from scratch during the exploration of the architecture space, which is highly inefﬁcient. In this paper, we propose a new framework toward efﬁcient architecture search by
exploring the architecture space based on the current network
and reusing its weights. We employ a reinforcement learning agent as the meta-controller, whose action is to grow the
network depth or layer width with function-preserving transformations. As such, the previously validated networks can
be reused for further exploration, thus saves a large amount
of computational cost. We apply our method to explore the
architecture space of the plain convolutional neural networks
(no skip-connections, branching etc.) on image benchmark
datasets (CIFAR-10, SVHN) with restricted computational
resources (5 GPUs). Our method can design highly competitive networks that outperform existing networks using
the same design scheme. On CIFAR-10, our model without skip-connections achieves 4.23% test error rate, exceeding a vast majority of modern architectures and approaching
DenseNet. Furthermore, by applying our method to explore
the DenseNet architecture space, we are able to achieve more
accurate networks with fewer parameters.

Introduction
The great success of deep neural networks in various challenging applications (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2012; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014; Silver et al. 2016)
has led to a paradigm shift from feature designing to architecture designing, which still remains a laborious task and
requires human expertise. In recent years, many techniques
for automating the architecture design process have been
proposed (Snoek, Larochelle, and Adams 2012; Bergstra
and Bengio 2012; Baker et al. 2017; Zoph and Le 2017;
Real et al. 2017; Negrinho and Gordon 2017), and promising results of designing competitive models against humandesigned models are reported on some benchmark datasets
∗

Correspondence to Weinan Zhang.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2787

