The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Training CNNs with Normalized Kernels
Mete Ozay,1 Takayuki Okatani1,2
1

Graduate School of Information Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan
2
RIKEN Center for AIP, Tokyo, Japan
{mozay,okatani}@vision.is.tohoku.ac.jp

reparametrization of convolution kernels, and internal covariate shift. In order to cope with these problems, various
methods have been proposed for normalization of kernels1
using different orthogonality constraints (Arpit et al. 2016;
Salimans and Kingma 2016).
However, different kernel normalization methods may affect geometry of search spaces, dissimilarly. More precisely,
kernel normalization methods may provide kernel spaces
with different geometric properties according to the constraints used in the normalization operations. In order to
assure convergence of SGD algorithms to solutions at single minimum, we need to identify search spaces and compute steps according to the geometry of kernel spaces in
CNNs. Consequently, convergence properties of SGD may
vary among different kernel normalization methods. Since
various orthogonality constraints are nonconvex and nonlinear, embedding constraints into cost functions may lead to
many local minimizers (Wen and Yin 2013). These theoretical challenges imply more crucial problems in implementation of optimization methods for training CNNs with normalized kernels. SGD methods will not work as intended if
they are implemented without proper consideration of geometry of normalized kernels. For example, if projections
deﬁned for unit norm kernels are employed to perform SGD
steps using column-wise normalized or orthonormal kernels
in CNNs, then gradients explode and vanish in the ﬁrst few
epochs of the SGD.
We address the aforementioned problems by identifying kernel spaces as Riemannian manifolds under a geometric optimization framework for training of CNNs. We
pose the kernel estimation problem in CNNs (LeCun et al.
1998) as optimization on Riemannian submanifolds which
are described according to different geometric properties of
the kernels, such as orthonormal rectangular or orthogonal
square kernels. Thereby, we can deﬁne constraints of optimization problems of CNNs in search spaces of SGD algorithms, instead of embedding the constraints into cost functions of the problems (Mishra and Sepulchre 2016).
However, when we employ well-known Riemannian optimization methods developed for shallow SGD (Absil, Mahony, and Sepulchre 2007) to train CNNs, we encounter another challenge. In our experiments, we observe that appli-

Abstract
Several methods of normalizing convolution kernels have
been proposed in the literature to train convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), and have shown some success. However,
our understanding of these methods has lagged behind their
success in application; there are a lot of open questions, such
as why a certain type of kernel normalization is effective and
what type of normalization should be employed for each (e.g.,
higher or lower) layer of a CNN. As the ﬁrst step towards
answering these questions, we propose a framework that enables us to use a variety of kernel normalization methods at
any layer of a CNN. A naive integration of kernel normalization with a general optimization method, such as SGD, often entails instability while updating parameters. Thus, existing methods employ ad-hoc procedures to empirically assure
convergence. In this study, we pose estimation of convolution
kernels under normalization constraints as constraint-free optimization on kernel submanifolds that are identiﬁed by the
employed constraints. Note that naive application of the established optimization methods for matrix manifolds to the
aforementioned problems is not feasible because of the hierarchical nature of CNNs. To this end, we propose an algorithm for optimization on kernel manifolds in CNNs by appropriate scaling of the space of kernels based on structure
of CNNs and statistics of data. We theoretically prove that
the proposed algorithm has assurance of almost sure convergence to a solution at single minimum. Our experimental results show that the proposed method can successfully train
popular CNN models using several different types of kernel
normalization methods. Moreover, they show that the proposed method improves classiﬁcation performance of baseline CNNs, and provides state-of-the-art performance for major image classiﬁcation benchmarks.

Introduction
Over the last decade, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have been utilized to perform various tasks such as image
classiﬁcation (Wei et al. 2015). While performing optimization using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithms
with backpropagation (BP) in CNNs, we observe that norm
of gradients may exponentially increase or decrease (Glorot
and Bengio 2010; Pascanu, Mikolov, and Bengio 2013). Exploding and vanishing gradients trigger several open problems such as convergence of SGD and its robustness to
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

3884

We refer to convolution kernels used in CNNs by kernels.

