The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Using Syntax to Ground
Referring Expressions in Natural Images
Volkan Cirik, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, Louis-Philippe Morency
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{vcirik,tberg,morency}@cs.cmu.edu
it? To make effective use of an identiﬁed supporting object,
we must understand how this object is related to the target.
And ﬁnally, for many natural referring expressions, the process is recursive: a supporting object may itself be identiﬁed by a relationship with another supporting object. As a
result, models that reason about referring expressions must
respect this hierarchy, processing sub-expressions before attacking larger expressions. Modeling this compositionality
is critical to designing recognition systems that behave in an
interpretable way and can justify their decisions.
In this paper, we introduce GroundNet, the ﬁrst dynamic
neural architecture for referring expression recognition that
takes full advantage of syntactic compositionality. Past approaches, such as the Compositional Modular Networks
(CMN) model (Hu et al. 2017), have relied on limited
syntactic information in processing referring expressions –
for example, CMN tracks a single supporting object – but
have not modeled linguistic recursion and therefore is incapable of tracking multiple supporting objects. As shown
in Figure 1, our GroundNet framework relies on a syntactic parse of the input referring expression to dynamically
create a computation graph that reﬂects the recursive hierarchy of the input expression. As a result, our approach
tracks intermediate localization decisions of all supporting
objects. Following the approach of (Andreas et al. 2016b;
2016a), this computation graph is translated into a neural architecture that keeps interpretable information at each step
of the way, as can be seen in Figure 1d.
We additionally present a new set of annotations that specify the correct locations of supporting objects in a portion
of the standard benchmark dataset, GoogleRef (Mao et al.
2016) to evaluate the interpretability of models for referring expression recognition. Using these additional annotations, our empirical evaluations demonstrate that GoundNet
substantially outperforms the state-of-the-art at intermediate predictions of the supporting objects, yet maintains comparable accuracy at target object localization. These results
demonstrate that syntactic compositionality can be successfully used to improve interpretability in neural models of
language and vision. Our annotations for supporting objects
and implementations are available for public use1 .

Abstract
We introduce GroundNet, a neural network for referring expression recognition – the task of localizing (or grounding)
in an image the object referred to by a natural language expression. Our approach to this task is the ﬁrst to rely on a
syntactic analysis of the input referring expression in order to
inform the structure of the computation graph. Given a parse
tree for an input expression, we explicitly map the syntactic
constituents and relationships present in the tree to a composed graph of neural modules that deﬁnes our architecture
for performing localization. This syntax-based approach aids
localization of both the target object and auxiliary supporting objects mentioned in the expression. As a result, GroundNet is more interpretable than previous methods: we can (1)
determine which phrase of the referring expression points to
which object in the image and (2) track how the localization
of the target object is determined by the network. We study
this property empirically by introducing a new set of annotations on the GoogleRef dataset to evaluate localization of
supporting objects. Our experiments show that GroundNet
achieves state-of-the-art accuracy in identifying supporting
objects, while maintaining comparable performance in the localization of target objects.

1

Introduction

Spatial referring expressions are part of our everyday social
life (“Please drop me at the blue house next to the red mailbox.”) and also part of professional interactions (“Could you
pass the small scalpel to the right of the forceps?”). These
natural language expressions are designed to uniquely locate an object in the visual world. The process of grounding
referring expressions into visual scenes involves many intermediate challenges. As a ﬁrst step, we want to locate all
the objects mentioned in the expression. While one of these
mentions refers to the target object, the other mentions (i.e.
supporting object mentions) are also important because they
were included by the author of the referring expression in order to disambiguate the target. In fact, Grice (1975) argued
that supporting objects will only be mentioned when they
are necessary for disambiguation. As a second step, we want
to identify the spatial relationships between these objects. Is
the target to the left of the supporting object? Is it beneath
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

6756

https://github.com/volkancirik/groundnet

