The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multi-Scale Bidirectional FCN
for Object Skeleton Extraction
1

2

Fan Yang,1 Xin Li,1∗ Hong Cheng,2 Yuxiao Guo,1 Leiting Chen,1 Jianping Li1

School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
Center for Robotics, School of Automation Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
fanyang uestc@hotmail.com, xinli uestc@hotmail.com, hcheng@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Object skeleton detection is a challenging problem with wide
application. Recently, deep Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) have substantially improved the performance of the
state-of-the-art in this task. However, most of the existing
CNN-Based methods are based on a skip-layer structure
where low-level and high-level features are combined and
learned so as to gather multi-level contextual information.
As shallow features are too messy and lack semantic knowledge, they may cause errors and inaccuracy. Therefore, we
propose a novel network architecture, Multi-Scale Bidirectional Fully Convolutional Network (MSB-FCN), to better
capture and consolidate multi-scale high-level context information for object skeleton detection. Our network uses only
deep features to build multi-scale feature representations, and
employs a bidirectional structure to collect contextual knowledge. Hence the proposed MSB-FCN has the ability to learn
the semantic-level information from different sub-regions.
Furthermore, we introduce dense connections into the bidirectional structure of our MSB-FCN to ensure that the learning process at each scale can directly encode information
from all other scales. Extensive experiments on various commonly used benchmarks demonstrate that the proposed MSBFCN has achieved signiﬁcant improvements over the state-ofthe-art algorithms.

Image

Edge

Object skeleton

Figure 1: Object skeleton detection is a high-level vision
task. It is inherently different from edge detection. Edge has
some local properties, and thus shallow CNN features can
beneﬁt edge detection. In contrast, object skeleton is more
of a semantic-level concept, and in object skeleton extraction, deep features play a much more important role.

is mainly caused by the limitations of traditional handcrafted
features, which are unable to accurately summarize semantic knowledge. In recent years, deep Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) have demonstrated a strong capability of
learning semantic-level representations. This has motivated
recent research efforts to employ CNNs for object skeleton
detection. The CNN-Based methods (Shen et al. 2016c) (Ke
et al. 2017) have substantially improved the performance,
achieving accurate results even when handling complex “inthe-wild” scenes.
In order to deal with the scale-space problem, existing
CNN-Based methods (Shen et al. 2016c) (Ke et al. 2017)
adopt the Holistically-Nested Edge Detector (HED) network architecture (Xie and Tu 2015) that was originally designed for edge detection. With its skip-layer structure, HED
learns rich hierarchical representations to resolve ambiguity
in edge. However, object skeleton extraction is an inherently
different problem from edge detection (Wang, Zhao, and
Huang 2017). As shown in Fig. 1, the edge has some local
properties and unique local structures. Therefore, shallow
CNN features, despite their lack of semantic-knowledge, are

Introduction
Object skeleton detection, also known as object symmetry
extraction, is an important topic of great interest to computer
vision researchers. It is aimed at localizing the object symmetry axes in an image. Object skeleton detection can be
used in a variety of tasks, such as image segmentation (Teo,
Fermuller, and Aloimonos 2016), text-line detection (Zhang
et al. 2015), object proposal generation (Lee, Fidler, and
Dickinson 2015), foreground extraction (Fu et al. 2014), and
3D object structure estimation (Gao and Yuille 2017).
To automatically extract object skeletons from natural images is a challenging vision task due to varied appearances,
self occlusion, object diversity and scene variety. Traditional
methods (Tsogkas and Kokkinos 2012) (Sironi, Lepetit, and
Fua 2014) have difﬁculties in handling images with complex scenes, or objects with cluttered interior textures. This
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7461

