The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Long Text Generation via Adversarial
Training with Leaked Information
Jiaxian Guo,† Sidi Lu,† Han Cai,† Weinan Zhang,†∗ Yong Yu,† Jun Wang‡
†

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, ‡ University College London
{jiaxian,steve lu,hcai,wnzhang,yyu}@apex.sjtu.edu.cn, j.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Hu et al. 2017). A typical approach is to train a recurrent
neural network (RNN) to maximize the log-likelihood of
each ground-truth word given prior observed words (Graves
2013), which, however, suffers from so-called exposure bias
due to the discrepancy between training and inference stage:
the model sequentially generates the next word based on previously generated words during inference but itself is trained
to generate words given ground-truth words (Huszár 2015).
A scheduled sampling approach (Bengio et al. 2015) is proposed to addressed this problem, but is proved to be fundamentally inconsistent (Huszár 2015). Generative Adversarial Nets (GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014), which is ﬁrstly
proposed for continous data (image generation etc.), is then
extended to discrete, sequential data to alleviate the above
problem and has shown promising results (Yu et al. 2017).
Due to the discrete nature of text samples, text generation
is modeled as a sequential decision making process, where
the state is previously generated words, the action is the next
word to be generated, and the generative net G is a stochastic policy that maps current state to a distribution over the
action space. After the whole text generation is done, the
generated text samples are then fed to the discriminative net
D, a classiﬁer that is trained to distinguish real and generated text samples, to get reward signals for updating G.
Since then, various methods have been proposed in text
generation via GAN (Lin et al. 2017; Rajeswar et al. 2017;
Che et al. 2017). Nonetheless, the reported results are limited to the cases that the generated text samples are short
(say, fewer than 20 words) while more challenging long text
generation is hardly studied, which is necessary for practical tasks such as auto-generation of news articles or product
descriptions. A main drawback of existing methods to long
text generation is that the binary guiding signal from D is
sparse as it is only available when the whole text sample is
generated. Also, the scalar guiding signal for a whole text is
non-informative as it does not necessarily preserve the picture about the intermediate syntactic structure and semantics
of the text that is being generated for G to sufﬁciently learn.
On one hand, to make the guiding signals more informative, discriminator D could potentially provide more guidance beside the ﬁnal reward value, since D is a trained
model, e.g. a convolutional neural network (CNN) (Zhang
and LeCun 2015), rather than an unknown black box. With
that idea, (Zhang et al. 2017) proposed to train generator G

Abstract
Automatically generating coherent and semantically meaningful text has many applications in machine translation, dialogue systems, image captioning, etc. Recently, by combining with policy gradient, Generative Adversarial Nets
(GAN) that use a discriminative model to guide the training of the generative model as a reinforcement learning policy has shown promising results in text generation. However,
the scalar guiding signal is only available after the entire text
has been generated and lacks intermediate information about
text structure during the generative process. As such, it limits its success when the length of the generated text samples
is long (more than 20 words). In this paper, we propose a
new framework, called LeakGAN, to address the problem for
long text generation. We allow the discriminative net to leak
its own high-level extracted features to the generative net to
further help the guidance. The generator incorporates such
informative signals into all generation steps through an additional M ANAGER module, which takes the extracted features of current generated words and outputs a latent vector to guide the W ORKER module for next-word generation.
Our extensive experiments on synthetic data and various realworld tasks with Turing test demonstrate that LeakGAN is
highly effective in long text generation and also improves the
performance in short text generation scenarios. More importantly, without any supervision, LeakGAN would be able to
implicitly learn sentence structures only through the interaction between M ANAGER and W ORKER.

Introduction
The ability to generate coherent and semantically meaningful text plays a key role in many natural language processing
applications such as machine translation (Yang et al. 2017),
dialogue generation (Li et al. 2017), and image captioning
(Fang et al. 2015). While most previous work focuses on
task-speciﬁc applications in supervised settings (Bahdanau,
Cho, and Bengio 2014; Vinyals et al. 2015), the generic unsupervised text generation, which aims to mimic the distribution over real text from a corpus, has recently drawn much
attention (Graves 2013; Yu et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2017;
∗

Correspondence to Weinan Zhang. This work is ﬁnancially
supported by NSFC (61702327) and Shanghai Sailing Program
(17YF1428200).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5141

