The Eighth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence 2018 (EAAI-18)

Model AI Assignments 2018
Todd W. Neller

Zack Butler

Nate Derbinsky

Gettysburg College
tneller@gettysburg.edu

Rochester Institute of Technology
zjb@cs.rit.edu

Northeastern University
n.derbinsky@northeastern.edu

Heidi Furey

Fred Martin

Michael Guerzhoy

Manhattan College
hfurey01@manhattan.edu

University of Massachusetts Lowell
fred martin@uml.edu

University of Toronto
guerzhoy@cs.toronto.edu

Ariel Anders

Joshua Eckroth

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
aanders@csail.mit.edu

Stetson University
jeckroth@stetson.edu
An important aspect of an introductory AI course is exposure to the complexities and tradeoffs involved in deploying an application that integrates one or more intelligence
techniques. This project assumes students have studied
(un)informed search algorithms (e.g. via Pacman Projects;
(Neller et al. 2010)), and guides them through the process of
developing an image-based maze solver. The assignment begins by assuming a clean grid-based representation, and has
students formulate maze-solving as a search problem. They
are then tasked with applying basic computer-vision and
image-processing techniques (via OpenCV; (Bradski 2000))
to convert an input image into the assumed problem representation, and then project the solved path onto the picture for the user to see. Throughout the project, students are
pushed to visualize their work, verify incremental steps, and
analyze tradeoffs between algorithmic performance and solution feasibility/quality. The assignment concludes with a
variety of extensions, allowing students to pursue more challenging aspects that suit their interests.

Abstract
The Model AI Assignments session seeks to gather and
disseminate the best assignment designs of the Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AI) Education community. Recognizing
that assignments form the core of student learning experience, we here present abstracts of seven AI assignments from the 2018 session that are easily adoptable,
playfully engaging, and ﬂexible for a variety of instructor needs. Assignment speciﬁcations and supporting resources may be found at http://modelai.gettysburg.edu.

Go For a Walk! Pedestrian-Friendly A* with
Learned Cost Functions
Zack Butler
This assignment is a two-part project based on path planning for pedestrians in an urban environment. In the ﬁrst part
of the project, students use real-world data collected from
OpenStreetMap and digital elevation data to build an A*
path planner. In particular, they need to consider the distance
as well as elevation gained or lost on each edge, and provide
a cost function and admissible heuristic derived from their
ad-hoc estimates and/or published pedestrian models. Extensions use OpenStreetMap metadata to consider planning
for bicycles and cars. In the second part of the project, the
students in the course walk through the environment to collect actual data on the time taken to follow different paths.
This data is shared to the entire class to build an overall data
set. Students then perform regression over the features in
their cost function using this data set to develop a new cost
function. They can also compare the cost function derived
from only their individual data to that derived from the overall class data set, and as an extension to the assignment, compare different types of regression algorithms.

A Module on Ethical Thinking about
Autonomous Vehicles in an AI Course
Heidi Furey and Fred Martin
A computer science faculty member and a philosophy
faculty member collaborated in the development of a oneweek introduction to ethics which was integrated into a traditional AI course. The module provided a brief introduction
to ethics and utilitarianism, and then engaged students in
considering the classic “Trolley Problem,” which has gained
contemporary relevance with the emergence of autonomous
vehicles. Students used this introduction to ethics in thinking through the implications of their ﬁnal projects. Results
from the course ﬁnal examination showed that nearly all students in the course understood the Trolley Problem (62 of 63
students). This Model AI assignment submission includes
the presentation materials used in lecture, student exercises
(recommended to be done in class, in pairs), and suggested
readings.

Solve a Maze via Search
Nate Derbinsky
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7959

