The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Doing the Best We Can with What We Have: Multi-Label
Balancing with Selective Learning for Attribute Prediction
Emily M. Hand, Carlos Castillo, Rama Chellappa
University of Maryland, College Park
College Park, MD
{emhand, carlos, rama} @umiacs.umd.edu

methods using CNNs for feature extraction (Liu et al. 2015;
Rudd, Gunther, and Boult 2016; Wang, Cheng, and Feris
2016).
Impressive results have been achieved on CelebA (Liu et
al. 2015), however this dataset exhibits some extreme biases. It consists of mostly frontal, high-quality, posed images of celebrities, which is not representative of real-world
imagery. Models trained on this data - without accounting
for its biases - are not likely to perform well on another domain (e.g. images of non celebrities, or low quality images).
A traditional method for handling imbalanced data is to sample the data so as to balance a particular label. However, for
the multi-label setting, the data cannot be balanced in this
way. Sampling the data so that one label is balanced changes
the distribution for the other labels. In an ideal world, we
would have access to unbiased, balanced, precisely-labeled
datasets, but with CelebA as the only widely available, largescale attribute dataset, we must ﬁnd ways to overcome its
biases in order to move towards a solution to the attribute
prediction problem.
In (Rudd, Gunther, and Boult 2016), the authors try to adjust for the imbalance in CelebA by introducing a mixed objective loss, which adjusts the back-propagation weights according to a given target distribution. This method is a step in
the right direction, but does not take full advantage of deep
networks. Deep CNNs use batch learning, and so the label
imbalance must be addressed in each batch. We argue that
in order to truly account for the bias in CelebA, label balancing must be performed at the batch level when training
a CNN. To this end, we propose a domain-adaptive batch
re-sampling method for training CNNs, which we call Selective Learning. Selective Learning adapts each batch separately for every attribute according to a given target distribution for that attribute. There are many under-represented
attributes in CelebA, including bald, mustache, gray hair,
etc, and several over-represented attributes, such as young,
and nobeard. In order to remove the bias in CelebA, Selective Learning adapts the batches for each attribute, allowing
the model to learn from balanced data in every batch. This
multi-label balancing allows our deep network to learn features which truly represent the facial attributes, not just the
bias in the training data.
We evaluate the proposed Selective Learning on CelebA,
LFWA, and a new dataset: UMD-AED. UMD-AED consists

Abstract
Attributes are human describable features, which have been
used successfully for face, object, and activity recognition.
Facial attributes are intuitive descriptions of faces and have
proven to be very useful in face recognition and veriﬁcation.
Despite their usefulness, to date there is only one large-scale
facial attribute dataset, CelebA (Liu et al. 2015). Impressive
results have been achieved on this dataset, but it exhibits a
variety of very signiﬁcant biases. As CelebA contains mostly
frontal idealized images of celebrities, it is difﬁcult to generalize a model trained on this data for use on another dataset
(of non celebrities). A typical approach to dealing with imbalanced data involves sampling the data in order to balance
the positive and negative labels, however, with a multi-label
problem this becomes a non-trivial task. By sampling to balance one label, we affect the distribution of other labels in
the data. To address this problem, we introduce a novel Selective Learning method for deep networks which adaptively
balances the data in each batch according to the desired distribution for each label. The bias in CelebA can be corrected
for in this way, allowing the network to learn a more robust attribute model. We argue that without this multi-label
balancing, the network cannot learn to accurately predict attributes that are poorly represented in CelebA. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on the problem of facial
attribute prediction on CelebA, LFWA, and the new University of Maryland Attribute Evaluation Dataset (UMD-AED),
outperforming the state-of-the-art on each dataset (Liu et al.
2015).

Introduction
Attributes are semantic features which have been used for
many different applications, ranging from face veriﬁcation
to action recognition (Kumar et al. 2009; Zheng et al.
2014). Accurately predicting facial attributes (e.g. gender,
hair color, eye color, etc.) from images is a very difﬁcult
problem, and has become of recent interest in the computer
vision community with the introduction of CelebA (Liu et al.
2015). CelebA is the ﬁrst and only widely available largescale facial attribute dataset. Since it’s introduction, there
has been a lot of progress made on the problem of facial attribute recognition from images. Deep CNNs have proven to
be very effective in attribute prediction, with state-of-the-art
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6878

