The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Coverage-Based Utility Model
for Identifying Unknown Unknowns
Gagan Bansal, Daniel S. Weld
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
{bansalg, weld}@cs.washington.edu
x

Abstract

x
1

A classiﬁer’s low conﬁdence in prediction is often indicative of whether its prediction will be wrong; in this case, inputs are called known unknowns. In contrast, unknown unknowns (UUs) are inputs on which a classiﬁer makes a high
conﬁdence mistake. Identifying UUs is especially important in safety-critical domains like medicine (diagnosis) and
law (recidivism prediction). Previous work by Lakkaraju et
al. (2017) on identifying unknown unknowns assumes that
the utility of each revealed UU is independent of the others, rather than considering the set holistically. While this
assumption yields an efﬁcient discovery algorithm, we argue that it produces an incomplete understanding of the classiﬁer’s limitations. In response, this paper proposes a new
class of utility models that rewards how well the discovered
UUs cover (or “explain”) a sample distribution of expected
queries. Although choosing an optimal cover is intractable,
even if the UUs were known, our utility model is monotone
submodular, affording a greedy discovery strategy. Experimental results on four datasets show that our method outperforms bandit-based approaches and achieves within 60.9%
utility of an omniscient, tractable upper bound.

1

y

2

y

2

z

(a)

z

(b)

Figure 1: Two payoff sets of seven unknown unknowns
(UUs). The green region denotes the space of true positives; the straight black line shows the decision boundary;
red regions are false positives. Red areas x, y, and z are
low conﬁdence predictions near the decision boundary. Red
interior regions 1 and 2 contain UUs. The stars indicate the
discovered UUs. (a) Lakkaraju et al.’s utility function yields
a tightly clustered set and does not discover the upper blind
spot. (b) our utility function rewards better coverage.

Identifying a classiﬁer’s UUs is an important task for
many reasons: for understanding the classiﬁer’s limitations, for debugging it (Amershi et al. 2015), for attacking
(Szegedy et al. 2014) or preventing attacks against it (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015), or for deploying a high
performing human-machine hybrid system (Werling et al.
2015; ?). Understanding a machine learner’s limitations
is especially important when developing safer AI systems
for use in high-stakes domains, such as health care and
transportation, where errors could be catastrophic (?; ?;
?).
? (2015) found that many UUs, particularly highconﬁdence mistakes, may be present as systematic errors
in a speciﬁc region of a classiﬁer’s feature space, a kind of
“blind spot.” They developed a novel crowdsourcing workﬂow that provides human workers monetary incentives for
discovering UUs. Subsequently, Lakkaraju et al. (2017)
developed an automatic method to ﬁnd UUs for black-box
classiﬁers using an innovative clustering and reinforcementlearning-based algorithm. However, their method assumes
that discovering a UU results in a ﬁxed reward independent
of any observation that the system might have made previously. While this independence affords an efﬁcient algo-

Introduction
With the rise of machine learning, pre-trained classiﬁers
are often available as a Web service accessible via an API,
e.g., Microsoft Cognitive Services, Amazon Rekognition
and IBM Watson. Since users of these services will apply
them to their own data, which likely differs from the service
provider’s training data, the classiﬁcation performance may
deviate from expectations.
? (2015) found that a classiﬁer may be prone to systematically making mistakes on inputs, despite being highly conﬁdent of its prediction; they referred to such high-conﬁdence
mistakes as “unknown unknowns.” While many reasons can
account for poor classiﬁer performance, ? (?) discusses an
interesting one: unmodeled aspects of the world. He also
used the term, unknown unknowns, for the resultant errors,
because the system is unaware of its mistake. For a classiﬁer, such situations may arise because of bias in the training
data, a difference in the training and test set distribution, insufﬁcient classiﬁer expressiveness, and others.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1463

