The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Table-to-Text Generation by Structure-Aware Seq2seq Learning
Tianyu Liu, Kexiang Wang, Lei Sha, Baobao Chang, Zhifang Sui
Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Ministry of Education,
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
{tianyu0421, wkx, shalei, chbb, szf}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Table-to-text generation aims to generate a description for
a factual table which can be viewed as a set of ﬁeld-value
records. To encode both the content and the structure of a
table, we propose a novel structure-aware seq2seq architecture which consists of ﬁeld-gating encoder and description
generator with dual attention. In the encoding phase, we update the cell memory of the LSTM unit by a ﬁeld gate and
its corresponding ﬁeld value in order to incorporate ﬁeld information into table representation. In the decoding phase,
dual attention mechanism which contains word level attention and ﬁeld level attention is proposed to model the semantic relevance between the generated description and the table. We conduct experiments on the WIKIBIO dataset which
contains over 700k biographies and corresponding infoboxes
from Wikipedia. The attention visualizations and case studies show that our model is capable of generating coherent
and informative descriptions based on the comprehensive understanding of both the content and the structure of a table.
Automatic evaluations also show our model outperforms the
baselines by a great margin. Code for this work is available
on https://github.com/tyliupku/wiki2bio.

Figure 1: The Wikipedia infobox of Charles Winstead, the
corresponding introduction on his wiki page reads “Charles
Winstead (1891 - 1973) was an FBI agent in the 1930s - 40s,
famous for being one of the agents who shot and killed John
Dillinger.”.
based on the Wikipedia infoboxes. As shown in Fig 1, a
biographic infobox is a ﬁxed-format table that describes a
person with many ﬁeld-value records like (Name, Charles
B. Winstead), (Nationality, American), (Occupation, FBI
Agent), etc. We utilize WIKIBIO dataset proposed by Lebret, Grangier, and Auli (2016) which contains 700k biographies from Wikipedia, with 400k words in total as the benchmark dataset.
Previous work has made signiﬁcant progress on this
task. Lebret, Grangier, and Auli (2016) proposed a statistical n-gram model with local and global conditioning on a
Wikipedia infobox. However the ﬁeld content of a record
is likely to be a sequence of words, the statistical language
model is not good at capturing long-range dependencies between words. Mei, Bansal, and Walter (2015) proposed a
selective generation method based on an encoder-alignerdecoder framework. The model utilizes a sparse one-hot vector to represent a weather record. However it’s inefﬁcient to
represent the complex structure of a table by one-hot vectors.
We propose a structure-aware sequence to sequence
(seq2seq) generation framework to model both content and
structure of the table by local and global addressing. When a
human writes a biography for a person based on the related

Introduction
Generating natural language description for a structured table is an important task for text generation from structured data. Previous researches include weather forecast
based on a set of weather records (Liang, Jordan, and Klein
2009) and sportscasting based on temporally ordered events
(Chen and Mooney 2008). However, previous work models
the structured data in the limited pre-deﬁned schemas. For
example, a weather record rainChance(time:06:00-21:00,
mode:SSE, value:20) is represented by a ﬁxed-length onehot vector by its record type, record time, record value
and record value. To this end, we focus on table-to-text
generation which involves comprehensive representation for
the complex structure of a table rather than pre-deﬁned
schemas. In contrast to previous work experimented on
small datasets which contain only a few tens of thousands
of records such as WEATHERGOV (Liang, Jordan, and Klein
2009) and ROBOCUP (Chen and Mooney 2008), we focus on a more challenging task to generate biographies
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4881

