The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Addressee and Response Selection in Multi-Party
Conversations with Speaker Interaction RNNs
Rui Zhang
Yale University
r.zhang@yale.edu

Honglak Lee

Lazaros Polymenakos

dressee and response based on embedding similarity. However, this model updates only the sender embedding, not the
embeddings of the addressee or observers, with the corresponding utterance, and it selects the addressee and response
separately. In this way, it only models who says what and
fails to capture addressee information. Experimental results
show that the separate selection process often produces inconsistent addressee-response pairs.
To solve these issues, we introduce the Speaker Interaction Recurrent Neural Network (SI-RNN). SI-RNN redesigns the dialog encoder by updating speaker embeddings in a role-sensitive way. Speaker embeddings are updated in different GRU-based units depending on their roles
(sender, addressee, observer). Furthermore, we note that the
addressee and response are mutually dependent and view
the task as a joint prediction problem. Therefore, SI-RNN
models the conditional probability (of addressee given the
response and vice versa) and selects the addressee and response pair by maximizing the joint probability.
On a public standard benchmark data set, SI-RNN signiﬁcantly improves the addressee and response selection
accuracy, particularly in complex conversations with many
speakers and responses to distant messages many turns in
the past. Our code and data set are available online 1 .

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of addressee and response selection in multi-party conversations. Understanding multi-party conversations is challenging because of complex speaker interactions: multiple speakers exchange messages with each other, playing different roles (sender, addressee, observer), and these roles vary across turns. To tackle
this challenge, we propose the Speaker Interaction Recurrent Neural Network (SI-RNN). Whereas the previous stateof-the-art system updated speaker embeddings only for the
sender, SI-RNN uses a novel dialog encoder to update speaker
embeddings in a role-sensitive way. Additionally, unlike the
previous work that selected the addressee and response separately, SI-RNN selects them jointly by viewing the task as
a sequence prediction problem. Experimental results show
that SI-RNN signiﬁcantly improves the accuracy of addressee
and response selection, particularly in complex conversations
with many speakers and responses to distant messages many
turns in the past.

1

Dragomir Radev

University of Michigan IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
Yale University
honglak@eecs.umich.edu
lcpolyme@us.ibm.com
dragomir.radev@yale.edu

Introduction

Real-world conversations often involve more than two
speakers. In the Ubuntu Internet Relay Chat channel (IRC),
for example, one user can initiate a discussion about an
Ubuntu-related technical issue, and many other users can
work together to solve the problem. Dialogs can have complex speaker interactions: at each turn, users play one of
three roles (sender, addressee, observer), and those roles
vary across turns.
In this paper, we study the problem of addressee and response selection in multi-party conversations: given a responding speaker and a dialog context, the task is to select
an addressee and a response from a set of candidates for the
responding speaker. The task requires modeling multi-party
conversations and can be directly used to build retrievalbased dialog systems (Lu and Li 2013; Hu et al. 2014;
Ji, Lu, and Li 2014; Wang et al. 2015).
The previous state-of-the-art DYNAMIC -RNN model
from Ouchi and Tsuboi (2016) maintains speaker embeddings to track each speaker status, which dynamically
changes across time steps. It then produces the context embedding from the speaker embeddings and selects the ad-

2

Related Work

We follow a data-driven approach to dialog systems. Singh
et al. (1999), Henderson, Lemon, and Georgila (2008), and
Young et al. (2013) optimize the dialog policy using Reinforcement Learning or the Partially Observable Markov Decision Process framework. In addition, Henderson, Thomson, and Williams (2014) propose to use a predeﬁned ontology as a logical representation for the information exchanged in the conversation. The dialog system can be divided into different modules, such as Natural Language
Understanding (Yao et al. 2014; Mesnil et al. 2015), Dialog State Tracking (Henderson, Thomson, and Young 2014;
Williams, Raux, and Henderson 2016), and Natural Language Generation (Wen et al. 2015). Furthermore, Wen et
al. (2016) and Bordes and Weston (2017) propose end-toend trainable goal-oriented dialog systems.

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

5690

The released code: https://github.com/ryanzhumich/sirnn

