The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Syntax-Directed Attention for Neural Machine Translation
Kehai Chen,1∗ Rui Wang,2† Masao Utiyama,2 Eiichiro Sumita,2 Tiejun Zhao1
1

2

Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology, Kyoto, Japan
{khchen, tjzhao}@hit.edu.cn, {wangrui, mutiyama, eiichiro.sumita}@nict.go.jp

coder focuses on the ﬁxed-window encoder states centered
around the source position pi , and compute a context vector cli by alignment weights αl for predicting current target
word. Figure 1(a) shows a Chinese-to-English NMT model
with the local attention, and its contextual window is set
to ﬁve. When the aligned source word is “fenzi”, the local attention focuses on source words {“zhexie”, “weixian”,
“fenzi”, “yanzhong”, “yingxiang”} in the window to compute its context vector. Meanwhile, the local attention is to
obtain the positions of ﬁve encoder states by Gaussian distribution, which penalty their alignment weights according
to the distance with word “fenzi”. For example, the syntax
distances of these ﬁve source words are {2, 1, 0, 1, 2} in
contextual window, as shown in Figure 1(b). In other words,
the greater the distance from the aligned word in the window is, the smaller the source words in the window to the
context vector would contribute. In spite of its success, the
local attention is to encode source context and compute a
local context vector by linear distance centered around current aligned source position. It does not take syntax distance
constraints into account.
Figure 1(c) shows the dependency tree of the Chinese sentence in Figure 1(b). Support the word “fenzi0 ”
as the aligned source word, its syntax-distance neighbor
window is {“zhexie1 ”, “weixian1 ”, “fenzi0 ”, “yingxiang1 ”,
“yanzhong2 ”, “zhengce2 ”} , where the footnote of a word is
its syntax-distance with the central word. In comparison, its
local neighbor window is {“zhexie”, “weixian”, “yanzhong”,
“yingxiang”, “zhengchang”} based on linear distance. Note
that the “zhengce” is very informative for the correct translation, but it is far away from “fenzi” such that it is not easy
to be focused by the local attention. Besides, the syntax distances of “yanzhong” and “yingxiang” are two and one, but
the linear distances are one and two. This means that the
“yingxiang” is syntactically more relevant to the “fenzi” than
“yingxiang”. However, the existing attention mechanism, including the global or local attention, does not allow NMT to
distinguish syntax distance constraint from source representation.
In this paper, we extend the local attention with a novel
syntax-distance constraint, to capture syntax related source
words with the predicted target word. Following the dependency tree of a source sentence, each source word has a
syntax-distance constraint mask, which denotes its syntax

Abstract
Attention mechanism, including global attention and local
attention, plays a key role in neural machine translation
(NMT). Global attention attends to all source words for word
prediction. In comparison, local attention selectively looks at
ﬁxed-window source words. However, alignment weights for
the current target word often decrease to the left and right by
linear distance centering on the aligned source position and
neglect syntax distance constraints. In this paper, we extend
the local attention with syntax-distance constraint, which focuses on syntactically related source words with the predicted
target word to learning a more effective context vector for
predicting translation. Moreover, we further propose a double
context NMT architecture, which consists of a global context
vector and a syntax-directed context vector from the global
attention, to provide more translation performance for NMT
from source representation. The experiments on the largescale Chinese-to-English and English-to-German translation
tasks show that the proposed approach achieves a substantial
and signiﬁcant improvement over the baseline system.

1

Introduction

Recent works of neural machine translation (NMT) have
been proposed to adopt the encoder-decoder framework
(Kalchbrenner and Blunsom 2013; Cho et al. 2014;
Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014), which employs a recurrent neural network (RNN) encoder to represent source sentence and a RNN decoder to generate target translation word
by word. Especially, the NMT with an attention mechanism
(called as global attention) is proposed to acquire source
sentence context dynamically at each decoding step, thus
improving the performance of NMT (Bahdanau, Cho, and
Bengio 2015). The global attention is further reﬁned into a
local attention (Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015), which
selectively looks at ﬁxed-window source context at each decoding step, thus demonstrating its effectiveness on WMT
translation tasks between English and German in both directions.
Speciﬁcally, the local attention ﬁrst predicts a single
aligned source position pi for the current time-step i. The de∗
Kehai Chen was an internship research fellow at NICT when
conducting this work.
†
Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4792

