The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning with Single-Teacher Multi-Student
†

Shan You,† Chang Xu,‡ Chao Xu,† Dacheng Tao‡
Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MOE), Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center,
School of EECS, Peking University, China
‡
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, SIT, FEIT, University of Sydney, Australia
youshan@pku.edu.cn, c.xu@sydney.edu.au
xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Suppose we have a multiclass classiﬁer (e.g. structural
SVM) which has been already trained well. It allows us
to identify a class from multiple candidates. In some real
circumstances, however, the task in hand may only require
a binary classiﬁcation task, i.e. identifying whether a test
instance belongs to one speciﬁc class instead of what class it
belongs to. For example, in news categorization a multiclass
classiﬁer is implemented to recognize what category a news
item is related to, such as tech news, entertainment news,
economic news, et.al. However, when a user only requests
for the tech news, the system only needs to classify whether
the news items are tech-related or not. Another example
refers to the suspect tracking in criminal detection. Usually,
a face recognition system has already existed whose function
is to identify a person’s ID according to his/her face. This
system may be capable of distinguishing millions of people.
Nevertheless, for suspect tracking, we only concern whether
the testing faces belong to the suspect or not.
Of course, we can still use the multiclass classiﬁer to directly recognize whether the instance is a tech news item (or
the suspect). If the instance is related to other news categories
(or persons), we think it is no tech news (or suspect). However, this practice will always involve the inference of all the
other classes; thus for a binary classiﬁcation, the inference
cost is too expensive. Or just using the training data to learn
the binary classiﬁers is also an intuitive method. Nevertheless, this can not take advantage of the existing multiclass
classiﬁer which may provide some useful information. Therefore, it is of the need to learn a new binary classiﬁer with
much faster inference speed than the multiclass classiﬁer, and
higher classiﬁcation accuracy than that of simple learning
with training data.
In our paper, we suggest learning the binary classiﬁers
by virtue of the existing multiclass classiﬁer. In fact, this
can be likened vividly to the basketball team training by
a single teacher (or coach) (He, Eisner, and Daume 2012;
Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015; You et al. 2017b; Zhu,
Liu, and Lopes 2017). An experienced teacher has extensive
knowledge about how to be a good forward, center and guard.
What the teacher wants is to train a team and each player has
his/her own speciality; some specialize in the forward while
others are more suitable for centers or guards. Our problem
can also be regarded as learning from a single teacher (i.e. the
multiclass classiﬁer) to obtain multiple students (i.e. binary

Abstract
In this paper we study a new learning problem deﬁned as
“Single-Teacher Multi-Student” (STMS) problem, which investigates how to learn a series of student (simple and speciﬁc) models from a single teacher (complex and universal)
model. Taking the multiclass and binary classiﬁcation for example, we focus on learning multiple binary classiﬁers from
a single multiclass classiﬁer, where each of binary classiﬁer
is responsible for a certain class. This actually derives from
some realistic problems, such as identifying the suspect based
on a comprehensive face recognition system. By treating the
already-trained multiclass classiﬁer as the teacher, and multiple binary classiﬁers as the students, we propose a gated
support vector machine (gSVM) as a solution. A series of
gSVMs are learned with the help of single teacher multiclass
classiﬁer. The teacher’s help is two-fold; ﬁrst, the teacher’s
score provides the gated values for students’ decision; second,
the teacher can guide the students to accommodate training
examples with different difﬁculty degrees. Extensive experiments on real datasets validate its effectiveness.

Introduction
Multiclass classiﬁcation (MC) (Aly 2005; Bishop 2006;
Nie, Wang, and Huang 2017) considers that an instance can
be afﬁliated to one of multiple (≥ 2) classes. Many real
applications can be cast into MC problem. Taking the face
recognition (He et al. 2017) for example, the task is required
to distinguish multiple people based on their face photos, e.g.
126 individuals in AR Face Database (Martinez 1998). Other
MC applications refer to image classiﬁcation (Guo 2017),
text categorization (Xu et al. 2017), information retrieval
(Yang et al. 2017), multi-view classiﬁcation (Xu, Tao, and
Xu 2013) et.al.
To accommodate multiple classes, the multiclass classiﬁers
usually adopt a score-based prediction mechanism. In detail,
they can generate a score vector in terms of all classes as the
output, then the class with the maximum score is regarded as
the prediction. Some of the widely-used multiclass classiﬁers
actually follow this mechanism, such as One-vs-All (Vapnik 2013), structural SVM (Tsochantaridis et al. 2004), rank
SVM (Joachims 2002), et.al. As a result, the multiclass classiﬁers usually have larger model size than the binary classiﬁers,
and more expensive inference cost as well.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4390

