The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

The Shape of Art History in the Eyes of the Machine
Ahmed Elgammal, Bingchen Liu, Diana Kim, Mohamed Elhoseiny
The Art and AI Laboratory, Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University, NJ, USA

Marian Mazzone
Department of Art History, College of Charleston, SC, USA
Kroeber 1953; Gombrich 1968). Up to now connoisseurship
has proven to be one of the most effective means to detect
the styles of various artists, and differentiate style categories
and distinctions in larger movements and periods.
Recent research in Artiﬁcial Intelligence have shown the
ability of the machine to learn to discriminate between different style categories such as Renaissance, Baroque, Cubism, etc., with reasonable accuracy, (e.g. (Shamir et al.
2010; Karayev et al. 2013; Saleh et al. 2016; Saleh and Elgammal 2015)). However, classifying style by the machine
is not what interests art historians. Instead, the important issues are what machine learning may tell us about how the
characteristics of style are identiﬁed, and the patterns or sequence of style changes. None of the aforementioned papers
brought any understanding of the problem of style that can
be useful to art historian. The ability of the machine to classify styles implies that the machine has learned an internal
representation that encodes discriminative features through
its visual analysis of the paintings. However, it is typical that
the machine uses visual features that are not interpretable by
humans. This limits the ability to discover knowledge out of
these results.
Our study’s emphasis is on understanding how the machine achieves classiﬁcation of style, what internal representation it uses to achieve this task, and how that representation is related to art history methodologies for identifying
styles. To achieve such understanding, we utilized one of the
key formulations of style pattern and style change in art history, the theory of Heinrich Wölfﬂin (1846-1945). Wölfﬂin’s
comparative approach to formal analysis has become a standard method of art history pedagogy. Wölfﬂin chose to separate form analysis from discussions of subject matter and
expression, focusing on the “visual schema” of the works,
and how the “visible world crystallized for the eye in certain
forms” (Wölﬂin 1950). Wölfﬂin identiﬁed pairs of works of
art to demonstrate style differences through comparison and
contrast exercises that focused on key principles or features.
Wölfﬂin used his method to differentiate the Renaissance
from the Baroque style through ﬁve key visual principles:
linear/painterly, planar/recessional, closed form/open form,
multiplicity/unity, absolute clarity/relative clarity. Wölfﬂin
posited that form change has some pattern of differentiation,
such that style types and changes can only come into being
in certain sequences.

Abstract
How does the machine classify styles in art? And how does
it relate to art historians’ methods for analyzing style? Several studies showed the ability of the machine to learn and
predict styles, such as Renaissance, Baroque, Impressionism,
etc., from images of paintings. This implies that the machine
can learn an internal representation encoding discriminative
features through its visual analysis. However, such a representation is not necessarily interpretable. We conducted a
comprehensive study of several of the state-of-the-art convolutional neural networks applied to the task of style classiﬁcation on 67K images of paintings, and analyzed the learned
representation through correlation analysis with concepts derived from art history. Surprisingly, the networks could place
the works of art in a smooth temporal arrangement mainly
based on learning style labels, without any a priori knowledge
of time of creation, the historical time and context of styles, or
relations between styles. The learned representations showed
that there are a few underlying factors that explain the visual variations of style in art. Some of these factors were
found to correlate with style patterns suggested by Heinrich
Wölfﬂin (1846-1945). The learned representations also consistently highlighted certain artists as the extreme distinctive
representative of their styles, which quantitatively conﬁrms
art historian observations.

Introduction
Style is central to the discipline of art history. The word
“style” is used to refer to the individual way or manner
that someone makes or does something, for example Rembrandt’s style of painting. Style also refers to groups of
works that have a similar typology of characteristics, such as
the Impressionist style, or High Renaissance style. Art historians are obligated to identify, characterize, and deﬁne styles
based on the evidence of the physical work itself, in combination with an analysis of the cultural and historical features
of the time and place in which it was made. Although we
see style, and we all know that it exists, there is still no central, agreed upon theory of how style comes about, or how
and why it changes. Some of the best scholars of art history have written persuasively about the importance of style
to the discipline, and the concomitant difﬁculty of deﬁning
or explaining what it is and why it changes (Schapiro and
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2183

