The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Automatic Segmentation
of Data Sequences
Liangzhe Chen, Sorour E. Amiri, B. Aditya Prakash
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech.
Email: {liangzhe, esorour, badityap}@cs.vt.edu

Abstract
Segmenting temporal data sequences is an important problem which helps in understanding data dynamics in multiple applications such as epidemic surveillance, motion capture sequences, etc. In this paper, we give DASSA, the ﬁrst
self-guided and efﬁcient algorithm to automatically ﬁnd a
segmentation that best detects the change of pattern in data
sequences. To avoid introducing tuning parameters, we design DASSA to be a multi-level method which examines segments at each level of granularity via a compact data structure called the segment-graph. We build this data structure
by carefully leveraging the information bottleneck method
with the MDL principle to effectively represent each segment.
Next, DASSA efﬁciently ﬁnds the optimal segmentation via
a novel average-longest-path optimization on the segmentgraph. Finally we show how the outputs from DASSA can
be naturally interpreted to reveal meaningful patterns.
We ran DASSA on multiple real datasets of varying sizes and
it is very effective in ﬁnding the time-cut points of the segmentations (in some cases recovering the cut points perfectly)
as well as in ﬁnding the corresponding changing patterns.

1

Introduction

Given a data-sequence of Ebola infections, can we quickly
tell when the characteristics of infected people change,
possibly due to a mutation? In this paper, we study the
problem of automatically segmenting sequences of multidimensional data point (with categorical and/or real-valued
features like age, gender, speed etc.) so as to capture relevant
trends and changes. The data observations can be unevenly
distributed temporally and repeated multiple times in the sequence, naturally generalizing multi-variate time-series.
Such segmentations can be helpful in many real applications, as they may shed light on the underlying dynamics and
patterns, thereby helping in modeling, anomaly detection,
and also visualization. Consider epidemiological surveillance, where tracking disease propagation (Thompson, Comanor, and Shay 2006) can enhance the chance of a successful intervention and increase the situation awareness. For
example, automatically ﬁnding changes in patient characteristics in a sequence of infected cases can help us point to
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

changes in the disease itself. In Fig. 1(a), in a series of ﬂuinfections, DASSA ﬁnds that the disease infects elder, richer
people ﬁrst, and then spreads to younger people with lower
income. Similarly, ﬁguring out the changes in how words are
used together in user tweets (due to changes in users’ health
status) can help in estimating disease incidence (Chen et al.
2014). See Fig. 1(b): in a series of ﬂu-related tweets, we observe a transition between word usage in each segment from
infection to recovery. Our motivation in this paper is to design a general-purpose scalable segmentation algorithm for
data sequences.
Informal Problem: Given a multi-dimensional data sequence, automatically ﬁnd a time segmentation s.t. consecutive segments are not similarly informative.
Surprisingly, despite its importance, this general problem
has not been studied widely (see related work in Sec. 5).
Such a problem cannot be trivially converted to one in time
series, and has many challenges. The main properties we
want a good solution to satisfy are:
P1 (Generality): No prior assumption on either data types
or data distributions. The algorithm should work well regardless even if the data is skewed, or not forming clusters
or not drawn from a known distribution.
P2 (Self-Guided): Automatically ﬁnd the appropriate number and identity of cut-points without user input.
P3 (Efﬁciency): Finish within reasonable time for real
datasets.
In this paper, we present an algorithm DASSA (DAta Sequence Segmentation Automatically), which satisﬁes all the
three properties. To this end, we introduce three main ideas
which may be useful for other segmentation problems as
well: (a) looking at all possible segmentations efﬁciently using the so-called segment-graph; (b) compressing data in
each segment based on temporal data distributions using
Information Bottleneck and Minimum Description Length;
and (c) using a novel path optimization to ﬁnd the best segmentation, which automatically regularizes the number of
segments and total segment difference. Via extensive experiments ranging from epidemiological, social to motion capture datasets we show how DASSA can recover high-quality
segmentations, and meaningful patterns in practice. To the
best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to present an efﬁcient,
self-guided method for the purpose of segmenting general
data sequences.

2844

