The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Sequence-to-Sequence Learning via Shared Latent Representation
†

Xu Shen,† Xinmei Tian,† Jun Xing, Yong Rui,‡ Dacheng Tao
CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in Geo-Spatial Information Processing and Application Systems,
University of Science and Technology of China, China

Institute for Creative Technologies, University of Southern California
‡
Lenovo Research

UBTECH Sydney Artiﬁcial Intelligence Institute, SIT, FEIT, University of Sydney, Australia
shenxu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xinmei@ustc.edu.cn, junxnui@gmail.com,
yongrui@lenovo.com, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au
Abstract
sentence

Sequence-to-sequence learning is a popular research area in
deep learning, such as video captioning and speech recognition. Existing methods model this learning as a mapping
process by ﬁrst encoding the input sequence to a ﬁxed-sized
vector, followed by decoding the target sequence from the
vector. Although simple and intuitive, such mapping model is
task-speciﬁc, unable to be directly used for different tasks. In
this paper, we propose a star-like framework for general and
ﬂexible sequence-to-sequence learning, where different types
of media contents (the peripheral nodes) could be encoded
to and decoded from a shared latent representation (SLR)
(the central node). This is inspired by the fact that human
brain could learn and express an abstract concept in different
ways. The media-invariant property of SLR could be seen as
a high-level regularization on the intermediate vector, enforcing it to not only capture the latent representation intra each
individual media like the auto-encoders, but also their transitions like the mapping models. Moreover, the SLR model
is content-speciﬁc, which means it only needs to be trained
once for a dataset, while used for different tasks. We show
how to train a SLR model via dropout and use it for different sequence-to-sequence tasks. Our SLR model is validated
on the Youtube2Text and MSR-VTT datasets, achieving superior performance on video-to-sentence task, and the ﬁrst
sentence-to-video results.

video

sentence
o1

vector

o2

SLR
i2

i1

video

(a) mapping

video

sentence

(b) star-like

Figure 1: Concept illustration of different models. (a) the
mapping model ﬁrst encodes the video into a ﬁxed-sized
vector, followed by decoding a sentence from the vector.
(b) the star-like model learns a shared latent representation
(SLR) among the video and sentence, and could reconstruct
them from the SLR. The star-like mode could be used for
different learning tasks, such as video-to-sentence learning
when activating the video input (i1 ) and sentence output
(o2 ).
quence. However, these mapping models are task-speciﬁc,
which means we need to train different models separately
(e.g. English-to-Chinese and Chinese-to-English). It may
bring more computation and time cost and deployment difﬁculty as the model number increases.
In human brain, information collected and extracted from
different channels (e.g. visual and auditory information) are
ﬁrst mapped to a common inferior front cortex area, then
this cortex area sends signals to the control cortex for further
processing to drive various motor controls (Bear, Conners,
and Paradiso 1996). This motivates us to propose a star-like
framework for sequence-to-sequence learning (Figure 1b).
In the framework, the peripheral nodes are the various media
sequences (e.g. text, audio and video) that could be encoded
to and decoded from the central node called the shared latent representation (SLR). In particular, the SLR could be
learned from a single or multiple media sources, and generate the same (e.g. sentence-to-sentence) or different (videoto-sentence) medias. The star structure decouples the input from output, enabling a general and ﬂexible framework
for various sequence learning applications. Different from

Introduction
Sequence-to-sequence learning recently gains enormous attention both academically and commercially, and has been
successfully used to develop various practical and powerful applications, such as machine translation (Sutskever,
Vinyals, and Le 2014), speech recognition (Graves, Mohamed, and Hinton 2013) and video captioning (Venugopalan et al. 2015a). This has been greatly advanced with
the increasing power of recurrent neural networks, especially the LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), for
sequential processing. Despite the diversity of sequences,
existing methods share a common mapping framework (Figure 1a), where the input sequence is ﬁrst encoded to a ﬁxedsized vector, then the vector is decoded to the output sec 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2395

