The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

IONet: Learning to Cure the
Curse of Drift in Inertial Odometry
Changhao Chen, Xiaoxuan Lu, Andrew Markham, Niki Trigoni
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, United Kingdom
Email: {ﬁrstname.lastname}@cs.ox.ac.uk

,QSXWV
,08GDWD6HTXHQFH

Abstract
Inertial sensors play a pivotal role in indoor localization,
which in turn lays the foundation for pervasive personal applications. However, low-cost inertial sensors, as commonly
found in smartphones, are plagued by bias and noise, which
leads to unbounded growth in error when accelerations are
double integrated to obtain displacement. Small errors in state
estimation propagate to make odometry virtually unusable in
a matter of seconds. We propose to break the cycle of continuous integration, and instead segment inertial data into independent windows. The challenge becomes estimating the
latent states of each window, such as velocity and orientation, as these are not directly observable from sensor data.
We demonstrate how to formulate this as an optimization
problem, and show how deep recurrent neural networks can
yield highly accurate trajectories, outperforming state-of-theart shallow techniques, on a wide range of tests and attachments. In particular, we demonstrate that IONet can generalize to estimate odometry for non-periodic motion, such as
a shopping trolley or baby-stroller, an extremely challenging
task for existing techniques.

'HHS1HXUDO1HWZRUNV

2XWSXWV
)XOO7UDMHFWRU\

Figure 1: Overview of our proposed learning-based method
step (Li et al. 2012). Instead of double integrating accelerations into locations, a step length update mitigates exponential increasing drifts into linear increasing drifts. However,
dynamic step estimation is heavily inﬂuenced by sensor
noise, user’s walking habits and phone attachment changes,
causing unavoidable errors to the entire system (Brajdic and
Harle 2013). In some scenarios, no steps can be detected,
for example, if a phone is placed on a baby stroller or shopping trolley, the assumption of periodicity, exploited by stepbased PDR would break down. Therefore, the intrinsic problems of SINS and PDR prevent widespread use of inertial
localization in daily life. The architecture of two existing
methods is illustrated in Figure 2.
To cure the unavoidable ‘curse’ of inertial system drifts,
we break the cycle of continuous error propagation, and reformulate inertial tracking as a sequential learning problem.
Instead of developing multiple modules for step-based PDR,
our model can provide continuous trajectory for indoor users
from raw data without the need of any hand-engineering, as
shown in Figure 1. Our contributions are three-fold:

Fast and accurate indoor localization is a fundamental need
for many personal applications, including smart retail, public places navigation, human-robot interaction and augmented reality. One of the most promising approaches is to
use inertial sensors to perform dead reckoning, which has attracted great attention from both academia and industry, because of its superior mobility and ﬂexibility (Lymberopoulos
et al. 2015).
Recent advances of MEMS (Micro-electro-mechanical
systems) sensors have enabled inertial measurement units
(IMUs) small and cheap enough to be deployed on smartphones. However, the low-cost inertial sensors on smartphones are plagued by high sensor noise, leading to unbounded system drifts. Based on Newtonian mechanics, traditional strapdown inertial navigation systems (SINS) integrate IMU measurements directly. They are hard to realize
on accuracy-limited IMU due to exponential error propagation through integration. To address these problems, stepbased pedestrian dead reckoning (PDR) has been proposed.
This approach estimates trajectories by detecting steps, estimating step length and heading, and updating locations per

• We cast the inertial tracking problem as a sequential
learning approach by deriving a sequence-based physical
model from Newtonian mechanics.
• We propose the ﬁrst deep neural network (DNN) framework that learns location transforms in polar coordinates
from raw IMU data, and constructs inertial odometry regardless of IMU attachment.
• We collected a large dataset for training and testing, and
conducted extensive experiments across different attachments, users/devices and new environment, whose results

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6468

