The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Conditional PSDDs: Modeling and
Learning with Modular Knowledge
Yujia Shen, Arthur Choi, Adnan Darwiche
Computer Science Department
University of California, Los Angeles
{yujias,aychoi,darwiche}@cs.ucla.edu

2012; Barber 2012). Moreover, Bayesian networks represent
such knowledge while remaining modular in a sense that we
shall explain next and exploit later.
A Bayesian network has two components. The ﬁrst is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) with its nodes representing variables of interest, and its topology encoding conditional independence constraints. The second component consists of
a set of conditional probability tables (CPTs), one for each
variable in the network. The CPT for a variable deﬁnes a set
of distributions for that variable, conditioned on the states of
its parents in the network. A key property of Bayesian networks is their modularity, which allows the parameter estimation problem under complete data to be decomposed into
local CPT estimation problems, with closed-form solutions.
However, in the presence of Boolean constraints, Bayesian
networks may have very connected topologies, in addition
to variables with many states and parents, potentially making them unusable practically.
Bayesian networks and PSDDs can then be viewed as
two extremes on a spectrum. On the one hand, Bayesian
networks can exploit background knowledge in the form of
conditional independencies, but they cannot handle Boolean
constraints as effectively as PSDDs. On the other hand, PSDDs can effectively incorporate background knowledge in
the form of Boolean constraints, but cannot directly exploit
known conditional independencies as do Bayesian networks.
In this paper, we propose a representation that inherits advantages from both representations. First, we propose the
conditional PSDD, which is a tractable representation of
probability distributions that are conditioned on the same set
of variables. We then use these PSDDs to represent the conditional probability tables (CPTs) of a Bayesian network.
This allows us to inherit the modularity of Bayesian networks and their ability to explicitly encode independence,
while also inheriting from PSDDs their ability to effectively
incorporate Boolean domain constraints. We refer to the resulting representation as a structured Bayesian network, as
it also allows nodes with (exponentially) many states. This
increases the reach of both PSDDs and Bayesian networks,
on the modeling, learning and computational fronts.
This paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst review background knowledge as exploited by PSDDs, followed by a review of this representation. We next consider modular forms
of background knowledge, which are required and exploited

Abstract
Probabilistic Sentential Decision Diagrams (PSDDs) have
been proposed for learning tractable probability distributions
from a combination of data and background knowledge (in
the form of Boolean constraints). In this paper, we propose a
variant on PSDDs, called conditional PSDDs, for representing a family of distributions that are conditioned on the same
set of variables. Conditional PSDDs can also be learned from
a combination of data and (modular) background knowledge.
We use conditional PSDDs to deﬁne a more structured version of Bayesian networks, in which nodes can have an exponential number of states, hence expanding the scope of domains where Bayesian networks can be applied. Compared
to classical PSDDs, the new representation exploits the independencies captured by a Bayesian network to decompose the
learning process into localized learning tasks, which enables
the learning of better models while using less computation.
We illustrate the promise of conditional PSDDs and structured Bayesian networks empirically, and by providing a case
study to the modeling of distributions over routes on a map.

Introduction
The Probabilistic Sentential Decision Diagram (PSDD) is
a recently proposed tractable representation for probability
distributions (Kisa et al. 2014). The PSDD was motivated
by the need to learn distributions in the presence of abundant background knowledge, expressed using Boolean constraints. For example, PSDDs have previously been leveraged to learn distributions in domains that can give rise
to massive Boolean constraints, such as user preference
rankings (Choi, Van den Broeck, and Darwiche 2015) as
well as modeling routes and games (Choi, Tavabi, and Darwiche 2016; Choi, Shen, and Darwiche 2017). The typical approach for constructing a PSDD is to ﬁrst compile
Boolean constraints into a tractable logical representation
called the Sentential Decision Diagram (SDD). A PSDD is
then learned from the compiled SDD and a given dataset.
While PSDDs can be quite effective in the presence of
massive Boolean constraints, they do not allow users to explicitly represent background knowledge in the form of conditional independence constraints. In contrast, probabilistic graphical models use graphs to represent such knowledge (Darwiche 2009; Koller and Friedman 2009; Murphy
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6433

