The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

The Geometric Block Model
Sainyam Galhotra, Arya Mazumdar, Soumyabrata Pal, Barna Saha
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
{sainyam,arya,spal,barna}@cs.umass.edu

are only two communities of exactly equal sizes, and the intern
cluster edge probability is b log
and intra-cluster edge proban
a log n
bility is n , it is known that perfect recovery is possible if
√
√
√
and only if a − b > 2 (Abbe, Bandeira, and Hall 2016;
Mossel, Neeman,and Sly
 2015). The regime of the probabilities being Θ logn n has been put forward as one of
most interesting ones, because in an Erdös-Renyi random
graph, this is the threshold for graph connectivity (Bollobás 1998). This result has been subsequently generalized for k communities (Abbe and Sandon 2015a; 2015b;
Hajek, Wu, and Xu 2016) (for constant k or when k =
o(log n)), and under the assumption that the communities
are generated according to a probabilistic generative model
(there is a prior probability pi of an element being in the ith
community) (Abbe and Sandon 2015a). Note that, the results
are not only of theoretical interest, many real-world networks
exhibit a “sparsely connected” community feature (Leskovec
et al. 2008), and any efﬁcient recovery algorithm for SBM
has many potential applications.
One aspect that the SBM does not account for is a “transitivity rule” (‘friends having common friends’) inherent to
many social and other community structures. To be precise,
consider any three vertices x, y and z. If x and y are connected by an edge (or they are in the same community), and
y and z are connected by an edge (or they are in the same
community), then it is more likely than not that x and z are
connected by an edge. This phenomenon can be seen in many
network structures - predominantly in social networks, blognetworks and advertising. SBM, primarily a generalization
of Erdös-Renyi random graph, does not take into account
this characteristic, and in particular, probability of an edge
between x and z there is independent of the fact that there
exist edges between x and y and y and z. However, one needs
to be careful such that by allowing such “transitivity”, the
simplicity and elegance of the SBM is not lost.
Inspired by the above question, we propose a random graph
community detection model analogous to the stochastic block
model, that we call the geometric block model (GBM). The
GBM depends on the basic deﬁnition of the random geometric graph that has found a lot of practical use in wireless
networking because of its inclusion of the notion of proximity
between nodes (Penrose 2003).
Deﬁnition. A random geometric graph (RGG) on n ver-

Abstract
To capture the inherent geometric features of many community
detection problems, we propose to use a new random graph
model of communities that we call a Geometric Block Model.
The geometric block model generalizes the random geometric
graphs in the same way that the well-studied stochastic block
model generalizes the Erdös-Renyi random graphs. It is also a
natural extension of random community models inspired by
the recent theoretical and practical advancement in community detection. While being a topic of fundamental theoretical
interest, our main contribution is to show that many practical
community structures are better explained by the geometric
block model. We also show that a simple triangle-counting
algorithm to detect communities in the geometric block model
is near-optimal. Indeed, even in the regime where the average
degree of the graph grows only logarithmically with the number of vertices (sparse-graph), we show that this algorithm
performs extremely well, both theoretically and practically.
In contrast, the triangle-counting algorithm is far from being optimum for the stochastic block model. We simulate our
results on both real and synthetic datasets to show superior
performance of both the new model as well as our algorithm.

1

Introduction

The planted-partition model or the stochastic block model
(SBM) is a random graph model for community detection that
generalizes the well-known Erdös-Renyi graphs (Holland,
Laskey, and Leinhardt 1983; Dyer and Frieze 1989; Decelle
et al. 2011; Abbe and Sandon 2015a; Abbe, Bandeira, and
Hall 2016; Hajek, Wu, and Xu 2015; Chin, Rao, and Vu 2015;
Mossel, Neeman, and Sly 2015). Consider a graph G(V, E),
where V = V1  V2  · · ·  Vk is a disjoint union of k clusters
denoted by V1 , . . . , Vk . The edges of the graph are drawn
randomly: there is an edge between u ∈ Vi and v ∈ Vj with
probability qi,j , 1 ≤ i, j ≤ k. Given the adjacency matrix of
such a graph, the task is to ﬁnd exactly (or approximately)
the partition V1  V2  · · ·  Vk of V .
This model has been incredibly popular both in theoretical and practical domains of community detection, and the
aforementioned references are just a small sample. Recent
theoretical works focus on characterizing sharp threshold of
recovering the partition in the SBM. For example, when there
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2215

