The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

T-C3D: Temporal Convolutional 3D
Network for Real-Time Action Recognition
Kun Liu,1 Wu Liu,1 Chuang Gan,2 Mingkui Tan,3 Huadong Ma1
1

Beijing Key Lab of Intelligent Telecommunication Software and Multimedia,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China;
2
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China; 3 South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
Email: {liu kun, liuwu, mhd}@bupt.edu.cn; ganchuang1990@gmail.com; mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn
Abstract
Video-based action recognition with deep neural networks
has shown remarkable progress. However, most of the existing approaches are too computationally expensive due to
the complex network architecture. To address these problems, we propose a new real-time action recognition architecture, called Temporal Convolutional 3D Network (T-C3D),
which learns video action representations in a hierarchical
multi-granularity manner. Speciﬁcally, we combine a residual 3D convolutional neural network which captures complementary information on the appearance of a single frame
and the motion between consecutive frames with a new temporal encoding method to explore the temporal dynamics of
the whole video. Thus heavy calculations are avoided when
doing the inference, which enables the method to be capable of real-time processing. On two challenging benchmark
datasets, UCF101 and HMDB51, our method is signiﬁcantly
better than state-of-the-art real-time methods by over 5.4% in
terms of accuracy and 2 times faster in terms of inference
speed (969 frames per second), demonstrating comparable
recognition performance to the state-of-the-art methods. The
source code for the complete system as well as the pre-trained
models are publicly available at https://github.com/tc3d.

1

(a) Playing Piano and Archery

(b) High Jump and Long Jump

Figure 1: Example videos from four classes of UCF101.
Some actions can be reliably distinguished through the motion computed from consecutive frames. However, certain
similar actions require the overall features of the video to
identify since the short-term information on a clip is almost
the same. For example, in (a), we can identify the “Playing Piano” and “Archery” with sequential frame. While in
(b), “High Jump” and “Long Jump” can be accurately recognized only when the overall information is obtained.

Introduction
short-term motions), but there are also certain similar actions that require the overall features of long-term video
(i.e., long-term motions), where the short-term information
on short clips is almost the same.
To illustrate the above issues, we show some example
videos from UCF101 (Soomro, Zamir, and Shah 2012)
dataset in Figure 1. As shown in Figure 1, “Playing Piano” and “Archery” can be easily recognized through the
appearance information of a static frame or small motion between continual frames. However, sometimes short clips are
not sufﬁcient for distinguishing similar classes (high jump
vs long jump). In this situation, the video-level representations must be taken into consideration. Therefore, it is important to exploit the complementary nature of the single
static image, the short and long-term temporal evolution, and
the video-level representations, which, however, is a great
challenge in video processing. Last but not least, due to the
highly complex nature of the videos, it often requires expensive computational cost to deal with a video. In practice,
this is often the most critical bottleneck for video-based ac-

Video-based action recognition is to enable the computers to recognize the human actions automatically in realworld videos. It has attracted considerable attention from
the academic community (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014;
Tran et al. 2015) to industry applications such as video
classiﬁcation (Karpathy et al. 2014) and behavior analysis
in public security systems (Wang and Schmid 2013). The
task of human action recognition in videos, however, is still
very challenging due to several reasons. First, the video is
naturally an information-intensive media with a number of
complexities, e.g., scale variations, cluttered background,
viewpoint changes, camera motions, and so on. Second, unlike action recognition in a still image, video-based action
recognition should have the ability of characterizing both
short-term small motions and long-term temporal evolutions
of appearances. Some actions can be reliably distinguished
through the motion computed from consecutive frames (i.e.,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7138

