The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Adaptive Quantization for Deep Neural Network
Yiren Zhou,1 Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli,2 Ngai-Man Cheung,1 Pascal Frossard2
1

Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD)
2
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
yiren zhou@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, ngaiman cheung@sutd.edu.sg
{seyed.moosavi, pascal.frossard}@epﬂ.ch

In order to reduce the resource requirement of DNN models, one approach relies on model pruning. By pruning some
parameters in the model (Han, Mao, and Dally 2015), or
skipping some operations during the evaluation (Figurnov
et al. 2016), the storage space and/or the computational cost
of DNN models can be reduced. Another approach consists
in parameter quantization (Han, Mao, and Dally 2015). By
applying quantization on model parameters, these parameters can be stored and computed under lower bit-width. The
model size can be reduced, and the computation becomes
more efﬁcient under hardware support (Han et al. 2016). It
is worth noting that model pruning and parameter quantization can be applied at the same time, without interfering with
each other (Han, Mao, and Dally 2015); we can apply both
approaches to achieve higher compression rates.
Many deep model compression works have also considered using parameter quantization (Gupta et al. 2015;
Han, Mao, and Dally 2015; Wu et al. 2016) together with
other compression techniques, and achieve good results.
However, these works usually assign the same bit-width for
quantization in the different layers of the deep network. In
DNN models, the layers have different structures, which
lead to the different properties related to quantization. By
applying the same quantization bit-width for all layers, the
results could be sub-optimal. It is however possible to assign different bit-width for different layers to achieve optimal quantization result (Hwang and Sung 2014).
In this work, we propose an accurate and efﬁcient
method to ﬁnd the optimal bit-width for coefﬁcient quantization on each DNN layer. Inspired by the analysis
in (Fawzi, Moosavi-Dezfooli, and Frossard 2016), we propose a method to measure the effect of parameter quantization errors in individual layers on the overall model prediction accuracy. Then, by combining the effect caused by all
layers, the optimal bit-width is decided for each layer. By
this method we avoid the exhaustive search for optimal bitwidth on each layer, and make the quantization process more
efﬁcient. We apply this method to quantize different models
that have been pre-trained on ImageNet dataset and achieve
good quantization results on all models. Our method constantly outperforms recent state-of-the-art, i.e., the SQNRbased method (Lin, Talathi, and Annapureddy 2016) on different models, and achieves 20-40% higher compression rate
compared to equal bit-width quantization. Furthermore, we

Abstract
In recent years Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been
rapidly developed in various applications, together with increasingly complex architectures. The performance gain of
these DNNs generally comes with high computational costs
and large memory consumption, which may not be affordable
for mobile platforms. Deep model quantization can be used
for reducing the computation and memory costs of DNNs,
and deploying complex DNNs on mobile equipment. In this
work, we propose an optimization framework for deep model
quantization. First, we propose a measurement to estimate the
effect of parameter quantization errors in individual layers on
the overall model prediction accuracy. Then, we propose an
optimization process based on this measurement for ﬁnding
optimal quantization bit-width for each layer. This is the ﬁrst
work that theoretically analyse the relationship between parameter quantization errors of individual layers and model
accuracy. Our new quantization algorithm outperforms previous quantization optimization methods, and achieves 20-40%
higher compression rate compared to equal bit-width quantization at the same model prediction accuracy.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved signiﬁcant
success in various machine learning applications, including image classiﬁcation (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2012; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Szegedy et al. 2015),
image retrieval (Hoang et al. 2017; Do, Doan, and Cheung
2016), and natural language processing (Deng, Hinton, and
Kingsbury 2013). These achievements come with increasing
computational and memory cost, as the neural networks are
becoming deeper (He et al. 2016), and contain more ﬁlters
per single layer (Zeiler and Fergus 2014).
While the DNNs are powerful for various tasks, the increasing computational and memory costs make it difﬁcult
to apply on mobile platforms, considering the limited storage space, computation power, energy supply of mobile devices (Han, Mao, and Dally 2015), and the real-time processing requirements of mobile applications. There is clearly
a need to reduce the computational resource requirements of
DNN models so that they can be deployed on mobile devices (Zhou et al. 2016).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4596

