The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Low-Cost Ethics Shaping Approach for
Designing Reinforcement Learning Agents
Yueh-Hua Wu, Shou-De Lin
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taiwan University
Taipei 10617, Taiwan
d06922005@ntu.edu.tw, sdlin@csie.ntu.edu.tw

means possible, to enumerate all plausible ethical/non-ethical
scenarios or rules, not to mention designing meaningful rewards to them. Second, the judgment of ethics is likely to
be dynamic, depending on the present environment or situation. Thus the hand-crafted ethical patterns might not be
valid given updated situations, making the design of general
ethical RL rewards challenging.
The research question we would like to address here is: Is it
possible to alleviate the burden of RL designers from having
to consider many ethical issues in the design? For instance,
to build a supermarket shopping agent, can an RL designer
simply focus on implementing the shopping capability of
an agent (i.e. seeking and fetching items, checking out in
the counter, etc) instead of worrying about trivial ethical
decisions it may face (e.g., helping elder persons, assisting
lost kids, reporting wet ﬂoor, etc) and let our framework take
care of the learning of such behavior? One idea to achieve
such goal is to collect enough ethical behavior data of human
acting toward the given goal, and then apply the inverse
reinforcement learning (IRL) (Amin and Singh 2016; Evans,
Stuhlmüller, and Goodman 2016; Ng, Russell, and others
2000; Sezener 2015) technique to learn an ethical agent that
follows a similar pattern. IRL and apprenticeship learning
(Abbeel and Ng 2004) have been considered as promising
solutions due to their ability to extract rules and policies
of human behaviors. IRL is also admired for the ability to
generalize to unseen states, which greatly saves the effort of
manually enumerating reward.
However, there are several concerns for adopting IRL.
First, collecting a large amount of human data toward maximizing the reward is costly, and can bias the ethical learning
since it is likely only data from a small number of personnel is
collected. Second, the human data might not be optimal (e.g.,
human not aware of a better solution); thus, learning based
on such imperfect data might lead to sub-optimal outcomes.
Third, IRL is insufﬁcient for agents to infer temporally complex norms (Arnold, Kasenberg, and Scheutz 2017).
On the other hand, we have observed that although human
behavior data optimizing certain RL goals is costly to obtain,
general human data without targeting at the desired goals is
much easier to gather. For instance, in the previous shopping
bot example, it might not be as easy to gather many people’s
behavior in the supermarket compared to gathering general
shopping or wandering data of people in any commercial

Abstract
This paper proposes a low-cost, easily realizable strategy to
equip a reinforcement learning (RL) agent the capability of
behaving ethically. Our model allows the designers of RL
agents to solely focus on the task to achieve, without having
to worry about the implementation of multiple trivial ethical
patterns to follow. Based on the assumption that the majority of
human behavior, regardless which goals they are achieving, is
ethical, our design integrates human policy with the RL policy
to achieve the target objective with less chance of violating
the ethical code that human beings normally obey.

1

Introduction

As AI systems become part of our lives and sometimes make
decisions related to life-or-death consequences such as clinical decision making (Bennett and Hauser 2013), awareness
should be raised to prevent machines from making not only
incorrect but also unethical decisions. Reinforcement learning (Sutton and Barto 1998) is designed to tackle intricate
real-world problems in rather short time (Strehl et al. 2006;
Brafman and Tennenholtz 2002) with a performance bound
(Strehl, Li, and Littman 2009); however, it relies heavily on
the quality of the reward functions provided as the inputs.
The problems of unintended and harmful behavior that may
emerge from poor design of AI systems are mentioned in
(Amodei et al. 2016).
Nevertheless, identifying all plausible ethical concerns for
an agent is challenging, not to mention implementing them
into the system. Here we consider a scenario in machine
ethics that objective functions are speciﬁcally designed to reward a given goal without considering much ethical violation,
so that penalties are not delivered when the agents attempt
to make unethical decisions. Consequently, even though the
goal or desired performance is achieved, some unethical behavior may appear such as robbing a pharmacy to get the
drug or passing by an injured person without offering any
help when minimizing the traveling time.
To address these concerns, we need to design an RL agent
that can not only optimize the cumulative rewards but also
minimize the ethical violation. A straightforward solution is
to design the rewards for ethical moves. However, such strategy suffers at least two drawbacks. First, it is costly, if by all
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1687

