The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Training Set Debugging Using Trusted Items
Xuezhou Zhang and Xiaojin Zhu and Stephen Wright
{zhangxz1123, jerryzhu, swright}@cs.wisc.edu
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison

education

education

Training set bugs are ﬂaws in the data that adversely affect
machine learning. The training set is usually too large for
manual inspection, but one may have the resources to verify a few trusted items. The set of trusted items may not by
itself be adequate for learning, so we propose an algorithm
that uses these items to identify bugs in the training set and
thus improves learning. Speciﬁcally, our approach seeks the
smallest set of changes to the training set labels such that the
model learned from this corrected training set predicts labels
of the trusted items correctly. We ﬂag the items whose labels
are changed as potential bugs, whose labels can be checked
for veracity by human experts. To ﬁnd the bugs in this way is a
challenging combinatorial bilevel optimization problem, but
it can be relaxed into a continuous optimization problem. Experiments on toy and real data demonstrate that our approach
can identify training set bugs effectively and suggest appropriate changes to the labels. Our algorithm is a step toward
trustworthy machine learning.

1

1

1

Abstract

0.5

0

0

0.5

1

magical heritage

(a) training & trusted data

0.5

0

0

0.5

1

magical heritage

(b) DUTI ﬂagged bugs

Figure 1: Harry Potter Toy Example
cacy on multiple data sets. All code and data are published
at http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~jerryzhu/DUTI.
To build intuition, consider a toy example a la Harry
Potter in Figure 1a. Each blue point is a Hogwarts student
whose magical heritage ranges from 0 (muggle-born) to 1
(pureblood), and education ranges from 0 (failed school) to
1 (Hermione level). These blue points form a classiﬁcation
training set, where the class label is ‘+’ (hired by Ministry
of Magic after graduation) or ‘o’ (not hired). This training
set shows historical bias against muggle-borns with high education. Kernel logistic regression trained on the data reﬂects this bias (black decision boundary). But suppose we
know two more students and how they should be classiﬁed (the red points) – the assumption being that a fair decision is based simply on education ≥ 0.5. These two points
are the trusted items. Simply training on the trusted items
alone will be unsatisfactory – the boundary will not be ﬂat at
education= 0.5. Instead, DUTI can utilize the trusted items
to ﬂag potential bugs in the training set (Fig. 1b). Darker
color represents higher conﬁdence that a training item is a
bug.

Introduction

A good training set is essential for machine learning. The
presence of bugs – mislabeled training items1 – has adverse
effects on learning (Brodley and Friedl 1999; Guruswami
and Raghavendra 2009; Caramanis and Mannor 2008). Bugs
can appear as outliers that are relatively easy to detect, or as
systematic biases. Systematic bugs are much harder to detect
because the data appear self-consistent.
We propose a novel algorithm DUTI (Debugging Using
Trusted Items) which can detect both outlier and systematic
training set bugs. In addition, it can propose ﬁxes, namely
the corrected label for the bugs. To do so, DUTI utilizes the
knowledge of the machine learning algorithm and a small
set of additional “trusted items”. At its core, DUTI ﬁnds
the smallest changes to the training set such that, when
trained on the changed training set, the learned model agrees
with the trusted items. The changes are then shown to a
domain expert as suggested bug ﬁxes. We will show how
DUTI can be relaxed and solved efﬁciently using continuous optimization, and we demonstrate its debugging efﬁ-

2

Training Set Debugging Formulation

DUTI needs three inputs:
1. The training set in the form of feature, label pairs
(X, Y ) = {(xi , yi )}1:n . The labels Y can be continuous
for regression or discrete for classiﬁcation, and are potentially buggy.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We focus on label bugs for simplicity, though our framework
can be extended to feature bugs in a straightforward manner.

2. Trusted items (X̃, Ỹ ) = {(x̃i , ỹi , ci )}1:m . These are

4482

