The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Facial Landmarks Detection by Self-Iterative
Regression Based Landmarks-Attention Network
Tao Hu,1 Honggang Qi,1 Jizheng Xu,2 Qingming Huang1
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
hutao16@mails.ucas.ac.cn, hgqi@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Cascaded Regression (CR) based methods have been proposed to solve facial landmarks detection problem, which
learn a series of descent directions by multiple cascaded regressors separately trained in coarse and ﬁne stages. They
outperform the traditional gradient descent based methods in
both accuracy and running speed. However, cascaded regression is not robust enough because each regressor’s training
data comes from the output of previous regressor. Moreover,
training multiple regressors requires lots of computing resources, especially for deep learning based methods. In this
paper, we develop a Self-Iterative Regression (SIR) framework to improve the model efﬁciency. Only one self-iterative
regressor is trained to learn the descent directions for samples from coarse stages to ﬁne stages, and parameters are iteratively updated by the same regressor. Speciﬁcally, we proposed Landmarks-Attention Network (LAN) as our regressor,
which concurrently learns features around each landmark and
obtains the holistic location increment. By doing so, not only
the rest of regressors are removed to simplify the training process, but the number of model parameters is signiﬁcantly decreased. The experiments demonstrate that with only 3.72M
model parameters, our proposed method achieves the stateof-the-art performance.

(a) Cascaded Regression.

(b) Self-Iterative Regression.

Figure 1: Facial landmarks detection process of Cascaded
Regression(a) and Self-Iterative Regression(b). To predict
the landmarks’ location parameters, the CR based methods
require multiple regressors, while SIR just need one regressor and updates parameters iteratively.

Xiong and la Torre 2013; Ren et al. 2014; Zhu et al. 2016;
Liu et al. 2016; Tzimiropoulos 2015; Tu 2008) have been
proposed and applied to solve the non-linear least squares
problem. They usually train multiple regressors to predict
the parameters’ increment sequentially, which outperform
the traditional gradient descent based methods in both accuracy and running speed. Moreover, deep learning based
cascaded regression methods (Sun, Wang, and Tang 2013;
Zhang et al. 2014b; Trigeorgis et al. 2016; Xiao et al. 2016;
Zhang et al. 2014a) are widely leveraged for this task because of the powerful ability to extract the discriminative
feature. However, when applying cascaded regression system, three main problems arise: (1) Each regressor just
works well in its local data space, when previous regressor
predicts the false descent direction, the ﬁnal results are very
likely to drift away; (2) In general, higher accuracy can be
obtained by adding more cascaded regressors, while it will
increase model storage memory and computing resources;
(3) Subsequent regressors usually cannot be activated for
training until previous regressors ﬁnished their training process, which increases the system complexity.
In this paper, we develop a Self-Iterative Regression (SIR)
framework to solve the above issues. By means of the powerful representation of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN),
we only train one regressor to learn the descent directions in
coarse and ﬁne stages together. The training data is obtained
by random sampling in the parameter space, and in the testing process, parameters are updated iteratively by calling the

Introduction
Facial landmarks detection is one of the most important
techniques in face analysis, such as face recognition, facial
animation and 3D face reconstruction. It aims to detect the
facial landmarks such as eyes, nose and mouth, namely predicting the location parameters of landmarks.
Researchers usually regard this task as a typical non-linear
least squares problem (Xiong and la Torre 2013). The Newton’s method and its variants are the traditional gradient
based solution, whose convergence rate is quadratic and is
guaranteed to converge, provided that the initial estimate is
sufﬁciently close to the minimum. However, when the objective function is not differentiable(e.g. SIFT(Lowe 2004)) or
the Hessian matrix is not positive deﬁnite, the method won’t
works well (Xiong and la Torre 2013; 2015).
In recent years, cascaded regression based methods (Dollár, Welinder, and Perona 2010; Cao et al. 2014;
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6926

