The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Dialogue Generation with GAN
Hui Su,1∗ Xiaoyu Shen,2 Pengwei Hu,1 Wenjie Li,1 Yun Chen3
1

2

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
Max Planck Institute Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany
3
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

distribution to match the posterior. The posterior take the input x and a random noise η with a ﬁxed distributionn (e.g.,
Gaussian), which can learn any arbitrary distribution and no
longer constrained to be Gaussian.
We demonstrate that the GAN framework can be effectively used for common dialogue generation and generate
more consistent latent variables than VHRED model.

Abstract
This paper presents a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)
to model multi-turn dialogue generation, which trains a latent
hierarchical recurrent encoder-decoder simultaneously with a
discriminative classiﬁer that make the prior approximate to
the posterior. Experiments show that our model achieves better results.

Related work

Introduction

VHRED The variational hierarchical recurrent encoder
decoder (VHRED) model has previously been proposed for
dialogue modeling. The response x is generated from the
distribution pθ (x|z, c). In contrast to calculating the exact
log-likelihood, it can be efﬁciently trained by optimizing a
valid lower bound. The objective takes the following form:

− log pθ (x|c) = − log pθ (z|c)pθ (x|z, c)dz

Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.
2014) have made signiﬁcant progress in learning smooth latent variable representations of continuous data. However,
directly applying GAN on discrete text data is difﬁcult.
Current approaches usually combine it with reinforcement
learning or continuous approximations (Kim et al. 2017), but
none of them have demonstrated convincing advantages. Using GAN with reinforcement learning (RL) (Li et al. 2017)
has been made to investigate dialogue generation, while the
model variance is too high.
Recently (Serban et al. 2017) proposed the Variational
Hierarchical Recurrent Encoder-Decoder (VHRED) model
which borrows the idea from conditional variational autoencoders (CVAE) (Sohn, Lee, and Yan 2015) to model multiturn dialogue generation. However, the approximated posterior distribution needs to be speciﬁed and the prior distribution is not guaranteed to be the same as the marginal
posterior distribution in the global optimum.
Inspired by the recent success of Adversarial Autoencoder (Makhzani et al. 2015), in this paper, we propose an
end-to-end differentiable GAN framework (D-GAN) for dialogue generation, which learns a discriminator that measures the differences between the continuous latent representation of prior and posterior distribution. Speciﬁcally, in
a conversation, a response x is generated as follows: A latent
variable z is sampled from a prior distribution pθ (z|c) based
on the current dialogue context c, then the response is generated from the distribution pθ (x|z, c). In training phrase,
we generate response from posterior pθ (z|c, x) and the discriminator is trained to distinguish between samples from
the prior and posterior distribution, thereby pushing the prior

z

≤ −Eqφ (z|x,c) [log p(x|z, c)] + KL(qφ (z|x, c)||p(z)|c)))
(1)
Adversarial autoencoders CVAE model typically use a
factorial Gaussian as the prior, which enables closed-form
optimization while restricting the expressive power of the
model. Adversarial autoencoders replace the KL divergence
with an adversarial training criterion to allow richer families
of priors. Our work differs in that we do not sample from a
ﬁxed prior distribution, both prior and posterior are instead
parameterized through the neural network.

Model
We decompose a dialogue into two levels: sequences of utterances and sub-sequences of words, as in (Serban et al.
2017). Let w1 , . . . , wN be a dialogue with N utterances,
where wn = (wn,1 , . . . , wn,Mn ) is the n-th utterance. The
probability distribution of the utterance sequence factorizes
as:
N
n
 M

Pθ (wm,n |wm,<n , w<n )
(2)
n=1 m=1

where θ represents the model parameters and w<n encodes
the dialog context until step n. A word encoder and context
encoder is implemented to separately model the dynamics of
these two levels.

∗

Correspondence to H. Su (suhui15@mails.ucas.ac.cn).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8163

