The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Model-Free Iterative Temporal Appliance Discovery for
Unsupervised Electricity Disaggregation
Mark Valovage, Akshay Shekhawat, Maria Gini
Computer Science and Engineering
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN
{valov002,shekh027,gini}@umn.edu

electrical signal (Hart 1992). While existing smart meters
have the capability to monitor the consumption of individual appliances, the cost of purchasing a smart meter for every appliance in a building greatly outweighs any potential
savings obtained by reducing waste. In contrast, electricity
disaggregation can monitor energy usage of all appliances
with a single smart meter (Carrie Armel et al. 2012).
Appliance-speciﬁc data has multiple uses. First, reporting
appliance-speciﬁc power consumption to consumers has a
measurable impact on reducing waste. Second, an automated
system could use such data to provide recommendations to
consumers on speciﬁc actions to reduce waste, identify outdated appliances and recommend efﬁcient replacements, and
(if given authority) could automatically turn off unused appliances or shift their operation to times when electricity
is cheaper. Third, real-world data could help manufacturers improve efﬁciency of future appliance models. Finally,
utility companies could use such data for better market segmentation and load forecasting, reducing operational costs
by up to 28% (Lobaccaro, Carlucci, and Löfström 2016).
Despite signiﬁcant research in electricity disaggregation,
existing methods remain unimplemented in the real world.
Supervised learning requires multiple isolated training samples for each appliance, a time-consuming task most consumers are unwilling to perform. In contrast, unsupervised
learning methods have the potential to disaggregate appliances without training samples, but their ability to discover
appliances is limited since they can only discover appliances
that happen to occur in isolation, require pre-existing appliance models, or use brute force search and are restricted to
discovering appliances with very short sequence lengths.
Contributions: This paper introduces iterative appliance
discovery, an unsupervised disaggregation technique that
makes no prior assumptions on appliances. Iterative discovery reconstructs appliances from detected events by identifying the simplest appliances with the closest temporal events
ﬁrst. Following each new discovery, iterative discovery reduces the search space complexity, enabling identiﬁcation of
additional, more complex appliances. This novel approach
yields higher accuracy, faster execution time, and scalability to longer event sequences than any previously introduced unsupervised disaggregation algorithm. We demonstrate these improvements on two publicly available datasets
containing 7 houses against an existing competitive method.

Abstract
Electricity disaggregation identiﬁes individual appliances
from one or more aggregate data streams and has immense
potential to reduce residential and commercial electrical
waste. Since supervised learning methods rely on meticulously labeled training samples that are expensive to obtain, unsupervised methods show the most promise for widespread application. However, unsupervised learning methods
previously applied to electricity disaggregation suffer from
critical limitations. This paper introduces the concept of iterative appliance discovery, a novel unsupervised disaggregation method that progressively identiﬁes the ‘easiest to ﬁnd’
or ‘most likely’ appliances ﬁrst. Once these simpler appliances have been identiﬁed, the computational complexity of
the search space can be signiﬁcantly reduced, enabling iterative discovery to identify more complex appliances. We test
iterative appliance discovery against an existing competitive
unsupervised method using two publicly available datasets.
Results using different sampling rates show iterative discovery has faster runtimes and produces better accuracy. Furthermore, iterative discovery does not require prior knowledge
of appliance characteristics and demonstrates unprecedented
scalability to identify long, overlapped sequences that other
unsupervised learning algorithms cannot.

Introduction
Every year, wasted energy costs the United States $130 billion and produces over a gigaton of pollution, over half of
which comes from wasted electricity (Granade et al. 2009).
A variety of Artiﬁcial Intelligence applications have been
proposed to reduce waste, including automated energy pricing and demand response (Malik and Lehtonen 2016), but
some of the largest potential savings require adjustments to
consumer behavior. Behavioral adjustments that have a minimal effect on consumers’ lifestyles could reduce residential
consumption by up to 20%, but applications to drive these
adjustments remain largely unimplemented due to limitations in existing approaches (Frankel, Heck, and Tai 2013).
Electricity disaggregation is one such application.
Electricity disaggregation, also called Non-Intrusive Appliance Load Monitoring or Single Point Sensing (Gupta,
Reynolds, and Patel 2010), is the process of extracting energy usage for multiple appliances from a single aggregate
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2484

