The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Fourier Feature Approximations for
Periodic Kernels in Time-Series Modelling
Anthony Tompkins, Fabio Ramos
School of Information Technologies
The University of Sydney, New South Wales, 2006, Australia
atom7176@uni.sydney.edu.au, fabio.ramos@sydney.edu.au

applicable for decision making processes - such problems
include environmental or disease modelling, robotics, and
control systems, and these can in turn inﬂuence planning
decisions by humans or automated systems. Regarding temporal modelling, the ability to accurately model long term
forecasts in the form of multi-step ahead predictions is often critical to making informed decisions and indeed these
processes often contain fully or quasi-periodic trends which
are difﬁcult or impossible to model by only using individual
kernels.
Although GPs in their original formulation are an excellent method for modelling data, they are often unable
to take into account all the information present in large
datasets. Recent developments in stochastic gradient optimisation which take advantage of automatic-differentiation and
Variational Inference methods (Kingma and Welling 2014;
Tran et al. 2016) have extended the applicability of machine
learning to huge datasets. Furthermore, Bayesian machine
learning algorithms have a number of well deﬁned methods
for learning model parameters and hyperparameters from
training data, that do not involve cross validation. When
used in combination, stochastically optimized Bayesian machine learning algorithms allow practitioners to learn probabilistic predictors from large data sets with minimal tuning
and retraining.
Previous works investigating periodicity in the context of
GPs often assume pre-existing structures within the data and
set the periodicity to be reasonable based on expert knowledge of the problem (Senanayake, Simon Timothy, and
Ramos 2016) (e.g. yearly), constrained random initialisation
based with or without random restarts (Solin and Särkkä
2014), heuristic re-optimisation (Klenske et al. 2016). We
demonstrate that one can use a natural formalisation using
the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) for seeding kernel hyperparameter periodicities and then optimise within a full variational model. This step further demonstrates a reduction
in computational burden of either relying on a good random initialisation for selecting periodic hyperparameters or
spawning large numbers of periodic kernels across a sweep
of frequencies.
In this paper we make use of some of these recent developments in stochastic gradient methods and stochastic variational inference for supervised regression tasks. This paper
thus presents a novel compositional model and methodology

Abstract
Gaussian Processes (GPs) provide an extremely powerful
mechanism to model a variety of problems but incur an
O(N 3 ) complexity in the number of data samples. Common
approximation methods rely on what are often termed inducing points but still typically incur an O(N M 2 ) complexity in
the data and corresponding inducing points. Using Random
Fourier Feature (RFF) maps, we overcome this by transforming the problem into a Bayesian Linear Regression formulation upon which we apply a Bayesian Variational treatment
that also allows learning the corresponding kernel hyperparameters, likelihood and noise parameters. In this paper we
introduce an alternative method using Fourier series to obtain spectral representations of common kernels, in particular for periodic warpings, which surprisingly have a convergent, non-random form using special functions, requiring
fewer spectral features to approximate their corresponding
kernel to high accuracy. Using this, we can fuse the Random
Fourier Feature spectral representations of common kernels
with their periodic counterparts to show how they can more
effectively and expressively learn patterns in time-series for
both interpolation and extrapolation. This method combines
robustness, scalability and equally importantly, interpretability through a symbolic declarative grammar that is both functionally and humanly intuitive - a property that is crucial for
explainable decision making. Using probabilistic programming and Variational Inference we are able to efﬁciently optimise over these rich functional representations. We show signiﬁcantly improved Gram matrix approximation errors, and
also demonstrate the method in several time-series problems
comparing other commonly used approaches such as recurrent neural networks.

1

Introduction

Non-parametric modelling methods (Ghahramani 2005)
such as GPs (Rasmussen and Williams 2006), inﬁnite Hidden Markov Models, inﬁnite latent factor models, and
Dirichlet process mixtures are ﬂexible modelling methods
that, in contrast to parametric models, assume the data distribution cannot be deﬁned by a ﬁnite set of parameters θ.
A commonly used technique is GP regression which deﬁnes
a distribution over functions: p(f ). Such methods can give
useful probabilistic inference capabilities and are highly
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4155

