The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Understanding Social Interpersonal Interaction
via Synchronization Templates of Facial Events
Rui Li

Jared Curhan

College of Computing & Info. Sciences
Sloan School of Management
Rochester Institute of Technology
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Rochester, New York 14623
Cambridge, Boston 02139
Email: rxlics@rit.edu
Email: curhan@mit.edu

Mohammed Ehsan Hoque
Department of Computer Science
University of Rochester
Rochester, New York 14627
Email: mehoque@cs.rochester.edu

ent affective information in different contexts of social interaction (Singer et al. 2006; Tamietto and de Gelder 2010;
Barrett, Mesquita, and Gendron 2011). These factors motivate us to investigate facial expressions from the perspective
of interactional synchrony.
Interactional synchrony refers to periodic temporal coordination between people’s nonverbal behaviors in social interaction (Schmidt et al. 2012). It describes the intrinsic mutual inﬂuence of two-way communication in ﬂux. In particular, facial expression synchrony has been found strongly
indicative for social signals including (dis-)agreement, empathy, hostility, and any other attitude towards others that
cannot be expressed using just words (Gratier 2004; Curhan
and Pentland 2007; Dunbar et al. 2014). Besides, face-toface (FtF) interaction, we also focus on interpersonal interaction via video-conferencing (VC) platforms. The explosive growth of the Internet and VC signiﬁes the importance
of understanding the social behaviors in this medium. Moreover, VC communication efﬁciency is hindered by some
drawbacks including the limited view of the person, disengaged eye contact, and occasional interruptions resulting
from network latency. Online analysis and interpretation of
facial expression synchronization can help to mitigate these
deﬁciencies.
In this study, we investigate pairs of conversation partners’ facial expression synchronization while they are engaging in VC and FtF communication. In order to represent interactional synchrony, we develop a novel probabilistic framework to discover and summarize common and
unique facial synchronization templates shared among multiple conversation pairs, as shown in Figure 1. The facial
synchronization templates are described by synchronized facial events periodically displayed by the conversation partners.
A facial synchronization template essentially characterizes two levels of statistical regularities of conversation
pairs’ facial expressions.

Abstract
Automatic facial expression analysis in inter-personal communication is challenging. Not only because conversation
partners’ facial expressions mutually inﬂuence each other,
but also because no correct interpretation of facial expressions is possible without taking social context into account.
In this paper, we propose a probabilistic framework to model
interactional synchronization between conversation partners
based on their facial expressions. Interactional synchronization manifests temporal dynamics of conversation partners’
mutual inﬂuence. In particular, the model allows us to discover a set of common and unique facial synchronization
templates directly from natural interpersonal interaction without recourse to any predeﬁned labeling schemes. The facial
synchronization templates represent periodical facial event
coordinations shared by multiple conversation pairs in a speciﬁc social context. We test our model on two different dyadic
conversations of negotiation and job-interview. Based on the
discovered facial event coordination, we are able to predict their conversation outcomes with higher accuracy than
HMMs and GMMs.

Introduction
Facial expression plays a key role in human communication
and relationships, as it is our direct and naturally preeminent
means of communicating and understanding affective state
and intentions. There has been signiﬁcant progress in automatic algorithms for facial expression recognition on both
static images and video clips (Pantic and Rothkrantz 2000;
Zhao and Pietikainen 2007; Zhong et al. 2012; Liu et al.
2014). On the other hand, automatically interpreting facial
expressions in interpersonal interaction is still challenging.
One difﬁculty is to capture the temporal dynamical mutual
inﬂuence between conversation partners. Social psychology studies show that there is spontaneous mutual inﬂuence
in social interactions, usually without conscious awareness
(Shockley, Santana, and Fowler 2003; Singer et al. 2006).
Namely, as active participants, conversation partners constantly adjust their facial expression in response to feedback
from each other. Another challenge is that it heavily depends
on the social context to correctly decode a person’s facial
expression. The same facial expression can convey differ-

• At the individual level, a template consists of a similar facial event displayed by the individuals who play the same
social role (e.g., recruiters) in the conversations.
• At the dyadic level, a template describes a particular temporal coordination of conversation partners’ facial events
that is periodically exhibited in the interaction.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1579

