The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Generating Sentences
Using a Dynamic Canvas
Harshil Shah

Bowen Zheng

David Barber

University College London

University College London

University College London
and Alan Turing Institute

latent variable model with an RNN and train it using SGVB
(we refer to this as Gen-RNN). Samples from the prior produce well-formed, coherent sentences, and the model is effective at imputing missing words. However, the authors
ﬁnd that the KL divergence term of the log-likelihood lower
bound reduces to 0, which implies that the model ignores
the latent representation and collapses to a standard RNN
language model, similar to that of Graves (2014). The authors use word dropout to alleviate this problem, and show
that Gen-RNN generates sentences with more varied vocabulary and is better at imputing missing words than the RNN
language model. Semeniuta, Severyn, and Barth (2017) and
Yang et al. (2017) make use of convolutional layers, which
appear to encourage their models to more strongly rely on
the latent representation without using word dropout.
In the context of computer vision, DRAW (Gregor et al.
2015) showed that using an attention mechanism to ‘paint’
locally on a canvas produced images of remarkable quality.
A natural question therefore is whether a similar approach
could work well for natural language. To this end we introduce the Attentive Unsupervised Text (W)riter (AUTR),
which is a word level generative model for text; AUTR uses
an RNN with a dynamic attention mechanism to iteratively
update a canvas (analogous to an external memory (Gemici
et al. 2017)).
Using an attention mechanism in this way can be very
powerful—it allows the model to use the RNN to focus on
local parts of the sentence at each time step whilst relying on the latent representation to encode global sentence
features. By viewing the canvas at intermediate stages, and
where the RNN is placing its attention, we gain insight into
how the model constructs a sentence. Additionally, we verify that AUTR attains competitive lower bounds on the loglikelihood whilst being computationally efﬁcient. As well
as learning a meaningful latent representation for each sentence, the model generates coherent sentences and successfully imputes missing words. A generative model which is
able to, in some sense, ‘understand’ natural language (which
we believe AUTR shows signs of doing) should facilitate
much better performance when used as a module for downstream tasks such as translation and question answering.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: in
section 2 we deﬁne the AUTR architecture and generative
process, in section 3 we review related work, in section 4

Abstract
We introduce the Attentive Unsupervised Text (W)riter
(AUTR), which is a word level generative model for natural
language. It uses a recurrent neural network with a dynamic
attention and canvas memory mechanism to iteratively construct sentences. By viewing the state of the memory at intermediate stages and where the model is placing its attention,
we gain insight into how it constructs sentences. We demonstrate that AUTR learns a meaningful latent representation for
each sentence, and achieves competitive log-likelihood lower
bounds whilst being computationally efﬁcient. It is effective
at generating and reconstructing sentences, as well as imputing missing words.

1

Introduction

Latent variable models have recently enjoyed signiﬁcant
success when modelling images (Gregor et al. 2015;
Rezende et al. 2016; Gulrajani et al. 2017), as well as
sequential data such as handwriting and speech (Bayer
and Osendorfer 2015; Chung et al. 2015). They specify
a conditional distribution of observed data, given a set
of hidden (latent) variables. The stochastic gradient variational Bayes (SGVB) algorithm (Kingma and Welling 2014;
Rezende, Mohamed, and Wierstra 2014) has made (approximate) maximum likelihood learning possible on a large scale
in models where the true posterior distribution of the latent
variables is not tractable. Deep neural networks can be used
to parametrise the generative and variational distributions,
allowing for extremely ﬂexible and powerful model classes.
There has been somewhat less exploration into deep generative models for natural language. Graves (2014) uses a
stacked RNN architecture at the character level to generate sentences with long range dependencies. The model sequentially emits characters based on the previously generated ones, however it does not map each sentence to a single
latent representation. This means that even though the generated sentences are syntactically coherent and may show
local semantic consistency, the model does not encourage
the sentences to have long range semantic consistency. Additionally, the model cannot generate sentences conditioned on
meaning, style, etc. Bowman et al. (2016) use a word level
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5430

