The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Datum-Wise Sampling Frequency
for Energy-Efﬁcient Human Activity Recognition
Weihao Cheng, Sarah Erfani, Rui Zhang, Kotagiri Ramamohanarao
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne
{weihaoc@student.,sarah.erfani@,rui.zhang@,kotagiri@}unimelb.edu.au

Most of the existing HAR methods use a ﬁxed sampling
frequency for data acquisition. A problem of these methods
is that, they can either spend redundant energy for identifying highly discriminable instances, or obtain unsatisfactory accuracy for confusing instances. Several works have
been proposed for seeking dynamic sampling frequency
for HAR (Wang et al. 2010; Yan et al. 2012; Yurur et al.
2015). An A3R method (Yan et al. 2012) follows a table
of heuristic rules for frequency selection, and it decides to
switch frequency based on a predeﬁned threshold of prediction probability. Some other methods (Wang et al. 2010;
Yurur et al. 2015) solve the problem with a discrete state
Markov Decision Process (MDP), which merely takes one
of the predeﬁned user states as input and returns limited actions (increase/keep/decrease) for changing the frequency.
These methods lack direct information extraction from data
sample and cannot ﬁnd a desired optimal performance on
balancing accuracy and energy efﬁciency.
In this paper, we propose an effective method that dynamically chooses sampling frequencies for HAR. In contrast
to the existing approaches, our method directly exploits the
information from recently observed data instances. Given a
sequence of data entities, our goal is to dynamically choose
frequencies to sample each data entity for inference, so that
the recognition accuracy and the energy efﬁciency are balanced in a desired way. We formalize the problem as ﬁnding
an optimal classiﬁcation model and dynamically appropriate
sampling frequencies that minimize an objective function regarding overall classiﬁcation error and total energy cost. We
propose Datum-Wise Frequency Selection (DWFS) to address the minimization problem through an MDP, where a
policy function is learned for choosing the best sampling
frequency based on a continuous state. We assign the policy function with the datum-wise property, where the feature representation of sampled data is utilized to build a
connection between MDP states and sampling frequencies.
DWFS models a mutual relationship between the classiﬁcation model and the MDP, thereby, we propose to learn their
parameters via an alternative optimization approach. More
speciﬁcally, our main contributions can be summarized as
follows:

Abstract
Continuous Human Activity Recognition (HAR) is an important application of smart mobile/wearable systems for providing dynamic assistance to users. However, HAR in real-time
requires continuous sampling of data using built-in sensors
(e.g., accelerometer), which signiﬁcantly increases the energy
cost and shortens the operating span. Reducing sampling rate
can save energy but causes low recognition accuracy. Therefore, choosing adaptive sampling frequency that balances accuracy and energy efﬁciency becomes a critical problem in
HAR. In this paper, we formalize the problem as minimizing both classiﬁcation error and energy cost by choosing dynamically appropriate sampling rates. We propose DatumWise Frequency Selection (DWFS) to solve the problem via a
continuous state Markov Decision Process (MDP). A policy
function is learned from the MDP, which selects the best frequency for sampling an incoming data entity by exploiting a
datum related state of the system. We propose a method for
alternative learning the parameters of an activity classiﬁcation
model and the MDP that improves both the accuracy and the
energy efﬁciency. We evaluate DWFS with three real-world
HAR datasets, and the results show that DWFS statistically
outperforms the state-of-the-arts regarding a combined measurement of accuracy and energy efﬁciency.

1

Introduction

The task of Human Activity Recognition (HAR) is to recognize an individual’s daily activities, such as walking, running
and cycling. Due to the rapid development of ubiquitous
computing technology, there is a huge demand for applying HAR on mobile/wearable devices that facilitate the understanding of a user’s behaviors and provide intimate assistance to the user (Lockhart, Pulickal, and Weiss 2012). However, HAR in real-time requires continuous sampling data
using built-in sensors (e.g., accelerometer, microphone, and
camera), which causes excessive power consumption that
greatly shortens the lifespan of the mobile devices (Khan et
al. 2016). Simply using a low sampling frequency can save
energy, but this comes at the cost of reduced recognition accuracy (Krause et al. 2005). Therefore, dynamically selecting proper sampling frequency to balance accuracy and energy efﬁciency becomes an emergent challenge for HAR on
resource constrained mobile devices.

• We formalize a problem which ﬁnds an optimal classiﬁcation model and dynamically appropriate sampling frequencies to minimize an objective function regarding a

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2143

