The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Recurrent Attentional Reinforcement
Learning for Multi-label Image Recognition
1

Tianshui Chen,1 Zhouxia Wang,1,2 Guanbin Li,1∗ Liang Lin1,2
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
SenseTime Group Limited

as the real-world image is normally annotated with multiple
labels and modeling rich semantic information is essential
for the task of high-level image understanding.
A straightforward method that extends CNNs to multilabel image recognition is to ﬁne tune the networks pretrained on single-label classiﬁcation dataset (e.g., ImageNet
(Russakovsky et al. 2015)) and extract global representation
for multi-label recognition (Chatﬁeld et al. 2014). Though being end-to-end trainable, classiﬁers trained on global image
representation may not generalize well to images containing multiple objects with different locations, scales, occlusions, and categories. An alternative way (Yang et al. 2016;
Wei et al. 2016) is to introduce object proposals that are assumed to contain all possible foreground objects in the image,
and aggregate features extracted from all these proposals to
incorporate local information for multi-label image recognition. Despite notable improvement compared to global representation, these methods still have many ﬂaws. First, these
methods need to extract hundreds of proposal to achieve a
high recall but feeding such a large number of proposals to
the CNN for classiﬁcation is extremely time-consuming. Second, an image usually contains only several objects, most
of the proposals either provide intensely coarse information
of an object or even refer to the same object. In this way,
redundant computation and sub-optimal performance are inevitable, especially in complex scenarios. Last but not least,
they usually oversimplify the contextual dependencies among
foreground objects and thus fail to capture label correlations
in images.
In this paper, inspired by the way that humans continually move fovea from one discriminative object to the next
when performing image labeling tasks, we propose an endto-end trainable recurrent attention reinforcement learning
framework to adaptively search the attentional and contextual regions in term of classiﬁcation. Speciﬁcally, our proposed framework consists of a fully convolutional network
for extracting deep feature representation, and a recurrent
attention-aware module, implemented by an LSTM network,
to iteratively locate the class-related regions and predict
the label scores over these located regions. At each iteration, it predicts the label scores for the current region and
searches an optimal location for the next iteration. Note that
by “remember” the information of the previous iterations,
the LSTM can naturally capture contextual dependencies

Abstract
Recognizing multiple labels of images is a fundamental but
challenging task in computer vision, and remarkable progress
has been attained by localizing semantic-aware image regions
and predicting their labels with deep convolutional neural
networks. The step of hypothesis regions (region proposals)
localization in these existing multi-label image recognition
pipelines, however, usually takes redundant computation cost,
e.g., generating hundreds of meaningless proposals with nondiscriminative information and extracting their features, and
the spatial contextual dependency modeling among the localized regions are often ignored or over-simpliﬁed. To resolve
these issues, this paper proposes a recurrent attention reinforcement learning framework to iteratively discover a sequence of
attentional and informative regions that are related to different
semantic objects and further predict label scores conditioned
on these regions. Besides, our method explicitly models longterm dependencies among these attentional regions that help to
capture semantic label co-occurrence and thus facilitate multilabel recognition. Extensive experiments and comparisons on
two large-scale benchmarks (i.e., PASCAL VOC and MSCOCO) show that our model achieves superior performance
over existing state-of-the-art methods in both performance
and efﬁciency as well as explicitly identifying image-level
semantic labels to speciﬁc object regions.

Introduction
Image classiﬁcation, as a foundational problem in computer
vision, is receiving increasing attention in the research community. Although marked progress is achieved in this topic
thanks to the great success of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
He et al. 2016), existing approaches mainly focus on singlelabel image classiﬁcation that considers the situation where
an image would contain only one object. In contrast, multilabel image recognition shows more practical signiﬁcance,
∗
Corresponding author is Guanbin Li (Email: liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn). This work was supported by State Key
Development Program under Grant 2016YFB1001004, the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61622214 and
Grant 61702565, and Special Program of the NSFC-Guangdong
Joint Fund for Applied Research on Super Computation (the second phase). This work was also sponsored by CCF-Tencent Open
Research Fund.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6730

