The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Diverse Beam Search for Improved
Description of Complex Scenes
Ashwin K Vijayakumar,1 Michael Cogswell,1 Ramprasaath R Selvaraju,1
Qing Sun,2 Stefan Lee,1 David Crandall,3 Dhruv Batra1,4
1

Georgia Tech, 2 Virginia Tech, 3 Indiana University, 4 Facebook AI Research
{ashwinkv, cogswell, ramprs, steﬂee, dbatra}@gatech.edu
sunqing@vt.edu, djcran@indiana.edu
Modeling Visually-Grounded Language. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), Long Short-Term Memory networks
(LSTMs), or more generally, neural sequence models have
been extensively used for modeling time-series in a datadriven manner – including, standard sequence-to-sequence
problems such as speech recognition (Graves, Mohamed,
and Hinton 2013), machine translation (Bahdanau, Cho, and
Bengio 2014), and conversation modeling (Vinyals and Le
2015). More recently, neural sequence models have been
applied to visually-grounded language generation tasks like
image and video captioning (Vinyals et al. 2015; Venugopalan et al. 2015), question generation (Mostafazadeh et
al. 2016), and dialog (Das et al. 2017). In these tasks, neural
sequence models are typically trained to estimate the likelihood of a sequence of output tokens y = (y1 , . . . , yT ) from
a ﬁnite vocabulary V, conditioned on some input x. For example, in image captioning, the input x is a continuous representation of a source image as encoded by a Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) and the output y is a natural language description of the scene depicted in the source image.
Inference in RNNs. At test time, Maximum a Posteriori
(MAP) inference must be performed to decode the most
likely sequence given an input image. However, the space of
all T length sequences consists of |V|T possibilities; therefore, exact inference is intractable even for modestly sized
tasks. Instead, approximate inference algorithms like Beam
Search (BS) are commonly used to decode likely sequences.
BS is a heuristic graph-search algorithm that maintains
the B most-likely partial sequences expanded in a greedy
left-to-right fashion (Fig. 1 (middle) shows a sample search
tree). Despite its widespread usage, it is generally known to
produce generic or “safe” outputs. For example, generic captions like “Animals standing in the ﬁeld” or responses such
as “I can’t tell” in dialog are applicable to a wide range of
images and hence, are largely uninformative. Equally problematic, the top-B outputs from BS lack diversity and typically express an identical sentiment through minor rewordings (often only in the last few words). While this behavior is
disadvantageous for many reasons (including being computationally wasteful), we argue that the most adverse effects
occur in cases where Pr(y|x) truly is multimodal; as is often
the case in language generation tasks where there is generally not a single ‘correct’ utterance.
Fig. 1 highlights these deﬁciencies in an example image

Abstract
A single image captures the appearance and position of multiple entities in a scene as well as their complex interactions.
As a consequence, natural language grounded in visual contexts tends to be diverse – with utterances differing as focus shifts to speciﬁc objects, interactions, or levels of detail. Recently, neural sequence models such as RNNs and
LSTMs have been employed to produce visually-grounded
language. Beam Search, the standard work-horse for decoding sequences from these models, is an approximate inference algorithm that decodes the top-B sequences in a greedy
left-to-right fashion. In practice, the resulting sequences are
often minor rewordings of a common utterance, failing to
capture the multimodal nature of source images. To address
this shortcoming, we propose Diverse Beam Search (DBS),
a diversity promoting alternative to BS for approximate inference. DBS produces sequences that are signiﬁcantly different from each other by incorporating diversity constraints
within groups of candidate sequences during decoding; moreover, it achieves this with minimal computational or memory
overhead. We demonstrate that our method improves both diversity and quality of decoded sequences over existing techniques on two visually-grounded language generation tasks
– image captioning and visual question generation – particularly on complex scenes containing diverse visual content. We
also show similar improvements at language-only machine
translation tasks, highlighting the generality of our approach.

1

Introduction

A picture is often said to be worth a thousand words, owing this high valuation to its capability to simultaneously
capture multiple objects and their interactions precisely.
Communicating this rich information in natural language
requires providing many details about the scene at varying levels of granularity, resulting in a great deal of diversity in visually-grounded language. Recently, automated approaches for generating visually-grounded language based
on neural sequence models have been studied (Vinyals et al.
2015; Venugopalan et al. 2015; Mostafazadeh et al. 2016;
Das et al. 2017); however, in practice, utterances generated
from these models often tend to be generic and fail to recover the diversity observed in human annotations.
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7371

