The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Collaborative Filtering with
User-Item Co-Autoregressive Models
†

†

Chao Du,† Chongxuan Li,† Yin Zheng,‡ Jun Zhu,∗† Bo Zhang†

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., State Key Lab of Intell. Tech. & Sys., TNList Lab,
Center for Bio-Inspired Computing Research, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
‡
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China

Extensive work has studied how to effectively exploit the
underlying correlations to make accurate predictions. Early
approaches (Resnick et al. 1994; Sarwar et al. 2001) consider
UUCs or IICs by computing the similarities between users
or items. As one of the most popular classes of CF methods, matrix factorization (MF) (Billsus and Pazzani 1998;
Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009; Salakhutdinov and Mnih
2007) assumes that the partially observed matrix (of ratings) is low-rank and embeds both users and items into a
shared latent space. MF methods consider both UUCs and
IICs implicitly as a prediction is simply the inner product
of the latent vectors of the corresponding user and item. Recently, deep learning methods have achieved promising results in various tasks (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014;
Mnih et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2016) due to their ability to
learn a rich set of abstract representations. Inspired by these
advances, neural networks based CF methods (Salakhutdinov,
Mnih, and Hinton 2007; Sedhain et al. 2015; Wu et al. 2016;
Zheng et al. 2016b), which employ highly ﬂexible transformations to model a user’s behavior proﬁle (all behaviors)
with a compact representation, are widely studied as alternatives to MF. These methods essentially consider all UUCs
explicitly as they take inputs of users’ all observed behaviors.
(See more details in Sec. 2.)

Abstract
Deep neural networks have shown promise in collaborative
ﬁltering (CF). However, existing neural approaches are either user-based or item-based, which cannot leverage all the
underlying information explicitly. We propose CF-UIcA, a
neural co-autoregressive model for CF tasks, which exploits
the structural correlation in the domains of both users and
items. The co-autoregression allows extra desired properties to
be incorporated for different tasks. Furthermore, we develop
an efﬁcient stochastic learning algorithm to handle large scale
datasets. We evaluate CF-UIcA on two popular benchmarks:
MovieLens 1M and Netﬂix, and achieve state-of-the-art performance in both rating prediction and top-N recommendation
tasks, which demonstrates the effectiveness of CF-UIcA.

1

Introduction

With the fast development of electronic commerce, social networks and music/movie content providers, recommendation systems have attracted extensive research attention (Burke 2002; Schafer et al. 2007). As one of the most
popular methods, collaborative ﬁltering (CF) (Schafer et
al. 2007; Billsus and Pazzani 1998; Resnick et al. 1994;
Salakhutdinov, Mnih, and Hinton 2007) predicts users’ preferences for items based on their previous behaviors (rating/clicking/purchasing etc.) in a recommendation system.
CF enjoys the beneﬁt of content-independence of the items
being recommended. Thus, it does not need expert knowledge about the items when compared with content-based
methods (Van den Oord, Dieleman, and Schrauwen 2013;
Gopalan, Charlin, and Blei 2014) and could possibly provide
cross-domain recommendations.
The basic assumption behind CF is that there exist correlations between the observed user behaviors, and these correlations can be generalized to their future behaviors. Basically,
the correlations can be categorized as User-User Correlations
(UUCs)—the correlations between different users’ behaviors
on a same item, and Item-Item Correlations (IICs)—the correlations between a user’s behaviors on different items. These
two types of underlying correlations usually exist crisscrossing in the partially observed user behaviors, making CF a
difﬁcult task.

Though previous neural networks based methods are
promising, one common drawback of these methods lies
in that they cannot exploit both UUCs and IICs together,
making them further improvable. To this end, we propose a
novel neural autoregressive model for CF, named User-Item
co-Autoregressive model (CF-UIcA), which considers the
autoregression in the domains of both users and items, so
as to model both UUCs and IICs together. The introduced
co-autoregression naturally provides a principled way to select the UUCs and IICs to be generalized that are helpful for
prediction. This allows us to incorporate extra desired properties into the model for different tasks, which is not studied
in previous work. We further develop a stochastic learning algorithm for CF-UIcA to make it applicable for large datasets.
We demonstrate our method on two real benchmarks: MovieLens 1M and Netﬂix, achieving state-of-the-art results in both
rating prediction and top-N recommendation tasks, which is
rarely accomplished in previous work. In addition, the visualization demonstrates that CF-UIcA learns semantic patterns
without extra supervision.

∗

corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2175

