The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Accelerated Best-First Search with Upper-Bound
Computation for Submodular Function Maximization
Shinsaku Sakaue

Masakazu Ishihata

NTT Communication Science Laboratories
sakaue.shinsaku@lab.ntt.co.jp

Hokkaido University
ishihata.masakazu@ist.hokudai.ac.jp

For SKPs,
the greedy algorithm is known to achieve
√
(1 − 1/ e)-approximation (Lin and Bilmes 2010); we say
solution X (or an algorithm that returns X) is α-optimal if
X is an α-approximate solution, i.e., g(X) ≥ αg(X ∗ ). Furthermore, (1 − 1/e)-optimal solutions can be obtained by
executing the greedy algorithm O(|U |3 ) times (Sviridenko
2004). On the other hand, it is known that (1 − 1/e + ε)approximation guarantees cannot be obtained in polynomial
time unless P = NP (Feige 1998).
Although the aforementioned greedy algorithms are often
effective, their approximation guarantees are sometimes unsatisﬁable. In many important decision problems, we need
to ﬁnd solutions
√ whose approximation guarantee is better
than 1 − 1/ e ≈ 0.39 or 1 − 1/e ≈ 0.63. The best-ﬁrst
search (BFS), a general framework that includes the wellknown A∗ search, is one of the most promising approaches
that can achieve better approximation guarantees. The BFSbased approach for submodular maximization was established in (Chen, Chen, and Weinberger 2015); their original
paper call the algorithm ﬁltered search (FS). Although the
time and space complexities of BFS are generally exponential in |U |, α-approximate solutions can be found for any
α ∈ [0, 1], and we can control the trade-off between the computation cost and optimality by tuning the hyper-parameter,
α. As in the standard A∗ search, BFS uses heuristic function
h(X) to measure how promising the current solution X is,
and the performance of BFS strongly depends on how we
design the heuristic function h(·). Unfortunately, as we will
see in the experiments, BFSs with existing heuristic functions
sometimes work poorly in important SKP instances.

Abstract
Submodular maximization continues to be an attractive subject of study thanks to its applicability to many real-world
problems. Although greedy-based methods are guaranteed to
ﬁnd (1 − 1/e)-approximate solutions for monotone submodular maximization, many applications require solutions with
better approximation guarantees; moreover, it is desirable to
be able to control the trade-off between the computation time
and approximation guarantee. Given this background, the bestﬁrst search (BFS) has been recently studied as a promising
approach. However, existing BFS-based methods for submodular maximization sometimes suffer excessive computation cost
since their heuristic functions are not well designed. In this paper, we propose an accelerated BFS for monotone submodular
maximization with a knapsack constraint. The acceleration is
attained by introducing a new termination condition and developing a novel method for computing an upper-bound of the
optimal value for submodular maximization, which enables us
to use a better heuristic function. Experiments show that our
accelerated BFS is far more efﬁcient in terms of both time and
space complexities than existing methods.

Introduction
Submodular maximization has attracted much attention
thanks to its applicability to various problems: document summarization (Lin and Bilmes 2010), sensor placement (Krause,
Singh, and Guestrin 2008), inﬂuence maximization (Alon,
Gamzu, and Tennenholtz 2012), and so on. We let U :=
[n] be a ﬁnite set, where [n] := {1, . . . , n}. Set function
g : 2U → R is said to be submodular if g(X) + g(Y ) ≥
g(X ∪ Y ) + g(X ∩ Y ) for any X, Y ⊆ U and monotone if
g(Y ) ≥ g(X) for any X ⊆ Y ⊆ U .
In this paper, we consider monotone submodular maximization problems with a knapsack constraint, which we
Let cv ≥ 0 be
call submodular knapsack problems (SKPs). 
cost values for all v ∈ U ; we deﬁne c(X) := v∈X cv and
cX := {cv : v ∈ X} for any X ⊆ U . Given monotone
submodular function g that satisﬁes g(∅) = 0 and a budget
B > 0, we address the following SKP:
(1)

maximize g(X)
X⊆U

Our Contribution
In this paper, we propose an accelerated BFS for SKPs. The
acceleration is attained by introducing a new termination
condition to BFS and using a novel heuristic function. As
we will see later, computing heuristic function values reduces to computing upper-bounds for optimal values of SKPs
that appear as subproblems in BFS. Therefore, we propose
a novel technique to compute such upper-bounds. The obtained upper-bound is empirically more accurate than those
obtained by existing techniques, thus enabling us to use a
better heuristic function in BFS. Combining the upper-bound
with the proposed termination condition substantially reduces
the computation cost of BFS; our accelerated BFS is partic-

subject to c(X) ≤ B.

In what follows, X ∗ denotes an optimal solution for SKP (1).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1413

