The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Char-Net: A Character-Aware Neural Network
for Distorted Scene Text Recognition
Wei Liu, Chaofeng Chen, Kwan-Yee K. Wong
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong
{wliu, cfchen, kykwong}@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we present a Character-Aware Neural Network
(Char-Net) for recognizing distorted scene text. Our CharNet is composed of a word-level encoder, a character-level
encoder, and a LSTM-based decoder. Unlike previous work
which employed a global spatial transformer network to rectify the entire distorted text image, we take an approach of
detecting and rectifying individual characters. To this end, we
introduce a novel hierarchical attention mechanism (HAM)
which consists of a recurrent RoIWarp layer and a characterlevel attention layer. The recurrent RoIWarp layer sequentially extracts a feature region corresponding to a character from the feature map produced by the word-level encoder, and feeds it to the character-level encoder which removes the distortion of the character through a simple spatial transformer and further encodes the character region. The
character-level attention layer then attends to the most relevant features of the feature map produced by the characterlevel encoder and composes a context vector, which is ﬁnally
fed to the LSTM-based decoder for decoding. This approach
of adopting a simple local transformation to model the distortion of individual characters not only results in an improved
efﬁciency, but can also handle different types of distortion
that are hard, if not impossible, to be modelled by a single
global transformation. Experiments have been conducted on
six public benchmark datasets. Our results show that CharNet can achieve state-of-the-art performance on all the benchmarks, especially on the IC-IST which contains scene text
with large distortion. Code will be made available.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Some examples of scene text suffering from
different kinds of distortion. (b) A text along a curve can be
considered a sequence of individually rotated characters.

and efﬁciently.
To the best of our knowledge, there exist two methods
(Shi et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2016) that employ global spatial transformer networks (Jaderberg et al. 2015b) to rectify
the distorted text. They both adopt a complicated thin-plate
spline (TPS) transformation to model different types of distortion in the scene text. As their spatial transformer networks are only optimized with the weak supervision of the
recognition loss, they have difﬁculty in precisely locating
the ﬁducial points which tightly bound the text region. This
leads to error in the estimation of the TPS transformation,
and hence the deformation of the scene text, from the ﬁducial points.
In this work, instead of estimating a global transformation
and rectifying the entire scene text, we take the approach
of detecting and rectifying individual characters in the distorted text. We observe that by considering characters in the
distorted text separately, the distortion modelled by a complicated transformation can actually be described by some
much simpler local transformations of the individual characters. For instance, a text along a curve can be regarded
as a sequence of individually rotated characters (see Figure
1b). Hence, we can remove the distortion of the scene text
by rectifying each individual character through a simple local transformation (e.g., rotation). This approach of adopting
a simple local transformation to model the distortion of indi-

Introduction
Recently, scene text recognition has been receiving much
attention as it is fundamental in extracting textual information embedded in natural scenes. With the increased
popularity of wearable cameras such as GoPro, more and
more images are captured under arbitrary poses. This inevitably introduces different kinds of distortion in the text
appearing in these images (see Figure 1a). Although remarkable results have been reported in recognizing undistorted
scene text (Wang et al. 2012; Jaderberg et al. 2014; 2015a;
He et al. 2016b; Shi, Bai, and Yao 2016; Lee and Osindero
2016), it remains a challenge to build a robust text recognizer that can handle highly distorted scene text effectively
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7154

