The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Spatio-Temporal Features with Partial
Expression Sequences for on-the-Fly Prediction
Wissam J. Baddar, Yong Man Ro
Image and Video Systems Lab., Electrical Engineering,
KAIST, South Korea
{wisam.baddar,ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

of action units has been introduced in (Liu et al. 2013;
2015). Spatial features were learned from local textural patterns, namely ”micro-action-patterns”, using a convolutional
neural network (CNN). The learned spatial features were
then used to classify the facial expression (Liu et al. 2013;
2015). In (Mollahosseini, Chan, and Mahoor 2015), the authors proposed adopting deeper CNN models by utilizing
the concept of inception layers, to improve the FER performance in expressive face images. However, those methods
relied only on the spatial features, and the facial expression
dynamics were not utilized, which could limit the model performance at non-apex frames or frames of subtle expression.
Inspired by the dynamic nature of facial expressions
(Jiang, Valstar, and Pantic 2011), researchers investigated
spatio-temporal features to capture the dynamics of facial
expressions in video sequences. In (Jung et al. 2015), appearance and geometric features were learned from expressive face sequences through a fusion of a 3D CNN and a
multi-layer perceptron. The authors in (Liu et al. 2014), proposed using a 3D CNN to learn spatio-temporal features
from deformable facial action parts. The large number of
parameters (weights and biases) in 3D CNNs that needs to
be learned and the large computational complexity makes
the learning processes challenging (Prasoon et al. 2013;
Roth et al. 2014) and increases the prediction time. To reduce the complexity, sampling a small number of frames or
temporal normalization is usually used. This could cause a
loss of information in the facial expression dynamics (Kim
et al. 2017). Added to that, the aforementioned methods require the full sequence to be available at the prediction time
in order to work efﬁciently, and cannot operate on-the-ﬂy.
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs), in particular long
short-term memory (LSTM) have been popular in encoding
temporal and spatio-temporal features (Goodfellow, Bengio,
and Courville 2016). They can provide a solid framework
for on-the-ﬂy prediction as described in (Eyben et al. 2010;
Ringeval et al. 2015). However, when training the networks
in (Eyben et al. 2010; Ringeval et al. 2015), the authors utilized dense labeled data (frame level labeling), which improves the prediction in an on-the-ﬂy setting. On the other
hand, The authors in (Kim et al. 2017) utilized LSTMs to
encode the spatio-temporal dynamics of facial expressions
from ”weakly” labeled sequences (video level labels). This
improved the prediction at pre-segmented sequences but did

Abstract
Spatio-temporal feature encoding is essential for encoding facial expression dynamics in video sequences. At test time,
most spatio-temporal encoding methods assume that a temporally segmented sequence is fed to a learned model, which
could require the prediction to wait until the full sequence is
available to an auxiliary task that performs the temporal segmentation. This causes a delay in predicting the expression.
In an interactive setting, such as affective interactive agents,
such delay in the prediction could not be tolerated. Therefore,
training a model that can accurately predict the facial expression ”on-the-ﬂy” (as they are fed to the system) is essential.
In this paper, we propose a new spatio-temporal feature learning method, which would allow prediction with partial sequences. As such, the prediction could be performed on-theﬂy. The proposed method utilizes an estimated expression intensity to generate dense labels, which are used to regulate
the prediction model training with a novel objective function.
As results, the learned spatio-temporal features can robustly
predict the expression with partial (incomplete) expression
sequences, on-the-ﬂy. Experimental results showed that the
proposed method achieved higher recognition rates compared
to the state-of-the-art methods on both datasets. More importantly, the results veriﬁed that the proposed method improved
the prediction frames with partial expression sequence inputs.

Introduction
Facial expressions are a channel in which humans use to
non-verbally convey and communicate their internal states,
emotions and intentions (Littlewort et al. 2011). Recently,
recognizing and interpreting facial expressions have attracted researchers in computer vision, affective computing
and human computer interaction ﬁelds (Lee, Baddar, and Ro
2016). This is mainly attributed to the multitude of potential applications, such as emotionally intelligent interactive
agents, fatigue measurement or even lie detection (Ekman
and Rosenberg 1997).
The recent success of deep learning in various computer vision tasks has inﬂuenced researchers to investigate
the utilization of deep learning techniques in facial expression recognition (FER) (Liu et al. 2014; 2013; 2015;
Jung et al. 2015; Khorrami, Paine, and Huang 2015; Kim
et al. 2016). A FER method inﬂuenced by the concept
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6666

