The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Search Engine Guided Neural Machine Translation
Jiatao Gu,† Yong Wang,† Kyunghyun Cho,‡ Victor O.K. Li†
†

‡

The University of Hong Kong
New York University, CIFAR Azrieli Global Scholar
†
{jiataogu, wangyong, vli}@eee.hku.hk
‡
kyunghyun.cho@nyu.edu

multilingual translation (Firat, Cho, and Bengio 2016; Luong
et al. 2015), multi-source translation (Zoph and Knight 2016;
Firat et al. 2016), multimodal translation (Caglayan et al.
2016) and syntax guided translation (Nadejde et al. 2017;
Eriguchi, Tsuruoka, and Cho 2017).

Abstract
In this paper, we extend an attention-based neural machine
translation (NMT) model by allowing it to access an entire
training set of parallel sentence pairs even after training. The
proposed approach consists of two stages. In the ﬁrst stage–
retrieval stage–, an off-the-shelf, black-box search engine is
used to retrieve a small subset of sentence pairs from a training
set given a source sentence. These pairs are further ﬁltered
based on a fuzzy matching score based on edit distance. In
the second stage–translation stage–, a novel translation model,
called search engine guided NMT (SEG-NMT), seamlessly
uses both the source sentence and a set of retrieved sentence
pairs to perform the translation. Empirical evaluation on three
language pairs (En-Fr, En-De, and En-Es) shows that the
proposed approach signiﬁcantly outperforms the baseline approach and the improvement is more signiﬁcant when more
relevant sentence pairs were retrieved.

In this paper, we ﬁrst notice that this ability in incorporating arbitrary meta-data by neural machine translation allows
us to naturally extend it to a model in which a neural machine
translation system explicitly takes into account a full training
set consisting of source-target sentence pairs (in this paper
we refer them as a general translation memory). We can build
a neural machine translation system that considers not only a
given source sentence, which is to be translated but also a set
of training sentence pairs in the process of translation. To do
so, we propose a novel extension of attention-based neural
machine translation that seamlessly fuses two information
streams, each of which corresponds to the current source
sentence and a set of training sentence pairs, respectively.

Introduction

A major technical challenge, other than designing such a
neural machine translation system, is the scale of a training
parallel corpus which often consists of hundreds of thousands
to millions of sentence pairs. We address this issue by incorporating an off-the-shelf black-box search engine into the
proposed neural machine translation system. The proposed
approach ﬁrst queries a search engine, which indexes a whole
training set, with a given source sentence, and the proposed
neural translation system translates the source sentence while
incorporating all the retrieved training sentence pairs. In this
way, the proposed translation system automatically adapts to
the search engine and its ability to retrieve relevant sentence
pairs from a training corpus.

Neural machine translation is a recently proposed paradigm
in machine translation, where a single neural network, often consisting of encoder and decoder recurrent networks,
is trained end-to-end to map from a source sentence to its
corresponding translation(Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014;
Cho et al. 2014; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Kalchbrenner and Blunsom 2013). The success of neural machine translation, which has already been adopted by major industry players in machine translation(Wu et al. 2016;
Crego et al. 2016), is often attributed to the advances in building and training recurrent networks as well as the availability
of large-scale parallel corpora for machine translation.
Neural machine translation is most characteristically distinguished from the existing approaches to machine translation,
such as phrase-based statistical machine translation(Koehn,
Och, and Marcu 2003), in that it projects a sequence of discrete source symbols into a continuous space and decodes
back the corresponding translation. This allows one to easily incorporate other auxiliary information into the neural
machine translation system as long as such auxiliary information could be encoded into a continuous space using a
neural network. This property has been noticed recently and
used for building more advanced translation systems such as

We evaluate the proposed search engine guided neural
machine translation (SEG-NMT) on three language pairs
(En-Fr, En-De, and En-Es, in both directions) from JRCAcquis Corpus(Steinberger et al. 2006) which consists of
documents from a legal domain. This corpus was selected
to demonstrate the efﬁcacy of the proposed approach when
a training corpus and a set of test sentences are both from a
similar domain. Our experiments reveal that the proposed
approach exploits the availability of the retrieved training
sentence pairs very well, achieving signiﬁcant improvement
over the strong baseline of attention-based neural machine
translation(Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014).

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5133

