The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Axioms for Distance-Based Centralities
Oskar Skibski, Jadwiga Sosnowska
University of Warsaw, Poland

can be classiﬁed according to two factors: the type of ﬂow
and the type of a path considered. Another well-known characterization is due to Borgatti and Everett (2006) who characterized centrality measures in term of cohesiveness. Their
approach basically boils down to two categories, both with
two options: the type of path and the type of unit.
While these characteristics provide additional insights,
they do not help much in answering the question which centrality should be applied to a speciﬁc, perhaps non-standard,
setting. In particular, criteria chosen are not intuitive and are
mostly based on the mathematical formulations and not on
the properties stemming from them. For instance, it is hard
to decide whether a measure for key nodes in a social networks should be based on paths or walks.
To address the problems with characterization, various authors proposed axiomatic foundations for some centrality
measures. This approach was ﬁrst used by Sabidussi (1966),
who proposed several simple axioms that should be satisﬁed
by all centrality measures based on two graph operations –
adding an edge, and moving an edge. Since then, a number
of authors used axiomatic approach to characterize speciﬁc
centralities (see the Related Work section for details). Unfortunately, from the three standard centralities only the Degree Centrality has been extensively studied. In other words,
there are still no axiomatic characterizations of the other two
standard measures – the Closeness and Betweenness Centralities.
Against this background, we study a large class of
distance-based centralities which rely only on distances
from a node in question to other nodes in the network. This
class encompasses both the Degree and Closeness Centralities, as well as their many extensions, such as the Decay,
Reach, and Harmonic Centralities. In our analysis we attempt to answer two questions – in which settings distancebased centralities should be used? and, given those settings,
which centrality should be selected? To this end, we axiomatize the class of distance-based centralities using the
Sabidussi’s operations of adding and moving edges, but limited to versions invariant in this class. Building upon this
axiomatic characterization, we propose the ﬁrst axiom system for the Closeness Centrality. Furthermore, we propose
and axiomatically characterize the class of additive distancebased centralities and characterize several other centralities
from this class.

Abstract
We study the class of distance-based centralities that consists
of centrality measures that depend solely on distances to other
nodes in the graph. This class encompasses a number of centrality measures, including the classical Degree and Closeness Centralities, as well as their extensions: the Harmonic,
Reach and Decay Centralities. We axiomatize the class of
distance-based centralities and study what conditions are imposed by the axioms proposed in the literature. Building upon
our analysis, we propose the class of additive distance-based
centralities and pin-point properties which combined with the
axiomatic characterization of the whole class uniquely characterize a number of centralities from the literature.

Introduction
Identifying the nodes that play the most important role in
the network is a fundamental challenge in network analysis (Brandes and Erlebach 2005). This area of research,
named centrality analysis, is rooted in social network literature, but attracted attention in many ﬁelds, including AI. It
is, for instance, essential both in determining key infrastructure nodes in the Internet (Page et al. 1999) and central hubs
in a transportation networks (Guimera et al. 2005), but also
key proteins in protein-protein networks (Jeong et al. 2001).
Arguably, the most well-known centrality measures are
the Degree, Closeness and Betweenness Centralities (Freeman 1979). The Degree Centrality assesses the importance
of a node simply by looking at the number of its links. The
Closeness Centrality, deﬁned as the inverse of the sum of
distances to others in the network, promotes nodes which
are close to others in the network. In contrast, the Betweenness Centrality measures how many shortest paths in the
network traverse a given node. To date, many extensions of
these standard centrality measures have been proposed in the
literature (Koschützki et al. 2005a).
Unfortunately, the multitude of centrality measures with
unclear distinctions between them makes it difﬁcult to determine which one should be used in a speciﬁc application.
To help understand the differences between various centralities, various classiﬁcations have been proposed. Notably,
Borgatti (2005) argued that all standard centrality measures
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1218

