The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Mention and Entity Description
Co-Attention for Entity Disambiguation
1

Feng Nie,∗1 Yunbo Cao,∗2 Jinpeng Wang,3 Chin-Yew Lin,3 Rong Pan∗1

Sun-Yat-Sen University 2 Tencent Corporation, Beijing, China 3 Microsoft Research Asia
fengniesysu@gmail.com, yunbocao@tencent.com, {jinpwa, cyl}@microsoft.com, panr@sysu.edu.cn

tions can be effective for disambiguation. Take a speciﬁed
query Q1 in Figure 1 as an example, in order to determine
the meaning of ‘Hendrix’ (‘Jimi Hendirx’ vs. ‘Hendrix, Oklahoma’), it is sufﬁcient to examine the context words song
and guitar. Meanwhile, in the description of entity ea (with
the name ‘Jimi Hendrix’) sentences S1 and S2 contain more
information relevant to the context of Q1 than S3. To take
advantage of this observation, our proposal introduces a coattention mechanism which chooses information crucial for
disambiguation in both mention contexts and entity descriptions simultaneously. Speciﬁcally, it uses an entity representation to guide context attention and uses a context representation to guide description attention. Previous studies (Lazic
et al. 2015) on entity disambiguation also try to pick up
discriminative content from mention contexts or entity descriptions separately. However, for entity disambiguation,
the mention contexts and entity descriptions both contain
various kinds of information content while only a subset of
them are helpful for disambiguation. This insight motivates
the idea of the co-attention mechanism that aligns content
of mention contexts and entity descriptions, and picks up
discriminative content from mention contexts and entity descriptions simultaneously.
Moreover, entity type information for candidate entity can
help to bridge the semantic gap between mention contexts
and entity descriptions. For example, vocal and style are
most helpful words for mention ‘Hendrix’ in Q2 , however,
these words are absent from its answer ea but appear in
the descriptions of e1 , ..., en sharing the same entity type
‘artist.musician’ as ea . In light of that, we borrow the information from the type of an entity to enhance the co-attention
mechanism.
We conduct extensive experiments with three public
datasets. The results show that the proposed type-aware
co-attention model outperforms previous neural methods.
When combined with other evidence (e.g., similarity between entity mention and title of entity description, popularity), the proposal can outperform the state-of-the-arts as
well. The detailed analysis shows that our proposal performs
well particularly over hard queries and the co-attention
mechanism is crucial for the success of our proposal. The
main contributions of this paper are summarized as:

Abstract
For the task of entity disambiguation, mention contexts and
entity descriptions both contain various kinds of information
content while only a subset of them are helpful for disambiguation. In this paper, we propose a type-aware co-attention
model for entity disambiguation, which tries to identify the
most discriminative words from mention contexts and most
relevant sentences from corresponding entity descriptions simultaneously. To bridge the semantic gap between mention
contexts and entity descriptions, we further incorporate entity type information to enhance the co-attention mechanism.
Our evaluation shows that the proposed model outperforms
the state-of-the-arts on three public datasets. Further analysis
also conﬁrms that both the co-attention mechanism and the
type-aware mechanism are effective.

Introduction
Entity disambiguation is the task of mapping textual mentions of entities in unstructured text to the corresponding entities in a knowledge base. For example, the entity mention
‘Hendrix’ shown in Figure 1 may refer to an American rock
guitarist (ea ) or a town in Bryan County, Oklahoma (eb ),
depending on the contexts.
Several aspects of evidence are useful for entity disambiguation, such as semantic similarity, global consistency (Han, Sun, and Zhao 2011) and entity popularity (Cheng and Roth 2013; Durrett and Klein 2014; Huang
et al. 2014; Heinzerling, Strube, and Lin 2017). Among
all these aspects, it has been widely accepted that semantic similarity between the context of an entity mention and
its target entity candidates is the key to resolve the ambiguity (Bunescu and Pasca 2006; Cucerzan 2007; Ji and Grishman 2011; Shen, Wang, and Han 2015). In this paper, we
propose a Type-Aware Co-Attention model (TypeCoAtt)
for entity disambiguation, which introduces a co-attention
mechanism to estimate the semantic similarity. This model
is motivated as follows.
Identifying discriminative words from mention contexts
and relevant sentences from corresponding entity descrip∗

Correspondence author is Rong Pan. This work was done
when the ﬁrst author was an intern and second author was an employee at Microsoft Research Asia.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst effort of
studying both context attention and (entity) description at-

5908

