The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Multi-Task Deep Learning for Predicting Poverty from Satellite Images
Shailesh M. Pandey, Tushar Agarwal, Narayanan C Krishnan
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Ropar, India
{shailesh.pandey, tushar.agarwal, ckn}@iitrpr.ac.in

Abstract
Estimating economic and developmental parameters such as
poverty levels of a region from satellite imagery is a challenging problem that has many applications. We propose a
two step approach to predict poverty in a rural region from
satellite imagery. First, we engineer a multi-task fully convolutional deep network for simultaneously predicting the material of roof, source of lighting and source of drinking water
from satellite images. Second, we use the predicted developmental statistics to estimate poverty. Using full-size satellite
imagery as input, and without pre-trained weights, our models are able to learn meaningful features including roads, water bodies and farm lands, and achieve a performance that is
close to the optimum. In addition to speeding up the training
process, the multi-task fully convolutional model is able to
discern task speciﬁc and independent feature representations.

Figure 1: Regions with (A1) concrete roofs and (A2) thatch
roofs, (B1) 100% electricity and (B2) 0% electricity for
lighting, and (C1) 85.9% households with tap water and (C2)
99.1% with river/canal as drinking water source. Distinct visual features in satellite imagery can be associated with the
presence or lack of economic development.

Introduction
Developing countries spend a signiﬁcant amount of resources in planning and implementing policies and schemes
for poverty alleviation. The primary sources of data, if and
when used, for devising these schemes are ground level surveys, such as the decennial census, of socio-economic parameters. However, collecting extensive statistics is a signiﬁcant exercise in manual effort and monetary resources
resulting in infrequent sampling. Therefore, timely and accurate data are often not available at the time of formulating
policies. This may lead to ineffective implementation and, at
times, even wasteful expenditure. A timely, inexpensive and
accurate source of data that is readily available should help
in addressing some of these issues.
Satellite imagery is one such cost effective data-source
that provides a wealth of information for learning developmental conditions of a region. The ever-increasing resolution of satellite imagery and relatively easy access to it in the
public domain make it a potential resource. Figure 1 presents
the satellite imagery for rural areas from different parts of India. In the ﬁrst column, the image on the top shows a region
having houses with concrete roofs (Figure 1 A1), whereas
the image on the bottom shows a region with thatch-roofed
houses (Figure 1 A2). The second column illustrates contrasting images of two regions classiﬁed as having 100%

electricity (Figure 1 B1) and 0% electricity (Figure 1 B2)
for lighting. The last column shows regions with tap water
(Figure 1 C1) and a river or a canal (Figure 1 C2) as a major
source of drinking water. There are distinct visual features
that can be associated with the presence or lack of economic
development. For instance, roads and streets are visible in
satellite imagery and correlate with the level of economic
development. Further, soil color, roof material, water bodies, farmland etc. are also visible and may provide useful
information about the level of development in a region. The
primary objective of this study is to automatically learn visual features in satellite images indicative of development
and poverty and build models that can predict poverty in regions of India reliably.
Our main contribution is a two step approach for poverty
prediction. First, we engineer a multi-task fully convolutional model to predict the material of roof, source of lighting and source of drinking water from the satellite imagery
of a village. Unlike income or poverty data, the values for
these parameters are available at the village level in the In-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7793

