The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Semantic QA-Based Approach for Text Summarization Evaluation
Ping Chen, Fei Wu, Tong Wang, Wei Ding
University of Massachusetts Boston
ping.chen@umb.edu

portant NLP applications, such as summarization, text categorization, text simplification, and machine translation. Not
surprisingly, many evaluation methods have been proposed,
but the quality of existing methods themselves is hard to assess. In many cases, human evaluation must be adopted,
which is often slow, subjective, and expensive. In this paper
we present an intuitive and innovative idea completely different from existing methods:

Abstract
Many Natural Language Processing and Computational Linguistics applications involve the generation of new texts
based on some existing texts, such as summarization, text
simplification and machine translation. However, there has
been a serious problem haunting these applications for decades, that is, how to automatically and accurately assess quality of these applications. In this paper, we will present some
preliminary results on one especially useful and challenging
problem in NLP system evaluation – how to pinpoint content
differences of two text passages (especially for large passages
such as articles and books). Our idea is intuitive and very different from existing approaches. We treat one text passage as
a small knowledge base, and ask it a large number of questions to exhaustively identify all content points in it. By comparing the correctly answered questions from two text passages, we will be able to compare their content precisely. The
experiment using 2007 DUC summarization corpus clearly
shows promising results.

If we treat one text passage as a small knowledge base,
can we ask it a large number of questions to exhaustively
identify all content points in it?
By comparing the correctly answered questions from two
text passages, we can compare their content precisely. This
idea may seem confusing as “circling around the target” instead of “directly hitting the target”. However, Our Question
Answering (QA)-based content evaluation is intuitive and
supported by the following insights:
1) When we assess someone’s understanding on a subject,
we do not ask him to write down all he knows about the
subject. Instead, a list of questions will be asked, and accurate and objective assessment can be achieved by counting
the number of correct answers. During this question answering process, we can also identify which areas he needs to
improve.

Introduction
Technologies spawned from Natural Language Processing
(NLP) and Computational Linguistics (CL) have fundamentally changed how we process, share, and access information, e.g., search engines, and questions answering systems. However, there has been a serious problem haunting
many NLP applications, that is, how to automatically and
accurately assess the quality of these applications. In some
case, evaluation of a NLP task itself has become an active
research area itself, such as text summarization evaluation.
The main difficulty for developing such evaluation comes
from the diversity of the NLP domain, and our insufficient
understanding of natural languages and human intelligence
in general. In this paper, we focus on one especially useful
and challenging area in NLP evaluation – how to semantically compare the content of two text passages (e.g., paragraphs, articles, or even large corpora). Pinpointing content
differences among texts is critical to evaluation of many im-

2) Practical operability. When assessing the similarity of
two texts, direct comparison may look natural. However,
with current methods (no matter supervised or rule-based)
this direct approach becomes increasingly difficult as we
move to larger text passages. For example, comparing two
articles needs to answer the following questions: how to
align sentences, how to semantically represent a sentence,
how to generate similarity scores without annotated samples
(or as few as possible to minimize cost), how to interpret and
evaluate these scores, how to find the content differences of
two texts, etc.

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4800

