The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

ExprGAN: Facial Expression Editing
with Controllable Expression Intensity
Hui Ding,1 Kumar Sricharan,2 Rama Chellappa3
1,3

University of Maryland, College Park
2
PARC, Palo Alto

train the model. In the second category, deep learning-based
methods are mainly used. The early work by Susskind et
al. (2008) used a deep belief network to generate emotional
faces, which can be controlled by the Facial Action Coding
System (FACS) labels. In (Reed et al. 2014), a three-way
gated Boltzmann machine was employed to model the relationships between the expression and identity. However,
the synthesized images of these methods have low resolution (48 x 48), lacking ﬁne details and tend to be blurry.
Moreover, existing works can only transform the expression to different classes, like Angry or Happy. However, in
reality, the intensity of facial expression is often displayed
over a range. For example, humans can express the Happy
expression either with a huge grin or by a gentle smile.
Thus it is appealing if both the type of the expression and
its intensity can be controlled simultaneously. Motivated
by this, in this paper, we present a new expression editing model, Expression Generative Adversarial Network (ExprGAN) which has the unique property that multiple diverse
styles of the target expression can be synthesized where the
intensity of the generated expression can be continuously
controlled from weak to strong, without the need for training data with intensity values.
To achieve this goal, we specially design an expression
controller module. Instead of feeding in a deterministic onehot vector label like previous works, the expression code
generated by the expression controller module is used. It
is a real-valued vector conditioned on the label, thus more
complex information such as expression intensity can be described. Moreover, to force each dimension of the expression
code to capture a different factor of the intensity variations,
the conditional mutual information between the generated
image and the expression code is maximized by a regularizer network.
Our work is inspired by the recent success of the image generative model, where a generative adversarial network (Goodfellow et al. 2014) learns to produce samples
similar to a given data distribution through a two-player
game between a generator and a discriminator. Our ExprGAN also adopts the generator and discriminator framework in addition to the expression controller module and
the regularizer network. However, to facilitate image editing, the generator is composed of an encoder and a decoder.
The input of the encoder is a face image, the output of the

Abstract
Facial expression editing is a challenging task as it needs a
high-level semantic understanding of the input face image.
In conventional methods, either paired training data is required or the synthetic face’s resolution is low. Moreover,
only the categories of facial expression can be changed. To
address these limitations, we propose an Expression Generative Adversarial Network (ExprGAN) for photo-realistic
facial expression editing with controllable expression intensity. An expression controller module is specially designed
to learn an expressive and compact expression code in addition to the encoder-decoder network. This novel architecture
enables the expression intensity to be continuously adjusted
from low to high. We further show that our ExprGAN can
be applied for other tasks, such as expression transfer, image
retrieval, and data augmentation for training improved face
expression recognition models. To tackle the small size of the
training database, an effective incremental learning scheme
is proposed. Quantitative and qualitative evaluations on the
widely used Oulu-CASIA dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of ExprGAN.

Introduction
Facial expression editing is the task that transforms the expression of a given face image to a target one without affecting the identity properties. It has applications in facial
animation, human-computer interactions, entertainment, etc.
The area has been attracting considerable attention both
from academic and industrial research communities.
Existing methods that address expression editing can be
divided into two categories. One category tries to manipulate
images by reusing parts of existing ones (Yang et al. 2011;
Mohammed, Prince, and Kautz 2009; Yeh et al. 2016) while
the other resorts to synthesis techniques to generate a face
image with the target expression (Susskind et al. 2008;
Reed et al. 2014; Cheung et al. 2014). In the ﬁrst category,
traditional methods (Yang et al. 2011) often make use of
the expression ﬂow map to transfer an expression by image warping. Recently, Yeh et al. (2016) applied the idea to
a variational autoencoder to learn the ﬂow ﬁeld. Although
the generated face image has high resolution, paired data
where one subject has different expressions are needed to
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6781

