The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

On the Time and Space Complexity of
Genetic Programming for Evolving Boolean Conjunctions
Andrei Lissovoi, Pietro S. Oliveto
Rigorous Research, Department of Computer Science
University of Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld S1 4DP, United Kingdom
{a.lissovoi,p.oliveto}@shefﬁeld.ac.uk

the training set, the goal is to evolve a program that works
well on all possible inputs. In this case the program is said
to have good generalisation. GP can be applied to problems
for which no efﬁcient problem-speciﬁc algorithms are available, aiming to produce reasonable, if not optimal, solutions
without requiring problem-speciﬁc algorithm design.
While there are many examples of successful applications
of GP to practical problems (see e.g. (Koza 2010; Schuh,
Angryk, and Sheppard 2012; Liu and Shao 2013; Al-Sahaf
et al. 2017) for recent ones), there is a limited understanding
of what problem characteristics make GP successful, how
the multiple parameters should be set for optimal results,
and how common failures could be avoided (O’Neill et al.
2010; Poli, Langdon, and McPhee 2008). A solid theoretical
foundation is necessary to answer these questions and could
be used to guide the design of future GP algorithms, as well
as the choice of parameters in their applications.
A performance analysis of GP should focus on two different aspects of algorithmic behaviour: 1) the ability of the algorithm to ﬁt a complete training set, and 2) whether the solutions evolved using a smaller training set generalise well.
If the complete training set is not too large, then ﬁtting the
training set is sufﬁcient for efﬁcient optimisation. If, instead,
its size is prohibitively large, then the generalisation capabilities are crucial. In any case, an analysis of the performance
of a GP system using the complete set serves as a best-case
model of its behaviour: if the system is unable to produce a
reasonable solution while working with a complete training
set, it is unlikely to perform well in practice.
Most previous theoretical work on the analysis of GP
aimed at understanding the performance of simple GP systems for evolving trees with signiﬁcant structures rather
than programs with a given functionality (Langdon and Poli
2002; Durrett, Neumann, and O’Reilly 2011; Kötzing et al.
2014; Wagner, Neumann, and Urli 2015; Doerr et al. 2017).
Only recently (Mambrini and Oliveto 2016) analysed the
same simple GP algorithms for the ANDn and XORn problems that represent actual logical functions with proper inputs and logically-deﬁned outputs. The goal of the problems
is to evolve respectively conjunction and parity functions of
n variables using a function set consisting solely of a binary
AND (XOR, respectively) operator, and n input variables as
terminals. These functions were chosen to highlight the performance and behaviour of the GP system respectively for

Abstract
Genetic Programming (GP) is a general purpose bio-inspired
meta-heuristic for the evolution of computer programs. In
contrast to the several successful applications, there is little
understanding of the working principles behind GP. In this
paper we present a performance analysis that sheds light on
the behaviour of simple GP systems for evolving conjunctions of n variables (ANDn ). The analysis of a random local
search GP system with minimal terminal and function sets
reveals the relationship between the number of iterations and
the expected error of the evolved program on the complete
training set. Afterwards we consider a more realistic GP system equipped with a global mutation operator and prove that
it can efﬁciently solve ANDn by producing programs of linear size that ﬁt a training set to optimality and with high probability generalise well. Additionally, we consider more general problems which extend the terminal set with undesired
variables or negated variables. In the presence of undesired
variables, we prove that, if non-strict selection is used, then
the algorithm ﬁts the complete training set efﬁciently while
the strict selection algorithm may fail with high probability
unless the substitution operator is switched off. In the presence of negations, we show that while the algorithms fail to ﬁt
the complete training set, the constructed solutions generalise
well. Finally, from a problem hardness perspective, we reveal
the existence of small training sets that allow the evolution of
the exact conjunctions even in the presence of negations or of
undesired variables.

1

Introduction

Genetic Programming refers to a class of evolutionary algorithms introduced by (Koza 1992) to evolve computer programs. Traditionally syntax trees have been used to represent
programs. Their quality is evaluated by executing the trees
on a set of inputs and their output is compared with that of
a target function (the function to be evolved). The set of input/output test cases is usually referred to as the training set.
Typical Genetic Algorithm (GA) variation and selection operators, adapted to work on syntax trees, are used to create
new programs and natural selection principles are used to
evolve a population of programs with the aim of eventually
identifying one with the desired functionality. Although during the evolution the quality of programs is measured using
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1363

