The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Adapting to Concept Drift in Credit Card Transaction
Data Streams Using Contextual Bandits and Decision Trees
Dennis J. N. J. Soemers,1 Tim Brys,1 Kurt Driessens,2 Mark H. M. Winands,2 Ann Nowé1
1

1

Vrije Universiteit Brussel, 2 Maastricht University
{dsoemers, timbrys, anowe}@vub.ac.be, 2 {kurt.driessens, m.winands}@maastrichtuniversity.nl

Existing Fraud Detection Systems (Dal Pozzolo et al.
2014a; 2015a; Lebichot et al. 2016) typically use an ensemble of Machine Learning models trained ofﬂine. Every day at
midnight, new models are trained on new sets of labeled data
that have become available since the previous night. Large
quantities of data become “labeled” with a long delay, and
labels of smaller amounts of data from the previous day are
provided by human experts. The transactions labeled by human experts in these systems are simply the K instances
with the highest predicted reward, where K is the number
of transactions that can be investigated per day. The reward
of a transaction is often chosen to be equal to the monetary
transaction amount if it is indeed fraudulent, or 0 otherwise.
This is the primary evaluation criterion used in this paper.
The reward is sometimes also chosen to be independent of
the monetary transaction amount (Dal Pozzolo et al. 2014a).
In this paper, we aim to address two issues with the systems as described above. The ﬁrst issue is that experts only
provide short-term feedback by investigating transactions
that are already predicted to be highly rewarding. Suppose
that fraudsters can create concept drift by changing their behavior such that models predict low rewards for their transactions. Those transactions are not selected for investigation,
which means that there is no short-term feedback with labels for those instances. Models trained during the following night are unlikely to make better predictions for similar
instances, and it may take up to a week before the card holders are expected to have noticed and reported the fraudulent
transactions. The second issue is that, even if concept drift is
detected early, it still takes until the following night before a
new model is trained that uses this new knowledge.
We propose to use an incremental Regression Tree learner
(Ikonomovska 2012) to train a model to predict the rewards
of transactions. It is computationally cheap to update this
model directly when new labels are provided by experts,
making it unnecessary to wait until the next night. Additionally, we propose that the problem of selecting which transaction to send to an expert for investigation can be modeled as
a Contextual Multi-Armed Bandit (CMAB) problem (Zhou
2015). This model is not feasible when every instance is
considered as a separate arm, but becomes feasible by viewing every leaf node of the Regression Tree as a single arm
containing multiple instances. The CMAB formalization enables the use of a variety of algorithms that provide a balance

Abstract
Credit card transactions predicted to be fraudulent by automated detection systems are typically handed over to human
experts for veriﬁcation. To limit costs, it is standard practice
to select only the most suspicious transactions for investigation. We claim that a trade-off between exploration and exploitation is imperative to enable adaptation to changes in behavior (concept drift). Exploration consists of the selection
and investigation of transactions with the purpose of improving predictive models, and exploitation consists of investigating transactions detected to be suspicious. Modeling the detection of fraudulent transactions as rewarding, we use an incremental Regression Tree learner to create clusters of transactions with similar expected rewards. This enables the use
of a Contextual Multi-Armed Bandit (CMAB) algorithm to
provide the exploration/exploitation trade-off. We introduce
a novel variant of a CMAB algorithm that makes use of the
structure of this tree, and use Semi-Supervised Learning to
grow the tree using unlabeled data. The approach is evaluated
on a real dataset and data generated by a simulator that adds
concept drift by adapting the behavior of fraudsters to avoid
detection. It outperforms frequently used ofﬂine models in
terms of cumulative rewards, in particular in the presence of
concept drift.

1

Introduction

Fraudulent credit card transactions result in signiﬁcant costs
for companies if they are not detected early (Delamaire,
Abdou, and Pointon 2009). Credit card transactions can be
viewed as a data stream, where large quantities of data arrive
over time. It is typically assumed that human experts can
investigate and provide accurate labels (indicating whether
transactions are fraudulent or genuine) for a small number of transactions (e.g., 100) every day. Additionally, it is
assumed that labels automatically become available for all
other transactions after a longer delay (Dal Pozzolo et al.
2015a). For example, it can be considered safe to assume
that a transaction is valid if the card holder did not report it
as fraudulent after seven days. Fraudsters can change their
behavior over time in an attempt to avoid detection by a system trained to detect older fraudulent behaviors (Dal Pozzolo et al. 2014a). This problem, where the distribution of a
data stream is not stationary, is known as concept drift.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7831

