The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Deception Detection in Videos
Zhe Wu,1 Bharat Singh,1 Larry S. Davis,1 V. S. Subrahmanian2
1

University of Maryland 2 Dartmouth College
{zhewu,bharat,lsd}@umiacs.umd.edu vs@dartmouth.edu

Abstract
We present a system for covert automated deception detection
using information available in a video. We study the importance of different modalities like vision, audio and text for this
task. On the vision side, our system uses classiﬁers trained
on low level video features which predict human microexpressions. We show that predictions of high-level microexpressions can be used as features for deception prediction. Surprisingly, IDT (Improved Dense Trajectory) features
which have been widely used for action recognition, are also
very good at predicting deception in videos. We fuse the score
of classiﬁers trained on IDT features and high-level microexpressions to improve performance. MFCC (Mel-frequency
Cepstral Coefﬁcients) features from the audio domain also
provide a signiﬁcant boost in performance, while information
from transcripts is not very beneﬁcial for our system. Using
various classiﬁers, our automated system obtains an AUC of
0.877 (10-fold cross-validation) when evaluated on subjects
which were not part of the training set. Even though state-ofthe-art methods use human annotations of micro-expressions
for deception detection, our fully automated approach outperforms them by 5%. When combined with human annotations
of micro-expressions, our AUC improves to 0.922. We also
present results of a user-study to analyze how well do average humans perform on this task, what modalities they use for
deception detection and how they perform if only one modality is accessible.

Figure 1: Micro-expression: Eyebrows Raising. The left image and rightmost image in the image sequence are the same.
However, it is much easier to detect the micro-expression in
the image sequence when compared to the static image, as
shown by the two green dotted lines.
deception (Farah et al. 2014). Additionally, the cost of the
equipment and the overt nature of the method make the utility of these devices limited for real-life deception detection.
Another line of work attempts to ﬁnd behavioral cues
for deception detection (DePaulo et al. 2003). These cues
are faint behavioral residues, which are difﬁcult for untrained people to detect. For example, according to (Ekman
et al. 1969; Ekman 2009), facial micro-expressions reﬂect
emotions that subjects might want to hide. However, because of the variablity across different subjects, these microexpressions are extremely difﬁcult to detect using computer
vision, especially in unconstrained settings.
It is usually much easier for humans to detect a subtle facial expression from videos than from static images (GrillSpector et al. 1998). For example, Fig. 1 shows a comparison of static and dynamic representations of a simple micro micro-expression: Eyebrows Raise. Given only the left
static image, people have a difﬁcult time detecting that the
eyebrows are raising. In contrast, we can clearly see from
the right image sequence that the eyebrows are raising, even
though the last image of the image ﬂow is exactly the left
static image.
Motivated by these observations, we propose to use motion dynamics for recognizing facial micro-expressions.
This coincides with the psychological insights from (Duran et al. 2013), in which the authors suggest focusing on
dynamic motion signatures which are indicative of deception. To accomplish this, we design a two-level feature representation for capturing dynamic motion signatures. For the

Introduction
Deception is common in our daily lives. Some lies are harmless, while others may have severe consequences and can become an existential threat to society. For example, lying in
a court may affect justice and let a guilty defendant go free.
Therefore, accurate detection of a deception in a high stakes
situation is crucial for personal and public safety.
The ability of humans to detect deception is very limited.
In (Bond Jr and DePaulo 2006), it was reported that the average accuracy of detecting lies without special aids is 54%,
which is only slightly better than chance. To detect deception more accurately, physiological methods have been developed. However, physiological methods such as the Polygraph, or more recent functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) based methods are not always correlated with
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1695

