The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

On Trivial Solution and High Correlation
Problems in Deep Supervised Hashing∗
Yuchen Guo,† Xin Zhao,† Guiguang Ding,† Jungong Han‡
†

‡

School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University, Lancaster, LA1 4YW, UK
{yuchen.w.guo,zhaoxin19,jungonghan77}@gmail.com, dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep supervised hashing (DSH), which combines binary
learning and convolutional neural network, has attracted considerable research interests and achieved promising performance for highly efﬁcient image retrieval. In this paper, we
show that the widely used loss functions, pair-wise loss and
triplet loss, suffer from the trivial solution problem and usually lead to highly correlated bits in practice, limiting the performance of DSH. One important reason is that it is difﬁcult
to incorporate proper constraints into the loss functions under
the mini-batch based optimization algorithm. To tackle these
problems, we propose to adopt ensemble learning strategy for
deep model training. We found out that this simple strategy is
capable of effectively decorrelating different bits, making the
hashcodes more informative. Moreover, it is very easy to parallelize the training and support incremental model learning,
which are very useful for real-world applications but usually
ignored by existing DSH approaches. Experiments on benchmarks demonstrate the proposed ensemble based DSH can
improve the performance of DSH approaches signiﬁcant.

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

(a) Pair-wise, mAC=0.92

0.0

(b) Triplet, mAC=0.52

Figure 1: The correlation matrix (absolute value) of hashcode bits. Different hashcode bits are highly correlated.
hashing has been applied to many computer vision tasks, including not only image retrieval, but also large-scale clustering (Gong et al. 2015), classiﬁcation (Mu et al. 2014), and
re-identiﬁcation (Zheng and Shao 2016).
Inspired by the great success of convolutional neural
networks (CNN) for many computer vision tasks (He et
al. 2016), the researchers have made attempt to combine
CNN with hashing (Lai et al. 2015; Liong et al. 2015;
Liu et al. 2016; Xia et al. 2014). In particular, by slightly
modifying the network structure of CNN, especially the output layer, we can train a CNN model using the similarity supervision as a very effective hashing model which takes the
raw image as input and outputs the hashcodes for this image. Based on the power of CNN, the deep supervised hashing (DSH) model can effectively exploit the semantic similarity structure of images and produce better hashcodes than
non-deep hashing approaches. For example, Xia et al. (2014)
has shown that a simple and straightforward DSH model can
improve the mean Average Precision (mAP) over the stateof-the-art non deep approaches by 15% (from about 35% to
about 50%) on CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky 2009). With elaborate
designs, the mAP achieves 60% and more (Liu et al. 2016).

Introduction
The number of images on the Internet has been growing
rapidly in recent years, necessitating highly efﬁcient indexing techniques to facilitate large-scale image retrieval. The
recent works have demonstrated that hashing is a powerful
technique for efﬁcient and accurate image retrieval (Wang
et al. 2016). In particular, hashing transforms real-valued
image representations into binary hashcodes. Then, based
on the extremely fast basic CPU operations, like bit XOR,
the hamming distance between hashcodes can be obtained
with little time cost. In this way, linearly scanning the the
database is fast and the memory cost for storing the database
is low. Suppose we have 1 billion images and each image is represented as a 128-bit binary sequence. It requires
just 16GB memory to load all images’ hashcodes and computing the hamming distance between a query image and
all database images takes only a few seconds (Wang et al.
2015). Because of its outstanding efﬁciency and accuracy,

Problem Statement
The extraordinary performance and a large number of
follow-up works (Lai et al. 2015; Liong et al. 2015; Liu et
al. 2016; Xia et al. 2014; Zhuang et al. 2016) motivate us to
closely investigate the properties of DSH. From the literatures, we notice that the existing DSH can already yield good
results with short hashcodes, e.g., 8 to 24 bits. However, sig-

∗

This research was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant No. 61571269) and the Royal Society
Newton Mobility Grant (IE150997). Yuchen Guo and Xin Zhao
contributed equally. Corresponding author: Jungong Han.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2240

