A 3D Morphable Model of Craniofacial Shape and Texture Variation
Hang Dai, Nick Pears and William Smith
Department of Computer Science, University of York, UK

Christian Duncan
Alder Hey Hospital, Liverpool, UK

{hd816,nick.pears,william.smith}@york.ac.uk

Christian.Duncan@alderhey.nhs.uk

Abstract
We present a fully automatic pipeline to train 3D Morphable Models (3DMMs), with contributions in pose normalisation, dense correspondence using both shape and
texture information, and high quality, high resolution texture mapping. We propose a dense correspondence system,
combining a hierarchical parts-based template morphing
framework in the shape channel and a refining optical flow
in the texture channel. The texture map is generated using raw texture images from five views. We employ a pixelembedding method to maintain the texture map at the same
high resolution as the raw texture images, rather than using per-vertex color maps. The high quality texture map is
then used for statistical texture modelling. The Headspace
dataset used for training includes demographic information
about each subject, allowing for the construction of both
global 3DMMs and models tailored for specific gender and
age groups. We build both global craniofacial 3DMMs and
demographic sub-population 3DMMs from more than 1200
distinct identities. To our knowledge, we present the first
public 3DMM of the full human head in both shape and
texture: the Liverpool-York Head Model. Furthermore, we
analyse the 3DMMs in terms of a range of performance
metrics. Our evaluations reveal that the training pipeline
constructs state-of-the-art models.

1. Introduction
Morphable models of 3D shape have many applications in creative media, medical image analysis and biometrics. Traditional model building pipelines have used manual landmarking to initialise surface alignment. However,
this is extremely time-consuming and laborious for largescale datasets. Here we present a fully automatic approach
and apply it to a large dataset of 3D images of the human
head, thus generating the first public shape-and-texture 3D
morphable model (3DMM) of the full human head: the
Liverpool-York Head Model (LYHM).
A full head model opens up new opportunities not afforded by existing 3D face models [21]. For example: (i) we

can reconstruct the most likely full head shape from partial
data. This allows the modelling of different hair styles onto
a correctly proportioned cranium (cranial shape usually cannot be directly observed). (ii) any part of the head shape can
be matched against population norms thus facilitating tools
for craniofacial diagnoses and surgical intervention evaluation, and (iii) the ability to complete partial views of the
head may be exploited in biometric applications.
Contributions: (i) We propose a fully automatic
pipeline to build 3DMMs, with contributions in pose normalisation and dense correspondence - in particular we propose a hierarchical parts-based template morphing framework with optical flow correspondence refinement. (ii) We
propose a high quality texture map from several views of
cameras for the morphed template and use the texture map
for texture modelling. (iii) We build both global craniofacial 3DMMs and demographic sub-population 3DMMs
from more than 1200 distinct identities in the Headspace
dataset [1, 16] and we will make them publicly available
1
. Fig. 1 illustrates the principal components of the global
and child model. To our best knowledge, our models are
the first public shape-and-texture craniofacial 3DMMs of
the full human head. (iv) We demonstrate flexibility modes
of our model such that, when given a fixed face shape, we
compute the range of possible cranial shapes and vice-versa.
After discussing literature, we describe our dataset and
3DMM training pipeline, while the following sections
present details of the proposed methods. Section 8 provides
an extensive evaluation of the 3DMMs, and a final section
is used for conclusions.

2. Related work
In the late 1990s, Blanz and Vetter built a 3DMM from
3D face scans [7] and employed it in 2D face recognition [8]. Two hundred scans were used to build the model
(young adults, 100 males and 100 females). Dense correspondences were computed using optical flow with an energy dependent on both shape and texture.
There are very few publicly available morphable models
1 https://www-users.cs.york.ac.uk/ nep/research/LYHM/
˜

13085

