Embedding 3D Geometric Features for Rigid Object Part Segmentation
Yafei Song1 , Xiaowu Chen1∗, Jia Li1,2 ∗ , Qinping Zhao1
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
2

International Research Institute for Multidisciplinary Science, Beihang University

Abstract
Object part segmentation is a challenging and fundamental problem in computer vision. Its difficulties may be
caused by the varying viewpoints, poses, and topological
structures, which can be attributed to an essential reason,
i.e., a specific object is a 3D model rather than a 2D figure. Therefore, we conjecture that not only 2D appearance
features but also 3D geometric features could be helpful.
With this in mind, we propose a 2-stream FCN. One stream,
named AppNet, is to extract 2D appearance features from
the input image. The other stream, named GeoNet, is to extract 3D geometric features. However, the problem is that
the input is just an image. To this end, we design a 2Dconvolution based CNN structure to extract 3D geometric
features from 3D volume, which is named VolNet. Then
a teacher-student strategy is adopted and VolNet teaches
GeoNet how to extract 3D geometric features from an image. To perform this teaching process, we synthesize training data using 3D models. Each training sample consists
of an image and its corresponding volume. A perspective
voxelization algorithm is further proposed to align them.
Experimental results verify our conjecture and the effectiveness of both the proposed 2-stream CNN and VolNet.

1. Introduction
Object part segmentation(OPSeg), which aims to label
the right semantic part for each pixel of the objects in an
image, is an important problem in computer vision. OPSeg
can be regarded as a special case of semantic segmentation
that focuses on part information. Specially, part information is useful for some fine-grained tasks, e.g., image classification [29, 15], fine-grained action detection [23]. It is
also necessary for some specific tasks of robots, e.g., when
a robot wants to open the hood to fix a car, the hood should
be correctly segmented.
Object images are usually captured under different lightings, viewpoints and poses. Moreover, a class of ob∗ Corresponding Authors: Xiaowu Chen and Jia Li. E-Mail: {chen,
jiali}@buaa.edu.cn

Figure 1. Our basic idea is to exploit 3D geometric features during
object part segmentation. While 2D appearance features have been
widely used, 3D geometric features are rarely employed as the
corresponding 3D shape is usually unavailable.

jects usually have various materials, textures, and topological structures. These diversities lead to the difficulties in
OPSeg. Taken together, the difficulties can be attributed
to an essential reason, i.e., the objects are 3D models rather
than 2D figures in real world. Therefore, besides 2D appearance features, 3D geometric features should also be useful.
However, 3D information is usually unavailable. To this
end, as shown in Fig. 1, our basic idea is to exploit 3D
geometric features during OPSeg only with a single image.
In the existing literature, there are many semantic segmentation methods, but a few methods for OPSeg. Before
the popularity of deep learning, previous methods [26, 19]
usually 1) extract hand-crafted features for every pixel, 2)
get the initial semantic probability distribution via classifier
or other models, 3) construct MRF/CRF to optimize the final segmentation result. Entering deep learning era, step 1)
and 2) are combined together. A milestone work based on
deep learning may be FCN [20], which firstly performs semantic segmentation end-to-end. Chen et al. [3] further use
atrous convolution to avoid the up-sampling layers in FCN
and achieve better results. Moreover, DeepLab [3] also obtains good results on person-part segmentation. And several
recent works of OPSeg [33, 31] are based on DeepLab. Besides FCN based methods, LSTM is also applied to exploit
the context information for OPSeg [17, 18].

580

