Generating High-Quality Crowd Density Maps using Contextual Pyramid CNNs
Vishwanath A. Sindagi and Vishal M. Patel
Rutgers University, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
94 Brett Road, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA
vishwanath.sindagi@rutgers.edu, vishal.m.patel@rutgers.edu

Abstract
We present a novel method called Contextual Pyramid
CNN (CP-CNN) for generating high-quality crowd density
and count estimation by explicitly incorporating global and
local contextual information of crowd images. The proposed CP-CNN consists of four modules: Global Context
Estimator (GCE), Local Context Estimator (LCE), Density
Map Estimator (DME) and a Fusion-CNN (F-CNN). GCE
is a VGG-16 based CNN that encodes global context and
it is trained to classify input images into different density
classes, whereas LCE is another CNN that encodes local
context information and it is trained to perform patch-wise
classification of input images into different density classes.
DME is a multi-column architecture-based CNN that aims
to generate high-dimensional feature maps from the input
image which are fused with the contextual information estimated by GCE and LCE using F-CNN. To generate high
resolution and high-quality density maps, F-CNN uses a set
of convolutional and fractionally-strided convolutional layers and it is trained along with the DME in an end-to-end
fashion using a combination of adversarial loss and pixellevel Euclidean loss. Extensive experiments on highly challenging datasets show that the proposed method achieves
significant improvements over the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
With ubiquitous usage of surveillance cameras and advances in computer vision, crowd scene analysis [18, 43]
has gained a lot of interest in the recent years. In this
paper, we focus on the task of estimating crowd count
and high-quality density maps which has wide applications in video surveillance [15, 41], traffic monitoring, public safety, urban planning [43], scene understanding and
flow monitoring. Also, the methods developed for crowd
counting can be extended to counting tasks in other fields
such as cell microscopy [38, 36, 16, 6], vehicle counting
[23, 49, 48, 11, 34], environmental survey [8, 43], etc. The
task of crowd counting and density estimation has seen a

Figure 1: Density estimation results. Top Left: Input image
(from the ShanghaiTech dataset [50]). Top Right: Ground
truth. Bottom Left: Zhang et al. [50] (PSNR: 22.7 dB
SSIM: 0.68). Bottom Right: CP-CNN (PSNR: 26.8 dB
SSIM: 0.91).

significant progress in the recent years. However, due to the
presence of various complexities such as occlusions, high
clutter, non-uniform distribution of people, non-uniform illumination, intra-scene and inter-scene variations in appearance, scale and perspective, the resulting accuracies are far
from optimal.
Recent CNN-based methods using different multi-scale
architectures [50, 23, 29] have achieved significant success in addressing some of the above issues, especially in
the high-density complex crowded scenes. However, these
methods tend to under-estimate or over-estimate count in
the presence of high-density and low-density crowd images, respectively (as shown in Fig. 2). A potential solution is to use contextual information during the learning process. Several recent works for semantic segmentation [21], scene parsing [51] and visual saliency [52] have
demonstrated that incorporating contextual information can
provide significant improvements in the results. Motivated
by their success, we believe that availability of global context shall aid the learning process and help us achieve better

1861

