Non-Markovian Globally Consistent Multi-Object Tracking
Andrii Maksai1 , Xinchao Wang2 , François Fleuret3 , and Pascal Fua1
1

Computer Vision Laboratory, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland, {firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch
2
Beckman Institute, UIUC, Illinois, USA {firstname}@illinois.edu
3
IDIAP Reseach Institute, Martigny, Switzerland, {firstname.lastname}@idiap.ch

Abstract
Many state-of-the-art approaches to multi-object tracking rely on detecting them in each frame independently,
grouping detections into short but reliable trajectory segments, and then further grouping them into full trajectories.
This grouping typically relies on imposing local smoothness
constraints but almost never on enforcing more global ones
on the trajectories.
In this paper, we propose a non-Markovian approach to
imposing global consistency by using behavioral patterns
to guide the tracking algorithm. When used in conjunction with state-of-the-art tracking algorithms, this further
increases their already good performance on multiple challenging datasets. We show significant improvements both in
supervised settings where ground truth is available and behavioral patterns can be learned from it, and in completely
unsupervised settings.

1. Introduction
Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) has a long tradition for
applications such as radar tracking [18]. These early approaches gradually made their way into vision community
for object tracking purposes. They initially relied on Gating,
Kalman Filtering [17, 64, 36, 89, 57] and later on Particle
Filtering [32, 78, 66, 45, 90, 60, 19]. Because of their recursive nature, when used to track objects in crowded scenes,
they are prone to identity switches and trajectory fragmentations, which are difficult to recover from.
With the recent improvements of object detectors [27, 8],
the Tracking-by-Detection paradigm [4] has now become
the preferred way to address MOT. In most state-of-the-art
approaches [80, 23, 61, 88], this involves detecting objects
in each frame independently, grouping detections into short
but reliable trajectory segments, or tracklets, and then further grouping those into full trajectories.
While effective, existing tracklet-based approaches tend

1

Trajectories

3

Input

Learning

2

Patterns

4

Result

Running

Figure 1. Top row. At training time, our procedure alternates between learning global patterns from trajectories and improving the
trajectories on the basis of these patterns. When the initial trajectories come from annotated ground truth data, the patterns are simply learned without further iterations. Bottom row. At run time,
the learned patterns are used to improve trajectories produced by
state-of-the-art algorithms.

to only impose local smoothness constraints on the trajectories. These are Markovian in nature as opposed to being
global ones that stem from behavioral patterns. For example, a person entering a building via a particular door can
be expected to head to a specific set of rooms. Similarly,
a pedestrian emerging on the street from a shop will often
turn left or right to follow the sidewalk. Such patterns are of
course not absolutes because people sometimes do the unexpected but they should nevertheless inform the tracking
algorithms. We know of no existing technique that imposes
this kind of global non-Markovian constraints in a globally
optimal fashion.
Our first contribution is an energy function that relates
behavioral patterns to trajectories assigned to them. We use
it to infer global patterns and to guide a multi-target tracking
algorithm in a non-Markovian fashion.
Our second contribution is an unsupervised training
scheme. Given input trajectories from any source, it iterates
between learning patterns that maximize our energy function, and improving the trajectories by linking the detections that were the part of the original ones in a potentially
different way so as to maximize the same energy. When
the original trajectories come from annotated ground truth
data, the patterns are simply learned for them without fur-

2544

