Automatic Content-aware Projection for 360◦ Videos
Yeong Won Kim 1,∗,†

Chang-Ryeol Lee2,∗
Hyeok-Jae Choi2
1

Dae-Yong Cho2
Kuk-Jin Yoon2

Yong Hoon Kwon2

VUNO, South Korea
ywon.kim@vuno.co

2

Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST), South Korea
{crlee, dycho, hyeokjae94, yhkwon, kjyoon}@gist.ac.kr

Abstract
To watch 360◦ videos on normal 2D displays, we need
to project the selected part of the 360◦ image onto the 2D
display plane. In this paper, we propose a fully-automated
framework for generating content-aware 2D normal-view
perspective videos from 360◦ videos. Especially, we focus
on the projection step preserving important image contents
and reducing image distortion. Basically, our projection
method is based on Pannini projection model. At first, the
salient contents such as linear structures and salient regions
in the image are preserved by optimizing the single Panini
projection model. Then, the multiple Panini projection models at salient regions are interpolated to suppress image distortion globally. Finally, the temporal consistency for image projection is enforced for producing temporally stable
normal-view videos. Our proposed projection method does
not require any user-interaction and is much faster than
previous content-preserving methods. It can be applied to
not only images but also videos taking the temporal consistency of projection into account. Experiments on various
360◦ videos show the superiority of the proposed projection
method quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
Unlike traditional cameras which have a limited field of
view (FOV), 360◦ cameras take omni-directional images at
once. Therefore, it becomes much easier to capture the
objects of interest or meaningful events, whereas the traditional cameras require careful viewpoint control. Recently,
low-cost 360◦ cameras have been released thanks to the advance of Micro-Electro-Mechanical System (MEMS) technology, and lots of 360◦ videos are available on content dis∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.
† This work was done when the author was in Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST).

tribution sites such as Youtube and Facebook.
To watch the 360◦ videos on normal 2D displays, the
spherical images are projected onto the 2D plane with a
limited FOV. As the FOV becomes wider, the projected image includes more contents and it becomes more similar to
human perception, however, the distortion of the image becomes larger, and vice versa. Therefore, it is required to
minimize the subjective distortion of image contents while
approaching the possible widest FOV.
In the last decade, wide-angle projection has been studied in computer vision and graphics community. Most of
the previous works such as rectilinear, stereographic, Pannini projection [6] are based on a single fixed projection
model. Naturally, it has limitation for preserving important contents in the image. Furthermore, while the center
of the projection is less distorted, border regions of an image become more distorted. To handle this problem, Carroll
et al. [2] proposed to minimize the distortion of contents
such as salient lines and regions through optimization techniques. However, it requires manual extraction of lines to
be preserved and is time-consuming. Rectangling stereographic [3] is another contents-preserving projection with
automatic line extraction. However, it does not consider
objects of interest in an image, and hard constraint on linear
structures can cause large distortion on salient contents.
In this paper, we propose a fast and fully-automated
contents-preserving projection method for 360◦ videos. We
exploit the Pannini projection model [6] as a baseline
among many projection models, which has an advantage
of preserving not only conformality but also vertical lines.
In addition, we can easily control the behavior of the Pannini projection by adjusting two parameters. We take the
linear structures (i.e. lines) and salient regions in images
and videos into account for contents-preserving projection
which are very important to increase the subjective quality
of projected images. To preserve image contents locally and
globally, we locally apply multiple Pannini projection mod-

4743

