Transitive Invariance for Self-supervised Visual Representation Learning
Xiaolong Wang1
Kaiming He2
Abhinav Gupta1
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Facebook AI Research

Abstract

Inter-instance
Invariance

A

B

Learning visual representations with self-supervised
learning has become popular in computer vision. The idea
is to design auxiliary tasks where labels are free to obtain.
Most of these tasks end up providing data to learn specific
kinds of invariance useful for recognition. In this paper,
we propose to exploit different self-supervised approaches
to learn representations invariant to (i) inter-instance variations (two objects in the same class should have similar
features) and (ii) intra-instance variations (viewpoint, pose,
deformations, illumination, etc.). Instead of combining two
approaches with multi-task learning, we argue to organize
and reason the data with multiple variations. Specifically,
we propose to generate a graph with millions of objects
mined from hundreds of thousands of videos. The objects
are connected by two types of edges which correspond to
two types of invariance: “different instances but a similar viewpoint and category” and “different viewpoints of
the same instance”. By applying simple transitivity on the
graph with these edges, we can obtain pairs of images exhibiting richer visual invariance. We use this data to train
a Triplet-Siamese network with VGG16 as the base architecture and apply the learned representations to different
recognition tasks. For object detection, we achieve 63.2%
mAP on PASCAL VOC 2007 using Fast R-CNN (compare
to 67.3% with ImageNet pre-training). For the challenging
COCO dataset, our method is surprisingly close (23.5%)
to the ImageNet-supervised counterpart (24.4%) using the
Faster R-CNN framework. We also show that our network
can perform significantly better than the ImageNet network
in the surface normal estimation task.

Figure 1: We propose to obtain rich invariance by applying simple transitive relations. In this example, two different cars A and B are linked by the features that are good
for inter-instance invariance (e.g., using [9]); and each car
is linked to another view (A0 and B 0 ) by visual tracking
[56]. Then we can obtain new invariance from object pairs
hA, B 0 i, hA0 , Bi, and hA0 , B 0 i via transitivity. We show
more examples in the bottom.

1. Introduction

to complicated visual recognition tasks [17, 35].

Visual invariance is a core issue in learning visual representations. Traditional features like SIFT [36] and HOG
[6] are histograms of edges that are to an extent invariant to
illumination, orientations, scales, and translations. Modern
deep representations are capable of learning high-level invariance from large-scale data [42] , e.g., viewpoint, pose,
deformation, and semantics. These can also be transferred

In the scheme of supervised learning, human annotations
that map a variety of examples into a single label provide
supervision for learning invariant representations. For example, two horses with different illumination, poses, and
breeds are invariantly annotated as a category of “horse”.
Such human knowledge on invariance is expected to be
learned by capable deep neural networks [30, 27] through

Intra-instance
Invariance

Intra-instance
Invariance
Transitive
Invariance

A'
More Examples:
Object A
Object B

11329

B'

Tracked
Object A'

Tracked
Object B '

