Detect to Track and Track to Detect
Christoph Feichtenhofer ∗
Graz University of Technology

Axel Pinz
Graz University of Technology

Andrew Zisserman
University of Oxford

feichtenhofer@tugraz.at

axel.pinz@tugraz.at

az@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Recent approaches for high accuracy detection and
tracking of object categories in video consist of complex
multistage solutions that become more cumbersome each
year. In this paper we propose a ConvNet architecture that
jointly performs detection and tracking, solving the task in
a simple and effective way.
Our contributions are threefold: (i) we set up a ConvNet
architecture for simultaneous detection and tracking, using
a multi-task objective for frame-based object detection and
across-frame track regression; (ii) we introduce correlation
features that represent object co-occurrences across time
to aid the ConvNet during tracking; and (iii) we link the
frame level detections based on our across-frame tracklets
to produce high accuracy detections at the video level. Our
ConvNet architecture for spatiotemporal object detection is
evaluated on the large-scale ImageNet VID dataset where
it achieves state-of-the-art results. Our approach provides
better single model performance than the winning method
of the last ImageNet challenge while being conceptually
much simpler. Finally, we show that by increasing the temporal stride we can dramatically increase the tracker speed.

1. Introduction
Object detection in images has received a lot of attention over the last years with tremendous progress mostly
due to the emergence of deep Convolutional Networks
[12, 19, 21, 36, 37] and their region based descendants
[3, 9, 10, 31]. In the case of object detection and tracking in videos, recent approaches have mostly used detection as a first step, followed by post-processing methods
such as applying a tracker to propagate detection scores
over time. Such variations on the ‘tracking by detection’
paradigm have seen impressive progress but are dominated
by frame-level detection methods.
Object detection in video has seen a surge in interest
∗ Christoph Feichtenhofer is a recipient of a DOC Fellowship of the
Austrian Academy of Sciences at the Institute of Electrical Measurement
and Measurement Signal Processing, Graz University of Technology.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Challenges for video object detection. Training examples
for: (a) bicycle, bird, rabbit; (b) dog; (c) fox; and (d) red panda.

lately, especially since the introduction of the ImageNet
[32] video object detection challenge (VID). Different from
the ImageNet object detection (DET) challenge, VID shows
objects in image sequences and comes with additional
challenges of (i) size: the sheer number of frames that
video provides (VID has around 1.3M images, compared
to around 400K in DET or 100K in COCO [22]), (ii)
motion blur: due to rapid camera or object motion, (iii)
quality: internet video clips are typically of lower quality
than static photos, (iv) partial occlusion: due to change in
objects/viewer positioning, and (v) pose: unconventional
object-to-camera poses are frequently seen in video. In
Fig. 1, we show example images from the VID dataset; for
more examples please see1 .
To solve this challenging task, recent top entries in the
ImageNet [32] video detection challenge use exhaustive
post-processing on top of frame-level detectors. For example, the winner [17] of ILSVRC’15 uses two multi-stage
Faster R-CNN [31] detection frameworks, context suppression, multi-scale training/testing, a ConvNet tracker [38],
optical-flow based score propagation and model ensembles.
In this paper we propose a unified approach to tackle the
problem of object detection in realistic video. Our objective is to directly infer a ‘tracklet’ over multiple frames by
simultaneously carrying out detection and tracking with a
ConvNet. To achieve this we propose to extend the R-FCN
[3] detector with a tracking formulation that is inspired by
1 http://vision.cs.unc.edu/ilsvrc2015/ui/vid

13038

