DeNet: Scalable Real-time Object Detection with Directed Sparse Sampling
Lachlan Tychsen-Smith, Lars Petersson
CSIRO (Data61)
7 London Circuit, Canberra, ACT, 2601
Lachlan.Tychsen-Smith@data61.csiro.au, Lars.Petersson@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
We define the object detection from imagery problem
as estimating a very large but extremely sparse bounding
box dependent probability distribution. Subsequently we
identify a sparse distribution estimation scheme, Directed
Sparse Sampling, and employ it in a single end-to-end CNN
based detection model. This methodology extends and formalizes previous state-of-the-art detection models with an
additional emphasis on high evaluation rates and reduced
manual engineering. We introduce two novelties, a corner based region-of-interest estimator and a deconvolution
based CNN model. The resulting model is scene adaptive,
does not require manually defined reference bounding boxes
and produces highly competitive results on MSCOCO, Pascal VOC 2007 and Pascal VOC 2012 with real-time evaluation rates. Further analysis suggests our model performs particularly well when finegrained object localization is desirable. We argue that this advantage stems from
the significantly larger set of available regions-of-interest
relative to other methods. Source-code is available from:
https://github.com/lachlants/denet

Input
Image

Base
CNN

Pr(s|BS )
Sparse
Classify
Sample
CNN
BBox
Sampling
Update
Bounding
Boxes
Corner
Pr(t|k, y, x)
Detect

Figure 1. A high level flow diagram depicting the DeNet methodology. The CNN’s are highlighted in blue, the novel components
in purple and the outputs in yellow. The sampling bounding box
dependency BS (highlighted in red) is held constant during back
propagation to produce an end-to-end trained model. The corner distribution and final classification distribution are jointly optimized using cross entropy loss.

Rather than focusing on obtaining state-of-the-art accuracy in a competition environment (i.e. computationally unconstrained) in this paper we emphasis the dual task of obtaining the best detection performance at a predefined evaluation rate i.e. 60 Hz and 30 Hz. The primary contributions
made within this paper include:

1. Introduction

• An improved theoretical understanding of modern detection methods and a generic framework in which to
describe them i.e. Directed Sparse Sampling.

Feed-forward neural networks exhibit good convergence
properties given a random initialization under stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) and, given an appropriate network
design and training regime, can generalize well to previously unseen data [8]. In particular, convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) built from interleaved convolution and
pooling layers with ReLU activation functions have set numerous benchmarks in computer vision tasks [8] [6] [20].
A number of methodologies have been developed to map
their state-of-the-art dense regression and classification capabilities to the problem of identifying axis aligned bounding boxes of object instances in images. In particular we
highlight the relatively slow region based CNN approaches
(R-CNN [4], Faster R-CNN [15]) and the more recent work
on real-time detection (YOLO [14], SSD [12]).

• A novel, fast, region-of-interest estimator which
doesn’t require manually defined reference bounding
boxes.
• A novel application of deconvolution layers which
greatly improves evaluation rates.
• Six implementations of our method demonstrating
competitive detection performance on a range of
benchmarks.
• An easily extended Theano based code release to facilitate the research community.
1428

