Real-time Hand Tracking under Occlusion from an Egocentric RGB-D Sensor
Franziska Mueller1,2 Dushyant Mehta1,2 Oleksandr Sotnychenko1
Srinath Sridhar1 Dan Casas3 Christian Theobalt1
1
Max Planck Institute for Informatics 2 Saarland University 3 Universidad Rey Juan Carlos
{frmueller, dmehta, osotnych, ssridhar, dcasas, theobalt}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
We present an approach for real-time, robust and accurate hand pose estimation from moving egocentric RGB-D
cameras in cluttered real environments. Existing methods typically fail for hand-object interactions in cluttered
scenes imaged from egocentric viewpoints—common for
virtual or augmented reality applications. Our approach
uses two subsequently applied Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to localize the hand and regress 3D joint
locations. Hand localization is achieved by using a CNN
to estimate the 2D position of the hand center in the input,
even in the presence of clutter and occlusions. The localized
hand position, together with the corresponding input depth
value, is used to generate a normalized cropped image that
is fed into a second CNN to regress relative 3D hand joint
locations in real time. For added accuracy, robustness and
temporal stability, we refine the pose estimates using a kinematic pose tracking energy. To train the CNNs, we introduce a new photorealistic dataset that uses a merged reality
approach to capture and synthesize large amounts of annotated data of natural hand interaction in cluttered scenes.
Through quantitative and qualitative evaluation, we show
that our method is robust to self-occlusion and occlusions
by objects, particularly in moving egocentric perspectives.

1. Introduction
Estimating the full articulated 3D pose of hands is becoming increasingly important due to the central role that
hands play in everyday human activities. Applications
in activity recognition [21], motion control [42], human–
computer interaction [25], and virtual/augmented reality
(VR/AR) require real-time and accurate hand pose estimation under challenging conditions. Spurred by recent developments in commodity depth sensing, several methods
that use a single RGB-D camera have been proposed [33,
26, 30, 17, 4, 37]. In particular, methods that use Con-

Figure 1: We present an approach to track the full 3D pose
of the hand from egocentric viewpoints (left), a challenging
problem due to additional self-occlusions, occlusions from
objects and background clutter. Our method can reliably
track the hand in 3D even under such conditions using only
RGB-D input. Here we show tracking results overlaid with
color and depth map (center), and visualized from virtual
viewpoints (right).

volutional Neural Networks (CNNs), possibly in combination with model-based hand tracking, have been shown to
work well for static, third-person viewpoints in uncluttered
scenes [34, 24, 13], i.e., mostly for free hand motion in midair, a setting that is uncommon in natural hand interaction.
However, real-time hand pose estimation from moving,
first-person camera viewpoints in cluttered real-world
scenes where the hand is often occluded as it naturally interacts with objects, remains an unsolved problem. We
define first-person or egocentric viewpoints as those that
would typically be imaged by cameras mounted on the
head (for VR/AR applications), shoulder, or chest (see Figure 1). Occlusions, cluttered backgrounds, manipulated objects, and field-of-view limitations make this scenario particularly challenging. CNNs are a promising method to
tackle this problem but typically require large amounts of
annotated data which is hard to obtain since markerless
hand tracking (even with multiple views), and manual annotation on a large scale is infeasible in egocentric settings due to (self-)occlusions, cost, and time. Even semi-

1154

