Self-paced Kernel Estimation for Robust Blind Image Deblurring
Dong Gong†‡ , Mingkui Tan§ , Yanning Zhang† , Anton van den Hengel‡ , Qinfeng Shi‡∗
†
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
‡
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Australia
§
School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
edgong01@gmail.com, mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn, ynzhang@nwpu.edu.cn,
{anton.vandenhengel,javen.shi}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
The challenge in blind image deblurring is to remove the
effects of blur with limited prior information about the nature of the blur process. Existing methods often assume that
the blur image is produced by linear convolution with additive Gaussian noise. However, including even a small number of outliers to this model in the kernel estimation process
can significantly reduce the resulting image quality. Previous methods mainly rely on some simple but unreliable
heuristics to identify outliers for kernel estimation. Rather
than attempt to identify outliers to the model a priori, we
instead propose to sequentially identify inliers, and gradually incorporate them into the estimation process. The selfpaced kernel estimation scheme we propose represents a
generalization of existing self-paced learning approaches,
in which we gradually detect and include reliable inlier
pixel sets in a blurred image for kernel estimation. Moreover, we automatically activate a subset of significant gradients w.r.t. the reliable inlier pixels, and then update the intermediate sharp image and the kernel accordingly. Experiments on both synthetic data and real-world images with
various kinds of outliers demonstrate the effectiveness and
robustness of the proposed method compared to the stateof-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Image blur is a ubiquitous problem in image capture due
to variety factors such as camera movement [8, 6] and outof-focus effects [20]. The increasing usage of light-weight
hand-held photography devices (e.g. cell-phones) has significantly increased the demand for practical image debluring, especially when facing imperfect imaging situations,
∗ This work was supported by NSFC (61231016, 61572405, 61602185),
China 863 Program (2015AA016402), ARC (DP160100703). M. Tan is
supported by the Recruitment Program for Young Professionals, China

(a) Blurry image

(b) Xu and Jia [37]

(c) Pan et al. [26]

(d) Ours

Figure 1. Deblurring the image with outliers. (a) A real blurry
image with outliers, containing saturated regions (e.g. pixels in the
green box) and unknown noise. (b)-(d) Deblurring results of Xu
and Jia [37], Pan et al. [26] and the proposed method, respectively.

such as selfies.
To deal with the image blur, a classical way is to adopt
a spatially invariant linear blur kernel k [8, 35], and then
model the blurred image y by a convolution process on the
latent sharp image x with the blur kernel k:
y =x∗k+e,

(1)

where ∗ denotes the convolution operator, and e refers to
additive noise. Here y ∈ Rn , x ∈ Rn , k ∈ Rm and
e ∈ Rn . Note that the blur kernel is often unknown. Thus,
blind image deblurring aims to estimate both x and k from

1661

