Reconfiguring the Imaging Pipeline for Computer Vision
Mark Buckler
Cornell University

Suren Jayasuriya
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Advancements in deep learning have ignited an explosion of research on efficient hardware for embedded
computer vision. Hardware vision acceleration, however,
does not address the cost of capturing and processing
the image data that feeds these algorithms. We examine
the role of the image signal processing (ISP) pipeline
in computer vision to identify opportunities to reduce
computation and save energy. The key insight is that
imaging pipelines should be be configurable: to switch
between a traditional photography mode and a lowpower vision mode that produces lower-quality image
data suitable only for computer vision. We use eight
computer vision algorithms and a reversible pipeline
simulation tool to study the imaging system’s impact
on vision performance. For both CNN-based and classical vision algorithms, we observe that only two ISP
stages, demosaicing and gamma compression, are critical for task performance. We propose a new image
sensor design that can compensate for these stages. The
sensor design features an adjustable resolution and tunable analog-to-digital converters (ADCs). Our proposed
imaging system’s vision mode disables the ISP entirely
and configures the sensor to produce subsampled, lowerprecision image data. This vision mode can save ∼75%
of the average energy of a baseline photography mode
with only a small impact on vision task accuracy.

1. Introduction
The deep learning revolution has accelerated progress
in a plethora of computer vision tasks. To bring these
vision capabilities within the battery budget of a smartphone, a wave of recent work has designed custom hardware for inference in deep neural networks [15, 19, 30].
This work, however, only addresses part of the whole
cost: embedded vision involves the entire imaging
pipeline, from photons to task result. As hardware
acceleration reduces the energy cost of inference, the
cost to capture and process images will consume a larger
share of total system power [9, 31].

Adrian Sampson
Cornell University

We study the potential for co-design between camera
systems and vision algorithms to improve their end-toend efficiency. Existing imaging pipelines are designed
for photography: they produce high-quality images for
human consumption. An imaging pipeline consists of
the image sensor itself and an image signal processor
(ISP) chip, both of which are hard-wired to produce
high-resolution, low-noise, color-corrected photographs.
Modern computer vision algorithms, however, do not require the same level of quality that humans do. Our key
observation is that mainstream, photography-oriented
imaging hardware wastes time and energy to provide
quality that computer vision algorithms do not need.
We propose to make imaging pipelines configurable.
The pipeline should support both a traditional photography mode and an additional, low-power vision mode.
In vision mode, the sensor can save energy by producing
lower-resolution, lower-precision image data, and the
ISP can skip stages or disable itself altogether. We
examine the potential for a vision mode in imaging
systems by measuring its impact on the hardware efficiency and vision accuracy. We study vision algorithms’
sensitivity to sensor parameters and to individual ISP
stages, and we use the results to propose an end-to-end
design for an imaging pipeline’s vision mode.
Contributions: This paper proposes a set of modifications to a traditional camera sensor to support a
vision mode. The design uses variable-accuracy analogto-digital converters (ADCs) to reduce the cost of pixel
capture and power-gated selective readout to adjust
sensor resolution. The sensor’s subsampling and quantization hardware approximates the effects of two traditional ISP stages, demosaicing and gamma compression.
With this augmented sensor, we propose to disable the
ISP altogether in vision mode.
We also describe a methodology for studying the
imaging system’s role in computer vision performance.
We have developed a tool that simulates a configurable
imaging pipeline and its inverse to convert plain images to approximate raw signals. This tool is critical
for generating training data for learning-based vision
algorithms that need examples of images produced by

975

