Low-shot Visual Recognition by Shrinking and Hallucinating Features

Bharath Hariharan and Ross Girshick
Facebook AI Research (FAIR)
Novel classes (few training examples)

Base classes (many training examples)

Classifier (base and novel categories)
Representation learning

Feature
extractor

Low-shot learning

Figure 1: Our low-shot learning benchmark in two phases: representation learning and low-shot learning. Modern recognition
models use large labeled datasets like ImageNet to build good visual representations and train strong classifiers (representation learning).
However, these datasets only contain a fixed set of classes. In many realistic scenarios, once deployed, the model might encounter novel
classes that it also needs to recognize, but with very few training examples available (low-shot learning). We present two ways of significantly
improving performance in this scenario: (1) a novel loss function for representation learning that leads to better visual representations that
generalize well, and (2) a method for hallucinating additional examples for the data-starved novel classes.

Abstract
Low-shot visual learning—the ability to recognize novel
object categories from very few examples—is a hallmark
of human visual intelligence. Existing machine learning
approaches fail to generalize in the same way. To make
progress on this foundational problem, we present a lowshot learning benchmark on complex images that mimics
challenges faced by recognition systems in the wild. We then
propose (1) representation regularization techniques, and
(2) techniques to hallucinate additional training examples
for data-starved classes. Together, our methods improve the
effectiveness of convolutional networks in low-shot learning,
improving the one-shot accuracy on novel classes by 2.3×
on the challenging ImageNet dataset.

1. Introduction
Recently, error rates on benchmarks like ImageNet [8]
have been halved, and then halved again. These gains come
from deep convolutional networks (ConvNets) that learn
rich feature representations [24]. It is now clear that if an
application has an a priori fixed set of visual concepts and
thousands of examples per concept, an effective way to build
an object recognition system is to train a deep ConvNet. But
what if these assumptions are not satisfied and the network

must learn novel categories from very few examples?
The ability to perform low-shot learning—learning novel
concepts from very few examples—is a hallmark of the human visual system. We are able to do this not only for natural
object categories such as different kinds of animals, but also
for synthetic objects that are unlike anything we’ve seen
before [39]. In contrast, in spite of significant improvements
in recognition performance, computational recognition approaches fail to generalize well from few examples [25]. Our
goal in this paper is to make progress towards imparting this
human ability to modern recognition systems.
Our first contribution is a low-shot learning benchmark
based on the challenging ImageNet1k dataset. As shown
in Figure 1, our benchmark is implemented in two phases.
In the representation learning phase, the learner tunes its
feature representation on a set of base classes that have many
training instances. In the low-shot learning phase, the learner
is exposed to a set of novel classes with only a few examples per class and must learn a classifier over the joint label
space of base and novel classes. This benchmark simulates a
scenario in which the learner is deployed in the wild and has
to quickly learn novel concepts it encounters from very little
training data. Unlike previous low-shot learning tests (e.g.,
[13, 25]) we measure the learner’s accuracy on both the base
and novel classes. This provides a sanity check that accuracy
gains on novel classes do not come at the expense of a large
13018

