Learning to Reason: End-to-End Module Networks
for Visual Question Answering
Ronghang Hu1 Jacob Andreas1 Marcus Rohrbach1,2 Trevor Darrell1 Kate Saenko3
1
2
3
University of California, Berkeley
Facebook AI Research
Boston University
{ronghang,jda,trevor,rohrbach}@eecs.berkeley.edu, saenko@bu.edu

Abstract
Natural language questions are inherently compositional,
and many are most easily answered by reasoning about their
decomposition into modular sub-problems. For example, to
answer “is there an equal number of balls and boxes?” we
can look for balls, look for boxes, count them, and compare the results. The recently proposed Neural Module Network (NMN) architecture [3, 2] implements this approach to
question answering by parsing questions into linguistic substructures and assembling question-specific deep networks
from smaller modules that each solve one subtask. However,
existing NMN implementations rely on brittle off-the-shelf
parsers, and are restricted to the module configurations proposed by these parsers rather than learning them from data.
In this paper, we propose End-to-End Module Networks
(N2NMNs), which learn to reason by directly predicting
instance-specific network layouts without the aid of a parser.
Our model learns to generate network structures (by imitating expert demonstrations) while simultaneously learning
network parameters (using the downstream task loss). Experimental results on the new CLEVR dataset targeted at compositional question answering show that N2NMNs achieve
an error reduction of nearly 50% relative to state-of-theart attentional approaches, while discovering interpretable
network architectures specialized for each question.

1. Introduction
Visual Question Answering (VQA) requires joint comprehension of images and text. This comprehension often
depends on compositional reasoning, for example locating
multiple objects in a scene and inspecting their properties
or comparing them to one another (Figure 1). While conventional deep networks have shown promising VQA performance [9], there is limited evidence that they are capable of
explicit compositional reasoning [15]. Much of the success
of state-of-the-art approaches to VQA instead comes from
their ability to discover statistical biases in the data distribu-

There is a shiny object that is right of the gray metallic cylinder;
does it have the same size as the large rubber sphere?

Layout policy

find

find

relocate

filter

compare

find
compare
large
rubber
sphere

find

relocate

filter

gray
metallic
cylinder

right of

shiny

size

yes
Module Network

Figure 1: For each instance, our model predicts a computational expression and a sequence of attentive module parameterizations. It uses these to assemble a concrete network
architecture, and then executes the assembled neural module
network to output an answer for visual question answering.
(The example shows a real structure predicted by our model,
with text attention maps simplified for clarity.)
tion [10]. And to the extent that such approaches are capable
of more sophisticated reasoning, their monolithic structure
makes these behaviors difficult to understand and explain.
Additionally, they rely on the same non-modular network
structure for all input questions.
In this paper, we propose End-to-End Module Networks
(N2NMNs): a class of models capable of predicting novel
modular network architectures directly from textual input
and applying them to images in order to solve question answering tasks. In contrast to previous work, our approach
learns to both parse the language into linguistic structures
and compose them into appropriate layouts.
The present work synthesizes and extends two recent modular architectures for visual problem solving. Standard neural module networks (NMNs) [3] already provide a technique
for constructing dynamic network structures from collections
of composable modules. However, previous work relies on
an external parser to process input text and obtain the module layout. This is a serious limitation, because off-the-shelf
language parsers are not designed for language and vision
tasks and must therefore be modified using handcrafted rules
that often fail to predict valid layouts [15]. Meanwhile, the
compositional modular network [12] proposed for grounding

804

