BB8: A Scalable, Accurate, Robust to Partial Occlusion Method for Predicting
the 3D Poses of Challenging Objects without Using Depth
Mahdi Rad1
1
2

Vincent Lepetit1, 2

Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology, Austria

Laboratoire Bordelais de Recherche en Informatique, Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France
{rad, lepetit}@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
We introduce a novel method for 3D object detection and
pose estimation from color images only. We first use segmentation to detect the objects of interest in 2D even in
presence of partial occlusions and cluttered background.
By contrast with recent patch-based methods, we rely on
a “holistic” approach: We apply to the detected objects
a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) trained to predict
their 3D poses in the form of 2D projections of the corners of their 3D bounding boxes. This, however, is not sufficient for handling objects from the recent T-LESS dataset:
These objects exhibit an axis of rotational symmetry, and
the similarity of two images of such an object under two
different poses makes training the CNN challenging. We
solve this problem by restricting the range of poses used
for training, and by introducing a classifier to identify the
range of a pose at run-time before estimating it. We also
use an optional additional step that refines the predicted
poses. We improve the state-of-the-art on the LINEMOD
dataset from 73.7% [2] to 89.3% of correctly registered
RGB frames. We are also the first to report results on the
Occlusion dataset [1] using color images only. We obtain
54% of frames passing the Pose 6D criterion on average
on several sequences of the T-LESS dataset, compared to
the 67% of the state-of-the-art [10] on the same sequences
which uses both color and depth. The full approach is also
scalable, as a single network can be trained for multiple
objects simultaneously.

1. Introduction
3D pose estimation of object instances has recently become a popular problem again, because of its application
in robotics, virtual and augmented reality. Many recent
approaches rely on depth maps, sometimes in conjunction
with color images [5, 4, 9, 14, 7, 1, 21, 13, 3, 10]. However,
it is not always possible to use depth cameras, as they fail

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Zooms on estimated poses for (a) the Ape of the
LINEMOD dataset [7], (b) the Driller of the Occlusion dataset
[1], (c) and (d) three objects of the T-LESS [10] dataset. The green
bounding boxes correspond to the ground truth poses, and the blue
bounding boxes to the poses estimated with our method. The two
boxes often overlap almost perfectly, showing the accuracy of our
estimated poses. The parts of the bounding boxes occluded by the
object were removed using the object mask rendered from our estimated pose. In (b), we can still obtain a good pose despite the
large occlusion by the bench vise. In (c) and (d), we also obtain
very good estimates despite large occlusions, the similarities between the objects, and the fact that the symmetries challenge the
learning algorithms.

outdoor or on specular objects. In addition, they drain the
batteries of mobile devices, being an active sensor.
It is therefore desirable to rely only on color images for
3D pose estimation, even if it is more challenging. Recent
13828

