Decoder Network over Lightweight Reconstructed Feature for Fast Semantic
Style Transfer
Ming Lu ∗1 , Hao Zhao1 , Anbang Yao2 , Feng Xu3 , Yurong Chen2 , and Li Zhang1
1

Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
2
Cognitive Computing Laboratory, Intel Labs China
3
School of Software, Tsinghua University

{lu-m13@mails,zhao-h13@mails,feng-xu@mail,chinazhangli@mail}.tsinghua.edu.cn
{anbang.yao, yurong.chen}@intel.com

Abstract
Recently, the community of style transfer is trying to
incorporate semantic information into traditional system.
This practice achieves better perceptual results by transferring the style between semantically-corresponding regions.
Yet, few efforts are invested to address the computation bottleneck of back-propagation. In this paper, we propose a
new framework for fast semantic style transfer. Our method
decomposes the semantic style transfer problem into feature
reconstruction part and feature decoder part. The reconstruction part tactfully solves the optimization problem of
content loss and style loss in feature space by particularly
reconstructed feature. This significantly reduces the computation of propagating the loss through the whole network.
The decoder part transforms the reconstructed feature into
the stylized image. Through a careful bridging of the two
modules, the proposed approach not only achieves competitive results as backward optimization methods but also is
about two orders of magnitude faster.

Content Image

Style Image

Neural Doodle
(>100s)

Our Method
(~1.5s)

Figure 1. Our method can be applied to portrait style transfer.
Compared with backward optimization method [1], our method
can achieve competitive results but is about two orders faster.

Io = arg min Lcontent (f (Io ), f (Ic ))
Io

(1)
+λLstyle (f (Io ), f (Is ))

1. Introduction
Style transfer with Convolution Neural Network (CNN)
is becoming prevalent since the advent of the seminal work
[9]. It aims to generate a stylized image Io which preserves
the content of image Ic and the style of image Is . Both content and style are represented in the feature space of a deep
CNN f . The objective of neural style transfer is originally
formulated as the minimization of the content loss and style
loss:
∗ This work was done when Ming Lu was an intern at Intel Labs China
supervised by Anbang Yao who is responsible for correspondence.

The content loss is usually defined as the distance between CNN features. Comparatively, the community makes
great efforts to explore the representation of image style in
order to define the style loss. The image style can be represented as the gram matrix [9] of CNN feature. Then the
style loss can be naturally formulated by matching the gram
matrices between the stylized image and style counterpart.
Other methods [18, 19] based on neural patch characterize
the style loss as neural patch matching. These methods are
more suitable for the realistic style transfer than artistic style
transfer since local patch preserves more structural information. The optimization of Eq. 1 can be solved by backward
12469

