Learning to Super-Resolve Blurry Face and Text Images
Xiangyu Xu1,2,3 Deqing Sun3,4 Jinshan Pan5 Yujin Zhang1
Hanspeter Pfister3 Ming-Hsuan Yang2
1
Tsinghua University 2 University of California, Merced 3 Harvard University
4
Nvidia 5 Nanjing University of Science & Technology
https://sites.google.com/view/xiangyuxu/deblursr_iccv17

(a) Input

(b) SR [18]

(c) SR [18]+Deblur [33]

(d) Deblur [33]

(e) Deblur [33]+SR [18]

(f) Ours

(g) GT

Figure 1. Low-resolution blurry images (a) are challenging for the state-of-the-art super-resolution and deblurring methods ((b) and (d)).
Sequentially applying super-resolution and deblurring methods further exacerbates the artifacts ((c) and (e)). Our method (f) learns to
reconstruct realistic results with clear structures and fine details. The low-resolution images ((a) and (d)) are resized for visualization.

Abstract
We present an algorithm to directly restore a clear highresolution image from a blurry low-resolution input. This
problem is highly ill-posed and the basic assumptions for
existing super-resolution methods (requiring clear input)
and deblurring methods (requiring high-resolution input)
no longer hold. We focus on face and text images and
adopt a generative adversarial network (GAN) to learn a
category-specific prior to solve this problem. However, the
basic GAN formulation does not generate realistic highresolution images. In this work, we introduce novel training losses that help recover fine details. We also present a
multi-class GAN that can process multi-class image restoration tasks, i.e., face and text images, using a single generator network. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our method performs favorably against the state-of-the-art
methods on both synthetic and real-world images at a lower
computational cost.

1. Introduction
We address the problem of jointly super-resolving and
deblurring low-resolution blurry images. Such images often
arise when the objects of interest are far away from cameras
and under fast motion, e.g. in surveillance and sports videos.
Reconstructing high-resolution clear images from the degraded input not only generates visually pleasing images
but also helps other vision tasks, such as recognition [51].
This problem is highly ill-posed and causes significant

challenges for state-of-the-art super-resolution and deblurring methods by breaking the basic assumptions on the input. On one hand, super-resolution methods usually assume
the blur kernel is known or of simple form, such as Gaussian. When the low-resolution input undergoes complex
motion blur, existing super-resolution methods often generate results with large structural distortions, as shown in Figure 1(b). On the other hand, blind deblurring methods often assume that the input is of high resolution and contains
salient edges that can be extracted to recover the unknown
blur kernel. When the input lacks clear details, the recovered blur kernel and image are not accurate (Figure 1(d)). If
we apply super-resolution and deblurring methods sequentially, the artifacts are exacerbated, as shown in Figures 1(c)
and (e). A successful solution to this problem should simultaneously deblur and super-resolve the low-quality input.
Toward this end, we propose to focus on two important classes of images, i.e., faces and text, and learn strong
category-specific priors to solve this problem. Specifically,
we adopt a generative adversarial network (GAN) [13],
which consists of generator and discriminator sub-networks
that compete with each other. We find that the discriminative network is trained to distinguish fake and real images,
thereby learning a semantic prior. This is in sharp contrast
to empirical priors [9, 20, 23, 32, 33, 45] that are developed
using the statistics of natural images. These statistical pri-

251

