2D-Driven 3D Object Detection in RGB-D Images
Jean Lahoud, Bernard Ghanem
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
{jean.lahoud,bernard.ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
In this paper, we present a technique that places 3D
bounding boxes around objects in an RGB-D scene. Our
approach makes best use of the 2D information to quickly
reduce the search space in 3D, benefiting from state-ofthe-art 2D object detection techniques. We then use the
3D information to orient, place, and score bounding boxes
around objects. We independently estimate the orientation for every object, using previous techniques that utilize
normal information. Object locations and sizes in 3D are
learned using a multilayer perceptron (MLP). In the final
step, we refine our detections based on object class relations
within a scene. When compared to state-of-the-art detection
methods that operate almost entirely in the sparse 3D domain, extensive experiments on the well-known SUN RGBD dataset [29] show that our proposed method is much
faster (4.1s per image) in detecting 3D objects in RGB-D
images and performs better (3 mAP higher) than the stateof-the-art method that is 4.7 times slower and comparably
to the method that is two orders of magnitude slower. This
work hints at the idea that 2D-driven object detection in 3D
should be further explored, especially in cases where the 3D
input is sparse.

1. Introduction
An important aspect of scene understanding is object
detection, which aims to place tight 2D bounding boxes
around objects and give them semantic labels. Advances
in 2D object detection are motivated by impressive performance in numerous challenges and backed up by challenging and large-scale datasets [27, 20, 2]. The progress in 2D
object detection manifested in the development and ubiquity of fast and accurate detection techniques. Since 2D
object detection results are constrained to the image frame,
more information is needed to relate them to the 3D world.
Multiple techniques have attempted to extend 2D detections
into 3D using a single image [12, 13, 21], but these techniques need prior knowledge of the scene and do not gen-

Figure 1. Output of our 2D-driven 3D detection method. Given an
RGB image (left) and its corresponding depth image, we place 3D
bounding boxes around objects of a known class (right). We make
best use of 2D object detection methods to hone in at possible
object locations and place 3D bounding boxes.

eralize well. With the emergence of 3D sensors (e.g. the
Microsoft Kinect), which provide depth along with color
information, the task of propagating 2D knowledge into 3D
becomes more attainable.
The importance of 3D object detection lies in providing better localization that extends the knowledge from the
image frame to the real world. This enables interaction between a machine (e.g. robot) and its environment. Due to
the importance of 3D detection, many techniques replace
the 2D bounding box with a 3D one, benefitting from largescale RGB-D datasets, especially SUN RGB-D [29], which
provides 3D bounding box annotations for hundreds of object classes.
One drawback of state-of-the-art detection methods that
operate in 3D is their runtime. Despite hardware acceleration (GPU), they tend to be much slower than 2D object
detection methods for several reasons. (i) One of these reasons is the relative size of the 3D scene compared to its
2D image counterpart. Adding an extra spatial dimension

4622

