Interpretable Transformations with Encoder-Decoder Networks
Daniel E. Worrall

Stephan J. Garbin
Daniyar Turmukhambetov
University College London ∗

Abstract
Deep feature spaces have the capacity to encode complex
transformations of their input data. However, understanding
the relative feature-space relationship between two transformed
encoded images is difficult. For instance, what is the relative
feature space relationship between two rotated images? What
is decoded when we interpolate in feature space? Ideally, we
want to disentangle confounding factors, such as pose, appearance, and illumination, from object identity. Disentangling these
is difficult because they interact in very nonlinear ways. We
propose a simple method to construct a deep feature space,
with explicitly disentangled representations of several known
transformations. A person or algorithm can then manipulate
the disentangled representation, for example, to re-render an
image with explicit control over parameterized degrees of freedom. The feature space is constructed using a transforming
encoder-decoder network with a custom feature transform layer,
acting on the hidden representations. We demonstrate the advantages of explicit disentangling on a variety of datasets and
transformations, and as an aid for traditional tasks, such as
classification.

1. Introduction
We seek to understand and exploit the deep feature-space
relationship between images and their transformed versions.
Different feature spaces are illustrated in Figure 1, and
support different use-cases: separability helps discriminate
between categories such as identity, while invariance improves
robustness to nuisance variables during data capture. Taking
head pose as an example, what is a nuisance for one task could
be the focus of another. Therefore, we propose deep features
with transformation-specific interpretability, which combine
both (1) discriminative and (2) robustness properties, with the
further benefits of (3) a user-guided parameterized space for
controlling image synthesis through interpolation.
Learning such a feature space is difficult. In image data, transformations of objects usually couple in complex nonlinear ways,
leading to an entangling of transformations. The reverse process
of disentangling is then especially hard. An obvious post hoc
∗ http://visual.cs.ucl.ac.uk/pubs/interpTransform/

Uninterpretable feature space

Gabriel J. Brostow

Invariant feature space

Interpretable feature space

Figure 1. Three alternative feature spaces and how each encodes images
of the same person. (Left) A feature space that is hard to interpret,
similar to one learned by a typical CNN. While transformation
information is present, it is not obvious how to extract that directly from
the feature space. (Middle) A transformation-invariant feature space.
(Right) An interpretable feature-space, where ordered transformations
of the input subject relate to ordered, structured features. This is like
a learned metric space, but also allows for image synthesis. Images
of another person are not shown, but would ideally project similarly,
albeit elsewhere in each feature space.

solution is to learn disentangling transformations using a regressor [31], but this is a time-consuming and inexact process. We
cannot assume that the change in representation of a chair and its
rotated twin is necessarily the same as the change in representation between a banana and its equally rotated twin. We propose
disentangling as an end-to-end supervised learning problem.
Some image variations are hard to quantify or explain. But others, for instance 2D and 3D warps or color appearance changes,
allow ready access to pre- and post-warp image pairs, along
with their ground-truth transformation parameters. These easier
transformations, we find, lend themselves to smooth parameterization in feature space, and therefore interpretability. One could
argue that it is nicer to learn everything only from raw data,
but the transformation parameter labels considered here are obtained with little or no human effort. We therefore pre-define the
feature-space structures that encode basic transformations, and
train neural networks that map into and out of this feature-space.
We take our motivation from considering the feature space
structure, introduced by convolutional neural networks [30]
(CNNs). CNNs owe their success to two differences from the
older and more general multilayer perceptrons [36]: 1) the receptive field of deep neurons is localized to a small neighborhood,
typically not greater than 7×7 pixels from the layer below, and
2) incoming weights are tied between all translated neurons. The
motivation behind translational weight-tying is that correlations
in the activations are invariant under translation. The side-effect
of enforcing such a structure on the weights of a neural network
15726

