Multi-channel Weighted Nuclear Norm Minimization
for Real Color Image Denoising
Jun Xu1 , Lei Zhang1,∗ , David Zhang1 , and Xiangchu Feng2
1

Dept. of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
2
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
{csjunxu,cslzhang,csdzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk,xcfeng@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract

ods have also been developed by learning discriminative
priors from pairs of clean and noisy images [9–12].

Most of the existing denoising algorithms are developed
for grayscale images. It is not trivial to extend them for
color image denoising since the noise statistics in R, G, and
B channels can be very different for real noisy images. In
this paper, we propose a multi-channel (MC) optimization
model for real color image denoising under the weighted
nuclear norm minimization (WNNM) framework. We concatenate the RGB patches to make use of the channel redundancy, and introduce a weight matrix to balance the data
fidelity of the three channels in consideration of their different noise statistics. The proposed MC-WNNM model does
not have an analytical solution. We reformulate it into a
linear equality-constrained problem and solve it via alternating direction method of multipliers. Each alternative updating step has a closed-form solution and the convergence
can be guaranteed. Experiments on both synthetic and real
noisy image datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed MC-WNNM over state-of-the-art denoising methods.

When the input is a noisy RGB color image, there are
mainly three strategies for color image denoising. (1) The
first strategy is to apply the grayscale image denoising algorithm to each channel. However, such a straightforward solution will not exploit the spectral correlation among RGB
channels, and the denoising performance may not be very
satisfying. (2) The second strategy is to transform the RGB
image into a less correlated color space, such as YCbCr,
and perform denoising in each channel of the transformed
space [13, 14]. One representative work along this line is
the CBM3D algorithm [14]. However, the color transform
will complicate the noise distribution, and the correlation
among color channels is not fully exploited. (3) The third
strategy is to perform joint denoising on the RGB channels
simultaneously for better use of the spectral correlation. For
example, the patches from RGB channels are concatenated
as a long vector for processing [15, 16].

Image denoising is a classical yet fundamental problem
for image quality enhancement in computer vision and photography systems. Most of existing denoising algorithms
are designed for grayscale images, aiming to recover the
clean image x from its noisy observation y = x + n,
where n is generally assumed to be additive white Gaussian
noise (AWGN). State-of-the-art image denoising methods
include sparse representation [1], dictionary learning [2],
low-rank approximation [3], non-local self-similarity (NSS)
[4] based methods, and the combination of those techniques
[1–3, 5–8]. Recently, some discriminative denoising meth-

Though joint denoising of RGB channels is a more
promising way for color image denoising, it is not a trivial extension from single channel (grayscale image) to multiple channels (color image). The noise in standard RGB
(sRGB) space can be approximately modeled as AWGN,
but it has different variances for different channels [17–19]
due to the sensor characteristics and on-board processing
steps in digital camera pipelines [19, 20]. This makes the
real color image denoising problem much more complex. If
the three channels are treated equally in the joint denoising
process, false colors or artifacts can be generated [15]. How
to account for the different noise characteristics in color
channels, and how to effectively exploit the within and cross
channel correlation are the key issues for designing a good
color image denoising method.

∗ This work is supported by HK RGC GRF grant (PolyU 5313/13E) and
China NSFC grant (no. 61672446).

This paper presents a new color image denoising algorithm. Considering that the weighted nuclear norm mini-

1. Introduction

11096

