MemNet: A Persistent Memory Network for Image Restoration
Ying Tai∗ 1 , Jian Yang1 , Xiaoming Liu2 , and Chunyan Xu1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University
{taiying, csjyang, cyx}@njust.edu.cn, liuxm@cse.msu.edu

Abstract
(a) Plain structure

Recently, very deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have been attracting considerable attention in image restoration. However, as the depth grows, the longterm dependency problem is rarely realized for these very
deep models, which results in the prior states/layers having little influence on the subsequent ones. Motivated by
the fact that human thoughts have persistency, we propose a very deep persistent memory network (MemNet)
that introduces a memory block, consisting of a recursive unit and a gate unit, to explicitly mine persistent
memory through an adaptive learning process. The recursive unit learns multi-level representations of the current state under different receptive fields. The representations and the outputs from the previous memory blocks
are concatenated and sent to the gate unit, which adaptively controls how much of the previous states should be
reserved, and decides how much of the current state should
be stored. We apply MemNet to three image restoration
tasks, i.e., image denosing, super-resolution and JPEG deblocking. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the necessity of the MemNet and its unanimous superiority on all
three tasks over the state of the arts. Code is available
at https://github.com/tyshiwo/MemNet.

1. Introduction
Image restoration [29] is a classical problem in low-level
computer vision, which estimates an uncorrupted image
from a noisy or blurry one. A corrupted low-quality image
x can be represented as: x = D(x̃) + n, where x̃ is a highquality version of x, D is the degradation function and n is
∗ This work was supported by the National Science Fund of China under Grant Nos. 91420201, 61472187, 61502235, 61233011, 61373063
and 61602244, the 973 Program No. 2014CB349303, Program for
Changjiang Scholars, and partially sponsored by CCF-Tencent Open Research Fund. Jian Yang and Xiaoming Liu are corresponding authors.

(b) Skip connections

Gate Unit
Recursive Unit

(c) Proposed memory block

Figure 1. Prior network structures (a,b) and our memory block (c).
The blue circles denote a recursive unit with an unfolded structure
which generates the short-term memory. The green arrow denotes
the long-term memory from the previous memory blocks that is
directly passed to the gate unit.

the additive noise. With this mathematical model, extensive
studies are conducted on many image restoration tasks, e.g.,
image denoising [2, 5, 9, 37], single-image super-resolution
(SISR) [15, 38] and JPEG deblocking [18, 26].
As three classical image restoration tasks, image denoising aims to recover a clean image from a noisy observation, which commonly assumes additive white Gaussian noise with a standard deviation σ; single-image superresolution recovers a high-resolution (HR) image from a
low-resolution (LR) image; and JPEG deblocking removes
the blocking artifact caused by JPEG compression [7].
Recently, due to the powerful learning ability, very deep
convolutional neural network (CNN) is widely used to
tackle the image restoration tasks. Kim et al. construct a
20-layer CNN structure named VDSR for SISR [20], and
adopts residual learning to ease training difficulty. To control the parameter number of very deep models, the authors
further introduce a recursive layer and propose a DeeplyRecursive Convolutional Network (DRCN) [21]. To mitegate training difficulty, Mao et al. [27] introduce symmetric
skip connections into a 30-layer convolutional auto-encoder

4539

