Extreme clicking for efficient object annotation
Dim P. Papadopoulos1

Jasper R. R. Uijlings2

dim.papadopoulos@ed.ac.uk
1

Frank Keller1

jrru@google.com

keller@inf.ed.ac.uk
2

University of Edinburgh

Vittorio Ferrari1,2
vferrari@inf.ed.ac.uk

Google Research

Abstract
Manually annotating object bounding boxes is central
to building computer vision datasets, and it is very time
consuming (annotating ILSVRC [53] took 35s for one highquality box [62]). It involves clicking on imaginary corners
of a tight box around the object. This is difficult as these
corners are often outside the actual object and several adjustments are required to obtain a tight box. We propose
extreme clicking instead: we ask the annotator to click on
four physical points on the object: the top, bottom, left- and
right-most points. This task is more natural and these points
are easy to find. We crowd-source extreme point annotations
for PASCAL VOC 2007 and 2012 and show that (1) annotation time is only 7s per box, 5× faster than the traditional
way of drawing boxes [62]; (2) the quality of the boxes is
as good as the original ground-truth drawn the traditional
way; (3) detectors trained on our annotations are as accurate as those trained on the original ground-truth. Moreover, our extreme clicking strategy not only yields box coordinates, but also four accurate boundary points. We show
(4) how to incorporate them into GrabCut to obtain more
accurate segmentations than those delivered when initializing it from bounding boxes; (5) semantic segmentations
models trained on these segmentations outperform those
trained on segmentations derived from bounding boxes.

1. Introduction
Drawing the bounding boxes traditionally used for object
detection is very expensive. The PASCAL VOC bounding
boxes were obtained by organizing an “annotation party”
where expert annotators were gathered in one place to create high quality annotations [21]. But crowdsourcing is essential for creating larger datasets: Su et al. [62] developed
an efficient protocol to annotate high-quality boxes using
Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT). They report 39% efficiency gains over consensus-based approaches (which collect multiple annotations to ensure quality) [13, 60]. However, even this efficient protocol requires 35s to annotate
one box (more details in Sec. 2).

Submit
(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Annotating an instance of motorbike: (a) The conventional way of drawing a bounding box. (b) Our proposed extreme
clicking scheme.

Why does it take so long to draw a bounding box? Fig 1a
shows the typical process [12, 21, 32, 54, 61, 62]. First
the annotator clicks on a corner of an imaginary rectangle
tightly enclosing the object (say the bottom-right corner).
This is challenging, as these corners are typically not on
the object. Hence the annotator needs to find the relevant
extreme points of the object (the bottom point and the rightmost point) and adjust the x- and y-coordinates of the corner
to match them. After this, the annotator clicks and drags the
mouse to the diagonally opposite corner. This involves the
same process of x- and y-adjustment, but now based on a
visible rectangle. After the rectangle is adjusted, the annotator clicks again. He/she can make further adjustments by
clicking on the sides of the rectangle and dragging them until the box is tight on the object. Finally, the annotator clicks
a “submit” button.
From a cognitive perspective, the above process is suboptimal. The three steps (clicking on the first corner, dragging to the second corner, adjusting the sides) effectively
constitute three distinct tasks. Each task requires attention
to different parts of the object and using the mouse differently. In effect, the annotator is constantly task-switching, a
process that is cognitively demanding and is correlated with
increased response times and errors rates [45, 52]. Further14930

