Encoder Based Lifelong Learning
Amal Rannen∗ Rahaf Aljundi∗

Matthew B. Blaschko Tinne Tuytelaars
KU Leuven
KU Leuven, ESAT-PSI, IMEC, Belgium
firstname.lastname@esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract
This paper introduces a new lifelong learning solution
where a single model is trained for a sequence of tasks. The
main challenge that vision systems face in this context is
catastrophic forgetting: as they tend to adapt to the most
recently seen task, they lose performance on the tasks that
were learned previously. Our method aims at preserving the
knowledge of the previous tasks while learning a new one
by using autoencoders. For each task, an under-complete
autoencoder is learned, capturing the features that are crucial for its achievement. When a new task is presented to the
system, we prevent the reconstructions of the features with
these autoencoders from changing, which has the effect of
preserving the information on which the previous tasks are
mainly relying. At the same time, the features are given
space to adjust to the most recent environment as only their
projection into a low dimension submanifold is controlled.
The proposed system is evaluated on image classification
tasks and shows a reduction of forgetting over the state-ofthe-art.

1. Introduction
Intelligent agents are able to perform remarkably well
on individual tasks. However, when exposed to a new task
or a new environment, such agents have to be retrained. In
this process, they learn the specificity of the new task but
tend to loose performance on the tasks they have learned
before. For instance, imagine an agent that was trained to
localize the defects on a set of factory products. Then, when
new products are introduced and the agent has to learn to
detect the anomalies in these new products, it faces the risk
of forgetting the initial recognition task. This phenomenon
is known as catastrophic forgetting [16, 21, 15, 7, 10]. It
occurs when the datasets or the tasks are presented to the
model separately and sequentially, as is the case in a lifelong
learning setup [25, 26, 24].
∗ Authors with equal contribution

The main challenge is to make the learned model adapt
to new data from a similar or a different environment [19],
without losing knowledge on the previously seen task(s).
Most of the classical solutions for this challenge suffer from
important drawbacks. Feature extraction (as in [5]), where
the model / representation learned for the old task is re-used
to extract features from the new data without adapting the
model parameters, is highly conservative for the old task
and suboptimal for the new one. Fine-tuning (as in [8]),
adapts the model to the new task using the optimal parameters of the old task as initialization. As a result, the model
is driven towards the newly seen data but forgets what was
learned previously. Joint training (as in [4]) is a method
where the model is trained jointly on previous and current
tasks data. This solution converges to the best compromise
between ta, but requires the presence of all the data at the
same time. Such a requirement can be hard to meet, especially in the era of big data.
To overcome these drawbacks without the constraint of
storing data from the previously seen tasks, two main approaches can be found in the literature. The first, presented
in [14], proposes a way to train convolutional networks,
where a shared model is used for the different tasks but with
separate classification layers. When a new task is presented,
a new classification layer is added. Then, the model is finetuned on the data of the new task, with an additional loss
that incorporates the knowledge of the old tasks. This loss
tries to keep the previous task predictions on the new data
unchanged. Such a solution reduces the forgetting but is
heavily relying on the new task data. As a consequence, it
suffers from a build-up of errors when facing a sequence
of tasks [1]. The work presented recently in [12] tackles
the problem in a different way. Rather than having a dataoriented analysis, they consider the knowledge gained in
the model itself, and transfer it from one task to another
in a Bayesian update fashion. The method relies on approximating the weight distribution after training the model on
the new task. A Gaussian distribution, for which the mean is
given by the optimal weights for the first task, and the variance given by the diagonal of the Fisher information matrix

1320

