Attention-Based Multimodal Fusion for Video Description
Chiori Hori
Bret Harsham

Takaaki Hori
John R. Hershey

Teng-Yok Lee
Tim K. Marks

Ziming Zhang
Kazuhiko Sumi∗

Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL)
{chori, thori, tlee, zzhang, harsham, hershey, tmarks}@merl.com,

Abstract
Current methods for video description are based on
encoder-decoder sentence generation using recurrent neural networks (RNNs). Recent work has demonstrated the
advantages of integrating temporal attention mechanisms
into these models, in which the decoder network predicts
each word in the description by selectively giving more
weight to encoded features from specific time frames. Such
methods typically use two different types of features: image features (from an object classification model), and motion features (from an action recognition model), combined
by naı̈ve concatenation in the model input. Because different feature modalities may carry task-relevant information at different times, fusing them by naı̈ve concatenation may limit the model’s ability to dynamically determine
the relevance of each type of feature to different parts of
the description. In this paper, we incorporate audio features in addition to the image and motion features. To fuse
these three modalities, we introduce a multimodal attention model that can selectively utilize features from different
modalities for each word in the output description. Combining our new multimodal attention model with standard
temporal attention outperforms state-of-the-art methods on
two standard datasets: YouTube2Text and MSR-VTT.

1. Introduction
Automatic video description, also known as video captioning, refers to the automatic generation of a natural language description, such as a sentence that summarizes an
input video. Video description has widespread applications
including video retrieval, automatic description of home
movies or online uploaded video clips, and video descriptions for the visually impaired. Moreover, developing systems that can describe videos may help us to elucidate some
key components of general machine intelligence.
Recent work in video description has demonstrated the ad∗ On sabbatical from Aoyama Gakuin University.

sumi@it.aoyama.ac.jp

vantages of integrating temporal attention mechanisms into
encoder-decoder neural networks, in which the decoder network predicts each word in the description by selectively
giving more weight to encoded features from different times
in the video. Typically, two different types of features are
used: image features (learned from an object classification
task), and motion features (learned from an action recognition task). These are combined by naı̈ve concatenation in
the input to the video description model. Because different feature modalities may carry task-relevant information
at different times, fusing them by naı̈ve concatenation may
limit the model’s ability to dynamically determine the relevance of each type of feature to different parts of the description. In this paper, we expand the feature set to include
the audio modality, in addition to the image and motion features.
In this work, we propose a new use of attention: to fuse information across different modalities. Here we use modality
loosely to refer to different types of features derived from
the video, such as appearance, motion, or depth, as well as
features from different sensors such as video and audio features. Different modalities of input may be important for
selecting each word in the description. For example, the
description “A boy is standing on a hill” refers to objects
and their relations. In contrast, “A boy is jumping on a hill”
may rely on motion features to determine the action. “A boy
is listening to airplanes flying overhead” may require audio
features to recognize the airplanes, if they do not appear
in the video. Not only do the relevant modalities change
from sentence to sentence, but also from word to word, as
we move from action words that describe motion to nouns
that define object types. Attention to the appropriate modalities, as a function of the context, may help with choosing
the right words for the video description. Often features
from different modalities can be complementary, in that either can provide reliable cues at different times for some
aspect of a scene. Multimodal fusion is thus an important
longstanding strategy for robustness. However, optimally
combining information requires estimating the reliability of
each modality, which remains a challenging problem.
14193

