Following Gaze in Video
Adrià Recasens

Carl Vondrick
Aditya Khosla Antonio Torralba
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{recasens, vondrick, khosla, torralba}@csail.mit.edu

Gaze score

b) 0.8
0.5

a)

c)

0

-20

-10

0

10

20

Frames

d)

Figure 1: a) What is Tom Hanks looking at? When we watch a movie, understanding what a character is paying attention to
requires reasoning about multiple views. Many times, the character will be looking at something that fall outside the frame,
just like in (a), and detecting what object the character is looking at can not be addressed by previous saliency and gaze
following models. Solving this problem requires analyzing gaze, making use of semantic knowledge about the typical 3D
relationships between different views, and recognizing the objects that are the common targets of attention, just like we do
when watching a movie. Here we study the problem of gaze following in video where the object attended by a character
might appear only on a separate frame. Given a video (b) around the frame containing the character (t = 0) our system
selects the frames likely to contain the object attended by the selected character (c) and produces the output shown in (d).
This figure shows an actual result from our system.

Abstract
Following the gaze of people inside videos is an important signal for understanding people and their actions. In
this paper, we present an approach for following gaze in
video by predicting where a person (in the video) is looking even when the object is in a different frame. We collect
VideoGaze, a new dataset which we use as a benchmark to
both train and evaluate models. Given one frame with a
person in it, our model estimates a density for gaze location
in every frame and the probability that the person is looking in that particular frame. A key aspect of our approach
is an end-to-end model that jointly estimates: saliency, gaze
pose, and geometric relationships between views while only
using gaze as supervision. Visualizations suggest that the
model learns to internally solve these intermediate tasks
automatically without additional supervision. Experiments
show that our approach follows gaze in video better than
existing approaches, enabling a richer understanding of human activities in video.

1. Introduction
Can you tell where Tom Hanks (in Fig. 1(a)) is looking?
You might observe that there is not enough information in

the frame to predict the location of his gaze. However, if we
search the neighboring frames of the given video (shown
in Fig. 1(b)), we can identify he is looking at the woman
(illustrated in Fig. 1(d)). In this paper, we introduce the
problem of gaze following in video. Specifically, given a
video frame with a person, and a set of neighboring frames
from the same video, our goal is to identify which of the
neighboring frames (if any) contain the object being looked
at, and the location on that object that is being gazed upon.
Importantly, we observe that this task requires both a
semantic and geometric understanding of the video. For
example, semantic understanding is required to identify
frames that are from the same scene (e.g., indoor and
outdoor frames are unlikely to be from the same scene)
while geometric understanding is required to localize exactly where the person is looking in a novel frame using the
head pose and geometric relationship between the frames.
Based on this observation, we propose a novel convolutional neural network based model that combines semantic
and geometric understanding of frames to follow an individual’s gaze in a video. Despite encapsulating the structure of
the problem, our model requires minimal supervision and
produces an interpretable representation of the problem.
In order to train and evaluate our model, we collect

1435

