Inferring and Executing Programs for Visual Reasoning
Justin Johnson1
Judy Hoffman1
1

Bharath Hariharan2
Laurens van der Maaten2
Li Fei-Fei1
C. Lawrence Zitnick2
Ross Girshick2
2

Stanford University

Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Existing methods for visual reasoning attempt to directly
map inputs to outputs using black-box architectures without
explicitly modeling the underlying reasoning processes. As
a result, these black-box models often learn to exploit biases
in the data rather than learning to perform visual reasoning. Inspired by module networks, this paper proposes a
model for visual reasoning that consists of a program generator that constructs an explicit representation of the reasoning process to be performed, and an execution engine
that executes the resulting program to produce an answer.
Both the program generator and the execution engine are
implemented by neural networks, and are trained using a
combination of backpropagation and REINFORCE. Using
the CLEVR benchmark for visual reasoning, we show that
our model significantly outperforms strong baselines and
generalizes better in a variety of settings.

How many chairs are at the table?

Is there a pedestrian in my lane?

Is the person with the blue hat
touching the bike in the back?

Is there a matte cube that has the
same size as the red metal object?

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Compositional reasoning is a critical component needed
for understanding the complex visual scenes encountered in applications such as robotic navigation, autonomous driving, and
surveillance. Current models fail to do such reasoning [19].

In many applications, computer-vision systems need to
answer sophisticated queries by reasoning about the visual
world (Figure 1). To deal with novel object interactions or
object-attribute combinations, visual reasoning needs to be
compositional: without ever having seen a “person touching
a bike”, the model should be able to understand the phrase
by putting together its understanding of “person”, “bike”
and “touching”. Such compositional reasoning is a hallmark of human intelligence, and allows people to solve a
plethora of problems using a limited set of basic skills [27].
In contrast, modern approaches to visual recognition
learn a mapping directly from inputs to outputs; they do
not explicitly formulate and execute compositional plans.
Direct input-output mapping works well for classifying images [25] and detecting objects [10] for a small, fixed set of
categories. However, it fails to outperform strong baselines
on tasks that require the model to understand an exponentially large space of objects, attributes, actions, and interactions, such as visual question answering (VQA) [3, 50].
Instead, models that learn direct input-output mappings tend

to learn dataset biases but not reasoning [7, 18, 19].
In this paper, we argue that to successfully perform complex reasoning tasks, it might be necessary to explicitly incorporate compositional reasoning in the model structure.
Specifically, we investigate a new model for visual question answering that consists of two parts: a program generator and an execution engine. The program generator reads
the question and produces a plan or program for answering the question by composing functions from a function
dictionary. The execution engine implements each function using a small neural module, and executes the resulting
module network on the image to produce an answer. Both
the program generator and the modules in the execution engine are neural networks with generic architectures; they
can be trained separately when ground-truth programs are
available, or jointly in an end-to-end fashion.
Our model builds on prior work on neural module networks that incorporate compositional reasoning [1, 2]. Prior
module networks do not generalize well to new problems,
because they rely on a hand-tuned program generator based
12989

