Temporal Tessellation: A Unified Approach for Video Analysis
Dotan Kaufman1 , Gil Levi1 , Tal Hassner2,3 , and Lior Wolf1,4
1

The Blavatnik School of Computer Science , Tel Aviv University, Israel
2
Information Sciences Institute , USC , CA, USA
3
The Open University of Israel, Israel
4
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
We present a general approach to video understanding,
inspired by semantic transfer techniques that have been successfully used for 2D image analysis. Our method considers a video to be a 1D sequence of clips, each one associated with its own semantics. The nature of these semantics – natural language captions or other labels – depends on the task at hand. A test video is processed by
forming correspondences between its clips and the clips of
reference videos with known semantics, following which,
reference semantics can be transferred to the test video.
We describe two matching methods, both designed to ensure that (a) reference clips appear similar to test clips and
(b), taken together, the semantics of the selected reference
clips is consistent and maintains temporal coherence. We
use our method for video captioning on the LSMDC’16
benchmark, video summarization on the SumMe and TVSum benchmarks, Temporal Action Detection on the Thumos2014 benchmark, and sound prediction on the Greatest
Hits benchmark. Our method not only surpasses the state
of the art, in four out of five benchmarks, but importantly, it
is the only single method we know of that was successfully
applied to such a diverse range of tasks.

1. Introduction
Despite decades of research, video understanding still
challenges computer vision. The reasons for this are many,
and include the hurdles of collecting, labeling and processing video data, which is typically much larger yet less abundant than images. Another reason is the inherent ambiguity
of actions in videos which often defy attempts to attach dichotomic labels to video sequences [26]
Rather than attempting to assign videos with single action labels (in the same way that 2D images are assigned
object classes in, say, the ImageNet collection [47]) an increasing number of efforts focus on other representations

Figure 1. Tessellation for temporal coherence. For video captioning, given a query video (top), we seek reference video clips
with similar semantics. Our tessellation ensures that the semantics
assigned to the test clip are not only the most relevant (the five
options for each clip) but also preserve temporal coherence (green
path). Ground truth captions are provided in blue.

for the semantics of videos. One popular approach assigns videos with natural language text annotations which
describe the events taking place in the video [4, 44]. Systems are then designed to automatically predict these annotations. Others attach video sequences with numeric values
indicating what parts of the video are more interesting or
important [13]. Machine vision is then expected to determine the importance of each part of the video and summarize videos by keeping only their most important parts.
Although impressive progress was made on these and
other video understanding problems, this progress was often
made disjointedly: separate specialized systems were utilized that were tailored to obtain state of the art performance
on different video understanding problems. Still lacking is
a unified general approach to solving these different tasks.
Our approach is inspired by recent 2D dense correspondence estimation methods (e.g., [16, 34]). These methods
were successfully shown to solve a variety of image understanding problems by transferring per-pixel semantics
from reference images to query images. This general ap-

94

