Learning Cooperative Visual Dialog Agents with Deep Reinforcement Learning
1

Abhishek Das1 *, Satwik Kottur2 *, José M.F. Moura2 , Stefan Lee3 , Dhruv Batra1,4
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 Carnegie Mellon University, 3 Virginia Tech, 4 Facebook AI Research
visualdialog.org

Abstract
We introduce the first goal-driven training for visual question answering and dialog agents. Specifically, we pose a
cooperative ‘image guessing’ game between two agents –
Q- BOT and A- BOT– who communicate in natural language
dialog so that Q- BOT can select an unseen image from a
lineup of images. We use deep reinforcement learning (RL)
to learn the policies of these agents end-to-end – from pixels
to multi-agent multi-round dialog to game reward.
We demonstrate two experimental results.
First, as a ‘sanity check’ demonstration of pure RL (from
scratch), we show results on a synthetic world, where the
agents communicate in ungrounded vocabularies, i.e., symbols with no pre-specified meanings (X, Y, Z). We find that
two bots invent their own communication protocol and
start using certain symbols to ask/answer about certain visual attributes (shape/color/style). Thus, we demonstrate
the emergence of grounded language and communication
among ‘visual’ dialog agents with no human supervision.
Second, we conduct large-scale real-image experiments on
the VisDial dataset [5], where we pretrain on dialog data
with supervised learning (SL) and show that the RL finetuned agents significantly outperform supervised pretraining. Interestingly, the RL Q- BOT learns to ask questions
that A- BOT is good at, ultimately resulting in more informative dialog and a better team.

1. Introduction
The focus of this paper is visually-grounded conversational
artificial intelligence (AI). Specifically, we would like to develop agents that can ‘see’ (i.e., understand the contents of
an image) and ‘communicate’ that understanding in natural language (i.e., hold a dialog involving questions and answers about that image). We believe the next generation of
intelligent systems will need to posses this ability to hold
a dialog about visual content for a variety of applications:
e.g., helping visually impaired users understand their surroundings [3] or social media content [40] (‘Who is in the
photo? Dave. What is he doing?’), enabling analysts to
sift through large quantities of surveillance data (‘Did any* The first two authors (AD, SK) contributed equally.

Two zebra are walking around their pen at the zoo.

Q1: Any people in the shot?
[0.1, -1, 0.2, … , 0.5]

A1: No, there aren’t any.

Q10: Are they facing each other?
[-0.5, 0.1, 0.7, … , 1]

A10: They aren’t.

I think we were talking about this image!

Figure 1: We propose a cooperative image guessing game between
two agents – Q- BOT and A- BOT– who communicate through a
natural language dialog so that Q- BOT can select a particular unseen image from a lineup. We model these agents as deep neural
networks and train them end-to-end with reinforcement learning.

one enter the vault in the last month? Yes, there are 103
recorded instances. Did any of them pick something up?’),
and enabling users to interact naturally with intelligent assistants (either embodied as a robot or not) (‘Did I leave my
phone on my desk? Yes, it’s here. Did I miss any calls?’).
Despite rapid progress at the intersection of vision and language, in particular, in image/video captioning [4, 14, 36–
38, 41] and question answering [2, 25, 28, 34, 35], it is clear
we are far from this grand goal of a visual dialog agent.
Two recent works [5, 6] have proposed studying this task
of visually-grounded dialog. Perhaps somewhat counterintuitively, both these works treat dialog as a static supervised learning problem, rather than the interactive agent
learning problem that it naturally is. Specifically, both
works [5, 6] first collect a dataset of human-human dialog, i.e., a sequence of question-answer pairs about an image (q1 , a1 ), . . . , (qT , aT ). Next, a machine (a deep neural network) is provided with the image I, the human dialog recorded till round t − 1, (q1 , a1 ), . . . , (qt−1 , at−1 ), the
follow-up question qt , and is supervised to generate the hu12951

