Temporal Dynamic Graph LSTM for Action-driven Video Object Detection
Yuan Yuan1 Xiaodan Liang2 Xiaolong Wang2 Dit-Yan Yeung1 Abhinav Gupta2
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Carneige Mellon University
yyuanad@ust.hk, xiaodan1@cs.cmu.edu, xiaolonw@cs.cmu.edu, dyyeung@cse.ust.hk, abhinavg@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate a weakly-supervised object detection framework. Most existing frameworks focus
on using static images to learn object detectors. However,
these detectors often fail to generalize to videos because of
the existing domain shift. Therefore, we investigate learning
these detectors directly from boring videos of daily activities. Instead of using bounding boxes, we explore the use of
action descriptions as supervision since they are relatively
easy to gather. A common issue, however, is that objects
of interest that are not involved in human actions are often absent in global action descriptions known as “missing
label”. To tackle this problem, we propose a novel temporal dynamic graph Long Short-Term Memory network (TDGraph LSTM). TD-Graph LSTM enables global temporal
reasoning by constructing a dynamic graph that is based
on temporal correlations of object proposals and spans the
entire video. The missing label issue for each individual
frame can thus be significantly alleviated by transferring
knowledge across correlated objects proposals in the whole
video. Extensive evaluations on a large-scale daily-life action dataset (i.e., Charades) demonstrates the superiority of
our proposed method. We also release object bounding-box
annotations for more than 5,000 frames in Charades. We
believe this annotated data can also benefit other research
on video-based object recognition in the future.

1. Introduction
With the recent success of data-driven approaches in
recognition, there has been a growing interest in scaling
up object detection systems [38]. However, unlike classification, exhaustively annotating object instances with
diverse classes and bounding boxes is hardly scalable.
Therefore, there has been a surge in exploring in unsupervised and weakly-supervised approaches for object detection. However, fully unsupervised approaches [30, 17]
without any annotations currently give considerably inferior
performance on similar tasks, while conventional weaklysupervised methods [2, 16, 42] use static images to learn

the detectors. These object detectors, however, fail to generalize to videos due to shift in domain. One alternative is
to use these weakly-supervised approaches but using video
frames themselves. However, current approaches rely heavily on the accuracy of image-level labels and are vulnerable
to missing labels (as shown in Figure 1). Can we design a
learning framework that is robust to these missing labels ?
In this paper, we explore a novel slightly-supervised
video object detection pipeline that uses human action labels as supervision for object detection. As illustrated in
Figure 1, the coarse human action labels spanning multiple frames (e.g., watching a laptop or sitting in a chair)
help indicate the presence of participating object instances
(e.g., laptop and chair). Compared to prior works, our investigated setting has two major merits: 1) the textual action descriptions for videos are much cheaper to collect,
e.g., through text tags, search queries and action recognition datasets [32, 10, 36]; and 2) the intrinsic temporal coherence in video domain provides more cues to facilitate the
recognition of each object instance and help overcome the
missing label problem.
Action-driven supervision for object detection is much
more challenging since it can only access object labels for
some specific frames, while a considerable number of uninvolved object labels are unknown. As shown in the right
column of Figure 1, four action categories are labeled for
different periods in the given video. In each period, the action label (e.g., tidying a shelf ) only points out the shelf
category and misses the rest of the categories such as laptop, table, chair and refrigerator. On the other hand, the
missed categories (e.g., laptop) may appear in other labeled
actions in the same video. Inspired by this observation, we
propose to alleviate the missing label issue by exploiting the
rich temporal correlations of object instances in the video.
The core idea is that action labels in a different period may
help to infer the presence of some objects in this current period. Specifically, a novel temporal dynamic graph LSTM
(TD-Graph LSTM) framework is introduced to model the
complex and dynamic temporal graph structure for object
proposals in the whole video and thus enable the joint reasoning for all frames. The knowledge of all action labels in
11801

