Monocular Video-Based Trailer Coupler Detection using Multiplexer
Convolutional Neural Network
Yousef Atoum1 , Joseph Roth1 , Michael Bliss2 , Wende Zhang2 and Xiaoming Liu1
1
Michigan State University
2
General Motors
1

{atoumyou, rothjos1, liuxm}@msu.edu, 2 {michael.j.bliss, wende.zhang}@gm.com

Abstract

Our system

Vehicle control system

DCNN

This paper presents an automated monocular-camerabased computer vision system for autonomous self-backingup a vehicle towards a trailer, by continuously estimating
the 3D trailer coupler position and feeding it to the vehicle
control system, until the alignment of the tow hitch with the
trailers coupler. This system is made possible through our
proposed distance-driven Multiplexer-CNN method, which
selects the most suitable CNN using the estimated couplerto-vehicle distance. The input of the multiplexer is a group
made of a CNN detector, trackers, and 3D localizer. In the
CNN detector, we propose a novel algorithm to provide a
presence confidence score with each detection. The score
reflects the existence of the target object in a region, as well
as how accurate is the 2D target detection. We demonstrate
the accuracy and efficiency of the system on a large trailer
database. Our system achieves an estimation error of 1.4
cm when the ball reaches the coupler, while running at 18.9
FPS on a regular PC.

1. Introduction
Trailers range in size from small utility and boat trailers
to large box trailers or recreation vehicle (RV) trailers. RV
trailers alone had a revenue of five billion dollars in 2015 [9]
and are estimated to exceed 381 thousand units sold in the
United States in 2016 [22].
To hitch with a vehicle, trailers have a coupler at the front
that is placed over a ball connected to the vehicle at the
rear. Small, lightweight trailers may be manually moved
into place. However, for heavy trailers, the vehicle must be
driven backwards to connect to the stationary trailer. Traditionally, a second person, called a spotter, stands outside the
vehicle to instruct the driver. Even with rear-view cameras
on modern vehicles, the task is difficult and tedious due to
the small size of the coupler on the screen. An automated
system can take the place of the spotter and allow a single
person to connect to a trailer with ease.

TCNN1
TCNN2

5×1
Multiplexer

Detect trailer coupler

Detect/Track
coupler

Estimated
3D location

TCNN3
CCNN

Select

Distance estimation

Figure 1: Automatic trailer hitching by detecting and tracking the
coupler using a Multiplexer-CNN.

Engineers have developed numerous advanced vehicle
systems providing security and comfort for drivers, e.g.,
emergency breaking, blind spot assist, lane recognition, and
active park assist. Current systems for trailers only provide
assistance after they are hitched to a vehicle, such as maneuvering in narrow spaces [15], preventing large articulation
angles [21], and avoiding oscillation at high speeds [8]. To
the best of our knowledge, no other automated system exists for backing-up towards a trailer. This paper presents an
automated computer vision system using a single rear-view
camera to hitch the vehicle to a trailer, as in Fig. 1.
There are three main challenges or sources of visual variation: position, trailer, and environment. Position refers to
the pose and scale of the trailer. The trailer varies in type,
shape, color, and size of the trailer and coupler. The environment affects the background of the scene through asphalt, dirt, grass, or snow and the lighting from sun, clouds,
or nighttime. Furthermore, there are strong performance requirements needed to successfully hitch the trailer. When
hitching, the coupler 2D estimation should have an error
less than the radius of the ball, e.g., 2.2 cm for a standard
ball. And the efficiency should exceed 10 FPS.
Assuming the driver parks the vehicle with the trailer
in the field of view of the camera, this work presents a
Multiplexer-CNN based system to automatically detect and
track the trailer’s coupler and continuously provide 3D coordinates to control a vehicle, while relying solely on a
monocular rear-view fish-eye camera. Specifically, the goal
of our system is to estimate both the 2D location in pixels

5477

