Predictor Combination at Test Time
Kwang In Kim
University of Bath

James Tompkin
Brown University

Abstract
We present an algorithm for test-time combination of a set
of reference predictors with unknown parametric forms. Existing multi-task and transfer learning algorithms focus on
training-time transfer and combination, where the parametric forms of predictors are known and shared. However, when
the parametric form of a predictor is unknown, e.g., for a
human predictor or a predictor in a precompiled library,
existing algorithms are not applicable. Instead, we empirically evaluate predictors on sampled data points to measure
distances between different predictors. This embeds the set
of reference predictors into a Riemannian manifold, upon
which we perform manifold denoising to obtain the refined
predictor. This allows our approach to make no assumptions
about the underlying predictor forms. Our test-time combination algorithm equals or outperforms existing multi-task
and transfer learning algorithms on challenging real-world
datasets, without introducing specific model assumptions.

1. Introduction
When a single predictor is insufficient for a task, we can
refine it based on a set of reference predictors with the same
input domain. Recent advances in multi-task and transfer
learning have shown this by exploiting dependencies across
multiple related tasks. These approaches estimate and selectively strengthen pairwise similarities between different
predictors. Most work on these problems focuses on the
predictor training phase, where known parametric representations allow similarities to be measured and enforced (w.r.t.
a Euclidean metric). However, these assumptions make it
impossible to exploit dependencies between multiple predictors with different representations, such as support vector machines defined on different input feature spaces, or predictors
based on precomplied libraries, or even predictors without
any explicit functional form, such as human predictors.
We call this problem predictor combination: refining
a given predictor using a set of reference predictors with
unknown form. In this scenario, there is no guarantee that
all reference predictors are even relevant to the given task.
We present an algorithm to exploit only the relevant
predictors by automatically estimating their dependencies at
test time. Unlike prior techniques which assume known (and
possibly shared) predictor parametric forms, we assume no

Christian Richardt
University of Bath

known parametric form or even a shared parameter space.
We posit that reference predictors lie on an underlying
manifold M , and that our initial predictor f is a noisy observation of an underlying predictor t on M . We model points
(or predictors) on this manifold as non-parametric Gaussian
processes (GPs). Then, the similarity between two predictors
is obtained as the KL-divergence between their corresponding GPs. This renders M as a Riemannian manifold with the
Fisher information metric. Refining the predictor of interest—
combining it with our reference predictors—is then manifold
denoising: we refine the original noisy predictor through a
diffusion process on the reference predictor manifold.
The manifold assumption has been successfully applied
to multi-task learning [1, 11, 21]. However, the crucial
difference is that we do not use any explicit parametrization,
which facilitates combining multiple heterogeneous
predictors. Since the distances between different predictors
are measured in KL-divergences, it is inherently adaptive
to the data generating distributions as similarities between
predictors are stressed more in high-density regions. In contrast, in classical parametric models, once the parameters are
constructed, the distances between them are agnostic to data
distributions. Further, if prediction confidences are available,
our GP model provides a natural way to exploit them.
As our problem is to combine multiple existing predictors
of unknown form at test time, our approach is categorically
different to existing multi-task and transfer learning algorithms. To enable comparison, we conduct experiments in
which the parametric forms are explicitly provided to these
existing algorithms, but not to our approach. We compare on
challenging datasets including human body shape and pose
estimation, as well as on multi-task regression benchmark
datasets. In this setting, the performance of our approach
is comparable to or outperforms existing techniques, even
though we make no assumptions about the predictors’
parametric forms—even that a parametric form exists at all.

2. Related work
Our algorithm aims to refine a predictor f based on a set
{hi } of fixed reference predictors at test time; no knowledge
of f or {hi } is assumed. This could be regarded as an
instance of multi-task learning (MTL), in which all tasks are
learned simultaneously (assuming f = h1 ∈ {hi }). However,
our problem differs in that we focus on refining one predictor
given the reference predictors. It could also be regarded

3553

