Unmasking the abnormal events in video
Radu Tudor Ionescu1,2 , Sorina Smeureanu1,2 , Bogdan Alexe1,2 , Marius Popescu1,2
1
University of Bucharest, 14 Academiei, Bucharest, Romania
2
SecurifAI, 24 Mircea Vodă, Bucharest, Romania
Abstract
We propose a novel framework for abnormal event detection in video that requires no training sequences. Our
framework is based on unmasking, a technique previously
used for authorship verification in text documents, which
we adapt to our task. We iteratively train a binary classifier to distinguish between two consecutive video sequences
while removing at each step the most discriminant features.
Higher training accuracy rates of the intermediately obtained classifiers represent abnormal events. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first work to apply unmasking for a computer vision task. We compare our method
with several state-of-the-art supervised and unsupervised
methods on four benchmark data sets. The empirical results
indicate that our abnormal event detection framework can
achieve state-of-the-art results, while running in real-time
at 20 frames per second.

1. Introduction
Abnormal event detection in video is a challenging task
in computer vision, as the definition of what an abnormal
event looks like depends very much on the context. For instance, a car driving by on the street is regarded as a normal
event, but if the car enters a pedestrian area, this is regarded
as an abnormal event. A person running on a sports court
(normal event) versus running outside from a bank (abnormal event) is another example. Although what is considered
abnormal depends on the context, we can generally agree
that abnormal events should be unexpected events [10] that
occur less often than familiar (normal) events. As it is generally impossible to find a sufficiently representative set of
anomalies, the use of traditional supervised learning methods is usually ruled out. Hence, most abnormal event detection approaches [2, 4, 11, 14, 15, 16, 17, 26, 28] learn
a model of familiarity from a given training video and label events as abnormal if they deviate from the model. In
this paper, we consider an even more challenging setting,
in which no additional training sequences are available [6].
As in this setting we cannot build a model in advance and
find deviations from it, our approach is completely unsupervised, as we briefly explain next. Our method labels

Figure 1. Our anomaly detection framework based on unmasking [12]. The steps are processed in sequential order from (A)
to (H). Best viewed in color.

a short-lasting event as abnormal if the amount of change
from the immediately preceding event is substantially large.
We quantify the change as the training accuracy of a linear
classifier applied on a sliding window that comprises both
the preceding and the currently examined event, as illustrated in Figure 1. We consider that the first half of the
window frames are labeled as normal and take them as reference. We suppose the second half are labeled as abnormal, but we seek to find if this hypothesis is indeed true.
We extract both motion and appearance features from the
frames, and train a binary classifier with high regulariza-

2895

