AnnArbor: Approximate Nearest Neighbors Using Arborescence Coding
Artem Babenko
Yandex, Moscow
National Research University
Higher School of Economics, Moscow

Victor Lempitsky
Skolkovo Insitute of Science and Technology
(Skoltech), Moscow
lempitsky@skoltech.ru

artem.babenko@phystech.edu

Abstract
To compress large datasets of high-dimensional descriptors, modern quantization schemes learn multiple codebooks and then represent individual descriptors as combinations of codewords. Once the codebooks are learned,
these schemes encode descriptors independently. In contrast to that, we present a new coding scheme that arranges
dataset descriptors into a set of arborescence graphs, and
then encodes non-root descriptors by quantizing their displacements with respect to their parent nodes. By optimizing the structure of arborescences, our coding scheme can
decrease the quantization error considerably, while incurring only minimal overhead on the memory footprint and
the speed of nearest neighbor search in the compressed
dataset compared to the independent quantization. The advantage of the proposed scheme is demonstrated in a series
of experiments with datasets of SIFT and deep descriptors.

1. Introduction
Visual search and other computer vision applications are
routinely dealing with million or billion-scale datasets of
visual descriptors corresponding to images and/or image
parts. Lossy compression of such descriptor datasets that
reduce their memory footprint and increase the search speed
have therefore become an active area of research. Currently,
approaches based on (non-binary) quantizations [14, 12, 18,
3, 22, 5] achieve the best compression error-compression
ratio trade-off, while also permitting efficient computation
of scalar products and squared distances between uncompressed queries and compressed descriptor sets using lookup tables. For million-scale datasets, the look-up tables allow fast exhaustive search that scans through entire datasets
in a matter of milliseconds.
Existing quantization approaches represent dataset descriptors as combinations of codeword vectors that come
from different codebooks. The codebooks are invariably

adapted to the dataset (or its hold-out part) through the optimization process, so that statistical regularities of the descriptor distribution can be exploited for better coding accuracy. Importantly, once the codebooks have been learned,
existing quantization schemes apply independent coding to
each of the dataset descriptors.
In this work, we propose the approach that brings further improvement in terms of coding accuracy on top of
the existing descriptor coding techniques, while incurring
small memory and search time overheads. The improvement comes as we consider joint coding of descriptors in
the dataset that goes beyond codebook learning. Our approach (arborescence coding) avoids direct coding of the
majority of the dataset vectors, and instead focuses on coding relative displacements between nearby vectors. A similar idea underlies predictive coding [11], however arborescences coding goes beyond predictive coding by selecting
sets of parent-children pairs that are most suitable for predictive quantization.
The main idea of our approach is simple (Figure 1).
During coding, the optimization process splits the dataset
into a set of arborescence graphs (i.e. directed trees), with
individual descriptors being the vertices of those arborescences. For each arborescence, the topology (structure), the
absolute position of the root, and the relative displacements
along the arcs are encoded and stored using quantization
techniques. When computing the scalar product with the
query vector, the scalar product between the query and the
root vector is computed first, and the scalar products with
other vectors are computed in a breadth-first manner. Such
breadth-first scan process can then benefit from the standard look-up table tricks used by quantization methods [14]
thanks to the additivity of the scalar product. Arborescence
coding therefore does not incur significant reductions in
search speed compared to the base quantization algorithm.
Crucially, arborescence coding makes the topology (including the number) of the arborescences part of the optimization process during the encoding of the dataset. In
the process of optimization, individual descriptors are free
14885

