Anchored Regression Networks applied to Age Estimation and Super Resolution
Eirikur Agustsson
D-ITET, ETH Zurich
Switzerland

Radu Timofte
D-ITET, ETH Zurich
Merantix GmbH

Luc Van Gool
D-ITET, ETH Zurich
ESAT, KU Leuven

aeirikur@vision.ee.ethz.ch

timofter@vision.ee.ethz.ch

vangool@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract

1. Introduction
Image regression is relevant for many applications, such
as biometric prediction [9, 30], image super-resolution [43,
40], bounding box regression [10, 12], facial landmark localization [19], depth estimation [24, 34], and more. The
common denominator for these supervised learning tasks is
that the input is an image and the output is a single- or multidimensional vector.
In contrast to image classification, where multinomial
logistic regression is the dominant strategy for deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [21, 35, 37, 28], in
general still a wide array of regression methods are deployed, without a clear winner. Some cast the task into
classification [30], employ linear regression at the last
layer [12, 35, 25], or apply an array of methods on top of
the features extracted from a classification network. Each
of these strategies has serious drawbacks: a standard linear regression layer often underfits the data [30]; casting
to classification requires manually defining the classes; and
working with extracted features (e.g. using SVR [1]) impedes end-to-end learning.
Motivated by the above issues, we propose Anchored Re-

softmax

We propose the Anchored Regression Network (ARN), a
nonlinear regression network which can be seamlessly integrated into various networks or can be used stand-alone
when the features have already been fixed. Our ARN is a
smoothed relaxation of a piecewise linear regressor through
the combination of multiple linear regressors over soft assignments to anchor points. When the anchor points are
fixed the optimal ARN regressors can be obtained with a
closed form global solution, otherwise ARN admits end-toend learning with standard gradient based methods. We
demonstrate the power of the ARN by applying it to two very
diverse and challenging tasks: age prediction from face images and image super-resolution. In both cases, ARNs yield
strong results.

soft assignment

similarity

input

regressors

soft combination

output

Figure 1. Our proposed ARN architecture. When an input
point x is fed through the network, it is soft-assigned to the anchors c1 , · · · , cm w.r.t. a similarity s. For each anchor ci , there
is a corresponding regressor (Wi , bi ) which the input is also fed
to, which are then linearly combined over the soft assignments,
forming the output f˜s (x).

gression Networks (ARN), a novel regression architecture
suitable for various regression tasks. The network, depicted
in Figure 1, is easy to implement, can be seamlessly integrated into various deep or shallow networks or directly
used with fixed feature representations such as handcrafted
features or representations extracted from pretrained CNN
architectures.
The design of our ARN is based on the assumption that
the underlying features (such as raw data, handcrafted or
deep features) can linearize the regression problem within
local regions, such that a piecewise linear approximation
of the mapping is feasible. By ‘softly’ partitioning the input
space w.r.t. a set of anchor points, each having a corresponding linear regressor, our ARN can learn such an approximation. We show that an ARN can be learned globally w.r.t.
fixed anchors via a closed form solution, and also end-toend learned by standard gradient based methods as a layer
in a shallow or deep architecture.
We validate the proposed ARN for single and multivalue regression on two very different and challenging
tasks, namely age prediction from face images and single
image super-resolution. Our experiments show that the corresponding ARNs improve the baseline or state-of-the-art
methods and this with minimal modification.
11643

