Progressive Large Scale-Invariant Image Matching In Scale Space
Lei Zhou

Siyu Zhu

Tianwei Shen

Jinglu Wang

lzhouai@cse.ust.hk

szhu@cse.ust.hk

tshenaa@cse.ust.hk

jwangae@cse.ust.hk

Tian Fang*

Long Quan

tianft@cse.ust.hk

quan@cse.ust.hk

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

The power of modern image matching approaches is still
fundamentally limited by the abrupt scale changes in images. In this paper, we propose a scale-invariant image
matching approach to tackling the very large scale variation
of views. Drawing inspiration from the scale space theory,
we start with encoding the image’s scale space into a compact multi-scale representation. Then, rather than trying
to find the exact feature matches all in one step, we propose a progressive two-stage approach. First, we determine
the related scale levels in scale space, enclosing the inlier
feature correspondences, based on an optimal and exhaustive matching in a limited scale space. Second, we produce
both the image similarity measurement and feature correspondences simultaneously after restricting matching between the related scale levels in a robust way. The matching
performance has been intensively evaluated on vision tasks
including image retrieval, feature matching and Structurefrom-Motion (SfM). The successful integration of the challenging fusion of high aerial and low ground-level views
with significant scale differences manifests the superiority
of the proposed approach.

Distance

Abstract

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
1/256 1/64

1/16

1/4

1

4

16

64
256
Scale ratio

Figure 1: The top row visualizes the SIFT matches found by our
approach between images holding scale ratio around 55. The black
dots in below chart represent 69640 putative matches, characterized by feature scale ratio and descriptor distance. The yellow
squares denotes the false positive correspondences found by modern SIFT match strategies [23, 46, 43, 9]. Conversely, our approach first determines the related scale levels in scale space that
enclose the feature correspondences. Then image matching is restricted between the related scale levels. The red box encloses the
90 feature pairs existing between related scale levels, including 20
inlier correspondences found eventually denoted by red triangles.

1. Introduction
The past few years have witnessed the growing application of image-based 3D reconstruction due to the convenience of image capturing, the progress of scalable reconstruction algorithms [8, 52, 50, 17, 11, 12, 18, 33] and the
advance of 3D toolkit [45, 44, 48]. As the first yet nontrivial
step of standard SfM pipeline [1, 10, 39, 52], image matching generally first selects similar image pairs from unstructured image sets, then establishes exact feature correspondences between selected pairs for accurate camera registra* Tian Fang is with Shenzhen Zhuke Innovation Technology since 2017.

tion and structure recovery. However, modern matching approaches would get trapped when handling large differences
of view scales, e.g., the fusion case of street-to-aerial urban
reconstruction [38, 4].
The difficulties can be summarized in two aspects. On
one hand, devising scale-invariant similarity metric to identify whether two images share visual overlap is hard. On the
other hand, establishing exact feature correspondences albeit scale variations is harder. Concretely, image matching
across large scale differences has to include small-scale features to establish correspondences. However, overwhelm-

2362

