Aesthetic Critiques Generation for Photos
Kuang-Yu Chang∗, Kung-Hung Lu∗ , and Chu-Song Chen
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
{kuangyu, henrylu, song} @iis.sinica.edu.tw
Abstract
It is said that a picture is worth a thousand words. Thus,
there are various ways to describe an image, especially in
aesthetic quality analysis. Although aesthetic quality assessment has generated a great deal of interest in the last
decade, most studies focus on providing a quality rating of
good or bad for an image. In this work, we extend the task
to produce captions related to photo aesthetics and/or photography skills. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first study that deals with aesthetics captioning instead of
AQ scoring. In contrast to common image captioning tasks
that depict the objects or their relations in a picture, our approach can select a particular aesthetics aspect and generate captions with respect to the aspect chosen. Meanwhile,
the proposed aspect-fusion method further uses an attention
mechanism to generate more abundant aesthetics captions.
We also introduce a new dataset for aesthetics captioning called the Photo Critique Captioning Dataset (PCCD),
which contains pair-wise image-comment data from professional photographers. The results of experiments on PCCD
demonstrate that our approaches outperform existing methods for generating aesthetic-oriented captions for images.

1. Introduction
Aesthetic computing has long been an important topic in
the field of computer vision. In this paper, we consider the
problem of image captioning from the aesthetic viewpoint.
There are many studies on caption generation [11, 9, 12,
22, 2, 21, 8, 32, 9, 20]; however, most of them focus on
producing a single caption that depicts the objects or the
relative positions of the objects in a picture.
In this paper, we study a new problem, namely, aesthetic
analysis of photos. Aesthetic quality (AQ) assessment has
generated a great deal of interest in the last decade. Many
studies tackled this problem with various feature representations and/or learning architectures [19, 14, 17, 16, 24].
∗ indicates equal contribution.

Photo Critique Captioning: racing makes for
interesting pictures because of the speed
the movement the bright colors
Image Captioning: a man riding a motorcycle
down a street

Figure 1: Photo critique captioning versus image captioning

However, the purpose of AQ assessment is to provide a binary decision, which yields a quality rating of good or bad
for a specific photo. In this paper, we address a more general problem, namely, captioning of photo aesthetics and/or
photography skills. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first study that considers the problem, which covers a
broader range of applications than AQ assessment only. Besides AQ, our system analyzes the reasons why photos are
(or are not) appealing in some respect, so that a meaningful caption can be generated for a photo from an aesthetic
perspective. Figure 1 shows the difference between photo
aesthetics captioning and common image captioning.
Figure 2 provides more examples of captions produced
by our system. In Figure 2(a), the space reserved on the
right-hand side of the photo needs to be refined; in Figure 2(b), the vanishing point and lines are good and admired; and in Figure 2(c), the subjects gaze creates further
space that enhances the AQ. With the captions provided, the
topic addressed in this paper suggests a better applicability.
Besides the simple assessment of AQ, it is possible to provide in-depth descriptions and comments, which are informative and can improve the photographic skills of users.
13514

