Recursive Spatial Transformer (ReST) for Alignment-Free Face Recognition
Wanglong Wu1,2
Meina Kan1,3
Xin Liu1,2
Yi Yang4
Shiguang Shan1,3
Xilin Chen1
1
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
4
Huawei Technologies Co.,Ltd., Beijing 100085, China
{wanglong.wu,meina.kan,xin.liu,shiguang.shan,xilin.chen}@vipl.ict.ac.cn

yangyi16@huawei.com

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) has led to significant progress in face recognition. Currently most CNNbased face recognition methods follow a two-step pipeline,
i.e. a detected face is first aligned to a canonical one predefined by a mean face shape, and then it is fed into a
CNN to extract features for recognition. The alignment step
transforms all faces to the same shape, which can cause
loss of geometrical information which is helpful in distinguishing different subjects. Moreover, it is hard to define
a single optimal shape for the following recognition, since
faces have large diversity in facial features, e.g. poses, illumination, etc. To be free from the above problems with an
independent alignment step, we introduce a Recursive Spatial Transformer (ReST) module into CNN, allowing face
alignment to be jointly learned with face recognition in an
end-to-end fashion. The designed ReST has an intrinsic recursive structure and is capable of progressively aligning
faces to a canonical one, even those with large variations.
To model non-rigid transformation, multiple ReST modules
are organized in a hierarchical structure to account for different parts of faces. Overall, the proposed ReST can handle large face variations and non-rigid transformation, and
is end-to-end learnable and adaptive to input, making it an
effective alignment-free face recognition solution. Extensive experiments are performed on LFW and YTF datasets,
and the proposed ReST outperforms those two-step methods, demonstrating its effectiveness.

1. Introduction
Face recognition is one of the most important applications of computer vision. The task is to recognize or identify
a given subject based on the face appearance. As with many
other vision tasks, face recognition has benefited from the

Figure 1. Conventional face recognition pipeline

powerful deep learning models, particularly Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN), and has met prominent boost of
recognition accuracy [16, 14, 17]. Though equipped with
new models, most CNN-based face recognition approaches
still follow the conventional recognition pipeline. As illustrated in Fig.1, given an input image, face detection is first
performed to obtain the bounding box of each face. Then
the detected faces are aligned to a canonical one for more
robust feature extraction, and finally the aligned faces are
used to recognize the subjects.
In the step of face alignment, detected faces are transformed to a canonical one according to the affine relationships between their facial landmarks and a pre-defined
mean shape. Since inferring the affine transformation is
trivial, the main task of alignment is to predict the position of facial landmarks (i.e. face shape) with the face
appearance as input. Typical face alignment methods include Active Shape Model (ASM), Active Appearance
Model (AAM), which employ Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to build statistical models of face shape and appearance. More recently, there have been methods exploiting deep neural networks to model the regression from face
appearance to face shape [15, 23], and they can achieve high
prediction accuracy even in the presence of large variations
due to pose, expression, etc.
Taking aligned faces as input, many approaches have
been designed for face recognition. Previous works mainly
employ hand-crafted features, e.g. Gabor [11] and Local
Binary Patterns (LBP) [1], and linear models, as in the classic Eigenfaces [19] and Fisherfaces [2]. In recent research,
deep learning methods have shown great superiority over
13772

