How far are we from solving the 2D & 3D Face Alignment problem? (and a
dataset of 230,000 3D facial landmarks)
Adrian Bulat and Georgios Tzimiropoulos
Computer Vision Laboratory, The University of Nottingham
Nottingham, United Kingdom
{adrian.bulat, yorgos.tzimiropoulos}@nottingham.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper investigates how far a very deep neural network is from attaining close to saturating performance on
existing 2D and 3D face alignment datasets. To this end,
we make the following 5 contributions: (a) we construct,
for the first time, a very strong baseline by combining a
state-of-the-art architecture for landmark localization with
a state-of-the-art residual block, train it on a very large yet
synthetically expanded 2D facial landmark dataset and finally evaluate it on all other 2D facial landmark datasets.
(b) We create a guided by 2D landmarks network which converts 2D landmark annotations to 3D and unifies all existing datasets, leading to the creation of LS3D-W, the largest
and most challenging 3D facial landmark dataset to date
(~230,000 images). (c) Following that, we train a neural
network for 3D face alignment and evaluate it on the newly
introduced LS3D-W. (d) We further look into the effect of all
“traditional” factors affecting face alignment performance
like large pose, initialization and resolution, and introduce
a “new” one, namely the size of the network. (e) We show
that both 2D and 3D face alignment networks achieve performance of remarkable accuracy which is probably close
to saturating the datasets used. Training and testing code
as well as the dataset can be downloaded from https:
//www.adrianbulat.com/face-alignment/

1. Introduction
With the advent of Deep Learning and the development
of large annotated datasets, recent work has shown results
of unprecedented accuracy even on the most challenging
computer vision tasks. In this work, we focus on landmark localization, in particular, on facial landmark localization, also known as face alignment, arguably one of the
most heavily researched topics in computer vision over the
last decades. Very recent work on landmark localization
using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) has pushed

the boundaries in other domains like human pose estimation
[39, 38, 24, 17, 27, 42, 23, 5], yet it remains unclear what
has been achieved so far for the case of face alignment. The
aim of this work is to address this gap in literature.
Historically, different techniques have been used for
landmark localization depending on the task in hand. For
example, work in human pose estimation, prior to the advent of neural networks, was primarily based on pictorial structures [12] and sophisticated extensions [44, 25,
36, 32, 26] due to their ability to model large appearance changes and accommodate a wide spectrum of human
poses. Such methods though have not been shown capable of achieving the high degree of accuracy exhibited by
cascaded regression methods for the task of face alignment
[11, 8, 43, 50, 41]. On the other hand, the performance
of cascaded regression methods is known to deteriorate for
cases of inaccurate initialisation, and large (and unfamiliar) facial poses when there is a significant number of selfoccluded landmarks or large in-plane rotations.
More recently, fully Convolutional Neural Network architectures based on heatmap regression have revolutionized human pose estimation [39, 38, 24, 17, 27, 42, 23, 5]
producing results of remarkable accuracy even for the most
challenging datasets [1]. Thanks to their end-to-end training
and little need for hand engineering, such methods can be
readily applied to the problem of face alignment. Following this path, our main contribution is to construct and train
such a powerful network for face alignment and investigate
for the first time how far it is from attaining close to saturating performance on all existing 2D face alignment datasets
and a newly introduced large scale 3D dataset. More specifically, our contributions are:
1. We construct, for the first time, a very strong baseline
by combining a state-of-the-art architecture for landmark localization with a state-of-the-art residual block
and train it on a very large yet synthetically expanded
2D facial landmark dataset. Then, we evaluate it on all
other 2D datasets (~230,000 images), investigating how
11021

