Learning Video Object Segmentation with Visual Memory
Pavel Tokmakov

Karteek Alahari

Cordelia Schmid

Inria∗
Abstract
This paper addresses the task of segmenting moving
objects in unconstrained videos. We introduce a novel
two-stream neural network with an explicit memory module to achieve this. The two streams of the network encode spatial and temporal features in a video sequence respectively, while the memory module captures the evolution of objects over time. The module to build a “visual
memory” in video, i.e., a joint representation of all the
video frames, is realized with a convolutional recurrent unit
learned from a small number of training video sequences.
Given a video frame as input, our approach assigns each
pixel an object or background label based on the learned
spatio-temporal features as well as the “visual memory”
specific to the video, acquired automatically without any
manually-annotated frames. The visual memory is implemented with convolutional gated recurrent units, which allows to propagate spatial information over time. We evaluate our method extensively on two benchmarks, DAVIS and
Freiburg-Berkeley motion segmentation datasets, and show
state-of-the-art results. For example, our approach outperforms the top method on the DAVIS dataset by nearly 6%.
We also provide an extensive ablative analysis to investigate
the influence of each component in the proposed framework.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation is the task of extracting
spatio-temporal regions that correspond to object(s) moving in at least one frame in the video sequence. The
top-performing methods for this problem [11, 31] continue
to rely on hand-crafted features and do not leverage a
learned video representation, despite the impressive results
achieved by convolutional neural networks (CNN) for other
vision tasks, e.g., image segmentation [35], object detection [36]. Very recently, there have been attempts to build
CNNs for video object segmentation [6, 23, 43]. They are
indeed the first to use deep learning methods for video segmentation, but suffer from various drawbacks. For example, [6, 23] rely on a manually-segmented subset of frames
(typically the first frame of the video sequence) to guide the
∗ Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000
Grenoble, France.

Figure 1. Sample results on the DAVIS dataset. Segmentations
produced by MP-Net [43] (left) and our approach (right), overlaid
on the video frame.

segmentation pipeline. Our previous work [43] relies solely
on optical flow between pairs of frames to segment independently moving objects in a video, making it susceptible
to errors in flow estimation. It also can not extract objects
if they stop moving. Furthermore, none of these methods
has a mechanism to memorize relevant features of objects
in a scene. In this paper, we propose a novel framework to
address these issues; see sample results in Figure 1.
We present a two-stream network with an explicit memory module for video object segmentation (see Figure 2).
The memory module is a convolutional gated recurrent unit
(GRU) that encodes the spatio-temporal evolution of object(s) in the input video sequence. This spatio-temporal
representation used in the memory module is extracted from
two streams—the appearance stream which describes static
features of objects in the video, and the temporal stream
which captures motion cues.
The appearance stream is the DeepLab network [7] pretrained on the PASCAL VOC segmentation dataset and operates on individual video frames. The temporal one is a
motion prediction network [43] pretrained on the synthetic
FlyingThings3D dataset and takes optical flow computed
from pairs of frames as input, as shown in Figure 2. The two
streams provide complementary cues for object segmentation. With these spatio-temporal CNN features in hand,
we train the convolutional GRU component of the framework to learn a visual memory representation of object(s)
in the scene. Given a frame t from the video sequence as

4481

