Learning to Disambiguate by Asking Discriminative Questions
Yining Li1
Chen Huang2
Xiaoou Tang1
Chen Change Loy1
1
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
{ly015, xtang, ccloy}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, chenh2@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
The ability to ask questions is a powerful tool to gather
information in order to learn about the world and resolve
ambiguities. In this paper, we explore a novel problem of
generating discriminative questions to help disambiguate
visual instances. Our work can be seen as a complement and new extension to the rich research studies on
image captioning and question answering. We introduce
the first large-scale dataset with over 10,000 carefully annotated images-question tuples to facilitate benchmarking.
In particular, each tuple consists of a pair of images and
4.6 discriminative questions (as positive samples) and 5.9
non-discriminative questions (as negative samples) on average. In addition, we present an effective method for visual discriminative question generation. The method can be
trained in a weakly supervised manner without discriminative images-question tuples but just existing visual question
answering datasets. Promising results are shown against
representative baselines through quantitative evaluations
and user studies.

1. Introduction
Imagine a natural language dialog between a computer
and a human (see Fig. 1):
Kid
: “What sport is the man playing?”.
Computer : “What is the color of his shirt?”
Kid
: “Blue.”
Computer : “He is playing tennis.”
In the conversation, the kid refers to an object but the description is linguistically underspecified. The computer analyzes the visual differences of plausible targets and then reacts by asking a discriminative question “What is the color
of his shirt?” to resolve the reference.
We define the aforementioned problem as Visual Discriminative Question Generation (VDQG). Specifically, the
computer is given with two visual instances, and the goal is
to ask a good question to distinguish or disambiguate them.
In this study, we call the pair images as ambiguous pairs

Good
Good
Bad
Bad

What color is the man’s shirt?
What sport is the man playing?
How many people are there?
Where is the man?

Figure 1: Example ambiguous image pair and both good
and bad discriminative questions.
– the ambiguity may not necessarily be due to their subtle
visual differences. They may just belong to the same object class with close proximity in their deep representation.
Although such ambiguity can be easily resolved by human,
they can be difficult to a machine. Distinguishing different image pairs require asking different types of questions,
ranging from color, action, location, and number. Akin to
the classic “Twenty Questions” game, a careful selection of
questions can greatly improve the odds of the questioner to
narrow down the answer. A bad question would fail to eliminate ambiguities. Figure 1 gives good and bad examples of
questions. This questioning capability can subsequently be
extended to generating a sequence of discriminative questions and prompting a human-in-the-loop to answer them.
In the process, the machine accumulates evidence that can
gradually refine the language expression from humans and
finally distinguish the object of interest.
Such VDQG ability allows a machine to play a more
natural and interactive role in Human-Computer Interaction
(HCI), or improve a robot to bind the references made by a
speaker more accurately to objects in a scene. While there
have been various attempts to build a system that can provide explanations [14] or ask questions [30, 33] based on
visual instances, the problem of VDQG has not been ex13419

