Camera Calibration by Global Constraints on the Motion of Silhouettes
Gil Ben-Artzi
Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot, Israel

Intel Labs
Santa Clara, CA, USA

Abstract
We address the problem of epipolar geometry using the
motion of silhouettes. Such methods match epipolar lines
or frontier points across views, which are then used as
the set of putative correspondences. We introduce an approach that improves by two orders of magnitude the performance over state-of-the-art methods, by significantly reducing the number of outliers in the putative matching. We
model the frontier points’ correspondence problem as constrained flow optimization, requiring small differences between their coordinates over consecutive frames. Our approach is formulated as a Linear Integer Program and we
show that due to the nature of our problem, it can be solved
efficiently in an iterative manner. Our method was validated
on four standard datasets providing accurate calibrations
across very different viewpoints.

1. Introduction
Multi-camera systems are becoming increasingly more
popular for 3D reconstruction, marker-less motion capture, surveillance, and even for ”smart homes”. Traditionally, epipolar geometry is computed by finding the corresponding points between cameras. However, in such a setting many camera pairs are from very different viewpoints
and consequently, not enough reliable feature points can be
matched automatically. In cases where the silhouettes of
the objects in the scene are available or are easily extracted,
it has been proposed to use their motion for calibration
[34]. These methods match tangent epipolar lines on the
convex hull of the silhouettes across views [33]. For each
frame, a similarity function for every possible matching of
the corresponding tangent epipolar lines is evaluated and
the pair with the highest similarity is selected as a putative
correspondence [7]. Recovering the corresponding tangent
epipolar lines induces matching between the projections of
special points, denoted as extremal frontier points, across
views where occlusions do not occur (see [19, 33, 12, 28]
for a detailed description). Hereafter, when referring to
frontier points, we will refer to the extremal 3D frontier

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The set of possible frontier points are denoted by
green circles. It is difficult to distinguish between true and false
frontier points because often the candidates are at nearby positions
and share the same tangents to the convex hull. (b) The trajectory
of the true frontier points over 15 consecutive frames. We look for
frontier points whose positions vary slowly over time.

points or to the image points that represent their projections.
The epipolar geometry is evaluated by using RANSAC [16]
with the putative list of matching epipolar lines or frontier
points.
A key limitation of previous approaches is the high number of outliers in the recovered list of corresponding epipolar lines or frontier points. This is mainly because two
nearby points on the convex hull might make only a minor
difference in their associated tangents. Here, we present
an approach that markedly reduces the number of outliers.
This leads to an improvement of two orders of magnitude in
the performance. Unlike previous approaches where the putative matching is carried out for each frame independently,
we require that the positions of frontier points in consecutive frames will vary slowly. Fig. 1.a shows a set of possible
frontier points in the image denoted by full green circles.
Since nearby points share similar tangents, it is hard to recover the true frontier points. Fig. 1.b shows the trajectories
of the true frontier points over 15 frames. By looking for
frontier points that vary slowly over time, we can accurately
recover their positions, up to sub-pixel accuracy.
We model the problem as a constrained flow optimization problem. At each time instant we look for two corresponding pairs of frontier points. This translates into finding two paths in the graph under a set of constraints. The
15334

