Group Re-Identification via
Unsupervised Transfer of Sparse Features Encoding
Giuseppe Lisanti∗,1 , Niki Martinel∗,2 , Alberto Del Bimbo1 and Gian Luca Foresti2
1
MICC - University of Firenze, Italy
2
AViReS Lab - University of Udine, Italy
giuseppe.lisanti@unifi.it, niki.martinel@uniud.it
alberto.delbimbo@unifi.it, gianluca.foresti@uniud.it

Abstract
Person re-identification is best known as the problem of
associating a single person that is observed from one or
more disjoint cameras. The existing literature has mainly
addressed such an issue, neglecting the fact that people
usually move in groups, like in crowded scenarios. We believe that the additional information carried by neighboring
individuals provides a relevant visual context that can be
exploited to obtain a more robust match of single persons
within the group. Despite this, re-identifying groups of people compound the common single person re-identification
problems by introducing changes in the relative position of
persons within the group and severe self-occlusions. In this
paper, we propose a solution for group re-identification that
grounds on transferring knowledge from single person reidentification to group re-identification by exploiting sparse
dictionary learning. First, a dictionary of sparse atoms
is learned using patches extracted from single person images. Then, the learned dictionary is exploited to obtain a
sparsity-driven residual group representation, which is finally matched to perform the re-identification. Extensive
experiments on the i-LIDS groups and two newly collected
datasets show that the proposed solution outperforms stateof-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification is the problem of associating a
single person that moves across disjoint camera views. The
open challenges like changes in viewing angle, background
∗ G. Lisanti and N. Martinel should be considered as joint first-authors.

This research was partially supported by the Social Museum and
Smart Tourism, MIUR project no. CTN01 00034 23154 SMST and by the
“PREscriptive Situational awareness for cooperative autoorganizing aerial
sensor NETworks” project CIG68827500FB.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Major group re-identification issues. Examples of: (a)
position swap between person in a group; (b) different background
between group images; (c) group images with partial occlusion.

clutter, and occlusions have recently yield to a surge of effort by the community [49]. In particular, existing works
have focused on seeking either the best feature representations (e.g., [31, 39, 29]) or propose to learn optimal matching metrics (e.g., [26, 30, 53]). Despite obtaining interesting
results on benchmark datasets (e.g., [13, 40, 61], such works
have generally neglected the fact that in crowded public environments people often walk in groups.
We believe that being able to associate the same group
of people can be a powerful tool to improve classic singleperson re-identification. Indeed, the appearance of the
whole group provides a rich visual context that can be extremely useful to reduce the ambiguity in retrieving those
persons that are partially occluded or to understand the behavior of the group over time if a person in the group is
missed for a certain period of time.
Group re-identification introduce some additional difficulties with respect to classic person re-identification
(see Figure 1). First of all, the focus is no longer on a single subject, hence the visual appearance of all the persons
in the group should be considered. The relative displacement of the subjects in a group can be different from camera to camera. Self-occlusions or occlusions generated by
other people near by, as well as the fact that an individual
in a group may be missing because he/she left the group,
bring in additional challenges. Such challenges deny the
direct application of existing representation descriptors and

2449

