Improved Image Captioning via Policy Gradient optimization of SPIDEr
Siqi Liu∗1 , Zhenhai Zhu2 , Ning Ye2 , Sergio Guadarrama2 , and Kevin Murphy2
{liusiqi,zhenhai,nye,sguada,kpmurphy}@google.com
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
2
Google

Abstract
Current image captioning methods are usually trained
via maximum likelihood estimation.
However, the
log-likelihood score of a caption does not correlate well
with human assessments of quality. Standard syntactic
evaluation metrics, such as BLEU, METEOR and ROUGE,
are also not well correlated. The newer SPICE and CIDEr
metrics are better correlated, but have traditionally been
hard to optimize for. In this paper, we show how to
use a policy gradient (PG) method to directly optimize a
linear combination of SPICE and CIDEr (a combination
we call SPIDEr): the SPICE score ensures our captions
are semantically faithful to the image, while CIDEr score
ensures our captions are syntactically fluent. The PG
method we propose improves on the prior MIXER approach,
by using Monte Carlo rollouts instead of mixing MLE
training with PG. We show empirically that our algorithm
leads to easier optimization and improved results compared
to MIXER. Finally, we show that using our PG method we
can optimize any of the metrics, including the proposed
SPIDEr metric which results in image captions that are
strongly preferred by human raters compared to captions
generated by the same model but trained to optimize MLE
or the COCO metrics.

1. Introduction
Image captioning is the task of describing the visual
content of an image using one or more sentences.
This has many applications, including text-based image
retrieval, accessibility for blind users [25], and human-robot
interaction [6].
Most methods for solving this task require training a
statistical model on a dataset of (image, caption) pairs. The
model is usually trained to maximize the log likelihood of
∗ Work done while interning at Google Research.

the training set. After training, these models are usually
evaluated by computing a variety of different metrics on
a test set, such as COCO [12]. Standard metrics from
the machine translation community include BLEU [14],
METEOR [3], and ROUGE [11]. More recently, the
CIDEr metric [20] was proposed, specifically for the image
captioning task. We shall call the combination of these four
metrics “BCMR”, for short. Unfortunately, none of these
metrics correlate strongly with human measures of caption
quality. In fact, humans score lower on these metrics than
the methods that won the COCO 2015 challenge, despite
the fact that humans are still much better at this task.
These results motivated Anderson et al. [1] to propose
the SPICE metric. Rather than directly comparing a
generated sentence to a set of reference sentences in terms
of syntactic agreement, SPICE first parses each of the
reference sentences, and then uses them to derive an abstract
scene graph representation. The generated sentence is then
also parsed, and compared to the graph; this allows for
a comparison of the semantic similarity, without paying
attention to syntactic factors (modulo the requirement
that the generated sentence be parseable). [1] showed
that SPICE is the only existing metric that has a strong
correlation with human ratings, and ranks human captions
above algorithms submitted to the COCO benchmark.
Given this result, it is natural to want to directly
optimize SPICE. However, this is tricky, since it is not
a differentiable objective. In this paper, we show that it
is possible to use policy gradient (PG) methods [17] to
optimize such objectives. The idea of using PG to optimize
non differentiable objectives for image captioning was first
proposed in the MIXER paper [15]. However, they only
used it to optimize BLEU-4, which is not correlated with
human quality. Furthermore, when we tried to use their
method to optimize other metrics, such as CIDEr or SPICE,
we got poor results, since their method (which involves
an intricate incremental schedule which mixes from MLE
training to full PG training) is not very robust and require

873

