Deep globally constrained MRFs for Human Pose Estimation
Ioannis Marras, Petar Palasek and Ioannis Patras
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, Queen Mary University of London, United Kingdom
{i.marras, p.palasek, i.patras}@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
This work introduces a novel Convolutional Network architecture (ConvNet) for the task of human pose estimation,
that is the localization of body joints in a single static image. We propose a coarse to fine architecture that addresses
shortcomings of the baseline architecture in [26] that stem
from the fact that large inaccuracies of its coarse ConvNet cannot be corrected by the refinement ConvNet that
refines the estimation within small windows of the coarse
prediction. We overcome this by introducing a Markov Random Field (MRF)-based spatial model network between the
coarse and the refinement model that introduces geometric
constraints on the relative locations of the body joints. We
propose an architecture in which a) the filters that implement the message passing in the MRF inference are factored in a way that constrains them by a low dimensional
pose manifold the projection to which is estimated by a separate branch of the proposed ConvNet and b) the strengths
of the pairwise joint constraints are modeled by weights
that are jointly estimated by the other parameters of the
network. The proposed network is trained in an end-toend fashion. Experimental results show that the proposed
method improves the baseline model and provides state of
the art results on very challenging benchmarks.

1. Introduction
The problem of human pose estimation in monocular
RGB images, that is the problem of precise localization of
important landmarks of the human body, has received substantial attention in the Computer Vision community. Due
to the availability of ever larger and more comprehensive
datasets [1, 15, 24] and to the success of Deep Learning architectures, especially ConvNets [7, 27, 14, 26], there has
been significant progress in this problem over the recent
years.
A central issue in human pose estimation, when seen as
a special case of a Machine Learning problem with structured outputs, is the enforcement of constraints between the
different outputs, that is the enforcement of geometric con-

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. The probability of the hip location given the head location on (a) Fashion Pose and (b) MPII databases.

straints on the relative locations of the body joints. This
is typically modeled at the later layers of a ConvNet. For
example, in [26] a MRF that models pairwise relations between different joints is encoded in a single CNN layer. In
such a network the filters ea|c encode the conditional probabilities of the location of joint a, given the location of another joint c. A major drawback with such an approach is
that a single filter is used to model all of the pairwise relations. This works well when applied to simpler datasets,
such as FashionPose, where there is little pose variation and
therefore the conditional probabilities have a few distinct
modes. However, for more complex datasets the conditionals become more uninformative as they attempt to model
pairwise relations under wide variety of poses - for example, the relative location of the head and the hip both in upright and in laying poses. This is evident in Figure 1, where
the probability of the hip location given the head is depicted
in Figure 1(a) for images of the FashionPose dataset and
in Figure 1(b) for images of the MPII benchmark. Other
works, such as [5] where the geometric constraints are implicitly modeled in the latest layers of the network, suffer
from similar shortcomings. For example, in [5] the last layers that incorporates intensity constraints, imposes pairwise
constraints encoded in a single filter (that is, one filter per
pair of joints).
In this paper, we present a three stage coarse-to-fine Convolutional Network architecture for the task of human pose
13466

