What Is Around The Camera?
Stamatios Georgoulis
KU Leuven
Mario Fritz
MPI for Informatics

Konstantinos Rematas
University of Washington
Tinne Tuytelaars
KU Leuven

Tobias Ritschel
University College London
Luc Van Gool
KU Leuven & ETH Zurich

Abstract
How much does a single image reveal about the environment it was taken in? In this paper, we investigate how
much of that information can be retrieved from a foreground
object, combined with the background (i.e. the visible part
of the environment). Assuming it is not perfectly diffuse, the
foreground object acts as a complexly shaped and far-fromperfect mirror. An additional challenge is that its appearance
confounds the light coming from the environment with the
unknown materials it is made of. We propose a learningbased approach to predict the environment from multiple reflectance maps that are computed from approximate surface
normals. The proposed method allows us to jointly model
the statistics of environments and material properties. We
train our system from synthesized training data, but demonstrate its applicability to real-world data. Interestingly, our
analysis shows that the information obtained from objects
made out of multiple materials often is complementary and
leads to better performance.

1. Introduction
Images are ubiquitous on the web. Users of social media
quite liberally contribute to this fast growing pool, but also
companies capture large amounts of imagery (e.g. street
views). Simultaneously, users have grown aware of the risks
involved, forcing companies to obfuscate certain aspects of
images, like faces and license plates.
We argue that such images contain more information than
people may expect. The reflection in a foreground object
combined with the background - the part of the environment
revealed directly by the image - can be quite telling about
the entire environment, i.e. also the part behind the photographer. Apart from privacy issues, several other applications
can be based on the extraction of such environment maps.
Examples include the relighting of the foreground object in
a modified environment, the elimination of the photographer
in the reflection by the foreground object, or figuring out that

Figure 1. Given approximate surface normals, our approach predicts a truthful reconstruction of the environment from a single low
dynamic range image of a (potentially multi-material) object.

a photo might have been nicely framed, but that the actual
surroundings may not be quite as attractive as one might
have been lead to believe (e.g. browsing through real estate).
By combining large amount of synthesized data and deep
learning techniques, we present an approach that utilizes
partial and ambiguous data encoded in surface reflectance in
order to reconstruct a truthful appearance of the surrounding
environment the image was taken in. While we assume a
rough scene geometry to be given, we do not make any strong
assumptions on the involved materials or the surrounding
environment. Yet, we obtain a high level of detail in terms
of color and structure of that environment. Beyond the new
level of reconstruction quality obtained by our method, we
show that our learned representations and final predictions
lend to a range of application scenarios. Experiments are
conducted on both synthetic and real images from the web.
Prior work on estimating the illuminating environment
has either focused on retrieving a template map from a
database (e.g. [18]) or recovering key elements to approximate it (e.g. [46]), but both directions are limited in terms of
the achievable fidelity. Equally, prior work on inverse rendering [27, 24, 23] has the potential to derive arbitrary maps
with radiometric accuracy, but to date are not able to do so
with accurate appearance. In this spirit, we seek a different
tradeoff. By not constraining our solution to be radiometrically accurate, we investigate how far we can push the

5170

