FoveaNet: Perspective-aware Urban Scene Parsing
Xin Li1,2 Zequn Jie3 Wei Wang4,2 Changsong Liu1 Jimei Yang5
Xiaohui Shen5 Zhe Lin5 Qiang Chen6 Shuicheng Yan2,6 Jiashi Feng2
1

Department of EE, Tsinghua University, 2 Department of ECE, National University of Singapore
3
Tencent AI Lab 4 University of Trento 5 Adobe Research 6 360 AI institute
{lixincn2015,zequn.nus}@gmail.com wei.wang@unitn.it lcs@ocrserv.ee.tsinghua.edu.cn
{jimyang,xshen,zlin}@adobe.com {chenqiang-iri,yanshuicheng}360.cn elefjia@nus.edu.cn

Abstract
Parsing urban scene images benefits many applications,
especially self-driving. Most of the current solutions employ
generic image parsing models that treat all scales and locations in the images equally and do not consider the geometry property of car-captured urban scene images. Thus, they
suffer from heterogeneous object scales caused by perspective projection of cameras on actual scenes and inevitably
encounter parsing failures on distant objects as well as
other boundary and recognition errors. In this work, we
propose a new FoveaNet model to fully exploit the perspective geometry of scene images and address the common failures of generic parsing models. FoveaNet estimates the perspective geometry of a scene image through a convolutional
network which integrates supportive evidence from contextual objects within the image. Based on the perspective geometry information, FoveaNet “undoes” the camera perspective projection — analyzing regions in the space of the
actual scene, and thus provides much more reliable parsing results. Furthermore, to effectively address the recognition errors, FoveaNet introduces a new dense CRFs model
that takes the perspective geometry as a prior potential. We
evaluate FoveaNet on two urban scene parsing datasets,
Cityspaces and CamVid, which demonstrates that FoveaNet
can outperform all the well-established baselines and provide new state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Urban scene parsing is a heated research topic that finds
application in many fields, especially self-driving. It aims
to predict the semantic category for each pixel within a
scene image captured by car mounted cameras, which enables self-driving cars to perform reasoning about both the
overall scene background and the individual objects moving
in front of the cars.
Recent progress in urban scene parsing is mostly driven
by the advance of deep learning. Deep convolutional neu-

Figure 1: Illustration of our motivation. Top two rows: a scene
image with perspective geometry and its two zoomed-in regions.
Bottom two rows: typical failures in urban scene parsing. Left:
“broken-down” error on objects of large scales (the bus). Right:
boundary errors on objects of small scales.

ral network (CNN) based parsing algorithms [25, 21] have
demonstrated remarkable performance on several semantic
parsing benchmarks [7, 5, 24]. However, directly applying the generic CNN based image parsing models usually
leads to unsatisfactory results on urban scene images for
self-driving cars, since they ignore the important perspective geometry of scene images.
As captured by ego-centric cameras, perspective projection from actual scenes to the image plane changes the object scales: a nearby car seems much bigger than a car far
away, even though they have the same scale in reality. The
top row in Figure 1 illustrates such a perspective geometry structure within a scene image. Generic parsing models
do not take such heterogeneous object scales into consideration. Consequently, they do not perform well on parsing
distant objects (of small scales), and boundary and recognition errors are introduced. See the parsing result marked
with the small box in Figure 1. In addition, objects that are
near to the camera and usually distributed within the pe-

784

