Convergence Analysis of MAP based Blur Kernel Estimation
Sunghyun Cho
DGIST

Seungyong Lee
POSTECH

scho@dgist.ac.kr

leesy@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
One popular approach for blind deconvolution is to formulate a maximum a posteriori (MAP) problem with sparsity priors on the gradients of the latent image, and then
alternatingly estimate the blur kernel and the latent image.
While several successful MAP based methods have been
proposed, there has been much controversy and confusion
about their convergence, because sparsity priors have been
shown to prefer blurry images to sharp natural images. In
this paper, we revisit this problem and provide an analysis
on the convergence of MAP based approaches. We first introduce a slight modification to a conventional joint energy
function for blind deconvolution. The reformulated energy
function yields the same alternating estimation process, but
more clearly reveals how blind deconvolution works. We
then show the energy function can actually favor the right
solution instead of the no-blur solution under certain conditions, which explains the success of previous MAP based
approaches. The reformulated energy function and our conditions for the convergence also provide a way to compare
the qualities of different blur kernels, and we demonstrate
its applicability to automatic blur kernel size selection, blur
kernel estimation using light streaks, and defocus estimation.

1. Introduction
Image blur due to camera shakes is an annoying artifact
that severely degrades image quality. Image blur is often
modeled as:
b = k ∗ l + n,

(1)

where b is an observed blurry image, k is a blur kernel, l
is a latent sharp image, n is noise, and ∗ is the convolution
operator. Blind deconvolution is a problem to estimate l
and k from a given blurry image b, which is severely illposed because the number of unknowns l and k exceeds the
number of observed data b.
One popular approach to blind deconvolution is to formulate the problem as a maximum a posteriori (MAP) prob-

lem with sparsity priors on the gradients of the latent image,
and then alternatingly estimate k and l [2, 18, 3, 1, 22, 23].
While several successful MAP based methods with sparsity
priors have been proposed, there has been much controversy
and confusion about its convergence. Fergus et al. [4], in
their seminal work, reported that they initially tried a MAP
based approach but failed, so adopted a variational Bayesian
(VB) approach. Levin et al. [11] claimed that MAP based
approaches with sparsity priors cannot converge to the right
solution because sparsity priors favor the no-blur solution,
i.e., k = δ, where δ is a dirac delta function, over the correct one. To resolve this convergence issue, Krishnan et
al. [8] introduced a normalized sparsity measure, which favors sharp edges over blurry ones. Xu et al. [23] claimed
that MAP based approaches with an unnaturally sparse image representation can converge to the right solution, and
presented a blind deconvolution framework based on an L0
norm based image prior. However, it is not clear whether
their successful results are due to either the optimization
process, the energy function, or some other factors.
This paper provides an analysis on the convergence of
MAP based approaches. Our analysis explicitly shows that
the success of MAP based approaches is due to their energy function favoring the right solution over the no-blur
one, and even a naı̈ve MAP based approach can converge to
the right solution under certain conditions. For the convergence analysis, we take the most direct approach. We directly compare the energies of different solutions to find out
which solution is favored by the energy function. We also
experimentally analyze conditions for convergence with a
large collection of images, and show that the conditions are
generally consistent among different images. Our analysis
results support the success of MAP based methods based on
extremely sparse image representations, such as [3, 23].
To this end, we first introduce a simple modification to a
typical joint energy function of l and k and derive an energy
function of k. Typical joint energy functions used in previous works involve two variables k and l, and this makes it
difficult to analyze the energy functions because all possible
combinations of k and l should be considered. Our modification alleviates this by removing one variable from the en14808

