Sampling Matters in Deep Embedding Learning
Chao-Yuan Wu∗
UT Austin

R. Manmatha
A9/Amazon

Alexander J. Smola
Amazon

Philipp Krähenbühl
UT Austin

cywu@cs.utexas.edu

manmatha@a9.com

smola@amazon.com

philkr@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Deep embeddings answer one simple question: How similar
are two images? Learning these embeddings is the bedrock
of verification, zero-shot learning, and visual search. The
most prominent approaches optimize a deep convolutional
network with a suitable loss function, such as contrastive
loss or triplet loss. While a rich line of work focuses solely
on the loss functions, we show in this paper that selecting
training examples plays an equally important role. We propose distance weighted sampling, which selects more informative and stable examples than traditional approaches. In
addition, we show that a simple margin based loss is sufficient to outperform all other loss functions. We evaluate
our approach on the Stanford Online Products, CAR196,
and the CUB200-2011 datasets for image retrieval and
clustering, and on the LFW dataset for face verification.
Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on all of
them.

1. Introduction
Models that transform images into rich, semantic representations lie at the heart of modern computer vision, with
applications ranging from zero-shot learning [5, 41] and visual search [3, 10, 22, 29], to face recognition [6, 23, 25, 28]
or fine-grained retrieval [22, 28, 29]. Deep networks trained
to respect pairwise relationships have emerged as the most
successful embedding models [4, 6, 25, 34].
The core idea of deep embedding learning is simple: pull
similar images closer in embedding space and push dissimilar images apart. For example, the contrastive loss [11]
forces all positives images to be close, while all negatives
should be separated by a certain fixed distance. However,
using the same fixed distance for all images can be quite
restrictive, discouraging any distortions in the embedding
space. This motivated the triplet loss, which only requires
negative images to be farther away than any positive images
on a per-example basis [25]. This triplet loss is currently
∗ Part of this work performed while interning at Amazon.

among the best-performing losses on standard embedding
tasks [22, 25, 45]. Unlike pairwise losses, the triplet loss
does not just change the loss function in isolation, it changes
the way positive and negative example are selected. This
provides us with two knobs to turn: the loss and the sampling strategy. See Figure 1 for an illustration.
In this paper, we show that sample selection in embedding learning plays an equal or more important role than
the loss. For example, different sampling strategies lead to
drastically different solutions for the same loss function. At
the same time many different loss functions perform similarly under a good sampling strategy: A contrastive loss
works almost as well as the triplet loss, if the two use the
same sampling strategy. In this paper, we analyze existing sampling strategies, and show why they work and why
not. We then propose a new sampling strategy, where samples are drawn uniformly according to their relative distance
from one another. This corrects the bias induced by the
geometry of embedding space, while at the same time ensuring any data point has a chance of being sampled. Our
proposed sampling leads to a lower variance of gradients,
and thus stabilizes training, resulting in a qualitatively better embedding irrespective of the loss function.
Loss functions obviously also matter. We propose a simple margin-based loss as an extension to the contrastive loss.
It only encourages all positive samples to be within a distance of each other rather than being as close as possible.
It relaxes the loss, making it more robust. In addition, by
using isotonic regression, our margin based loss focuses on
the relative orders instead of absolute distances.
Our margin based loss and distance weighted sampling
achieve state-of-the-art image retrieval and clustering performance on the Stanford Online Products, CARS196, and
the CUB200-2011 datasets. It also outperforms previous
state-of-the-art results on the LFW face verification dataset
[16] using standard publicly available training data. Both
our loss function and sampling strategy are easy to implement and efficient to train.

2840

