Compositional Human Pose Regression
Xiao Sun1 , Jiaxiang Shang1 , Shuang Liang2∗, Yichen Wei1
1
Microsoft Research, 2 Tongji University
{xias, yichenw}@microsoft.com, jiaxiang.shang@gmail.com, shuangliang@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
Regression based methods are not performing as well as
detection based methods for human pose estimation. A central problem is that the structural information in the pose
is not well exploited in the previous regression methods.
In this work, we propose a structure-aware regression approach. It adopts a reparameterized pose representation using bones instead of joints. It exploits the joint connection
structure to define a compositional loss function that encodes the long range interactions in the pose. It is simple,
effective, and general for both 2D and 3D pose estimation
in a unified setting. Comprehensive evaluation validates the
effectiveness of our approach. It significantly advances the
state-of-the-art on Human3.6M [20] and is competitive with
state-of-the-art results on MPII [3].

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation has been extensively studied for
both 3D [20] and 2D [3]. Recently, deep convolutional neutral networks (CNNs) have achieved significant progresses.
Existing approaches fall into two categories: detection
based and regression based. Detection based methods generate a likelihood heat map for each joint and locate the joint
as the point with the maximum value in the map. These heat
maps are usually noisy and multi-mode. The ambiguity is
reduced by exploiting the dependence between the joints in
various ways. A prevalent family of state-of-the-art methods [11, 6, 31, 5, 47, 18] adopt a multi-stage architecture,
where the output of the previous stage is used as input to
enhance the learning of the next stage. These methods are
dominant for 2D pose estimation [1]. However, they do not
easily generalize to 3D pose estimation, because the 3D heat
maps are too demanding for memory and computation.
Regression based methods directly map the input image
to the output joints. They directly target at the task and they
are general for both 3D and 2D pose estimation. Nevertheless, they are not performing as well as detection based
∗ Corresponding author.

methods. As an evidence, only one method [6] in the 2D
pose benchmark [1] is regression based. While they are
widely used for 3D pose estimation [54, 30, 28, 43, 24, 42,
33], the performance is not satisfactory. A central problem
is that they simply minimize the per-joint location errors independently but ignore the internal structures of the pose.
In other words, joint dependence is not well exploited.
In this work, we propose a structure-aware approach,
called compositional pose regression. It is based on two
ideas. First, it uses bones instead of joints as pose representation, because the bones are more primitive, more stable,
and easier to learn than joints. Second, it exploits the joint
connection structure to define a compositional loss function
that encodes long range interactions between the bones.
The approach is simple, effective and efficient. It only
re-parameterizes the pose representation, which is the network output, and enhances the loss function, which relates
the output to ground truth. It does not alter other algorithm
design choices and is compatible with such choices, such as
network architecture. It can be easily adapted into any existing regression approaches with little overhead for memory
and computation, in both training and inference.
The approach is general and can be used for both 3D and
2D pose regression, indistinguishably. Moreover, 2D and
3D data can be easily mixed simultaneously in the training.
For the first time, it is shown that such directly mixed learning is effective. This property makes our approach different
from all existing ones that target at either 3D or 2D task.
The effectiveness of our approach is validated by comprehensive evaluation with a few new metrics, rigorous ablation study and comparison with state-of-the-art on both
3D and 2D benchmarks. Specifically, it advances the stateof-the-art on 3D Human3.6M dataset [20] by a large margin
and achieves a record of 59.1 mm average joint error, about
12% relatively better that state-of-the-art. On 2D MPII
dataset [3, 1], it achieves 86.4% (PCKh 0.5). It is the bestperforming regression based method and on bar with the
state-of-the-art detection based methods. As a by-product,
our approach generates high quality 3D poses for in the wild
images, indicating the potential of our approach for transfer
learning of 3D pose estimation in the wild.
12602

