Areas of Attention for Image Captioning
Marco Pedersoli1

Thomas Lucas2
Cordelia Schmid2
Jakob Verbeek2
1
École de technologie supérieure, Montréal, Canada
2
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France
1

Marco.Pedersoli@etsmtl.ca

2

firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Abstract
We propose “Areas of Attention”, a novel attentionbased model for automatic image captioning. Our approach
models the dependencies between image regions, caption
words, and the state of an RNN language model, using three
pairwise interactions. In contrast to previous attentionbased approaches that associate image regions only to the
RNN state, our method allows a direct association between
caption words and image regions. During training these
associations are inferred from image-level captions, akin to
weakly-supervised object detector training. These associations help to improve captioning by localizing the corresponding regions during testing. We also propose and compare different ways of generating attention areas: CNN activation grids, object proposals, and spatial transformers
nets applied in a convolutional fashion. Spatial transformers give the best results. They allow for image specific attention areas, and can be trained jointly with the rest of the
network. Our attention mechanism and spatial transformer
attention areas together yield state-of-the-art results on the
MSCOCO dataset.

1. Introduction
Image captioning, i.e. automatically generating natural
language image descriptions, is useful for the visually impaired, and for natural language based image search. It
is significantly more challenging than classic vision tasks
such as object recognition and image classification for two
reasons. First, the structured output space of well formed
natural language sentences is significantly more challenging to predict over than just a set of class labels. Second,
this complex output space allows a finer interpretation of
the visual scene, and therefore also requires a more detailed
visual analysis of the scene to do well at this task. Figure 1(top) gives an example of a typical image description
that not only refers to objects in the scene, but also the scene

A man is flying a kite on a sandy beach.

activation grid

object proposals

spatial transformer

Figure 1. We propose an attention mechanism that jointly predicts
the next caption word and the corresponding region at each timestep given the RNN state (top). Besides implementing our model
using attention areas defined over CNN activation grids or object
proposals, as used in previous work, we also present a end-to-end
trainable convolutional spatial transformer approach to compute
image specific attention areas (bottom).

type or location, object properties, and their interactions.
Neural encoder-decoder based approaches, similar to
those used in machine translation [30], have been found
very effective for this task, see e.g. [19, 23, 32]. These
methods use a convolutional neural network (CNN) to encode the input image into a compact representation. A recurrent neural network (RNN) is used to decode this representation word-by-word into a natural language description
of the image. While effective, these models are limited in
that the image analysis is (i) static, i.e. does not change over
time as the description is produced, and (ii) not spatially localized, i.e. describes the scene as a whole instead of focousing on local aspects relevant to parts of the description.
Attention mechanisms can address these limitations by dynamically focusing on different parts of the input as the output sequence is generated. Such mechanisms are effective
for a variety of sequential prediction tasks, including ma-

1242

