Dense-Captioning Events in Videos
Ranjay Krishna, Kenji Hata, Frederic Ren, Li Fei-Fei, Juan Carlos Niebles
Stanford University
{ranjaykrishna, kenjihata, fren, feifeili, jniebles}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
With the introduction of large scale activity datasets [22,
19, 12, 4], it has become possible to categorize videos into
a discrete set of action categories [27, 10, 9, 40, 35]. For
example, in Figure 1, such models would output labels like
playing piano or dancing. While the success of these methods is encouraging, they all share one key limitation: detail.
To elevate the lack of detail from existing action detection
models, subsequent work has explored explaining video semantics using sentence descriptions [29, 32, 28, 38, 37]. For
example, in Figure 1, such models would likely concentrate
on an elderly man playing the piano in front of a crowd.
While this caption provides us more details about who is
playing the piano and mentions an audience, it fails to recognize and articulate all the other events in the video. For
example, at some point in the video, a woman starts singing
along with the pianist and then later another man starts

An elderly man is playing the piano
in front of a crowd.
A woman walks to the piano and
briefly talks to the the elderly man.
The woman starts singing along
with the pianist.
Another man starts dancing to the
music, gathering attention from the
crowd.

time

Most natural videos contain numerous events. For example, in a video of a “man playing a piano”, the video might
also contain “another man dancing” or “a crowd clapping”. We introduce the task of dense-captioning events,
which involves both detecting and describing events in a
video. We propose a new model that is able to identify all
events in a single pass of the video while simultaneously
describing the detected events with natural language. Our
model introduces a variant of an existing proposal module
that is designed to capture both short as well as long events
that span minutes. To capture the dependencies between
the events in a video, our model introduces a new captioning module that uses contextual information from past
and future events to jointly describe all events. We also
introduce ActivityNet Captions, a large-scale benchmark
for dense-captioning events. ActivityNet Captions contains
20k videos amounting to 849 video hours with 100k total descriptions, each with its unique start and end time. Finally,
we report performances of our model for dense-captioning
events, video retrieval and localization.

Eventually the elderly man finishes
playing and hugs the woman, and
the crowd applaud.

Figure 1: Dense-captioning events in a video involves detecting multiple events that occur in a video and describing
each event using natural language. These events are temporally localized in the video with independent start and end
times, resulting in some events that might also occur concurrently and overlap in time.

dancing to the music. In order to identify all the events
in a video and describe them in natural language, we introduce the task of dense-captioning events, which requires a
model to generate a set of descriptions for multiple events
occurring in the video and localize them in time.
Dense-captioning events is analogous to dense-imagecaptioning [16]; it describes videos and localize events in
time whereas dense-image-captioning describes and localizes regions in space. However, we observe that densecaptioning events comes with its own set of challenges distinct from the image case. One observation is that events in
videos can range across multiple time scales and can even
overlap. While piano recitals might last for the entire duration of a long video, the applause takes place in a couple
of seconds. To capture all such events, we need to design
ways of encoding short as well as long sequences of video
frames to propose events. Past captioning works have circumvented this problem by encoding the entire video se1706

