Pixel Recursive Super Resolution
Ryan Dahl ∗

Mohammad Norouzi
Google Brain

Jonathon Shlens

{rld,mnorouzi,shlens}@google.com

Abstract
8×8 input

32×32 samples

ground truth

Super resolution is the problem of artificially enlarging a
low resolution photograph to recover a plausible high resolution version. In the regime of high magnification factors, the problem is dramatically underspecified and many
plausible, high resolution images may match a given low
resolution image. In particular, traditional super resolution
techniques fail in this regime due to the multimodality of the
problem and strong prior information that must be imposed
on image synthesis to produce plausible high resolution images. In this work we propose a new probabilistic deep network architecture, a pixel recursive super resolution model,
that is an extension of PixelCNNs to address this problem.
We demonstrate that this model produces a diversity of plausible high resolution images at large magnification factors.
Furthermore, in human evaluation studies we demonstrate
how previous methods fail to fool human observers. However, high resolution images sampled from this probabilistic
deep network do fool a naive human observer a significant
fraction of the time.

1. Introduction
The problem of super resolution entails artificially enlarging a low resolution photograph to recover a corresponding plausible image with higher resolution [31].
When a small magnification is desired (e.g., 2×), super resolution techniques achieve satisfactory results [42, 8, 16, 40,
22] by building statistical prior models of images [36, 2, 52]
that capture low-level characteristics of natural images.
This paper studies super resolution with particularly
small inputs and large magnification ratios, where the
amount of information available to accurately construct a
high resolution image is very limited (Figure 1, left column). Thus, the problem is underspecified and many plausible, high resolution images may match a given low resolution input image. Building improved models for state-ofthe-art in super resolution in the high magnification regime
∗ Work done as a member of the Google Brain Residency program
(g.co/brainresidency).

Figure 1: Illustration of our probabilistic pixel recursive
super resolution model trained end-to-end on a dataset of
celebrity faces. The left column shows 8×8 low resolution
inputs from the test set. The middle and last columns show
32 × 32 images as predicted by our model vs. the ground
truth. Our model incorporates strong face priors to synthesize realistic hair and skin details.
is significant for improving the state-of-art in super resolution, and more generally for building better conditional
generative models of images [45, 33, 30, 44].
As the magnification ratio increases, a super resolution
model need not only account for textures, edges, and other
low-level statistics [16, 40, 22], but must increasingly account for complex variations of objects, viewpoints, illumination, and occlusions. At increasing levels of magnification, the details do not exist in the source image anymore,
and the predictive challenge shifts from recovering details
(e.g., deconvolution [23]) to synthesizing plausible novel
15439

