Tube Convolutional Neural Network (T-CNN) for Action Detection in Videos
Rui Hou, Chen Chen, Mubarak Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision (CRCV), University of Central Florida (UCF)
houray@gmail.com, chenchen870713@gmail.com, shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
Deep learning has been demonstrated to achieve excellent results for image classification and object detection.
However, the impact of deep learning on video analysis has
been limited due to complexity of video data and lack of annotations. Previous convolutional neural networks (CNN)
based video action detection approaches usually consist of
two major steps: frame-level action proposal generation
and association of proposals across frames. Also, most of
these methods employ two-stream CNN framework to handle spatial and temporal feature separately. In this paper,
we propose an end-to-end deep network called Tube Convolutional Neural Network (T-CNN) for action detection in
videos. The proposed architecture is a unified deep network that is able to recognize and localize action based
on 3D convolution features. A video is first divided into
equal length clips and next for each clip a set of tube proposals are generated based on 3D Convolutional Network
(ConvNet) features. Finally, the tube proposals of different clips are linked together employing network flow and
spatio-temporal action detection is performed using these
linked video proposals. Extensive experiments on several
video datasets demonstrate the superior performance of TCNN for classifying and localizing actions in both trimmed
and untrimmed videos compared to state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
The goal of action detection is to detect every occurrence
of a given action within a long video, and to localize each
detection both in space and time. Deep learning learning
based approaches have significantly improved video action
recognition performance. Compared to action recognition,
action detection is a more challenging task due to flexible
volume shape and large spatio-temporal search space.
Previous deep learning based action detection approaches first detect frame-level action proposals by popular proposal algorithms [5, 30] or by training proposal networks [19]. Then the frame-level action proposals are associated across frames to form final action detection through

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed Tube Convolutional
Neural Network (T-CNN).

tracking based approaches [32]. Moreover, in order to capture both spatial and temporal information of an action, twostream networks (a spatial CNN and a motion CNN) are
used. In this manner, the spatial and motion information are
processed separately.
Region Convolution Neural Network (R-CNN) for object detection in images was proposed by Girshick et al. [4].
It was followed by a fast R-CNN proposed in [3], which includes the classifier as well. Later, faster R-CNN [20] was
developed by introducing a region proposal network. It has
been extensively used to produce excellent results for object detection in images. A natural generalization of the RCNN from 2D images to 3D spatio-temporal volumes is to
study their effectiveness for the problem of action detection
in videos. A straightforward spatio-temporal generalization
of the R-CNN approach would be to treat action detection
in videos as a set of 2D image detections using faster RCNN. However, unfortunately, this approach does not take
the temporal information into account and is not sufficiently
expressive to distinguish between actions.
Inspired by the pioneering work of faster R-CNN, we

5822

