MoFA: Model-based Deep Convolutional Face Autoencoder
for Unsupervised Monocular Reconstruction
Ayush Tewari1 Michael Zollhöfer1 Hyeongwoo Kim1 Pablo Garrido1
Florian Bernard1,2 Patrick Pérez3 Christian Theobalt1
1
Max-Planck-Institute for Informatics 2 LCSB, University of Luxembourg 3 Technicolor

Our model-based deep convolutional face autoencoder enables unsupervised learning of semantic pose, shape, expression,
reflectance and lighting parameters. The trained encoder predicts these parameters from a single monocular image, all at once.

Abstract
In this work we propose a novel model-based deep convolutional autoencoder that addresses the highly challenging
problem of reconstructing a 3D human face from a single
in-the-wild color image. To this end, we combine a convolutional encoder network with an expert-designed generative
model that serves as decoder. The core innovation is the
differentiable parametric decoder that encapsulates image
formation analytically based on a generative model. Our
decoder takes as input a code vector with exactly defined
semantic meaning that encodes detailed face pose, shape, expression, skin reflectance and scene illumination. Due to this
new way of combining CNN-based with model-based face
reconstruction, the CNN-based encoder learns to extract
semantically meaningful parameters from a single monocular input image. For the first time, a CNN encoder and an
expert-designed generative model can be trained end-to-end
in an unsupervised manner, which renders training on very
large (unlabeled) real world data feasible. The obtained reconstructions compare favorably to current state-of-the-art
approaches in terms of quality and richness of representation.

1. Introduction
Detailed, dense 3D reconstruction of the human face from
image data is a longstanding problem in computer vision
and computer graphics. Previous approaches have tackled
this challenging problem using calibrated multi-view data
or uncalibrated photo collections [26, 45]. Robust and de-

tailed three-dimensional face reconstruction from a single
arbitrary in-the-wild image, e.g., downloaded from the Internet, is still an open research problem due to the high degree
of variability of uncalibrated photos in terms of resolution
and employed imaging device. In addition, in unconstrained
photos, faces show a high variability in global pose, facial
expression, and are captured under diverse and difficult lighting. Detailed 3D face reconstruction is the foundation for a
broad scope of applications, which range from robust face
recognition, over emotion estimation, to complex image manipulation tasks. In many applications, faces should ideally
be reconstructed in terms of meaningful low-dimensional
model parameters, which facilitates interpretation and manipulation of reconstructions (cf. [54]).
Recent monocular reconstruction methods broadly fall
into two categories: Generative and regression-based. Generative approaches fit a parametric face model to image and
video data, e.g., [3, 2, 12] by optimizing the alignment between the projected model and the image [14, 54, 51, 52, 25].
State-of-the-art generative approaches capture very detailed
and complete 3D face models on the basis of semantically
meaningful low-dimensional parameterizations [14, 54]. Unfortunately, the fitting energies are usually highly nonconvex. Good results thus require an initialization close
to the global optimum, which is only possible with some
level of control during image capture or additional input data,
e.g., detected landmarks.
Only recently, first regression-based approaches for dense
3D face reconstruction based on deep convolutional neural
networks were proposed. Richardson et al. [41] use iterative
regression to obtain a high quality estimate of pose, shape

3715

