A Multilayer-Based Framework for Online Background Subtraction
with Freely Moving Cameras
Yizhe Zhu
Ahmed Elgammal
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854
yizhe.zhu@rutgers.edu

Abstract
The exponentially increasing use of moving platforms for
video capture introduces the urgent need to develop the general background subtraction algorithms with the capability
to deal with the moving background. In this paper, we propose a multilayer-based framework for online background
subtraction for videos captured by moving cameras. Unlike
the previous treatments of the problem, the proposed method
is not restricted to binary segmentation of background and
foreground, but formulates it as a multi-label segmentation
problem by modeling multiple foreground objects in different layers when they appear simultaneously in the scene.
We assign an independent processing layer to each foreground object, as well as the background, where both motion and appearance models are estimated, and a probability map is inferred using a Bayesian filtering framework.
Finally, Multi-label Graph-cut on Markov Random Field is
employed to perform pixel-wise labeling. Extensive evaluation results show that the proposed method outperforms
state-of-the-art methods on challenging video sequences.

1. Introduction
The identification of regions of interest is typically
the critical preprocessing step for various high-level computer vision applications, including event detection, video
surveillance, human motion analysis, etc. Background
subtraction is a widely-used technique to perform pixelwise segmentation of foreground regions out of background
scenes. Unlike foreground object detection algorithms,
background subtraction methods typically produce much
more accurate segmentation of foreground regions rather
than merely detection bounding boxes, without the need to
train individual object detectors. A great number of various traditional background subtraction methods and algorithms have been proposed [34, 8, 21, 32, 12, 28]. Most of
these methods focused on modeling background under the
assumption that the camera is stationary. However, more

elgammal@cs.rutgers.edu

and more videos are captured from moving platforms, such
as camera phones, and cameras mounted on ground vehicles, robots, ariel drones, etc. Traditional background subtraction algorithms are no longer applicable for such videos
captured from a non-stationary platform [7]. The exponentially increasing use of moving platforms for video capture
introduces a high demand for the development of general
background subtraction algorithms that are not only as effective as traditional background subtraction but also applicable to moving-camera videos.
Similar to most video segmentation methods, a few
works [26, 5] resort to processing the whole video offline.
Offline methods can typically produce good results on short
sequences since the information in latter frames can significantly benefit the segmentation in the earlier frames. However, since it needs to store and process the information over
the whole video, the memory and computational cost increase exponentially as the number of frames to process
grows [7]. Additionally, in various cases, such as video
surveillance and security monitoring, videos need to be analyzed as they being streamed in real time, where an efficient
online background subtraction method is greatly in demand.
The key to handling long sequences in an online way is
to learn and maintain models for the background and foreground layers. Such models accumulate and update the evidence over a large number of frames and also supply valuable knowledge foundation to high-level vision tasks. Recently, a few online background subtraction methods with
moving cameras have been proposed [31, 20, 9, 22, 41].
Most methods formulate it as a binary segmentation problem with the assumption of only one foreground object, naturally resulting in bad segmentation when multiple moving
objects appear in the scene. Especially in the case where
objects go across each other, motion estimation for objects
suffers great confusion, which further degrades the performance of background subtraction.
To remedy this drawback, we propose a general
multilayer-based framework with the capability of handling
multiple foreground objects in the scene. The objects can be
automatically detected based on motion inconsistency and
4321
5132

