An Empirical Study of Language CNN for Image Captioning
Jiuxiang Gu1 , Gang Wang2 , Jianfei Cai3 , Tsuhan Chen3
1
ROSE Lab, Interdisciplinary Graduate School, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Alibaba AI Labs, Hangzhou, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{jgu004, asjfcai, tsuhan}@ntu.edu.sg, gangwang6@gmail.com

Abstract
Language models based on recurrent neural networks
have dominated recent image caption generation tasks. In
this paper, we introduce a language CNN model which is
suitable for statistical language modeling tasks and shows
competitive performance in image captioning. In contrast
to previous models which predict next word based on one
previous word and hidden state, our language CNN is fed
with all the previous words and can model the long-range
dependencies in history words, which are critical for image captioning. The effectiveness of our approach is validated on two datasets: Flickr30K and MS COCO. Our extensive experimental results show that our method outperforms the vanilla recurrent neural network based language
models and is competitive with the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Image caption generation is a fundamental problem that
involves Computer Vision, Natural Language Processing
(NLP), and Machine Learning. It can be analogous to
“translating” an image to proper sentences. While this task
seems to be easy for human beings, it is quite challenging
for machines because it requires the model to understand
the image content and express their relationships in a natural
language. Also, the image captioning model should be capable of capturing implicit semantic information of an image and generating humanlike sentences. As a result, generating accurate captions for an image is not an easy task.
The recent surge of research interest in image caption generation task is due to the advances in Neural Machine Translation (NMT) [44] and large datasets [39, 29].
Most image captioning models follow the encoder-decoder
pipeline [4, 24, 35, 19, 41]. The encoder-decoder framework is recently introduced for sequence-to-sequence learning based on Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) or LongShort Term Memory (LSTM) networks. Both RNNs and

LSTM networks can be sequence learners. However, due
to the vanishing gradient problem, RNNs can only remember the previous status for a few time steps. LSTM network
is a special type of RNN architecture designed to solve the
vanishing gradient problem in RNNs [46, 15, 6]. It introduces a new component called memory cell. Each memory
cell is composed of three gates and a neuron with the selfrecurrent connection. These gates allow the memory cells
to keep and access information over a long period of time
and make LSTM network capable of learning long-term dependencies.
Although models like LSTM networks have memory
cells which aim to memorize history information for longterm, they are still limited to several time steps because
long-term information is gradually diluted at every time
step [49]. Besides, vanilla RNNs-based image captioning
models recursively accumulate history information without
explicitly modeling the hierarchical structure of word sequences, which clearly have a bottom-up structure [28].
To better model the hierarchical structure and long-term
dependencies in word sequences, in this paper, we adopt a
language CNN which applies temporal convolution to extract features from sequences. Such a method is inspired by
works in NLP which have shown CNN is very powerful for
text representation [18, 48]. Unlike the vanilla CNN architecture, we drop the pooling operation to keep the relevant
information for words representation and investigate the optimum convolutional filters by experiments. However, only
using language CNN fails to model the dynamic temporal
behavior. Hence, we still need to combine language CNN
with recurrent networks (e.g., RNN or LSTM). Our extensive studies show that adding language CNN to a recurrent
network helps model sequences consistently and more effectively, and leads to improved results.
To summarize, our primary contribution lies in incorporating a language CNN, which is capable of capturing
long-range dependencies in sequences, with RNNs for image captioning. Our model yields comparable performance
with the state-of-the-art approaches on Flickr30k [39] and

1222

