Mutual Enhancement for Detection of Multiple Logos in Sports Videos
Yuan Liao1 , Xiaoqing Lu1 , Chengcui Zhang2 , Yongtao Wang1 , Zhi Tang1
1
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Alabama at Birmingham, USA
{liao yuan, lvxiaoqing, wangyongtao, tangzhi}@pku.edu.cn, czhang02@uab.edu

Abstract
Detecting logo frequency and duration in sports videos
provides sponsors an effective way to evaluate their advertising efforts. However, general-purposed object detection methods cannot address all the challenges in sports
videos. In this paper, we propose a mutual-enhanced approach that can improve the detection of a logo through the
information obtained from other simultaneously occurred
logos. In a Fast-RCNN-based framework, we first introduce
a homogeneity-enhanced re-ranking method by analyzing
the characteristics of homogeneous logos in each frame, including type repetition, color consistency, and mutual exclusion. Different from conventional enhance mechanism
that improves the weak proposals with the dominant proposals, our mutual method can also enhance the relatively significant proposals with weak proposals. Mutual enhancement is also included in our frame propagation mechanism
that improves logo detection by utilizing the continuity of
logos across frames. We use a tennis video dataset and an
associated logo collection for detection evaluation. Experiments show that the proposed method outperforms existing
methods with a higher accuracy.

1. Introduction
Logo detection in images and videos has been gaining
considerable attention in the last decade, with many applications such as traffic-control systems and measurement of
brand exposure. Detecting and classifying logos in videos
are valuable for business analysis, especially for television
advertisers. The frequency and duration of logos allow
sponsors to evaluate the effect of their advertising efforts.
Detection requires localizing objects within an image.
Existing researches on logo detection and recognition have
made great achievements in still image [1, 2, 20, 23, 28].
Most logo databases adopted by retrieval systems consist of
still images only [13, 22, 23, 26]. The logos in still images
are generally clear and likely to be captured from a front
facing view. However in videos, due to zooming, panning

Figure 1. Challenges in logo detection. The logos from the same
sponsor, (a), (b), and (c) have different layouts and deformation in
tennis videos. The logos in neighboring frames (d), (e), and (f),
suffer from motion blur and partial occlusion.

and changing in camera exposures, the chrominance level
changes frequently, and the logos are often deformed and
blurred. Consequently, the logo detection for videos faces
many more challenges.
Logo detection could be considered as a sub problem of
object detection. The existing approaches [3, 7, 15] generally consist of two important modules: detecting candidate
object regions and classifying those regions. Besides the
common challenges in object detection in videos, the detection of sponsor logos faces at least three specific obstacles. First, as shown in Figures 1(a), (b) and (c), according
to the requirement of sponsors, the same sponsor’s logos
may exhibit different layouts and thus cause higher innercluster differences than ordinary objects; second, multiple
instances of the same logo sometimes appear simultaneously but with various visual qualities, as shown in Figures
1(d), (e), and (f). Traditional methods can hardly detect
all of them simultaneously. Furthermore, as a result of the
panning and zooming of the camera, consecutive frames
can produce different degrees of fuzziness, and the detection in fuzzy frames can be eased by utilizing relevant information from adjacent frames. To overcome the abovementioned obstacles, we propose a logo detection framework based on a mutual enhancement mechanism aiming
4321
4846

