Image-based localization using LSTMs for structured feature correlation
F. Walch1,3 C. Hazirbas1 L. Leal-Taixé1 T. Sattler2 S. Hilsenbeck3 D. Cremers1
1
Technical University of Munich 2 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich 3 NavVis

Abstract
In this work we propose a new CNN+LSTM architecture
for camera pose regression for indoor and outdoor scenes.
CNNs allow us to learn suitable feature representations for
localization that are robust against motion blur and illumination changes. We make use of LSTM units on the CNN
output, which play the role of a structured dimensionality
reduction on the feature vector, leading to drastic improvements in localization performance. We provide extensive
quantitative comparison of CNN-based and SIFT-based localization methods, showing the weaknesses and strengths
of each. Furthermore, we present a new large-scale indoor
dataset with accurate ground truth from a laser scanner.
Experimental results on both indoor and outdoor public
datasets show our method outperforms existing deep architectures, and can localize images in hard conditions, e.g.,
in the presence of mostly textureless surfaces, where classic
SIFT-based methods fail.

1. Introduction
Being able to localize a vehicle or device by estimating
a camera pose from an image is a fundamental requirement
for many computer vision applications such as navigating
autonomous vehicles [34], mobile robotics and Augmented
Reality [36], and Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [46].
Most state-of-the-art approaches [31, 44, 50, 62] rely on
local features such as SIFT [35] to solve the problem of
image-based localization. Given a SfM model of a scene,
where each 3D point is associated with the image features
from which it was triangulated, one proceeds in two stages
[32, 43]: (i) establishing 2D-3D matches between features
extracted from the query image and 3D points in the SfM
model via descriptor matching; (ii) using these correspondences to determine the camera pose, usually by employing
a n-point solver [29] inside a RANSAC loop [13]. Pose estimation can only succeed if enough correct matches have
been found in the first stage. Consequently, limitations of
both the feature detector, e.g., motion blur or strong illumination changes, or the descriptor, e.g., due to strong viewpoint changes, will cause localization approaches to fail.
Recently, two approaches have tackled the problem of

(a) PoseNet result [24]

(b) Our result

Figure 1: Our approach achieves accurate outdoor imagebased localization even in challenging lighting conditions
where other deep architectures fail.
localization with end-to-end learning. PlaNet [57] formulates localization as a classification problem, where the current position is matched to the best position in the training
set. While this approach is suitable for localization in extremely large environments, it only allows to recover position but not orientation and its accuracy is bounded by the
spatial extent of the training samples. More similar in spirit
to our approach, PoseNet [23,24] formulates 6DoF pose estimation as a regression problem. In this paper, we show
that PoseNet is significantly less accurate than state-of-theart SIFT methods [31, 44, 50, 62] and propose a novel network architecture that significantly outperforms PoseNet.

1.1. Contributions
In this paper, we propose to directly regress the camera
pose from an input image. To do so, we leverage, on the
one hand, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) which
allow us to learn suitable feature representations for localization that are more robust against motion blur and illumination changes. As we can see from the PoseNet [24]
results, regressing the pose after the high dimensional output of a FC layer is not optimal. Our intuition is that the
high dimensionality of the FC output makes the network
prone to overfitting to training data. PoseNet deals with
this problem with careful dropout strategies. We propose to
make use of Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) units [22]
on the FC output, which performs structured dimensionality
reduction and chooses the most useful feature correlations
for the task of pose estimation. Overall, we improve localization accuracy by 32-37% wrt. previous deep learning
architectures [23, 24]. Furthermore, we are the first to pro-

627

