Multi-label Image Recognition by Recurrently Discovering Attentional Regions
Zhouxia Wang1,2

Tianshui Chen1
1

3

Guanbin Li1,3
2

Sun Yat-sen University, China

Ruijia Xu1

Liang Lin1,2,3 ∗

SenseTime Group Limited

Engineering Research Center for Advanced Computing Engineering Software of Ministry of Education, China

{wzhoux, chtiansh, xurj3}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel deep architecture to address
multi-label image recognition, a fundamental and practical
task towards general visual understanding. Current solutions for this task usually rely on an extra step of extracting hypothesis regions (i.e., region proposals), resulting
in redundant computation and sub-optimal performance.
In this work, we achieve the interpretable and contextualized multi-label image classification by developing a recurrent memorized-attention module. This module consists of
two alternately performed components: i) a spatial transformer layer to locate attentional regions from the convolutional feature maps in a region-proposal-free way and ii)
an LSTM (Long-Short Term Memory) sub-network to sequentially predict semantic labeling scores on the located
regions while capturing the global dependencies of these
regions. The LSTM also output the parameters for computing the spatial transformer. On large-scale benchmarks of
multi-label image classification (e.g., MS-COCO and PASCAL VOC 07), our approach demonstrates superior performances over other existing state-of-the-arts in both accuracy and efficiency.

1. Introduction
Recognizing multiple labels of images is a fundamental yet practical problem in computer vision, as real-world
images always contain rich and diverse semantic information. Besides the challenges shared with single-label image classification (e.g., large intra-class variation caused by
viewpoint, scale, occlusion, illumination), multi-label image classification is much more difficult since accurately
predicting the presence of multiple object categories usu∗ Zhouxia Wang and Tianshui Chen contribute equally to this work and
share first-authorship. Corresponding author is Liang Lin (Email: linliang@ieee.org). This work was supported by the State Key Development
Program under Grant 2016YFB1001004, Special Program for Applied Research on Super Computation of the NSFC-Guangdong Joint Fund (second
phase), and CCF-Tencent Open Research Fund (NO.AGR20160115).

...

multi-label prediction

...

Figure 1. Multi-label image recognition with discovered attentional regions by our approach. These regions (highlighted by
different colors) corresponding to the semantic labels (visualized
below the images) are contextualized and discriminative in terms
of classification, although they may not preserve object boundaries
well.

ally needs understanding the image in depth (e.g., associating semantic labels with regions and capturing their dependencies).
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [18,
24] achieve great success in visual recognition/classification
tasks by learning powerful feature representations from
raw images, and they have been also applied to the problem of multi-label image classification by combining with
some object localization techniques [30, 27]. The resulting common pipeline usually involves two steps. A batch
of hypothesis regions are first produced by either exploiting bottom-up image cues [25] or casting extra detectors
[4], and these regions are assumed to contain all possible
foreground objects in the image. A classifier or neural network is then trained to predict the label score on these hypothesis regions, and these predictions are aggregated to
achieve the multi-label classification results. Despite acknowledged successes, these methods take the redundant
computational cost of extracting region proposals and usually over-simplify the contextual dependencies among foreground objects, leading to a sub-optimal performance in
complex scenarios. Recently, Wang et al. [26] proposed to
jointly characterize the semantic label dependency and the
image-label relevance by combining recurrent neural networks (RNNs) with CNNs. However, their model disregards the explicit associations between semantic labels and
1464

