Semi-Global Weighted Least Squares in Image Filtering
Wei Liu1∗ Xiaogang Chen2
Chuanhua Shen3
Zhi Liu4
Jie Yang1
1
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, China
3
4
The University of Adelaide, Australia
Shanghai University, China

Abstract
Solving the global method of Weighted Least Squares
(WLS) model in image filtering is both time- and memoryconsuming. In this paper, we present an alternative approximation in a time- and memory- efficient manner which
is denoted as Semi-Global Weighed Least Squares (SGWLS). Instead of solving a large linear system, we propose to iteratively solve a sequence of subsystems which
are one-dimensional WLS models. Although each subsystem is one-dimensional, it can take two-dimensional neighborhood information into account due to the proposed special neighborhood construction. We show such a desirable
property makes our SG-WLS achieve close performance to
the original two-dimensional WLS model but with much
less time and memory cost. While previous related methods mainly focus on the 4-connected/8-connected neighborhood system, our SG-WLS can handle a more general and
larger neighborhood system thanks to the proposed fast solution. We show such a generalization can achieve better
performance than the 4-connected/8-connected neighborhood system in some applications. Our SG-WLS is ∼ 20
times faster than the WLS model. For an image of M × N ,
the memory cost of SG-WLS is at most at the magnitude of
1
, N1 } of that of the WLS model. We show the effecmax{ M
tiveness and efficiency of our SG-WLS in a range of applications.

1. Introduction
Image smoothing is an important operation in both image processing and computer graphics. Many applications
require decomposing an image into a piecewise smooth base
layer which contains the main structure information and a
detail layer which captures the residual details. To achieve
the decomposition, Edge-Preserving Smoothing (EPS) is
required. EPS can be achieved with local filters which compute the output as a weighted average of the input. Bilateral
filter [24] is one of the well-known filters which has been
widely used in various applications such as image upsam∗ Part of this work was done when W. Liu was visiting The University
of Adelaide.

F IGURE 1: (a) Input image. Image smoothing (the upper left part) and
detail enhancement (the lower right part) with (b) WLS [6], time cost is
3.11 seconds, (c) FGS [20], time cost is 0.047 seconds, (d) our SG-WLS
with r = 1, τ = 1, time cost is 0.14 seconds. Our SG-WLS is over 20×
faster than WLS [6] but can overcome the limitation of FGS [20]. Zoom in
for better visual comparison.

pling [11], flash/no flash image filtering [21] and HDR tone
mapping [5]. There are also other local filters based on different theories and computational models [8, 10, 19, 29].
Most local filters can be efficiently computed. However,
they can cause gradient reversals and halo artifacts [6, 10]
which are their main drawbacks.
There are also EPS methods based on global filters
[6, 17, 26, 27]. These methods seek a globally optimal
solution to the objective function. The objective function
usually contains a data constraint term and a prior smoothness term and needs to be solved globally in a principled
manner. Global filters can overcome the limitations of local
filters such as gradient reversals and halo artifacts [6]. However, most of global filters are time-consuming and some
of them are also memory-consuming. The Weight Least
Squares (WLS) model has been widely used in image processing and computer graphics [1, 4, 6, 17]. The solution
to the model typically needs to solve a large linear system
which is both time- and memory-consuming.
In this paper, we present a new approximation to the
WLS model which is denoted as Semi-Global Weighted
Least Squares (SG-WLS). The main contributions of this
paper are as follows.

5861

