Dual-Glance Model for Deciphering Social Relationships
Junnan Li
Graduate School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering
National University of Singapore
Singapore

Yongkang Wong
Interactive & Digital Media Institute
National University of Singapore
Singapore

lijunnan@u.nus.edu

yongkang.wong@nus.edu.sg

Qi Zhao
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, USA

Mohan S. Kankanhalli
School of Computing
National University of Singapore
Singapore

qzhao@cs.umn.edu

mohan@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Since the beginning of early civilizations, social relationships derived from each individual fundamentally form the
basis of social structure in our daily life. In the computer
vision literature, much progress has been made in scene understanding, such as object detection and scene parsing.
Recent research focuses on the relationship between objects based on its functionality and geometrical relations.
In this work, we aim to study the problem of social relationship recognition, in still images. We have proposed a dualglance model for social relationship recognition, where the
first glance fixates at the individual pair of interest and the
second glance deploys attention mechanism to explore contextual cues. We have also collected a new large scale People in Social Context (PISC) dataset, which comprises of
22,670 images and 76,568 annotated samples from 9 types
of social relationship. We provide benchmark results on the
PISC dataset, and qualitatively demonstrate the efficacy of
the proposed model.

Figure 1: Example images from the new People in Social Context
(PISC) dataset.

1. Introduction
Social relationships derived from each individual fundamentally form the basis of social structure in our daily
life. Naturally, we perceive and interpret a scene with an
understanding of the social relationships of the people in
the scene. Sociology research shows that such social understanding of people permits inference about their characteristics and their possible behaviors [32].
In computer vision, social information has been exploited to improve several analytics tasks, including human

trajectory prediction [1, 30], multi-target tracking [4, 26],
and group activity recognition [9, 22, 23]. In image understanding task, visual concepts recognition is gaining more
attention, which include visual attribute [19] and visual relationship [25]. On the other hand, social attribute and social
relationship [35] are equally important concepts for scene
understanding, but have received less attention in the research community. In this work, we aim to address the problem of social relationship recognition. Understanding such
relationship can enable a well designed algorithm to gen12650

