Long Short-Term Memory Kalman Filters:
Recurrent Neural Estimators for Pose Regularization
Huseyin Coskun1 , Felix Achilles2 , Robert DiPietro3 , Nassir Navab1,3 , Federico Tombari1
1
Technische Universität München, 2 Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich,
3
Johns Hopkins University
huseyin.coskun@tum.de, felix.achilles@med.lmu.de
rdipietro@gmail.com, navab@cs.tum.edu, tombari@in.tum.de

Abstract

1. Introduction
Pose estimation from images is a recurring challenge
in computer vision, for example for tasks such as camera
pose estimation, body joint localization, and object tracking. Such tasks have recently benefited from learned models [16, 24, 4], but various problems persist when applying
one-shot pose estimation to video data. In fact, disregarding
temporal information can result in very noisy estimates and
in the confusion of visually similar but spatially distinct image features, such as those that result from the left and right
legs in the case of body joint localization. For this reason,
temporal filters are a popular approach for improving the ac-

CNN

CNN + Kalman

CNN + LSTM

CNN + LSTM-KF

Our Method

One-shot pose estimation for tasks such as body joint localization, camera pose estimation, and object tracking are
generally noisy, and temporal filters have been extensively
used for regularization. One of the most widely-used methods is the Kalman filter, which is both extremely simple and
general. However, Kalman filters require a motion model
and measurement model to be specified a priori, which burdens the modeler and simultaneously demands that we use
explicit models that are often only crude approximations of
reality. For example, in the pose-estimation tasks mentioned
above, it is common to use motion models that assume constant velocity or constant acceleration, and we believe that
these simplified representations are severely inhibitive. In
this work, we propose to instead learn rich, dynamic representations of the motion and noise models. In particular, we
propose learning these models from data using long shortterm memory, which allows representations that depend on
all previous observations and all previous states. We evaluate our method using three of the most popular pose estimation tasks in computer vision, and in all cases we obtain
state-of-the-art performance.

Ground Truth

Figure 1. The proposed LSTM-KF approach builds on Kalman filters and LSTM networks to yield an improved temporal regularizer for common pose estimation tasks such as 3D body landmark
localization from RGB images.

curacy of pose estimation. Among these methods, because
of their simplicity and general applicability, Kalman filters
(KF) [15] are an extremely widely-used choice. Moreover,
the extended Kalman filter (EKF) [26] is capable of handling non linear systems for both the measurement and transition models.
However, in many tasks, these measurement and transition models cannot be specified a priori, and in these situations the application of Kalman filters is severely limited.
In particular, in these in these tasks we must devise carefully tuned measurement and transition models, and even
once devised they tend to be overly simplistic. For example, in the aforementioned computer vision tasks the trajectories of objects and body parts do not follow any simple
15524

