Attribute Recognition by Joint Recurrent Learning of Context and Correlation
Jingya Wang1
Xiatian Zhu2
Queen Mary University of London1

Shaogang Gong1
Wei Li1
Vision Semantics Ltd.2

{jingya.wang, s.gong, wei.li}@qmul.ac.uk

eddy@visionsemantics.com

Abstract
Recognising semantic pedestrian attributes in surveillance images is a challenging task for computer vision,
particularly when the imaging quality is poor with complex background clutter and uncontrolled viewing conditions, and the number of labelled training data is small. In
this work, we formulate a Joint Recurrent Learning (JRL)
model for exploring attribute context and correlation in order to improve attribute recognition given small sized training data with poor quality images. The JRL model learns
jointly pedestrian attribute correlations in a pedestrian image and in particular their sequential ordering dependencies (latent high-order correlation) in an end-to-end encoder/decoder recurrent network. We demonstrate the performance advantage and robustness of the JRL model over
a wide range of state-of-the-art deep models for pedestrian
attribute recognition, multi-label image classification, and
multi-person image annotation on two largest pedestrian attribute benchmarks PETA and RAP.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian attributes, e.g. age, gender, and hair style
are humanly searchable semantic descriptions and can be
used as soft-biometrics in visual surveillance, with applications in person re-identification [20, 26, 32], face verification [18], and human identification [35]. An advantage of attributes as semantic descriptions over low-level visual features is their robustness against viewpoint changes
and viewing condition diversity. However, it is inherently
challenging to automatically recognise pedestrian attributes
from real-world surveillance images because: (1) The imaging quality is poor, in low resolution and subject to motion
blur (Fig. 1); (2) Attributes may undergo significant appearance changes and situate at different spatial locations in
an image; (3) Labelled attribute data from surveillance images are difficult to collect and only available in small numbers. These factors render learning a pedestrian attribute
model very difficult. Early attribute recognition methods
mainly rely on hand-crafted features like colour and tex-

LowerBody Formal
Long Sleeve
Leather Shoes
Age31-45
No Accessory

...

LowerBody Suits
Carrying Suitcase
Leather Shoes
Age31-45
Long Sleeve

...

Age16-30
Sneaker
Backpack
Hair Black
Jeans

...

Hair Black
Male
Luggage Case
Long Sleeve
UpperBody Casual

...

Male
Jacket
UpperBody Casual
Footwear Black
Hair Short

...

Figure 1. Pedestrian attribute recognition in poor surveillance images is inherently challenging due to ambiguous visual appearance
from low resolution and large variations in human pose and viewing conditions, e.g. illumination, background clutter, occlusion.

ture [20, 26, 15, 7]. Recently, deep learning based attribute
models have started to gain attraction [21, 33, 10, 9], due
to deep model’s capacity for learning more expressive representations when large scale data is available [17, 2, 39].
However, large scale training data is not available for pedestrian attributes. The two largest pedestrian attribute benchmark datasets PETA [7] and RAP [22] contain only 9, 500
and 33, 268 training images, much smaller than the popular ILSVRC (1.2 million) [36] and MS COCO (165, 482)
datasets [25]. Deep learning of pedestrian attributes is further compounded by degraded fine-grained details due to
poor image quality, low resolution and complex appearance
variations in surveillance scenes.
To address these difficulties, one idea is to discover the
interdependency and correlation among attributes [3, 21, 50,
47, 48], e.g. two attributes “female” and “skirt” are likely
to co-occur in a person image. This correlation provides
an inference constraint complementary to visual appearance
recognition. Another idea is to explore visual context as
an extra information source to assist attribute recognition
[23, 11]. For instance, different people may share similar
attributes in the same scene, e.g. most skiers wear sunglasses. However, these two schemes are mostly studied
independently by existing methods.
1531

