Deeply-Learned Part-Aligned Representations for Person Re-Identification
Liming Zhao† Xi Li†∗ Yueting Zhuang† Jingdong Wang‡∗
†
Zhejiang University ‡ Microsoft Research
{zhaoliming,xilizju,yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of person reidentification, which refers to associating the persons captured from different cameras. We propose a simple yet effective human part-aligned representation for handling the
body part misalignment problem. Our approach decomposes the human body into regions (parts) which are discriminative for person matching, accordingly computes the
representations over the regions, and aggregates the similarities computed between the corresponding regions of
a pair of probe and gallery images as the overall matching score. Our formulation, inspired by attention models, is a deep neural network modeling the three steps
together, which is learnt through minimizing the triplet
loss function without requiring body part labeling information. Unlike most existing deep learning algorithms
that learn a global or spatial partition-based local representation, our approach performs human body partition, and thus is more robust to pose changes and various human spatial distributions in the person bounding box.
Our approach shows state-of-the-art results over standard
datasets, Market-1501, CUHK03, CUHK01 and VIPeR. 1

1. Introduction
Person re-identification is a problem of associating the
persons captured from different cameras located at different physical sites. If the camera views are overlapped, the
solution is trivial: the temporal information is reliable to
solve the problem. In some real cases, the camera views are
significantly disjoint and the temporal transition time between cameras varies greatly, making the temporal information not enough to solve the problem, and thus this problem
becomes more challenging. Therefore, a lot of solutions exploiting various cues, such as appearance [12, 32, 23, 26],
which is also the interest in this paper, have been developed.
Recently, deep neural networks have been becoming a
∗ Corresponding authors.
1 This work was done when Liming Zhao was an intern at Microsoft
Research.

jingdw@microsoft.com

person 1

person 1

person 2

1

2

3

4
a

5
b

person 3 person 4 person 5

6
c

d

e

f

Figure 1. Illustrating the necessity of body part partition (best
viewed in color). Using spatial partition without further processing, the regions (1) and (2), as well as (4) and (5), are not matched
though they are from the same person; but the regions (1) and
(3), as well as (5) and (6), which are from different persons, are
matched. With body part decomposition, there is no such mismatch. More examples are shown in d, e, and f.

dominate solution for the appearance representation. The
straightforward way is to extract a global representation [33,
50, 6], using the deep network pretrained over ImageNet
and optionally fine-tuned over the person re-identification
dataset. Local representations are computed typically by
partitioning the person bounding box into cells, e.g., dividing the images into horizontal stripes [56, 9, 44] or
grids [23, 1], and extracting deep features over the cells.
These solutions are based on the assumption that the human
poses and the spatial distributions of the human body in the
bounding box are similar. In real cases, for example, the
bounding box is detected rather than manually labeled and
thus the human may be at different positions, or the human
poses are different, such an assumption does not hold. In
other words, spatial partition is not well aligned with human body parts. Thus, person re-identification, even with
subsequent complex matching techniques (e.g., [1, 23]) to
eliminate the misalignment, is often not quite reliable. Figure 1 provides illustrative examples.
In this paper, we propose a part-aligned human representation, which addresses the above problem instead in the
representation learning stage. The key idea is straightforward: detect the human body regions that are discrimina-

3219

