Material Editing Using a Physically Based Rendering Network
Guilin Liu1,3∗ Duygu Ceylan2 Ersin Yumer2 Jimei Yang2 Jyh-Ming Lien1
1
George Mason University 2 Adobe Research 3 NVIDIA

Abstract
input image
The ability to edit materials of objects in images is desirable by many content creators. However, this is an extremely challenging task as it requires to disentangle intrinsic physical properties of an image. We propose an
end-to-end network architecture that replicates the forward
image formation process to accomplish this task. Specifically, given a single image, the network first predicts intrinsic properties, i.e. shape, illumination, and material, which
are then provided to a rendering layer. This layer performs
in-network image synthesis, thereby enabling the network
to understand the physics behind the image formation process. The proposed rendering layer is fully differentiable,
supports both diffuse and specular materials, and thus can
be applicable in a variety of problem settings. We demonstrate a rich set of visually plausible material editing examples and provide an extensive comparative study.

1. Introduction
One of the main properties of an object that contributes
to its appearance, is material. Hence, many designers desire
to effortlessly alter materials of objects. In case of 2D design, however, often the designer only has access to a single
image of the object. Given one such image, e.g. an image
of a fabric sofa, how would you synthesize a new image that
depicts the same sofa with a more specular material?
A typical approach to addressing this image-based material editing problem is to first infer the intrinsic properties
(e.g. shape, material, illumination) from the image which
then enables access to edit them. However, this problem is
highly ambiguous since multiple combinations of intrinsic
properties may result in the same image. Many prior work
has tackled this ambiguity either by assuming at least one
of the intrinsic properties is known [13] or devising priors
about each of these properties [1]. The recent success of
deep learning based methods, on the other hand, has stimulated research to learn such priors directly from the data. A
feasible approach is to predict each of the intrinsic proper∗ This work was done when Guilin Liu was with Adobe and George
Mason University.

target material

output image

Figure 1. We replace the materials of the objects in the input images with the material properties of the objects in the middle column, resulting edited images are shown in the right column.

ties independently from an input image, i.e. using individual neural networks to predict normals, material, and lighting. However, the interaction of these properties during the
image formation process inspires us to devise a joint prediction framework. An alternative common practice of deep
learning methods is to represent the intrinsic properties in
a latent feature space [12] where an image can be decoded
from implicit feature representations. Directly editing such
feature representations, however, is not trivial since they do
not correspond to any true physical property. On the contrary, the physics of image formation process is well understood and motivates us to replace this black-box decoder
with a physical decoder and thus enables the network to
learn the physics of image formation.
We present an end-to-end network architecture that replicates the image formation process in a physically based rendering layer. Our network is composed of prediction modules that infer each of the intrinsic properties from a single
image of an object. These predictions are then provided
to a rendering layer which re-synthesizes the input image.
We define the loss function as a weighted sum of the error over the individual predictions and perceptual error over
12261

