Delving into Salient Object Subitizing and Detection
Shengfeng He1

Jianbo Jiao2 Xiaodan Zhang2,3 Guoqiang Han1 Rynson W.H. Lau2
1
South China University of Technology, China
2
City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China

Abstract
Subitizing (i.e., instant judgement on the number) and
detection of salient objects are human inborn abilities.
These two tasks influence each other in the human visual
system. In this paper, we delve into the complementarity
of these two tasks. We propose a multi-task deep neural
network with weight prediction for salient object detection,
where the parameters of an adaptive weight layer are dynamically determined by an auxiliary subitizing network.
The numerical representation of salient objects is therefore embedded into the spatial representation. The proposed joint network can be trained end-to-end using backpropagation. Experiments show the proposed multi-task
network outperforms existing multi-task architectures, and
the auxiliary subitizing network provides strong guidance
to salient object detection by reducing false positives and
producing coherent saliency maps. Moreover, the proposed
method is an unconstrained method able to handle images
with/without salient objects. Finally, we show state-of-theart performance on different salient object datasets.

1. Introduction
The human visual system has an excellent ability in
rapidly locating visually distinct objects in a scene, known
as visual attention. On the other hand, a human can accurately enumerate up to four objects at a glance without
counting. This rapid enumeration of a small number of
items is referred to as subitizing [13]. These two human inborn abilities can influence each other in an either serial or
parallel form within the human visual system [26, 25], and
evidences show that numerical and spatial representations
are intrinsically interconnected in our brain [11]. These
abilities are frequently involved in our daily life for prompt
decision making in basic tasks like searching, navigation,
and choice making.
However, these biologically-correlated abilities have not
been jointly explored in computer vision. Traditional methods focus solely on detecting salient objects. While achieving good results, they suffer from two main problems. First,

(a) Input

(b) w/o subitizing (c) w/ subitizing

(d) GT

Figure 1: Our method augments salient object detection
with subitizing. Subitizing provides strong guidance to accurately detect salient objects from complex background.
most methods assume the presence of salient objects, and
fail if this is not the case. Second, background distraction
is usually the main source of detection errors, leading to excessive detected regions or incorrect connections between
objects (see Fig. 1b). These two problems are in fact relevant to the subitizing task. Subitizing knowledge can help
predict the existence of dominant objects. Meanwhile, it
can also constrain the number of object-like regions to be
detected in the saliency map. Although Zhang et al. [36, 38]
propose to predict the number of salient objects, they only
use it to filter images without salient objects. No interactions are considered between the number and the detection
of salient objects.
In this paper, we aim to explore the interaction between
numerical and spatial representations in the salient object
detection task. To this end, we propose a multi-task deep
convolution neural network (CNN) with an adaptive weight
layer. While this CNN is trained for salient object detection,
the weights of its adaptive weight layer are dynamically determined by an auxiliary subitizing network, allowing the
layer to encode subitizing knowledge. In this way, a single deep CNN architecture has a dynamical representation
space, and it is able to deal with various input contextual
information by dynamically predicting weight in the adaptive weight layer. The proposed network is supervised by
two different tasks jointly, and it can be trained end-to-end
11059

