Referring Expression Generation and Comprehension via Attributes
Jingyu Liu1,3
Liang Wang1,2,3
Ming-Hsuan Yang4
1
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC),
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
2
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology (CEBSIT),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
4
University of California, Merced
{jingyu.liu, wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

mhyang@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
Referring expression is a kind of language expression
that used for referring to particular objects. To make the
expression without ambiguation, people often use attributes
to describe the particular object. In this paper, we explore
the role of attributes by incorporating them into both referring expression generation and comprehension. We first
train an attribute learning model from visual objects and
their paired descriptions. Then in the generation task, we
take the learned attributes as the input into the generation
model, thus the expressions are generated driven by both
attributes and the previous words. For comprehension, we
embed the learned attributes with visual features and semantics into the common space model, then the target object is retrieved based on its ranking distance in the common
space. Experimental results on the three standard datasets,
RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, and RefCOCOg show significant
improvements over the baseline model, demonstrating that
our method is effective for both tasks.

1. Introduction
Referring expression [27] is a particular kind of human expressions that focuses on effectively describing the
unique object in some environments. The interactive process of referring expression generation and comprehension
exists in our everyday life. Given the target object and its
distractions, one often uses the target’s unique attributes to
describe it. For instance, “a girl in a red skirt” contains the
attributes “girl”, “red” and “skirt” to differentiate the girl
from other people in a particular scenario. The more accurate and rich the attributes are, the easier for the listener
to comprehend which object is referred. This is where the
difference lies between referring expression generation and

man with red tie

donut with hole

red double decker bus

most front elephant

Figure 1. Some examples of our results. The first row are two
examples of referring expression generation. The target object is
shown in contour. The second row are two examples of referring
expression comprehension. The green boxes are ground truth and
the blue boxes are retrieved boxes.

natural language generation. On the other side, the task of
comprehension requires the listener to prove his comprehension by pointing to the target object’s location, which is
based on the quality of the listener’s interpretation of the expression. Figure 1 illustrates the two tasks. The top row and
bottom row are examples of generation and comprehension
respectively. In this paper, we mainly focus on the usage of
visual attributes in both referring expression generation and
comprehension, and the approach to effectively incorporate
them into both tasks.
Modern approaches of referring expression [7, 16, 31]
rely heavily on the encoding of both the image and the language. For referring expression generation, discriminative
features from different modalities like appearance and loca-

4856

