WordSup: Exploiting Word Annotations for Character based Text Detection
Han Hu1∗ Chengquan Zhang2∗ Yuxuan Luo2
Microsoft Research Asia1

Yuzhuo Wang2 Junyu Han2
IDL, Baidu Research2

Errui Ding2

hanhu@microsoft.com {zhangchengquan,luoyuxuan,wangyuzhuo,hanjunyu,dingerrui}@baidu.com

Abstract
Imagery texts are usually organized as a hierarchy of
several visual elements, i.e. characters, words, text lines
and text blocks. Among these elements, character is the
most basic one for various languages such as Western, Chinese, Japanese, mathematical expression and etc. It is natural and convenient to construct a common text detection engine based on character detectors. However, training character detectors requires a vast of location annotated characters, which are expensive to obtain. Actually, the existing
real text datasets are mostly annotated in word or line level.
To remedy this dilemma, we propose a weakly supervised
framework that can utilize word annotations, either in tight
quadrangles or the more loose bounding boxes, for character detector training. When applied in scene text detection,
we are thus able to train a robust character detector by exploiting word annotations in the rich large-scale real scene
text datasets, e.g. ICDAR15 [19] and COCO-text [39]. The
character detector acts as a key role in the pipeline of our
text detection engine. It achieves the state-of-the-art performance on several challenging scene text detection benchmarks. We also demonstrate the flexibility of our pipeline
by various scenarios, including deformed text detection and
math expression recognition.

1. Introduction
Understanding optical texts has a long history dating
back to the early twentieth century [34]. For a long time,
the attempts were made for texts of a few languages captured by very special devices, e.g. scanned English documents. With the growing popularity of smart phones, there
have been increasing demands for reading texts of various
languages captured under different scenarios.
We are interested in developing a common text extraction engine for various languages and scenarios. The first
step is to localize texts. It is not easy. Firstly, languages
differ in organization structures. For an example, English
∗ Equal contribution. This work is done when Han Hu is at IDL, Baidu
Research.

text-line/
structure

words

characters

Figure 1: The visual hierarchies for various language texts under
different scenarios. Different languages and scenarios may differ
in hierarchy, but they are all formed by a basic element, character.

texts include visual blank separation between words, while
Chinese not. For another example, regular human language
texts are organized sequentially, while math expressions are
structural. Secondly, texts may differ in visual shapes and
distortions according to the individual scenarios. Nevertheless, all optical texts share one common property that they
are all formed by characters, as illustrated in Fig. 1. It is
natural and convenient that we base a common text detection framework on character detection.
When characters are localized, we can then determine
the structure of texts in a bottom-up manner. The atomicity
and universality of characters enable structure analysis for
various languages and scenarios, e.g., oriented / deformed
text lines and structural math expression recognition (see
representative samples in Fig. 1).
The training of character detectors require a vast of location annotated characters. However, annotating character locations is very inconvenient and expensive, because
the characters are small, easily gluing with each other and
blurry. Actually, most existing large scale real text image
datasets are labeled coarsely in word level, as illustrated in
Table 1.
In this paper, we propose a weakly supervised learning
framework to address the problem of lacking real charac14940

