Characterizing and Improving Stability in Neural Style Transfer
Agrim Gupta1 Justin Johnson1 Alexandre Alahi1,2 Li Fei-Fei1
Stanford University1
École Polytechnique Fédérate de Lausanne2

Abstract
Recent progress in style transfer on images has focused
on improving the quality of stylized images and speed of
methods. However, real-time methods are highly unstable
resulting in visible flickering when applied to videos. In this
work we characterize the instability of these methods by examining the solution set of the style transfer objective. We
show that the trace of the Gram matrix representing style
is inversely related to the stability of the method. Then,
we present a recurrent convolutional network for real-time
video style transfer which incorporates a temporal consistency loss and overcomes the instability of prior methods.
Our networks can be applied at any resolution, do not require optical flow at test time, and produce high quality,
temporally consistent stylized videos in real-time.

1. Introduction
Artistic style transfer of images aims to synthesize novel
images combining the content of one image with the style
of another. This longstanding problem [2, 9, 17, 18] has recently been revisited with deep neural networks [12]. Subsequent work has improved speed [22, 34], quality [35, 13,
36], and modeled multiple styles with a single model [8].
Recent methods for style transfer on images fall into two
categories. Optimization-based approaches [12, 13] solve
an optimization problem for each synthesized image; they
give high-quality results but can take minutes to synthesize
each image. Feedforward methods [22, 34, 8] train neural networks to approximate solutions to these optimization
problems; after training they can be applied in real-time.
However, all these methods are highly unstable resulting
in visible flickering when applied to videos; see Figure 1.
Ruder et al. [30] extends the optimization-based approach
from images to videos. Their method produces high-quality
stylized videos, but is too slow for real-time application.
In this paper, our goal is to perform feedforward style
transfer of videos while matching the high-quality results
produced by the optimization-based methods. Recent methods for style transfer use Gram matrix of features to represent image style: stylized images are synthesized by match-

Figure 1. State-of-the-art real-time style transfer networks (e.g.,
[22]) are highly unstable. Consecutive video frames that are visually indistinguishable to humans (top) can result in perceptibly different stylized images (middle). In this work, we characterize such
instability and propose a recurrent convolutional network that produces temporally consistent stylized video in real-time (bottom).

ing the Gram matrix of the style image. We find that the
trace of the style image’s Gram matrix is closely related to
the pixel instability shown in Figure 1. Specifically, the solution set of the Gram matrix matching objective is a sphere
with radius determined by the trace of the style image’s
Gram matrix. Due to the nonconvexity of this objective,
minor changes in the content image can pull the synthesized
image to different solutions of this Gram matrix matching
objective function. If all the solutions are close together
(small trace), then different solutions will still result in similar stylized images (no instability). However, if the solutions are far apart (large trace), then different solutions will
result in very different stylized images (high instability).
Based on this insight, we propose a method which
greatly improves the stability of feedforward style transfer
methods, synthesizing high-quality stylized video. Specifically, we use a recurrent convolutional network for video
stylization, trained with a temporal consistency loss which
encourages the network to find similar solutions to the Gram
14067

