Stepwise Metric Promotion for Unsupervised Video Person Re-identification
Zimo Liu1 Dong Wang2∗ Huchuan Lu3
Dalian University of Technology
lzm920316@gmail.com1 wdice2∗ , lhchuan3 @dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
The intensive annotation cost and the rich but unlabeled
data contained in videos motivate us to propose an unsupervised video-based person re-identification (re-ID) method.
We start from two assumptions: 1) different video tracklets typically contain different persons, given that the tracklets are taken at distinct places or with long intervals; 2)
within each tracklet, the frames are mostly of the same person. Based on these assumptions, this paper propose a stepwise metric promotion approach to estimate the identities
of training tracklets, which iterates between cross-camera
tracklet association and feature learning. Specifically, We
use each training tracklet as a query, and perform retrieval
in the cross-camera training set. Our method is built on
reciprocal nearest neighbor search and can eliminate the
hard negative label matches, i.e., the cross-camera nearest
neighbors of the false matches in the initial rank list. The
tracklet that passes the reciprocal nearest neighbor check
is considered to have the same ID with the query. Experimental results on the PRID 2011, ILIDS-VID, and MARS
datasets show that the proposed method achieves very competitive re-ID accuracy compared with its supervised counterparts.

1. Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation (re-ID), aiming to retrieve a
query identity from a gallery in a different camera view,
usually relies on large volumes of labeled data. Due to the
high labeling cost, this paper is devoted to the unsupervised
scenario in which no identity labels are needed.
Focusing on video-based unsupervised re-ID, our work
is motivated from three aspects. First, videos contain much
richer information than single images, e.g., the space-time
cues and the pose variations, and are non-trivially available
by detection and tracking. The appearance/temporal information can signiﬁcantly improve the discriminative ability
of the learned visual representations [48, 29, 39]. More0 Dr. Wang2∗ is the corresponding author.

ID 001

ID 002

Figure 1. A video frame on the MARS dataset [48]. We draw
in this frame two tracklets (red and yellow) which are actually
observed at distinct time stamps. It is intuitive to assume that the
two tracklets can be treated as different identities. This observation
contributes to the model initialization process.

over, since videos contain more prior knowledge about the
scenario, the inﬂuence of background noise can be largely
weakened [42].
Second, video tracklets, produced by pedestrian detection and tracking (Fig. 1), are reliable data source for unsupervised learning methods. This process is fully automatic
and unsupervised. As implied in the recent survey [50],
different tracklets can be treated as different identities, as
long as we assume that the tracklets are captured at distinct
places or with long intervals. Therefore, even if no human
annotation is available, a discriminative model can be obtained via the tracklet data.
Third, feature learning using tracklets from the same
view may result in low discriminative ability. In fact, the key
component in unsupervised re-ID is label estimation. Given
the tracklets that provide some supervision under a certain
camera, it is important to propagate these labels across different cameras, so that cross-camera characteristics will be
learned.
Framework. This paper adopts an rather intuitive unsupervised framework for video-based person re-ID. In brief,
two steps are involved: 1) classiﬁer initialization using the
tracklets in the same camera [50] (see Fig. 1); 2) itera12429

