Ensemble Deep Learning for Skeleton-based Action Recognition
using Temporal Sliding LSTM networks
Inwoong Lee, Doyoung Kim, Seoungyoon Kang, Sanghoon Lee∗
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea
{mayddb100, tnyffx, auffallig, slee}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract

Coordinate
Transformation
Scale

Human action recognition is one of many challenging tasks targeted by computer vision researchers. It has
many important applications including video surveillance,
human-computer interaction, game control, sports video
analysis, etc. Although traditional studies about action
recognition have been focused on recognizing actions from
∗ Corresponding author (e-mail: slee@yonsei.ac.kr).

LSTM

Softmax axis

LSTM
LSTM
LSTM
Rotation

Ensemble of
Deep Learning

Motion 2

LSTM
LSTM

Multi-term Diversity axis

1. Introduction

Discriminative
Multi-term LSTMs

LSTM
LSTM

…

This paper addresses the problems of feature representation of skeleton joints and the modeling of temporal dynamics to recognize human actions. Traditional methods generally use relative coordinate systems dependent on some
joints, and model only the long-term dependency, while excluding short-term and medium term dependencies. Instead
of taking raw skeletons as the input, we transform the skeletons into another coordinate system to obtain the robustness
to scale, rotation and translation, and then extract salient
motion features from them. Considering that Long Shortterm Memory (LSTM) networks with various time-step sizes
can model various attributes well, we propose novel ensemble Temporal Sliding LSTM (TS-LSTM) networks for
skeleton-based action recognition. The proposed network is
composed of multiple parts containing short-term, mediumterm and long-term TS-LSTM networks, respectively. In
our network, we utilize an average ensemble among multiple parts as a final feature to capture various temporal
dependencies. We evaluate the proposed networks and the
additional other architectures to verify the effectiveness of
the proposed networks, and also compare them with several
other methods on five challenging datasets. The experimental results demonstrate that our network models achieve the
state-of-the-art performance through various temporal features. Additionally, we analyze a relation between the recognized actions and the multi-term TS-LSTM features by visualizing the softmax features of multiple parts.

Salient Motion
Extraction
Motion 1

Translation

Motion N

LSTM
LSTM

Ensemble

LSTM
LSTM

Figure 1: System overview of the proposed deep learning
network. The main four phases of the system are composed of coordinate transformation, motion feature extraction, multi-term LSTMs and ensemble deep learning.

the monocular RGB video sequences, it is hard to fully
capture the human action in 3D space by using monocular video sensors. With a rapid development of 3D data
acquisition over the past few decades, lots of researches on
human activity recognition from 3D data can have been actively performed [2].
A human body can be represented by a stick figure called
human skeleton, which consists of line segments linked
by joints, and the motion of joints can provide the key to
motion estimation and recognition of the whole figure [1].
Hence, if we can reliably extract and track a human skeleton in 3D space, action recognition can be performed by
classifying the temporal movement of the skeleton. Currently, reliable joint coordinates can be obtained from the
depth sensor using the real-time skeleton estimation algorithms [15, 22]. These kinds of effective pose estimation technologies have been facilitating studies on skeletonbased action recognition.
There are two related issues for human skeleton-based
action recognition. The first one is a problem for input data

1012

