Super-Trajectory for Video Segmentation
Wenguan Wang 1 , Jianbing Shen∗ 1 , Jianwen Xie 2 , and Fatih Porikli 3
1

Beijing Lab of Intelligent Information Technology, School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
University of California, Los Angeles, USA
3
Research School of Engineering, Australian National University, Australia

Abstract
We introduce a novel semi-supervised video segmentation approach based on an efficient video representation,
called as “super-trajectory”. Each super-trajectory corresponds to a group of compact trajectories that exhibit consistent motion patterns, similar appearance and close spatiotemporal relationships. We generate trajectories using
a probabilistic model, which handles occlusions and drifts in a robust and natural way. To reliably group trajectories, we adopt a modified version of the density peaks
based clustering algorithm that allows capturing rich spatiotemporal relations among trajectories in the clustering
process. The presented video representation is discriminative enough to accurately propagate the initial annotations
in the first frame onto the remaining video frames. Extensive
experimental analysis on challenging benchmarks demonstrate our method is capable of distinguishing the target
objects from complex backgrounds and even reidentifying
them after occlusions.

Figure 1. Our video segmentation method takes the first frame annotation as initialization (left). Leveraging on super-trajectories,
the segmentation process achieves superior results even for challenging scenarios including heavy occlusions, complex appearance variations, and large shape deformations (middle, right).

characteristics. A point trajectory, e.g., the tracked positions of an individual point across multiple frames, is a
constituent of super-trajectory. This representation captures
several aspects of a video:

1. Introduction

• Long-term motion information is explicitly modeled as
it consists of trajectories over extended periods;

We state the problem of semi-supervised video object segmentation as the partitioning of objects in a given video
sequence with available annotations in the first frame. Aiming for this task, we incorporate an efficient video representation, super-trajectory, to capture the underlying spatiotemporal structure information that is intrinsic to realword scenes. Each super-trajectory corresponds to a group
of trajectories that are similar in nature and have common

• Spatiotemporal location information is implicitly interpreted by clustering nearby trajectories; and

∗ Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen (shenjianbing@bit.edu.cn).
This work was supported in part by the National Basic Research Program
of China (973 Program) (No. 2013CB328805), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61272359), the Australian Research Council’s
Discovery Projects funding scheme (project DP150104645), and the Fok
Ying-Tong Education Foundation for Young Teachers. Specialized Fund
for Joint Building Program of Beijing Municipal Education Commission.

• Compact features, such as color and motion pattern,
are described in a conveniently compact form.
With above good properties, super-trajectory simplifies and
reduces the complexity of propagating human-provided labels in the segmentation process. We first generate trajectory based on Markovian process, which handles occlusions
and drifts naturally and efficiently. Then a density peaks
based clustering (DPC) algorithm [31] is modified for obtaining reasonable division of the trajectories, which offers
proper split of videos in space and time axes. The design of
our super-trajectory is motivated by the flowing two aspects.

1671

