Towards End-to-end Text Spotting
with Convolutional Recurrent Neural Networks

1

Hui Li1∗ , Peng Wang2,1∗, Chunhua Shen1
The University of Adelaide, and Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
2
Northwestern Polytechnical University, China

e-mail: {hui.li02,chunhua.shen}@adelaide.edu.au, peng.wang@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this work, we jointly address the problem of text detection and recognition in natural scene images based on
convolutional recurrent neural networks. We propose a
unified network that simultaneously localizes and recognizes text with a single forward pass, avoiding intermediate
processes, such as image cropping, feature re-calculation,
word separation, and character grouping. In contrast to existing approaches that consider text detection and recognition as two distinct tasks and tackle them one by one, the
proposed framework settles these two tasks concurrently.
The whole framework can be trained end-to-end, requiring only images, ground-truth bounding boxes and text labels. The convolutional features are calculated only once
and shared by both detection and recognition, which saves
processing time. Through multi-task training, the learned
features become more informative and improves the overall
performance. Our proposed method has achieved competitive performance on several benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Text in natural scene images contains rich semantic information and is of great value for image understanding.
As an important task in image analysis, scene text spotting,
including both text region detection and word recognition,
attracts much attention in computer vision field.
Due to the large variation in text patterns and background, spotting text in natural scene is much more challenging than in scanned documents. Although significant
progress has been made recently based on Deep Neural Network (DNN) techniques, it is still an open problem [36].
Previous works [28, 2, 12, 11] usually divide text spotting into a sequence of distinct sub-tasks. Text detection
is performed firstly with a high recall to get candidate text
∗ The first two authors equally contributed to this work. C. Shen is the
corresponding author.

regions. Then word recognition is performed on cropped
bounding boxes using different approaches, followed by
word separation or character grouping. A number of techniques are also developed which solely focus on text detection or word recognition. However, the tasks of word detection and recognition are highly correlated. Firstly, the feature information can be shared between them. In addition,
these two tasks can complement each other: detecting text
regions accurately helps improve recognition performance,
and recognition outputs can be used to refine detection results.
To this end, we propose an end-to-end trainable text spotter, which jointly detects and recognizes words in natural
scene images. An overview of the network architecture is
presented in Figure 1. It consists of several convolutional
layers, a region proposal network tailored specifically for
text (refer to as Text Proposal Network, TPN), a Recurrent
Neural Network (RNN) encoder for embedding proposals
of varying sizes to fixed-length vectors, multi-layer perceptrons for detection and bounding box regression, and an
attention-based RNN decoder for word recognition. Via this
framework, both text bounding boxes and word labels are
provided with a single forward evaluation of the network.
We do not need to process the intermediate issues such as
character grouping [35, 26] or text line separation [32], and
thus avoid potential error accumulation. The main contributions are thus three-fold:
(1) An end-to-end trainable DNN is designed to optimize the overall accuracy and share computations. The
network integrates both text detection and word recognition. With the simultaneous training on multiple tasks, the
learned features are more informative, which can promote
the detection results as well as the overall performance.
The convolutional features are shared by both detection
and recognition, which saves processing time. To our best
knowledge, this is the first attempt to integrate text detection
and recognition into a single end-to-end trainable network.
(2) We propose a new method for region feature extraction. In previous works [4, 21], Region-of-Interest (RoI)

5238

