Real-Time Monocular Pose Estimation of 3D Objects using
Temporally Consistent Local Color Histograms
Henning Tjaden, Ulrich Schwanecke
RheinMain University of Applied Sciences
Wiesbaden, Germany

Elmar Schömer
Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz
Mainz, Germany

{henning.tjaden, ulrich.schwanecke}@hs-rm.de

schoemer@uni-mainz.de

Abstract
We present a novel approach to 6DOF pose estimation and segmentation of rigid 3D objects using a single
monocular RGB camera based on temporally consistent, local color histograms. We show that this approach outperforms previous methods in cases of cluttered backgrounds,
heterogenous objects, and occlusions. The proposed histograms can be used as statistical object descriptors within
a template matching strategy for pose recovery after temporary tracking loss e.g. caused by massive occlusion or if
the object leaves the camera’s field of view. The descriptors
can be trained online within a couple of seconds moving
a handheld object in front of a camera. During the training stage, our approach is already capable to recover from
accidental tracking loss. We demonstrate the performance
of our method in comparison to the state of the art in different challenging experiments including a popular public
data set.

1. Introduction
Visually estimating the pose, meaning 3D orientation
and translation, of rigid objects is an essential and challenging task in many computer vision based systems. The
fields of application include robotics, medical navigation,
sports therapy, augmented reality and human computer interaction (see e.g. [16] for a detailed survey). Thereby, for
many practical scenarios it is important that the underlying pose estimation algorithms are real-time capable. Furthermore, they should be robust to cluttered backgrounds,
different lighting conditions and surface properties such as
texture, reflectance and color. In particular for handheld
objects it is crucial that occlusions can be handled appropriately (see Fig. 1). In practice, it is often desirable to use
only one ordinary camera instead of a multi-camera setup
as this keeps the hardware and calibration requirements at a
minimum and suffers least from visibility issues.

Figure 1. Estimating the pose of a heterogenous object in a cluttered scene under strong occlusions and viewpoint changes. Top:
RGB input frames. Bottom: Tracking result (within ∼16 ms).

In human environments, objects of interest such as tools,
components or vehicles are often weakly textured or even
texturless, which is why methods based on point features
[17] cannot be used in general. Additionally, intensity
gradient-based descriptors of the object’s surface are prone
to local minima in case of cluttered background, motion
blur or defocus [16, 27]. Since the appearance of such objects is characterized by their silhouette, so-called regionbased approaches have been introduced. Based on prior
shape knowledge usually in form of a 3D model, these
methods try to estimate the object’s pose by minimizing
the discrepancy between a suitable representation of both
the camera image and the projected silhouette of the model
parametrized by the sought pose.
In general, the problem of pose estimation can be separated into pose tracking and pose detection. In case of tracking, the object is assumed to be seen in a sequence of consecutive images such as a video footage. Thereby, the mo-

124

