Modeling Urban Scenes From Pointclouds
William Nguatem
Bundeswehr University Munich, Germany

Helmut Mayer
Bundeswehr University Munich, Germany

william.nguatem@unibw.de

helmut.mayer@unibw.de

Abstract
We present a method for Modeling Urban Scenes from
Pointclouds (MUSP). In contrast to existing approaches,
MUSP is robust, scalable and provides a more complete
description by not making a Manhattan-World assumption
and modeling both buildings (with polyhedra) as well as the
non-planar ground (using NURBS). First, we segment the
scene into consistent patches using a divide-and-conquer
based algorithm within a nonparametric Bayesian framework (stick-breaking construction). These patches often
correspond to meaningful structures, such as the ground,
facades, roofs and roof superstructures. We use polygon
sweeping to fit predefined templates for buildings, and for
the ground, a NURBS surface is fit and uniformly tessellated. Finally, we apply boolean operations to the polygons
for buildings, buildings parts and the tesselated ground to
clip unnecessary geometry (e.g., facades protrusions below
the non-planar ground), leading to the final model. The
explicit Bayesian formulation of scene segmentation makes
our approach suitable for challenging datasets with varying
amounts of noise, outliers, and point density. We demonstrate the robustness of MUSP on 3D pointclouds from image matching as well as LiDAR.

1. Introduction
Three-dimensional (3D) modeling of urban scenes has
received major interest in recent years [15, 18, 30, 41] due
to emerging applications in virtual and augmented reality,
simulation, etc. The ultimate goal is to generate compact
yet rich representations, making available 3D assets readily understandable by other processes (e.g. rendering). Two
major technologies have made these developments possible: (1) Image matching, i.e., Structure-from-Motion and
Multi-View Stereo (SfM/MVS) and, (2) Light Detection
And Ranging (LiDAR). LiDAR is a mature technology producing 3D points with high accuracy.

Figure 1. We propose an approach based on segmentation (random
colors are assigned to the segmented patches) and model fitting
for Modeling Urban Scenes from Pointclouds (MUSP). In this
example, MUSP transforms 35 million 3D points from a MultiView Stereo (MVS) reconstruction of a residential scene containing an irregular arrangement of buildings on a non-planar terrain
into a semantic watertight polygonal model. In the presence of
multiple close objects on a non-planar ground, consistent patch
segmentation in noisy pointclouds is itself a highly non-trivial
task. MUSP employs a probabilistic framework that addresses this
problem without any knowledge about the number of segments.
A template-based polygon fitting ensures consistency as well as
model completeness.

13837

