Spatial Memory for Context Reasoning in Object Detection
Xinlei Chen
Abhinav Gupta
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
{xinleic,abhinavg}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Modeling instance-level context and object-object relationships is extremely challenging. It requires reasoning
about bounding boxes of different classes, locations etc.
Above all, instance-level spatial reasoning inherently requires modeling conditional distributions on previous detections. Unfortunately, our current object detection systems do not have any memory to remember what to condition on! The state-of-the-art object detectors still detect
all object in parallel followed by non-maximal suppression
(NMS). While memory has been used for tasks such as captioning, they mostly use image-level memory cells without
capturing the spatial layout. On the other hand, modeling object-object relationships requires spatial reasoning –
not only do we need a memory to store the spatial layout,
but also a effective reasoning module to extract spatial patterns. This paper presents a conceptually simple yet powerful solution – Spatial Memory Network (SMN), to model the
instance-level context efficiently and effectively. Our spatial
memory essentially assembles object instances back into a
pseudo “image” representation that is easy to be fed into
another ConvNet for object-object context reasoning. This
leads to a new sequential reasoning architecture where image and memory are processed in parallel to obtain detections which update the memory again. We show our SMN
direction is promising as it provides 2.2% improvement over
baseline Faster RCNN on the COCO dataset with VGG161 .

1. Introduction
Context helps image understanding! Apart from strong
psychological evidence [4, 37, 64, 65] that context is vital
for humans to recognize objects, many empirical studies in
the computer vision community [10, 11, 16, 22, 23, 43, 60,
62, 73, 82, 83] have also suggested that recognition algorithms can be improved by proper modeling of context.
But what is the right model for context? Consider the
problem of object detection. There are two common models of context often used in the community. The first type
of model incorporates image or scene level context [5, 36,
1 For more up-to-date results, please check our arXiv submission
https://arxiv.org/abs/1704.04224.

Figure 1: Evidence of image-level context reasoning inside
ConvNets. All examples are from our baseline faster RCNN
detector with VGG16 conv5 3 features on COCO [52].
Numbers are class confidences. Left and middle: two examples where the ConvNet is able to detect tiny and simpleshaped objects much smaller than the receptive field size.
Bottom right: a false positive detection for person given the
seat on a passenger train. Our Spatial Memory Network
takes advantage of this power by encoding multiple object
instances into a “pseudo” image representation.
46, 58, 63, 74, 81]. The second type models object-object
relationships at instance-level [15, 27, 32, 58, 67, 94]. Take
the the top-left image of Fig. 1 as an example, both the person and the tennis racket can be used to create a contextual
prior on where the ball should be.
Of these two models, which one is more effective for
modeling context? A quick glimpse on the current stateof-the-art approaches, the idea of single region classification [40, 49, 51, 53, 69] with deep ConvNets [33, 76] is
still dominating object detection. On the surface, these approaches hardly use any contextual reasoning; but we believe the large receptive fields of the neurons in fact do incorporate image-level context (See Fig. 1 for evidences).
On the other hand, there has been little or no success in
modeling object-object relationships or instance-level context in recent years.
Why so? Arguably, modeling the instance-level context
is more challenging. Instance-level reasoning for object detection would have to tackle bounding boxes pairs or groups
in different classes, locations, scales, aspect ratios, etc.
Moreover, for modeling image-level context, the grid structure of pixels allows the number of contextual inputs to be
reduced efficiently (e.g. to a local neighborhood [11, 43, 73]
or a smaller scale [76, 87]), whereas such reductions for
arbitrary instances appear to be not so trivial. Above all,
14086

