DCTM: Discrete-Continuous Transformation Matching for Semantic Flow∗
Seungryong Kim1 , Dongbo Min2 , Stephen Lin3 , and Kwanghoon Sohn1
1
Yonsei University 2 Chungnam National University 3 Microsoft Research
{srkim89,khsohn}@yonsei.ac.kr

dbmin@cnu.ac.kr

stevelin@microsoft.com

Abstract
Techniques for dense semantic correspondence have provided limited ability to deal with the geometric variations
that commonly exist between semantically similar images.
While variations due to scale and rotation have been examined, there is a lack of practical solutions for more complex
deformations such as affine transformations because of the
tremendous size of the associated solution space. To address this problem, we present a discrete-continuous transformation matching (DCTM) framework where dense affine
transformation fields are inferred through a discrete label
optimization in which the labels are iteratively updated via
continuous regularization. In this way, our approach draws
solutions from the continuous space of affine transformations in a manner that can be computed efficiently through
constant-time edge-aware filtering and a proposed affinevarying CNN-based descriptor. Experimental results show
that this model outperforms the state-of-the-art methods for
dense semantic correspondence on various benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Establishing dense correspondences across semantically
similar images is essential for numerous tasks such as nonparametric scene parsing, scene recognition, image registration, semantic segmentation, and image editing [15, 33, 32].
Unlike traditional dense correspondence for estimating
depth [46] or optical flow [9, 51], semantic correspondence
estimation poses additional challenges due to intra-class
appearance and shape variations among object instances,
which can degrade matching by conventional approaches
[33, 59]. Recently, several methods have attempted to deal
with the appearance differences using convolutional neural
network (CNN) based descriptors because of their high invariance to appearance variations [34, 11, 61, 24]. However,
geometric variations are considered in just a limited manner
through constraint settings such as those used for depth or
optical flow. Some methods solve for geometric variations
∗ This work was supported by Institute for Information & communications Technology Promotion (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government
(MSIP) (No.2016-0-00197).

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

Figure 1. Visualization of our DCTM results: (a) source image, (b)
target image, (c), (d) ground truth correspondences, (e), (f), (g), (h)
warped images and correspondences after discrete and continuous
optimization, respectively. For images undergoing non-rigid deformations, our DCTM estimates reliable correspondences by iteratively optimizing the label space via continuous regularization.

such as scale or rotation [18, 41, 21], but they consider only
a discrete set of scales or rotations as possible solutions, and
do not capture the non-rigid geometric deformations that
commonly exist between semantically similar images.
It has been shown that these non-rigid image deformations can be locally well approximated by affine transformations [45, 30, 29]. To estimate dense affine transformation fields, a possible approach is to discretize the space of
affine transformations and find a labeling solution. However, the higher-dimensional search space for affine transformations makes discrete global optimization algorithms
such as graph cut [6] and belief propagation [48, 52] computationally infeasible. For more efficient optimization over
large label spaces, the PatchMatch Filter (PMF) [37] integrates constant-time edge-aware filtering (EAF) [43, 36]
with PatchMatch-based randomized search [2]. PMF is
leveraged for dense semantic correspondence in DAISY Filter Flow (DFF) [59], which finds labels for displacement
fields as well as for scale and rotation. Extending DFF to
affine transformations would be challenging though. One
reason is that its efficient technique for computing DAISY
features [54] at pre-determined scales and rotations cannot
be applied for affine transformations. Another reason is
that, as shown in [27, 21], the weak implicit smoothing em14529

