BlitzNet: A Real-Time Deep Network for Scene Understanding
Nikita Dvornik∗

Konstantin Shmelkov∗

Julien Mairal

Cordelia Schmid

Inria†

Abstract
Real-time scene understanding has become crucial in
many applications such as autonomous driving. In this paper, we propose a deep architecture, called BlitzNet, that
jointly performs object detection and semantic segmentation in one forward pass, allowing real-time computations.
Besides the computational gain of having a single network
to perform several tasks, we show that object detection
and semantic segmentation benefit from each other in terms
of accuracy. Experimental results for VOC and COCO
datasets show state-of-the-art performance for object detection and segmentation among real time systems.

1. Introduction
Object detection and semantic segmentation are two fundamental problems for scene understanding in computer vision. The task of object detection is to identify on an image
all objects of predefined categories and localize them via
bounding boxes. Semantic segmentation operates at a finer
scale; its aim is to parse an image and associate a class label
to each pixel. Despite the similarities of the two tasks, only
few works have tackled them jointly [3, 11, 28, 29].
Yet, there is a strong motivation to address both problems simultaneously. On the one hand, good segmentation
is sufficient to perform detection in some cases. As Figure 1 suggests, an object may be sometimes identified and
localized from segmentation only by simply looking at connected components of pixels sharing the same label. In the
more general case, it is easy to conduct a simple experiment showing that ground-truth segmentation is a meaningful clue for detection, using for instance ground-truth segmentation as the input of an object detection pipeline. On
the other hand, correctly identified detections are also useful for segmentation as shown by the success of weakly supervised segmentation techniques that learn from bounding
box annotation only [21]. The goal of our paper is to solve
∗ The authors contributed equally.
† Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000
Grenoble, France.

(a) Generated bounding boxes

(b) Generated masks

Fig. 1: The outputs of our pipeline. (a) The results of object
detection. (b) The results of semantic segmentation.

efficiently both problems at the same time, by exploiting
image data annotated at the global object level (via bounding boxes), at the pixel level (via partially or fully annoated
segmentation maps), or at both levels.
As most recent image recognition pipelines, our approach is based on convolutional neural networks [12],
which are widely adopted for object detection [6] and semantic segmentation [17]. More precisely, deep neural networks were first used as feature extractors to classify a large
number of candidate bounding boxes [6], which is computationally expensive. The improved version [5] reduces the
computational cost but relies on shallow techniques for extracting bounding box proposals and does not allow end-toend training. This issue was later solved in [25] by making
the object proposal mechanism a part of the neural network.
Yet, the approach remains expensive and relies on a regionbased strategy (see also [13]) that makes the network architecture inappropriate for semantic segmentation.
To match the real-time speed requirement, we choose
instead to base our work on the Single Shot Detection (SSD) [16] approach, which consists of a fullyconvolutional model to perform object detection in one forward pass. Besides the fact that it allows all computations to
be performed in real time, the pipeline is more generic, imposes less constraints on the network architecture and opens
new perspectives to solve our multi-task problem.
Interestingly, recent work on semantic segmentations are
also moving in the same direction, see for instance [17].
Specific to semantic segmentation, [17] also introduces new

4154

