VQS: Linking Segmentations to Questions and Answers for
Supervised Attention in VQA and Question-Focused Semantic Segmentation

1

Chuang Gan1 Yandong Li2 Haoxiang Li3 Chen Sun4 Boqing Gong2
IIIS, Tsinghua University, China 2 CRCV, University of Central Florida, USA
3
Adobe Research, USA 4 Google Research, USA

Abstract
Rich and dense human labeled datasets are among the
main enabling factors for the recent advance on visionlanguage understanding. Many seemingly distant annotations (e.g., semantic segmentation and visual question answering (VQA)) are inherently connected in that they reveal
different levels and perspectives of human understandings
about the same visual scenes — and even the same set of
images (e.g., of COCO). The popularity of COCO correlates those annotations and tasks. Explicitly linking them
up may significantly benefit both individual tasks and the
unified vision and language modeling.
We present the preliminary work of linking the instance
segmentations provided by COCO to the questions and answers (QAs) in the VQA dataset, and name the collected
links visual questions and segmentation answers (VQS).
They transfer human supervision between the previously
separate tasks, offer more effective leverage to existing
problems, and also open the door for new research problems and models. We study two applications of the VQS
data in this paper: supervised attention for VQA and a
novel question-focused semantic segmentation task. For the
former, we obtain state-of-the-art results on the VQA real
multiple-choice task by simply augmenting the multilayer
perceptrons with some attention features that are learned
using the segmentation-QA links as explicit supervision. To
put the latter in perspective, we study two plausible methods and compare them to an oracle method assuming that
the instance segmentations are given at the test stage.

1. Introduction
Connecting visual understanding with natural language
has received extensive attentions in recent years. We have
witnessed the resurgence of image captioning [41, 28, 18,
6, 39, 4, 46, 12, 32, 10] which is often addressed by jointly
modeling visual and textual content with deep neural networks. However, image captions tend to be diverse and subCode and data: https://github.com/Cold-Winter/vqs.

What time is it?

Is the street empty?

How many buses have only a single level?

Is he wearing a tie?

What is next to the dog?

Figure 1. Taking as input an image and a question about the image,
an algorithm for the question-focused semantic segmentation is
desired to generate some segmentation mask(s) over the entities in
the image that can visually answer the question.

jective — it is hard to evaluate the quality of captions generated by different algorithms [7, 40, 1], and tend to miss
subtle details — in training, the models may be led to capturing the scene-level gist rather than fine-grained entities.
In light of the premises and demerits of image captioning,
visual question answering (VQA) [3, 50, 35, 13] and visual grounding [34, 15, 36, 27, 16, 42, 49] are proposed, in
parallel, to accommodate automatic evaluation and multiple levels of focus on the visual entities (e.g., scene, object,
activity, attribute, context, relationships, etc.).
Rich and dense human annotated datasets are arguably
the main “enabler”, among others, for this line of exciting works on vision-language understanding. COCO [24]
is especially noticeable among them. It contains mainly
classical labels (e.g., segmentations, object categories and
instances, key points, etc.) and image captions. Many research groups have then collected additional labels of the
COCO images for a variety of tasks. Agrawal et al. crowdsourced questions and answers (QAs) about a subset of the
COCO images and abstract scenes [3]. Zhu et al. collected
seven types of QAs in which the object mentions are as11811

