Joint Prediction of Activity Labels and Starting Times in Untrimmed Videos
Tahmida Mahmud1 , Mahmudul Hasan2 , Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury1
1
University of California, Riverside, CA-92521, USA
2
Comcast Labs, Washington, DC-20005, USA
tmahm001@ucr.edu, mahmud.ucr@gmail.com, amitrc@ee.ucr.edu

Abstract
Most of the existing works on human activity analysis
focus on recognition or early recognition of the activity labels from complete or partial observations. Predicting the
labels of future unobserved activities where no frames of
the predicted activities have been observed is a challenging
problem, with important applications, which has not been
explored much. Associated with the future label prediction
problem is the problem of predicting the starting time of the
next activity. In this work, we propose a system that is able
to infer about the labels and the starting times of future activities. Activities are characterized by the previous activity
sequence (which is observed), as well as the objects present
in the scene during their occurrence. We propose a network
similar to a hybrid Siamese network with three branches to
jointly learn both the future label and the starting time. The
first branch takes visual features from the objects present
in the scene using a fully connected network, the second
branch takes previous activity features using a LSTM network to model long-term sequential relationships and the
third branch captures the last observed activity features to
model the context of inter-activity time using another fully
connected network. These concatenated features are used
for both label and time prediction. Experiments on two
challenging datasets demonstrate that our framework for
joint prediction of activity label and starting time improves
the performance of both, and outperforms the state-of-thearts.

1. Introduction
Human activity analysis is a widely studied computer
vision problem. The solution to this problem has crucial impact on a wide range of practical applications such
as video surveillance, human-computer interaction, autonomous navigation, active sensing, video indexing, active gaming, assisted living, etc. In spite of the enormous
amount of research conducted in this area, the problem is
still challenging due to the fundamental challenges inher-

Figure 1. An example sequence of a video stream from MPIICooking Dataset [32]. Two related problems are explained here
- early recognition of the ith activity from partial observations of
it, and prediction of its label from previously observed activities
only. In the early recognition problem (top-right), the first few
frames of the ith activity (cut slices) have been observed. In the
prediction problem (bottom-right), no frame of the ith activity has
been observed.

ent to the task, such as - the tremendous intra-class variance
among the activities, huge spatio-temporal scale variation,
target motion variations, etc. Moreover, low image resolution, object occlusion, illumination change and viewpoint
change further aggravate these challenges.
The majority of the existing works focus on the recognition of observed activities or early recognition of partially observed activities. In other words, they try to answer queries like what happened before or what is happening right now, whereas predicting the labels of future activities which have not yet been observed is a scarcely explored problem. In [2, 23, 24, 33, 42], by using the word
‘prediction’, these papers basically refer to the early recognition task, i.e., predicting the label of the ongoing activity
where the first few frames of that activity have already been
observed. However, in the prediction problem we are addressing, no observation is available beforehand. The difference between these two problems is illustrated in Figure 1. Predicting the future activity labels is critical in real
life scenarios, where anticipatory response is required such

5773

