Detailed Surface Geometry and Albedo Recovery from RGB-D Video
Under Natural Illumination
Xinxin Zuo1,2, *
Sen Wang2,1,∗
Jiangbin Zheng2
Ruigang Yang1,3
1
2
University of Kentucky
Northwestern Polytechnical University 3 Baidu
Lexington, KY, US
Xi’an, P.R.China
Beijing, P.R.China
{xinxin.zuo,sen.wang}@uky.edu

zhengjb@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper we present a novel approach for depth map
enhancement from an RGB-D video sequence. The basic
idea is to exploit the photometric information in the color
sequence. Instead of making any assumption about surface
albedo or controlled object motion and lighting, we use the
lighting variations introduced by casual object movement.
We are effectively calculating photometric stereo from a
moving object under natural illuminations. The key technical challenge is to establish correspondences over the entire image set. We therefore develop a lighting insensitive
robust pixel matching technique that out-performs optical
flow method in presence of lighting variations. In addition
we present an expectation-maximization framework to recover the surface normal and albedo simultaneously, without any regularization term. We have validated our method
on both synthetic and real datasets to show its superior performance on both surface details recovery and intrinsic decomposition.

1. Introduction
The availability of affordable depth sensors has sparked a
revolution in many areas of computer vision, such as human
computer interactions, robotics, and video analysis. Among
these 3D modeling has probably received the most benefits
from this advancement of sensors. Nevertheless, the current
generation of depth sensors still suffers from limited resolution and accuracy. As a result, fine-scale structural details
of an object cannot be recovered.
Many researchers have exploited high quality color image as guidance to enhance the depth map, such as denoise and up-sampling [28, 11, 40, 6, 25]. Among these
approaches, the fusion of depth maps with shading information contained in color images has shown its effectiveness in recovering surface geometry details. Most of these
* The first two authors contributed equally to this work

ryang@cs.uky.edu

methods implement shading refinement on single RGBD frame on the basis of Shape-from-Shading (SfS) techniques [41, 27, 37]. However, the inherent ambiguity for
SfS still exists and smooth regularization term is usually
incorporated. Another problem is that an albedo image is
needed to predict the appearance, which is also unknown.
Typically a constant albedo assumption is made. In order to
handle varying albedos, previous shading-based refinement
methods often approached this chicken-and-egg problem
by assuming prior assumptions or by enforcing particular
albedo regularizers. However, these regularizers are heuristic and may not work all the time. In this paper we propose
to take advantage of an RGB-D sequence to uniquely resolve the normal maps and albedo images.
We only make two basic assumptions about the object,
first it is primarily diffuse and second it is acquired by
casual movement of the object (not the camera). In this
way, the object’s movement induces illumination changes
in the image sequence, which is critical to resolve the surface normal and albedo without any ambiguity. It resembles the photometric stereo. But instead of controlling the
light when imaging the static object, we move the object
under general natural lighting. This kind of cue has been
exploited in multi-view photometric stereo [10] and shape
from video [22, 32, 42]. However, they have the environmental lighting constrained to be calibrated directional light
and the object is experiencing turntable motion or the motion is already calibrated. On the contrary our approach
works under natural lighting with the object under arbitrary
motion, which makes our method more widely used in everyday environment.
Given the captured RGB-D sequence, first we try to align
the RGB-D sequence and find the correspondences among
the images using a novel robust matching technique. Then
the environmental lighting is estimated using the intensity
ratios of the aligned sequence, which effectively factors out
the impact of varying albedo. Finally, we formulate an
Expectation-Maximization framework in which the surface
normal and its albedo can be calculated robustly, in the pres13133

