Refractive Structure-from-Motion Through a Flat Refractive Interface
François Chadebecq1,2
Francisco Vasconcelos1,2
George Dwyer1,2
René Lacher1
Sébastien Ourselin2
Tom Vercauteren2
Danail Stoyanov1,2
1
Surgical Robot Vision, UCL London, UK
2
Centre for Medical Image Computing, UCL, London, UK
f.chadebeq@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Recovering 3D scene geometry from underwater images
involves the Refractive Structure-from-Motion (RSfM) problem, where the image distortions caused by light refraction
at the interface between different propagation media invalidates the single view point assumption. Direct use of the
pinhole camera model in RSfM leads to inaccurate camera
pose estimation and consequently drift. RSfM methods have
been thoroughly studied for the case of a thick glass interface that assumes two refractive interfaces between the
camera and the viewed scene. On the other hand, when
the camera lens is in direct contact with the water, there
is only one refractive interface. By explicitly considering a
refractive interface, we develop a succinct derivation of the
refractive fundamental matrix in the form of the generalised
epipolar constraint for an axial camera. We use the refractive fundamental matrix to refine initial pose estimates obtained by assuming the pinhole model. This strategy allows
us to robustly estimate underwater camera poses, where
other methods suffer from poor noise-sensitivity. We also
formulate a new four view constraint enforcing camera pose
consistency along a video which leads us to a novel RSfM
framework. For validation we use synthetic data to show the
numerical properties of our method and we provide results
on real data to demonstrate performance within laboratory
settings and for applications in endoscopy.

1. Introduction
A variety of underwater activities rely on video imaging and can be supported by computer vision methods for
mapping the environment for enhanced navigation and exploration. Recovering the 3D geometry of the scene and
the motion of the camera requires adaptation to the multiview geometry used for reconstruction in air. To formulate
Refractive Structure-from-Motion (RSfM) it is important to
consider the deviation from the classical pinhole camera
model used to describe image formation (see Figure 1).

water

refractive interface

R,t
Figure 1. Refractive Structure-from-Motion for underwater imaging assuming a thin refractive plane.

Light rays undergo refraction when passing through
mediums with different optical density as defined by Snell’s
law. The angle of deflection depends on the refractive index
of traversed medium as well as the incidence angle of the
incoming light ray. This has a strong influence on the image formation process as it invalidates the single view point
assumption [10]. While adapting intrinsic camera parameters and distortion coefficients can compensate for refraction it introduces a systematic geometric bias which affects
3D measurements and camera pose estimation [18, 16, 24]
(see Figure 2 (a)). Moreover, if advanced radial basis distortion functions (RBF) are able to compensate for severe and
irregular distortions [1, 30], refractive distortion directly depends on the depth of the 3D points in the scene [27]. Therefore, RBF models only provide a reasonable approximation
within a limited range of distances.
It has been demonstrated that vision through a refractive
interface can be modelled by an axial camera to avoid such
bias, however, ray-based models are difficult to calibrate
due to the high dimensionality of their parametrisations
[10, 2]. Even if calibrated well, 3D reconstruction with
a moving general camera remains a challenge underwater.
Although the generalised camera model encompasses the

5315

