Learning Action Recognition Model From Depth and Skeleton Videos
Hossein Rahmani, and Mohammed Bennamoun
School of Computer Science and Software Engineering,
The University of Western Australia
hossein.rahmani@uwa.edu.au, mohammed.bennamoun@uwa.edu.au

Abstract
Depth sensors open up possibilities of dealing with the
human action recognition problem by providing 3D human
skeleton data and depth images of the scene. Analysis of human actions based on 3D skeleton data has become popular
recently, due to its robustness and view-invariant representation. However, the skeleton alone is insufficient to distinguish actions which involve human-object interactions. In
this paper, we propose a deep model which efficiently models human-object interactions and intra-class variations under viewpoint changes. First, a human body-part model is
introduced to transfer the depth appearances of body-parts
to a shared view-invariant space. Second, an end-to-end
learning framework is proposed which is able to effectively
combine the view-invariant body-part representation from
skeletal and depth images, and learn the relations between
the human body-parts and the environmental objects, the
interactions between different human body-parts, and the
temporal structure of human actions. We have evaluated
the performance of our proposed model against 15 existing
techniques on two large benchmark human action recognition datasets including NTU RGB+D and UWA3DII. The
Experimental results show that our technique provides a
significant improvement over state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Automatic human action recognition from videos is a
significant research problem with wide applications in various fields such as smart surveillance, health and medicine,
sports and recreation. Depth cameras, such as Microsoft
Kinect, have become popular for this task because, depth
images are robust to variations in illumination, clothing
color and texture, and 3D human joint positions can be extracted from a single depth image due to the development
of a real-time human skeleton tracking framework [28].
The depth sensor based human action recognition research can be broadly divided into three categories including skeleton data [6,12,25,33,34,38,40], depth images [15,

17, 18, 20, 21, 23, 37, 39] and depth skeleton [19, 26, 27, 36]
based methods. Although depth based approaches achieve
impressive results on most RGB-Depth action recognition datasets, their performance drops sharply in scenarios
where the humans significantly change their spatial locations, and the temporal extents of the activities significantly
vary [15]. On the other hand, limiting the learning into
skeleton based features cannot deliver high recognition accuracy in action recognition, because depth visual appearances of human body-parts provide discriminative information, and most of the usual human actions are defined based
on the interaction of the body with other objects. For example, drinking and eating snacks actions have a very similar skeleton motion. Thus, additional information, such as
depth images, is required to distinguish such actions. The
straightforward method for combining depth and skeleton
data (feature fusion) is to concatenate these different types
of features [19, 35, 36]. In this fashion, achieving the optimal combination of features for an accurate classification
cannot be guaranteed.
Moreover, a practical system should be able to recognize human actions from novel and unseen viewpoints
(generalization). However, unlike 3D skeletal data, viewinvariant representation of depth images is a challenging
task [20–22, 24]. This is because the depth images of a human performing an action appear quite different when observed from different viewpoints. Thus, how to effectively
represent these depth images in a view-invariant space and
combine them with estimated 3D skeleton data is a significant research problem which remains under explored.
Furthermore, in human actions, body joints move together in groups. Each group can be considered as a set of
body-parts, and actions can be interpreted as interactions of
different body-parts. Thus, the most discriminative interactions corresponding to different actions need to be exploited
for better recognition. Moreover, human actions may have
a specific temporal structure. Modeling the temporal structure of action videos is also crucial for the action recognition problem. Most existing depth sensor based methods [23, 33–36] model the temporal variations of videos us15832

