Semantic Jitter:
Dense Supervision for Visual Comparisons via Synthetic Images
Aron Yu
University of Texas at Austin

Kristen Grauman
University of Texas at Austin

aron.yu@utexas.edu

grauman@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Distinguishing subtle differences in attributes is valuable, yet learning to make visual comparisons remains nontrivial. Not only is the number of possible comparisons
quadratic in the number of training images, but also access
to images adequately spanning the space of fine-grained
visual differences is limited. We propose to overcome the
sparsity of supervision problem via synthetically generated
images. Building on a state-of-the-art image generation engine, we sample pairs of training images exhibiting slight
modifications of individual attributes. Augmenting real
training image pairs with these examples, we then train attribute ranking models to predict the relative strength of
an attribute in novel pairs of real images. Our results on
datasets of faces and fashion images show the great promise
of bootstrapping imperfect image generators to counteract
sample sparsity for learning to rank.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained analysis of images often entails making visual comparisons. For example, given two products in a
fashion catalog, a shopper may judge which shoe appears
more pointy at the toe. Given two selfies, a teen may gauge
in which one he is smiling more. Given two photos of
houses for sale on a real estate website, a home buyer may
analyze which facade looks better maintained.
In these and many other such cases, we are interested
in inferring how a pair of images compares in terms of a
particular property, or “attribute”. That is, which is more
pointy, smiling, well-maintained, etc. Importantly, the distinctions of interest are often quite subtle. Subtle comparisons arise both in image pairs that are very similar in almost
every regard (e.g., two photos of the same individual wearing the same clothing, yet smiling more in one photo than
the other), as well as image pairs that are holistically different yet exhibit only slight differences in the attribute in
question (e.g., two individuals different in appearance, and
one is smiling slightly more than the other).

Novel Pair
vs.

Real Pairs

Synthetic Pairs

Figure 1: Our method “densifies” supervision for training ranking functions to make visual comparisons, by generating ordered pairs of synthetic
images. Here, when learning the attribute smiling, real training images
need not be representative of the entire attribute space (e.g., Web photos may cluster around commonly photographed expressions, like toothy
smiles). Our idea “fills in” the sparsely sampled regions to enable finegrained supervision. Given a novel pair (top), the nearest synthetic pairs
(right) may present better training data than the nearest real pairs (left).

A growing body of work explores computational models
for visual comparisons [6, 19, 24, 28, 33, 36, 38, 39, 43,
46, 47, 48]. In particular, ranking models for “relative attributes” [19, 24, 28, 33, 43, 47] use human-ordered pairs
of images to train a system to predict the relative ordering
in novel image pairs.
A major challenge in training a ranking model is the
sparsity of supervision. That sparsity stems from two factors: label availability and image availability. Because
training instances consist of pairs of images—together with
the ground truth human judgment about which exhibits the
property more or less—the space of all possible comparisons is quadratic in the number of potential training images. This quickly makes it intractable to label an image
collection exhaustively for its comparative properties. At
the same time, attribute comparisons entail a greater cog15570

