SSH: Single Stage Headless Face Detector
Mahyar Najibi*

Pouya Samangouei* Rama Chellappa
University of Maryland

najibi@cs.umd.edu

Larry S. Davis

{pouya,rama,lsd}@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
We introduce the Single Stage Headless (SSH) face detector. Unlike two stage proposal-classification detectors,
SSH detects faces in a single stage directly from the early
convolutional layers in a classification network. SSH is
headless. That is, it is able to achieve state-of-the-art results while removing the “head” of its underlying classification network – i.e. all fully connected layers in the VGG-16
which contains a large number of parameters. Additionally,
instead of relying on an image pyramid to detect faces with
various scales, SSH is scale-invariant by design. We simultaneously detect faces with different scales in a single forward pass of the network, but from different layers. These
properties make SSH fast and light-weight. Surprisingly,
with a headless VGG-16, SSH beats the ResNet-101-based
state-of-the-art on the WIDER dataset. Even though, unlike the current state-of-the-art, SSH does not use an image
pyramid and is 5X faster. Moreover, if an image pyramid
is deployed, our light-weight network achieves state-of-theart on all subsets of the WIDER dataset, improving the AP
by 2.5%. SSH also reaches state-of-the-art results on the
FDDB and Pascal-Faces datasets while using a small input
size, leading to a speed of 50 frames/second on a GPU.

1. Introduction
Face detection is a crucial step in various problems involving verification, identification, expression analysis, etc.
From the Viola-Jones [29] detector to recent work by Hu
et al. [7], the performance of face detectors has been improved dramatically. However, detecting small faces is still
considered a challenging task. The recent introduction of
the WIDER face dataset [35], containing a large number
of small faces, exposed the performance gap between humans and current face detectors. The problem becomes
more challenging when the speed and memory efficiency
of the detectors are taken into account. The best performing face detectors are usually slow and have high memory
* Authors contributed equally

Figure 1: SSH is able to detect various face sizes in a single
CNN feed-forward pass and without employing an image
pyramid in ∼ 0.1 second for an image with size 800 × 1200
on a GPU.
foot-prints (e.g. [7] takes more than 1 second to process an
image, see Section 4.5) partly due to the huge number of
parameters as well as the way robustness to scale or incorporation of context are addressed.
State-of-the-art CNN-based detectors convert image
classification networks into two-stage detection systems
[4, 24]. In the first stage, early convolutional feature maps
are used to propose a set of candidate object boxes. In the
second stage, the remaining layers of the classification networks (e.g. fc6~8 in VGG-16 [26]), which we refer to as the
network “head”, are deployed to extract local features for
these candidates and classify them. The head in the classification networks can be computationally expensive (e.g. the
network head contains ∼ 120M parameters in VGG-16 and
∼ 12M parameters in ResNet-101). Moreover, in the two
stage detectors, the computation must be performed for all
proposed candidate boxes.
Very recently, Hu et al. [7] showed state-of-the-art results on the WIDER face detection benchmark by using a
similar approach to the Region Proposal Networks (RPN)
[24] to directly detect faces. Robustness to input scale is
achieved by introducing an image pyramid as an integral

4875

