Convolutional Dictionary Learning via Local Processing
Vardan Papyan

Yaniv Romano

Jeremias Sulam

vardanp@campus.technion.ac.il

yromano@tx.technion.ac.il

jsulam@cs.technion.ac.il

Michael Elad
elad@cs.technion.ac.il

Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Technion City, Haifa 32000, Israel

Abstract
Convolutional sparse coding is an increasingly popular model in the signal and image processing communities,
tackling some of the limitations of traditional patch-based
sparse representations. Although several works have addressed the dictionary learning problem under this model,
these relied on an ADMM formulation in the Fourier domain, losing the sense of locality and the relation to the
traditional patch-based sparse pursuit. A recent work suggested a novel theoretical analysis of this global model, providing guarantees that rely on a localized sparsity measure.
Herein, we extend this local-global relation by showing how
one can efficiently solve the convolutional sparse pursuit
problem and train the filters involved, while operating locally on image patches. Our approach provides an intuitive
algorithm that can leverage standard techniques from the
sparse representations field. The proposed method is fast to
train, simple to implement, and flexible enough that it can
be easily deployed in a variety of applications. We demonstrate the proposed training scheme for image inpainting
and image separation, achieving state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
The celebrated sparse representation model has led to
impressive results in various applications over the last
decade [10, 1, 29, 30, 8]. In this context one assumes that a
signal X ∈ RN is a linear combination of a few columns,
also called atoms, taken from a matrix D ∈ RN ×M termed
a dictionary; i.e. X = DΓ where Γ ∈ RM is a sparse
vector. Given X, finding its sparsest representation, called
sparse pursuit, amounts to solving the following problem
min kΓk0 s.t. kX − DΓk2 ≤ ǫ,
Γ

(1)

where ǫ stands for the model mismatch or an additive noise
strength. The solution for the above can be approximated

using greedy algorithms such as Orthogonal Matching Pursuit (OMP) [6] or convex formulations such as BP [7]. The
task of learning the model, i.e. identifying the dictionary D
that best represents a set of training signals, is called dictionary learning and several methods have been proposed for
tackling it, including K-SVD [1], MOD [13], online dictionary learning [21], trainlets [26], and more.
When dealing with high-dimensional images, traditional
image processing algorithms train a local model for fully
overlapping patches extracted from X, process these independently using the trained local prior and then average the
results to obtain a global estimate. This approach, which
we refer to in what follows as patch averaging, gained
much popularity and success due to its simplicity and highperformance [10, 30, 8, 20]. A different approach is the
Convolutional Sparse Coding (CSC), which works with a
global model by imposing a specific structure on the dictionary involved [15, 4, 19, 27, 17, 16, 18]. In particular, this
assumes that D is a banded convolutional dictionary, implying that the signal is a superposition of a few local atoms,
or filters, shifted to different positions. Unlike patch averaging that restores independently the same information in
the image several times, CSC treats the information jointly
and only once. Several works have presented algorithms
for training convolutional dictionaries [4, 17, 27], circumventing some of the computational burdens of this problem
by relying on ADMM solvers that operate in the Fourier
domain. In doing so, these methods lost the connection to
the patch-based processing paradigm, as widely practiced
in many signal and image processing applications.
In this work, we propose a novel approach for training
the CSC model, called slice-based dictionary learning. Unlike current methods, we leverage a localized strategy enabling the solution of the global problem in terms of only
local computations in the original domain. The main advantages of our method over existing ones are:
1. It operates locally on patches, while solving faithfully
15296

