No More Discrimination: Cross City Adaptation of Road Scene Segmenters
Yi-Hsin Chen1 , Wei-Yu Chen3,4 , Yu-Ting Chen1∗, Bo-Cheng Tsai2∗, Yu-Chiang Frank Wang4 , Min Sun1
Department of {1 Electrical Engineering,2 Communication Engineering}, National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
3
Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
4
Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
{yhethanchen, wyharveychen, yuting2401, vigorous0503}@gmail.com
ycwang@citi.sinica.edu.tw , sunmin@ee.nthu.edu.tw

Abstract
Despite the recent success of deep-learning based semantic segmentation, deploying a pre-trained road scene
segmenter to a city whose images are not presented in the
training set would not achieve satisfactory performance
due to dataset biases. Instead of collecting a large number of annotated images of each city of interest to train
or refine the segmenter, we propose an unsupervised learning approach to adapt road scene segmenters across different cities. By utilizing Google Street View and its timemachine feature, we can collect unannotated images for
each road scene at different times, so that the associated
static-object priors can be extracted accordingly. By advancing a joint global and class-specific domain adversarial learning framework, adaptation of pre-trained segmenters to that city can be achieved without the need of
any user annotation or interaction. We show that our
method improves the performance of semantic segmentation in multiple cities across continents, while it performs
favorably against state-of-the-art approaches requiring annotated training data.

1. Introduction
Recent developments of technologies in computer vision, deep learning, and more broadly artificial intelligence,
have led to the race of building advanced driver assistance
systems (ADAS). From recognizing particular objects of interest toward understanding the corresponding driving environments, road scene segmentation is among the key components for a successful ADAS. With a sufficient amount
of annotated training image data, existing computer vision
algorithms already exhibit promising performances on the
above task. However, when one applies pre-trained segmenters to a scene or city which is previously not seen,
∗ indicates equal contribution

Figure 1: Illustration of our unsupervised domain
adaptation method consisting of global and class-wise
segmentation adaptations. For class-wise adaptation, we
leverage “soft” pseudo labels and static object priors
(obtained without human supervision) to further alleviate
the domain discrimination in each class.
the resulting performance would be degraded due to dataset
(domain) biases.
We conduct a pilot experiment to illustrate how severe
a state-of-the-art semantic segmenter would be affected by
the above dataset bias problem. We consider the segmenter
of [2] which is trained on Cityscapes [5], and apply for segmenting about 400 annotated road scene images of different cities across countries: Rome, Rio, Taipei, and Tokyo.
A drop in mean of intersection over union (mIoU) of 2530% was observed (see later experiments for more details).
Thus, how to suppress the dataset bias would be critical
when there is a need to deploy road scene segmenters to
different cities.
It is not surprising that, collecting a large number of annotated training image data for each city of interest would
be computationally expensive. For instance, pixel labeling
of one Cityscapes image takes 90 minutes on average [5].
11992

