Cascaded Feature Network for Semantic Segmentation of RGB-D Images
Di Lin1
Guangyong Chen2
Daniel Cohen-Or1,3
Pheng-Ann Heng2,4
Hui Huang1,4∗
1
Shenzhen University 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong 3 Tel Aviv University 4 SIAT

Abstract
Fully convolutional network (FCN) has been successfully applied in semantic segmentation of scenes represented with RGB images. Images augmented with depth
channel provide more understanding of the geometric information of the scene in the image. The question is how to
best exploit this additional information to improve the segmentation performance.
In this paper, we present a neural network with multiple
branches for segmenting RGB-D images. Our approach is
to use the available depth to split the image into layers with
common visual characteristic of objects/scenes, or common
“scene-resolution”. We introduce context-aware receptive
field (CaRF) which provides a better control on the relevant
contextual information of the learned features. Equipped
with CaRF, each branch of the network semantically segments relevant similar scene-resolution, leading to a more
focused domain which is easier to learn. Furthermore, our
network is cascaded with features from one branch augmenting the features of adjacent branch. We show that such
cascading of features enriches the contextual information
of each branch and enhances the overall performance. The
accuracy that our network achieves outperforms the stateof-the-art methods on two public datasets.

1. Introduction
Semantic image segmentation is a fundamental problem
in computer vision. It enables the pixel-wise categorization of objects [9, 26] and scenes [30, 2]. Recently, deep
convolutional neural networks [21, 34, 15] pre-trained on
large-scale image data are adopted for semantic segmentation [28, 1, 27, 38, 23]. The emergence of powerful convolutional networks have significantly improved the performances of semantic segmentation.
There has also been an increasing interest in leveraging
depth information to assist semantic segmentation. Depth
data becomes widespread, as it can be easily captured by
commercially cheap sensors. Undoubtedly, depth information is able to improve segmentation, as it captures geomet∗ Hui Huang is the corresponding author of this paper.

Figure 1: There is correlation between depth and sceneresolution: the near field (highlighted in blue rectangle)
consists of high scene-resolution, while the far field (highlighted in red rectangle) has low scene resolution.
ric information that is not captured by the color channels,
and can directly enrich the image representation learned by
deep networks. In [12, 28, 16], the depth data is added as
a fourth channel in addition to the RGB channels as input
to the networks. This straightforward approach increased
the segmentation performance. More recent works [36, 17]
have developed networks that jointly learn from the depth
and color modalities, to further improve the segmentation.
Although depth data clearly helps to separate between objects/scenes, it has much less semantic information than colors do. Moreover, there is little correlation between depth
and color channels [36], which motivates better means to
exploit the depth to enhance semantic segmentation.
In this paper, we present a different approach to exploit
depth information. The key idea is to use the depth to
split the image into layers representing similar visual characteristic, or the “scene-resolution”. We refer to sceneresolution as the resolution of the objects and scenes in
general, as observed in the input images1 . As shown in
Figure 1, there is correlation between depth and sceneresolution; lower scene-resolution appears in regions that
have higher depth, and higher scene-resolution appears in
the near field. In lower scene-resolution regions, objects and
scenes densely co-exist, forming more complex correlation
between objects/scenes relative to higher scene-resolution
1 We assume the images are with similar resolution, which can be
achieved in pre-processing.

11311

