Online Robust Image Alignment via
Subspace Learning from Gradient Orientations
Qingqing Zheng1 , Yi Wang2∗, and Pheng Ann Heng1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
School of Biomedical Engineering, Health Science Center, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
1

qqzheng@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, onewang@szu.edu.cn, pheng@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Robust and efficient image alignment remains a challenging task, due to the massiveness of images, great illumination variations between images, partial occlusion and
corruption. To address these challenges, we propose an online image alignment method via subspace learning from
image gradient orientations (IGO). The proposed method
integrates the subspace learning, transformed IGO reconstruction and image alignment into a unified online framework, which is robust for aligning images with severe intensity distortions. Our method is motivated by principal component analysis (PCA) from gradient orientations
provides more reliable low-dimensional subspace than that
from pixel intensities. Instead of processing in the intensity domain like conventional methods, we seek alignment
in the IGO domain such that the aligned IGO of the newly
arrived image can be decomposed as the sum of a sparse error and a linear composition of the IGO-PCA basis learned
from previously well-aligned ones. The optimization problem is accomplished by an iterative linearization that minimizes the ℓ1 -norm of the sparse error. Furthermore, the
IGO-PCA basis is adaptively updated based on incremental thin singular value decomposition (SVD) which takes
the shift of IGO mean into consideration. The efficacy of
the proposed method is validated on extensive challenging
datasets through image alignment and face recognition. Experimental results demonstrate that our algorithm provides
more illumination- and occlusion-robust image alignment
than state-of-the-art methods do.

1. Introduction
Image alignment is one of the most widely used image processing techniques in computer vision [24]. The
technique seeks the optimal image transformations to establish spatial correspondences between different image ac∗ Corresponding Author

quisitions. Applications in video stabilization [19], medical
image registration [23], image recognition [27] and visual
tracking [31] all leverage alignment to estimate image correspondences. In recent years, with the increasing popularity of the image and video sharing in social networks,
such as Facebook and Instagram, we are seeing a dramatic
increasing amount of visual data available online. Such
enormous data poses great challenges for existing batch image alignment algorithms, due to great illumination variations between images, partial occlusion, gross pixel corruption, and the dynamically increasing images [2]. Therefore,
the robust alignment with both memory and time efficiency
deems to be a crucial image processing issue to be resolved
for handling large and increasing amount of images.
The problem of batch image alignment has been extensively exploited in the literature [5, 15]. Learned-Miller
et al. [11] minimized a sum of the pixel-stack entropies
to align images, and Huang et al. [8] further proposed a
clustered scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) based entropy to address the illumination variations involved in different images. Peng et al. [18] proposed a robust alignment by sparse and low-rank decomposition (RASL) for a
batch of linearly correlated images. In RASL, the optimal
transformations are established by exploiting the low-rank
property of aligned images. RASL has been widely used
for simultaneously aligning multiple images. However, to
align a newly arrived image to the previously aligned ones,
RASL has to adjust all the previous transformations to seek
the matrix rank minimization. In addition, RASL models
corruption and occlusion as sparse intensity errors. Nevertheless, many real-world corrupted images contain severe
intensity distortions which are dense thus difficult to be subtracted by RASL [13]. In contrast, Li et al. [12] arranged
the input images into a 3D tensor, and claimed that severe
intensity distortions and partial occlusions can be separated
out in the gradient and frequency domain. The optimally
aligned image tensor is achieved by simultaneously sparsifying a frequency tensor and a gradient error tensor. However, such offline alignment methods are very memory- and

1753

