Learning in an Uncertain World:
Representing Ambiguity Through Multiple Hypotheses
Christian Rupprecht1,2
Iro Laina1
Robert DiPietro2
Maximilian Baust1
1
1,2
Federico Tombari
Nassir Navab
Gregory D. Hager2
1

Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany
2
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore MD, USA

Abstract
Many prediction tasks contain uncertainty. In some
cases, uncertainty is inherent in the task itself. In future
prediction, for example, many distinct outcomes are equally
valid. In other cases, uncertainty arises from the way data
is labeled. For example, in object detection, many objects of
interest often go unlabeled, and in human pose estimation,
occluded joints are often labeled with ambiguous values.
In this work we focus on a principled approach for handling such scenarios. In particular, we propose a framework for reformulating existing single-prediction models as
multiple hypothesis prediction (MHP) models and an associated meta loss and optimization procedure to train them.
To demonstrate our approach, we consider four diverse applications: human pose estimation, future prediction, image
classification and segmentation. We find that MHP models outperform their single-hypothesis counterparts in all
cases, and that MHP models simultaneously expose valuable insights into the variability of predictions.

1. Introduction
Dealing with uncertainty is fundamental in many tasks.
Given an image, for example, one might think this is either
an alpaca or a llama, but it is certainly not an elephant.
When predicting the behavior of other drivers on the road,
we also tend to make good guesses based on our learned expectations. If someone is driving forward in the right lane,
one might think they will probably continue straight or take
a right turn soon. In addition, uncertainty models incomplete information. For example, we may not be able to distinguish a mug from a cup if its handle is not visible. In
short, when confronted with a situation that we are not sure
about, we tend to produce multiple plausible hypotheses.
In this work, we present a framework for multiple hypothesis prediction (MHP) which extends traditional single-

loss, single-output systems to multiple outputs and which
provides a piece-wise constant approximation of the conditional output space. To achieve this, we propose a probabilistic formulation and show that minimizing this formulation yields a Voronoi tessellation in the output space that is
induced by the chosen loss. Furthermore, we explain how
this theoretical framework can be used in practice to train
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) that predict multiple hypotheses. By employing a novel meta loss, training
can be achieved through standard procedures, i.e. gradient
descent and backpropagation.
Our framework has the following benefits. First, it is
general in the sense that it can easily retrofit any CNN architecture and loss function or even other learning methods, thus enabling multiple predictions for a wide variety of
tasks. Second, it exposes the variance of different hypotheses, thus providing insights into our model and predictions.
Third, as shown in our experiments, allowing multiple hypotheses often improves performance. For example, in the
case of regression, single hypothesis prediction (SHP) models often average over distinct modes, thus resulting in unrealistic, blurred predictions. MHP models are capable of
overcoming this issue, as demonstrated in Figure 4.
In an extensive experimental evaluation, we consider
four applications of our model: human pose estimation, future frame prediction, multi-label classification and semantic segmentation. Despite their vastly different nature, all
four tasks show that MHP models improve over their corresponding SHP models and also provide additional insights
into the model and into prediction variability.
We proceed in the next section by describing the related
work. In Section 3, we describe our approach and detail
the theory of the proposed multiple prediction framework.
Next, in Section 4, we describe our experiments; here, we
solidify the ideas from Section 3 and demonstrate the benefits of MHP models. Finally, in Section 5, we conclude.
13591

