Flow-Guided Feature Aggregation for Video Object Detection
Xizhou Zhu1,2∗
1

Yujie Wang2∗

Jifeng Dai2

University of Science and Technology of China
ezra0408@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Extending state-of-the-art object detectors from image to
video is challenging. The accuracy of detection suffers from
degenerated object appearances in videos, e.g., motion blur,
video defocus, rare poses, etc. Existing work attempts to exploit temporal information on box level, but such methods
are not trained end-to-end. We present flow-guided feature
aggregation, an accurate and end-to-end learning framework for video object detection. It leverages temporal coherence on feature level instead. It improves the per-frame
features by aggregation of nearby features along the motion paths, and thus improves the video recognition accuracy. Our method significantly improves upon strong singleframe baselines in ImageNet VID [33], especially for more
challenging fast moving objects. Our framework is principled, and on par with the best engineered systems winning the ImageNet VID challenges 2016, without additional
bells-and-whistles. The code would be released.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed significant progress in object detection [11]. State-of-the-art methods share a similar
two-stage structure. Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) [22, 36, 40, 14] are firstly applied to generate a
set of feature maps over the whole input image. A shallow
detection-specific network [13, 10, 30, 26, 5] then generates
the detection results from the feature maps.
These methods achieve excellent results in still images.
However, directly applying them for video object detection
is challenging. The recognition accuracy suffers from deteriorated object appearances in videos that are seldom observed in still images, such as motion blur, video defocus,
rare poses, etc (See an example in Figure 1 and more in Figure 2). As quantified in experiments, a state-of-the-art stillimage object detector (R-FCN [5] + ResNet-101 [14]) deteriorates remarkably for fast moving objects (Table 1 (a)).
∗ This work is done when Xizhou Zhu and Yujie Wang are interns at
Microsoft Research Asia

Lu Yuan2
2

Yichen Wei2

Microsoft Research

{v-yujiwa,jifdai,luyuan,yichenw}@microsoft.com

Nevertheless, the video has rich information about the
same object instance, usually observed in multiple “snapshots” in a short time. Such temporal information is exploited in existing video object detection methods [18, 19,
12, 23] in a simple way. These methods firstly apply object detectors in single frames and then assemble the detected bounding boxes across temporal dimension in a dedicated post processing step. This step relies on off-theshelf motion estimation such as optical flow, and handcrafted bounding box association rules such as object tracking. In general, such methods manipulate the single-frame
detection boxes with mediocre qualities but do not improve
the detection quality. The performance improvement is
from heuristic post-processing instead of principled learning. There is no end-to-end training. In this work, these
techniques are called box level methods.
We attempt to take a deeper look at video object detection. We seek to improve the detection or recognition quality by exploiting temporal information, in a principled way.
As motivated by the success in image recognition [11], feature matters, and we propose to improve the per-frame feature learning by temporal aggregation. Note that the features of the same object instance are usually not spatially
aligned across frames due to video motion. A naive feature
aggregation may even deteriorate the performance, as elaborated in Table 1 (b) later. This suggests that it is critical to
model the motion during learning.
In this work, we propose flow-guided feature aggregation (FGFA). As illustrated in Figure 1, the feature extraction network is applied on individual frames to produce the
per-frame feature maps. To enhance the features at a reference frame, an optical flow network [8] estimates the motions between the nearby frames and the reference frame.
The feature maps from nearby frames are warped to the reference frame according to the flow motion. The warped features maps, as well as its own feature maps on the reference
frame, are aggregated according to an adaptive weighting
network. The resulting aggregated feature maps are then
fed to the detection network to produce the detection result
on the reference frame. All the modules of feature extraction, flow estimation, feature aggregation, and detection are
1408

