Open Set Domain Adaptation
Pau Panareda Busto1,2
1
Airbus Group Innovations
Munich, Germany

Juergen Gall2
2
Computer Vision Group
University of Bonn, Germany

pau.panareda-busto@airbus.com

gall@iai.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
When the training and the test data belong to different
domains, the accuracy of an object classifier is significantly
reduced. Therefore, several algorithms have been proposed
in the last years to diminish the so called domain shift between datasets. However, all available evaluation protocols
for domain adaptation describe a closed set recognition
task, where both domains, namely source and target, contain exactly the same object classes. In this work, we also
explore the field of domain adaptation in open sets, which is
a more realistic scenario where only a few categories of interest are shared between source and target data. Therefore,
we propose a method that fits in both closed and open set
scenarios. The approach learns a mapping from the source
to the target domain by jointly solving an assignment problem that labels those target instances that potentially belong
to the categories of interest present in the source dataset. A
thorough evaluation shows that our approach outperforms
the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
For many applications, training data is scarce due to the
high cost of acquiring annotated training data. Although
there are large annotated image datasets publicly available,
the images collected from the Internet often differ from the
type of images which are relevant for a specific application. Depending on the application, the type of sensor or the
perspective of the sensor, the entire captured scene might
greatly differ from pictures on the Internet. The two types
of images are therefore in two different domains, namely the
source and target domain. In order to classify the images in
the target domain using the annotated images in the source
domain, the source and target domains can be aligned. In
our case, we will map the feature space of the source domain to the feature space of the target domain. Any classifier can then be learned on the transformed data of the
source domain to classify the images in the target domain.
This process is termed domain adaptation and is further di-

Target

Source
car

chair

dog

(a) Closed set domain adaptation

Source

Target

car chair dog unknown

(b) Open set domain adaptation

Figure 1. (a) Standard domain adaptation benchmarks assume that
source and target domains contain images only of the same set of
object classes. This is denoted as closed set domain adaptation
since it does not include images of unknown classes or classes
which are not present in the other domain. (b) We propose open
set domain adaptation. In this setting, both source and target domain contain images that do not belong to the classes of interest.
Furthermore, the target domain contains images that are not related
to any image in the source domain and vice versa.

vided in unsupervised and semi-supervised approaches depending on whether the target images are unlabelled or partially labelled.
Besides of the progress we have seen for domain adaptation over the last years [34, 19, 18, 9, 21, 13, 31, 15], the
methods have been so far evaluated using a setting where
the images of the source and target domain are from the
same set of categories. This setting can be termed closed set
domain adaptation as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). An example of
such a closed set protocol is the popular Office dataset [34].
The assumption that the target domain contains only images
of the categories of the source domain is, however, unrealistic. For most applications, the dataset in the target domain
contains many images and only a small portion of it might

754

