Localizing Moments in Video with Natural Language
∗

∗

Lisa Anne Hendricks1 , Oliver Wang2 , Eli Shechtman2 , Josef Sivic2,3 , Trevor Darrell1 , Bryan Russell2
1
UC Berkeley, 2 Adobe Research, 3 INRIA
https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/˜lisa_anne/didemo.html

Text query: The little girl jumps back up after falling.

Figure 1: We consider localizing moments in video with natural language and demonstrate that incorporating local and
global video features is important for this task. To train and evaluate our model, we collect the Distinct Describable Moments
(DiDeMo) dataset which consists of over 40,000 pairs of localized video moments and corresponding natural language.

Abstract
We consider retrieving a specific temporal segment, or
moment, from a video given a natural language text description. Methods designed to retrieve whole video clips
with natural language determine what occurs in a video
but not when. To address this issue, we propose the Moment Context Network (MCN) which effectively localizes
natural language queries in videos by integrating local and
global video features over time. A key obstacle to training our MCN model is that current video datasets do not
include pairs of localized video segments and referring expressions, or text descriptions which uniquely identify a
corresponding moment. Therefore, we collect the Distinct
Describable Moments (DiDeMo) dataset which consists of
over 10,000 unedited, personal videos in diverse visual settings with pairs of localized video segments and referring
expressions. We demonstrate that MCN outperforms several baseline methods and believe that our initial results
together with the release of DiDeMo will inspire further research on localizing video moments with natural language.

1. Introduction
Consider the video depicted in Figure 1, in which a little girl jumps around, falls down, and then gets back up to
start jumping again. Suppose we want to refer to a particular temporal segment, or moment, from the video, such as

when the girl resiliently begins jumping again after she has
fallen. Simply referring to the moment via an action, object,
or attribute keyword may not uniquely identify it. For example, important objects in the scene, such as the girl, are
present in each frame. Likewise, recognizing all the frames
in which the girl is jumping will not localize the moment
of interest as the girl jumps both before and after she has
fallen. Rather than being defined by a single object or activity, the moment may be defined by when and how specific
actions take place in relation to other actions. An intuitive
way to refer to the moment is via a natural language phrase,
such as “the little girl jumps back up after falling”.
Motivated by this example, we consider localizing moments in video with natural language. Specifically, given a
video and text description, we identify start and end points
in the video which correspond to the given text description. This is a challenging task requiring both language
and video understanding, with important applications in
video retrieval, such as finding particular moments from a
long personal holiday video, or desired B-roll stock video
footage from a large video library (e.g., Adobe Stock1 ,
Getty2 , Shutterstock3 ).
Existing methods for natural language based video retrieval [21, 48, 43] retrieve an entire video given a text string
but do not identify when a moment occurs within a video.
To localize moments within a video we propose to learn a
joint video-language model in which referring expressions
and video features from corresponding moments are close
1 https://stock.adobe.com
2 http://www.gettyimages.com
3 https://www.shutterstock.com

∗ Work done at Adobe Research during LAH’s summer internship

15803

