Deep Growing Learning
Guangcong Wang1 , Xiaohua Xie1,2,4∗, Jianhuang Lai1,2,4 , and Jiaxuan Zhuo3
1
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology
3
School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, China
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education
{wanggc3, zhuojx5}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {xiexiaoh6, stsljh}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

SoftmaxWtihLoss
pseudolabeled

Softmax

Fully connected

Fully connected

Growing
sub-network

Conv.+pooling

∗ Corresponding author

unlabeled

select

grow

Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [22, 21, 12]
have exhibited state-of-the-art performance in image classification [22, 21, 35, 4], and the prediction accuracy of the
CNN-based classifier can be improved by training on massive amounts of data (e.g., ImageNet [2]). However, the
task of labeling huge amounts of samples is quite expensive
and time-consuming. Recent research [28, 26, 15, 18, 23]
reveals that the semi-supervised learning, which uses a
large amount of unlabeled data in conjunction with a small amount of labeled data, is also greatly beneficial to train
deep networks and has achieved leading results on the MNIST [22] and CIFAR-10 [20] benchmarks.
Driven by the significance of the semi-supervised deep
learning, a question arises: how to exploit both labeled and

labeled

Conv.+pooling

1. Introduction

train

Conv.+pooling

Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is an import paradigm
to make full use of a large amount of unlabeled data in
machine learning. A bottleneck of SSL is the overfitting
problem when training over the limited labeled data, especially on a complex model like a deep neural network. To
get around this bottleneck, we propose a bio-inspired SSL framework on deep neural network, namely Deep Growing Learning (DGL). Specifically, we formulate the SSL as
an EM-like process, where the deep network alternately iterates between automatically growing convolutional layers
and selecting reliable pseudo-labeled data for training. The
DGL guarantees that a shallow neural network is trained
with labeled data, while a deeper neural network is trained
with growing amount of reliable pseudo-labeled data, so as
to alleviate the overfitting problem. Experiments on different visual recognition tasks have verified the effectiveness
of DGL.

Supervised
sub-network

Fixed
sub-network

unconfident

Selection
sub-network

Figure 1: Overview. Deep growing learning can efficiently
learn a deep convolutional network with a small amount of
labeled data and a large amount of unlabeled data. Basically, it consists of three phases: first, it grows a new layer when meets some conditions. Second, we train the network using the labeled and pseudo-labeled data. Third, we
predict the labels of all the unlabeled data and select the
confident ones as pseudo-labeled data. This process is repeated until a certain termination condition is reached. The
proposed architecture is comprised of four sub-networks:
growing sub-network, fixed sub-network, supervised subnetwork, and selection sub-network. (Best viewed in color)

unlabeled data to train deep neural networks in an end-toend way? An obstacle to answering this question is the
overfitting problem when training a deep neural network
with a large number of parameters by exploiting a few labeled examples only. Existing works [28, 26, 18, 23, 15, 33]
that may offer a partial solution to this problem can be
generally categorized into three groups based on different
schemes of collaborating labeled data with unlabeled data.

2812

