Non-linear Convolution Filters for CNN-based Learning
Georgios Zoumpourlis Alexandros Doumanoglou Nicholas Vretos Petros Daras
Information Technologies Institute, Center for Research and Technology Hellas, Greece
6th km Charilaou-Thermi Road, Thessaloniki, Greece
{zoump.giorgos, aldoum, vretos, daras}@iti.gr

Abstract
During the last years, Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) have achieved state-of-the-art performance in image classification. Their architectures have largely drawn
inspiration by models of the primate visual system. However, while recent research results of neuroscience prove the
existence of non-linear operations in the response of complex visual cells, little effort has been devoted to extend the
convolution technique to non-linear forms. Typical convolutional layers are linear systems, hence their expressiveness is limited. To overcome this, various non-linearities
have been used as activation functions inside CNNs, while
also many pooling strategies have been applied. We address the issue of developing a convolution method in the
context of a computational model of the visual cortex, exploring quadratic forms through the Volterra kernels. Such
forms, constituting a more rich function space, are used as
approximations of the response profile of visual cells. Our
proposed second-order convolution is tested on CIFAR-10
and CIFAR-100. We show that a network which combines
linear and non-linear filters in its convolutional layers, can
outperform networks that use standard linear filters with
the same architecture, yielding results competitive with the
state-of-the-art on these datasets.

1. Introduction

their linear nature, they lack the ability of expressing possible non-linearities that may actually appear in the response
of complex cells in the primary visual cortex [25]. Hence,
we claim that their expressiveness is limited. To overcome
this, various non-linearities have been used as activation
functions inside CNNs, while also many pooling strategies
have been applied. Little effort has been devoted to explore
new computational models that extend the convolution technique to non-linear forms, taking advantage of the research
results of neuroscience, that prove the existence of nonlinear operations in the response of visual cells [31][24].
The complexity of human visual cortex demonstrates gaps
that need to be bridged by CNNs, regarding the way convolution operations are applied. One of these gaps, is the
exploration of higher-order models.
In this work, we study the possibility of adopting an alternative convolution scheme to increase the learning capacity of CNNs by applying Volterra’s theory [32], which has
been used to study non-linear physiological systems, adapting it to the spatial domain. Considering the convolution
operation, instead of summing only linear terms to compute
a filter’s response on a data patch, we propose to also sum
the non-linear terms produced by multiplicative interactions
between all the pairs of elements of the input data patch.
Transforming the inputs through a second-order form, we
aim at making them more separable. In this way, convolution filters with more rich properties in terms of selectivity
and invariance are created.
The novelties of the proposed work are:

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been shown
to achieve state-of-the-art results on various computer vision tasks, such as image classification. Their architectures
have largely drawn inspiration by models of the primate visual system, as the one described by Hubel and Wiesel [13].
The notion of convolution, used to mimic a functional aspect of neurons in the visual cortex, is critical to understand
their success.
Typical convolutional layers are linear systems, as their
outputs are affine transformations of their inputs. Due to

• The incorporation of a biologically plausible nonlinear convolution scheme in the functionality of
CNNs
• The derivation of the equations that describe the forward and backward pass during the training process of
this filter type
• A CUDA-based implementation of our method as a

4761

