Generative Modeling of Audible Shapes for Object Perception

Zhoutong Zhang∗1 Jiajun Wu∗1 Qiujia Li2 Zhengjia Huang3 James Traer1
Josh H. McDermott1 Joshua B. Tenenbaum1 William T. Freeman1,4
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 University of Cambridge
3
ShanghaiTech University 4 Google Research

Abstract
Humans infer rich knowledge of objects from both auditory and visual cues. Building a machine of such competency,
however, is very challenging, due to the great difficulty in
capturing large-scale, clean data of objects with both their
appearance and the sound they make. In this paper, we
present a novel, open-source pipeline that generates audiovisual data, purely from 3D object shapes and their physical
properties. Through comparison with audio recordings and
human behavioral studies, we validate the accuracy of the
sounds it generates. Using this generative model, we are
able to construct a synthetic audio-visual dataset, namely
Sound-20K, for object perception tasks. We demonstrate
that auditory and visual information play complementary
roles in object perception, and further, that the representation learned on synthetic audio-visual data can transfer to
real-world scenarios.

1. Introduction
Humans perceive objects through both their visual appearance and the sounds they make. Given a short audio clip
of objects interacting, humans, including young children,
can recover rich information about the materials, surface
smoothness, and the quantity of objects involved [46, 22, 35].
Although visual information provides cues for some of these
questions, others can only be assessed with sound. Figure 1 shows an example: objects with different masses and
Young’s moduli may have almost identical appearance, but
they make different sounds when impacted, and vice versa.
This suggests the importance of using both modalities when
building machines for object perception tasks.
Compared to visual data, collecting large-scale audio recordings with rich object-level annotations is timeconsuming and technically challenging for multiple reasons.
∗ indicates equal contributions.

(A) paper cup

(B) ceramic cup

(C) ceramic plate

Figure 1: Audio and visual data provide complementary information: visual cues tell us that A and B are cups and C is a plate, but
only auditory cues inform us that A is made of a different material
(paper) than B and C are (ceramic).

First, labeling objects at a finer granularity requires strong domain knowledge: various types of wood may have different
physical properties, and therefore sound distinct; however,
labeling wood type itself is already a highly nontrivial task.
Further, some core object properties such as Young’s modulus and density greatly affects the sound of an object, but it is
often expensive and even intractable to obtain ground truth
values. This could possibly explain why recent large-scale
audio datasets, like the AudioSet [16], provide labels only on
audio events, but not on the objects that generate the sounds.
Secondly, sound recorded in real life is generally a mixture of multiple sound sources and background noise. This
poses an additional challenge in disentangling the sound
each object makes. For example, the The Greatest Hits
dataset [32] contains videos of objects hit by a drumstick.
Despite being object-centric, the dataset contains many audio clips where the sound from the object is overwhelmed
by that of the drumstick.
We introduce an alternative approach to overcome such
difficulties — synthesizing audio-visual data for object perception — inspired by recent attempts in using synthetic
visual data [36]. Synthesized data is automatically labeled,
11251

