Rolling Shutter Correction in Manhattan World
Pulak Purkait
Toshiba Research Europe
Cambridge, UK

Christopher Zach
Toshiba Research Europe
Cambridge, UK

Ales Leonardis
University of Birmingham
Birmingham, UK

pulak.isi@gmail.com

christopher.m.zach@gmail.com

a.leonardis@cs.bham.ac.uk

Abstract
A vast majority of consumer cameras operate the rolling
shutter mechanism, which often produces distorted images
due to inter-row delay while capturing an image. Recent
methods for monocular rolling shutter compensation utilize
blur kernel, straightness of line segments, as well as angle and length preservation. However, they do not incorporate scene geometry explicitly for rolling shutter correction, therefore, information about the 3D scene geometry is
often distorted by the correction process. In this paper we
propose a novel method which leverages geometric properties of the scene—in particular vanishing directions—to
estimate the camera motion during rolling shutter exposure from a single distorted image. The proposed method
jointly estimates the orthogonal vanishing directions and
the rolling shutter camera motion. We performed extensive
experiments on synthetic and real datasets which demonstrate the benefits of our approach both in terms of qualitative and quantitative results (in terms of a geometric structure fitting) as well as with respect to computation time.

1. Introduction
People largely share knowledge and experiences through
visual photographs, often captured by low-budget commercial devices. These devices are generally built upon
CMOS sensors, which possess a prevalent mechanism
widely known as rolling shutter (RS). In contrast to global
shutter (GS), it captures the scene in a row-wise manner
from top to bottom with a constant inter-row delay. The RS
imaging acquires apparent camera motion for different rows
and violates the properties of the perspective camera model.
This causes noticeable distortions—straight line segments
can become arc segments, which are very prominent for the
images in urban areas. This distortion needs to be corrected
for aesthetically pleasing visualization and further geometric analysis [14] of the scene.
In this work, we address the RS compensation from a
single distorted image. This problem has been addressed in

(a) A distorted image

(b) Result by [27]

(c) Our Result

Figure 1: (a) A real rolling shutter distorted image. (b) Rectified by Rengarajan et al. [27]. (c) Proposed joint estimation of orthogonal vanishing directions and rolling shutter
motion. The colors red, green and blue are employed for
the orthogonal vanishing directions, while yellow is used
to mark the outliers (lines that are not associated with the
vanishing directions). Sign-post and roads are more geometrically consistent by the proposed method.
recent methods [30, 27], however, no scene geometry was
incorporated utilizing only a single image while compensating the RS effects. We observe that most of the images
taken in man-made environments (such as urban areas) feature at least two orthogonal vanishing directions. Consequently, we believe that the Manhattan world assumption is
satisfied especially when the rolling shutter effect is most
prominent in images. In this work, we propose an RS correction method utilizing these orthogonal vanishing directions, therefore the corrected image without RS distortions
is not only visually more appealing, but also geometrically
more meaningful. Our proposed method demonstrates better performance qualitatively and computationally. We also
evaluate proposed method quantitatively by fitting a geometric structure (e.g., rotational homography, epipolar geometry [14]). In Figure 1, we display our result on a real
RS distorted image. Notice that this example is not of a typical urban image and proposed method still produces more
geometrically consistent results than the baseline.

1.1. Related Work
Recent works on RS compensation can be grouped into
three categories—(i) external sensors based methods, (ii)

882

