Guided Perturbations: Self-corrective Behavior in Convolutional Neural
Networks
Swami Sankaranarayanan∗
UMIACS, University of Maryland
College Park

Arpit Jain
GE Global Research Center
Niskayuna NY

Ser Nam Lim
GE Global Research Center
Niskayuna NY

swamiviv@umiacs.umd.edu

Arpit.Jain1@ge.com

limser@ge.com

Abstract
Forward / inference

Convolutional Neural Networks have been a subject of
great importance over the past decade and great strides
have been made in their utility for producing state of the
art performance in many computer vision problems. However, the behavior of deep networks is yet to be fully understood and is still an active area of research. In this work,
we present an intriguing behavior: pre-trained CNNs can
be made to improve their predictions by structurally perturbing the input. We observe that these perturbations - referred as Guided Perturbations - enable a trained network
to improve its prediction performance without any learning or change in network weights. We perform various ablative experiments to understand how these perturbations
affect the local context and feature representations. Furthermore, we demonstrate that this idea can improve performance of several existing approaches on semantic segmentation and scene labeling tasks on the PASCAL VOC
dataset and supervised classification tasks on MNIST and
CIFAR10 datasets.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have achieved
state of the art results on several computer vision benchmarks such as ILSVRC [15] and PASCAL VOC [4] over
the past few years. Despite their overwhelming success,
recent results have highlighted that they can be sensitive
to small adversarial noise in the input [5] or can be easily fooled using structured noise patterns [14]. To understand how a CNN can learn complex and meaningful representations but at the same time be easily fooled by simple and imperceptible perturbations still remains an open
research problem. The work of Goodfellow et. al. [5] and
Szegedy et al. [17] among others, bring out the intrigu∗ This work was done during the author’s internship at GE Global Research.

Input

output

Forward / inference

Perturbed Input

Self-corrective Behavior

Forward / inference

8
output

Input
Forward / inference

6

Perturbed Input

Self-corrective Behavior

Figure 1: Self-corrective behavior due to Guided Perturbations for segmentation and classification tasks.
ing properties of neural networks by introducing perturbations in either the hidden layer weights or the input image.
While these approaches have focused on understanding the
effect of adversarial noise in deep networks, in this work we
present an interesting observation: input perturbations can
enable a CNN to correct its mistakes. We find that these perturbations exploit the local neighborhood information from
network’s prediction which in turn results in contextually
smooth predictions.
In almost all the CNN based approaches, the output is
obtained using a single forward pass during the prediction
time. In the proposed approach, we use the prediction made
by the network during the forward pass to generate perturbations at the input. Specifically, we backpropagate the gradient of the prediction error all the way to the input. We
would like to emphasize that the error gradients are generated purely based on the network’s prediction without any

3562

