High-Resolution Shape Completion Using Deep Neural Networks for
Global Structure and Local Geometry Inference
Xiaoguang Han1,∗ Zhen Li1,∗ Haibin Huang2 Evangelos Kalogerakis2 Yizhou Yu1
1
2
The University of Hong Kong
University of Massachusetts, Amherst

1282

Projected depth images

128

32
32

3

Local patches

S32
LSTM-CF
+ 3DFCN

2

Down sample

Global Structure Inference

323

32

Global
structure
guidance

Completion

3

Encoder + Decoder
(3DConv + 3DDeconv)

3

2563 D256

323

323

P3 2

Local Geometry Refinement

Figure 1: Pipeline of our high-resolution shape completion method. Given a 3D shape with large missing regions, our method
outputs a complete shape through global structure inference and local geometry refinement. Our architecture consists of two
jointly trained sub-networks: one network predicts the global structure of the shape while the other locally generates the
repaired surface under the guidance of the first network.

Abstract
We propose a data-driven method for recovering missing parts of 3D shapes. Our method is based on a new
deep learning architecture consisting of two sub-networks:
a global structure inference network and a local geometry
refinement network. The global structure inference network
incorporates a long short-term memorized context fusion
module (LSTM-CF) that infers the global structure of the
shape based on multi-view depth information provided as
part of the input. It also includes a 3D fully convolutional
(3DFCN) module that further enriches the global structure
representation according to volumetric information in the
input. Under the guidance of the global structure network,
the local geometry refinement network takes as input local 3D patches around missing regions, and progressively
produces a high-resolution, complete surface through a volumetric encoder-decoder architecture. Our method jointly
trains the global structure inference and local geometry refinement networks in an end-to-end manner. We perform
qualitative and quantitative evaluations on six object categories, demonstrating that our method outperforms existing
state-of-the-art work on shape completion.
* equal contribution

1. Introduction
Inferring geometric information for missing regions of
3D shapes is a fundamental problem in the fields of computer vision, graphics and robotics. With the increasing
availability of consumer depth cameras and geometry acquisition devices, robust reconstruction of complete 3D shapes
from noisy, partial geometric data remains a challenging
problem. In particular, a significant complication is the existence of large missing regions in the acquired 3D data due
to occlusions, reflective material properties, and insufficient
lighting conditions. Traditional geometry-based methods,
such as Poisson surface reconstruction ([12]), are only able
to handle relatively small gaps in the acquired 3D data. Unfortunately, these methods often fail to repair large missing regions. Learning-based approaches are more suitable
for this task because of their ability to learn powerful 3D
shape priors from large online 3D model collections (e.g.,
ShapeNet, Trimble Warehouse) for repairing such missing
regions.
In the past, volumetric convolutional networks have been
utilized [8] to learn a mapping from an incomplete 3D shape
to a complete one, where both the input and output shapes are
represented with voxel grids. Due to the high computational
1 85

