Learning Visual Attention to Identify People with Autism Spectrum Disorder
Ming Jiang, Qi Zhao
University of Minnesota
mjiang@umn.edu, qzhao@cs.umn.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
The ‘gold standard’ diagnostic process of neurodevelopmental disorders is expensive, subjective, and timeconsuming. Relying on a multidisciplinary team of neurologists, pediatricians, pathologists, and therapists, it usually
takes years of successive interviews and behavioral evaluations that are susceptible to interpretive biases. For example, Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) affects one in 68
people in the US [9]. Because of the prevalence of ASD
and the limited clinical resources, early diagnoses and interventions are not widely accessible or applicable. Highfunctioning people on the spectrum are usually overlooked
in their childhood. Therefore, quantitative and objective diagnostic tools have been in great need for decades, yet little
progress has been made.
Recently, we have witnessed the fast growth of two relevant and important domains that could potentially revolutionize the diagnosis of neurodevelopmental disorders – visual attention and artificial neural networks (DNNs). The

face
mouth
hand
text
…

This paper presents a novel method for quantitative and
objective diagnoses of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) using eye tracking and deep neural networks. ASD is prevalent, with 1.5% of people in the US. The lack of clinical resources for early diagnoses has been a long-lasting issue.
This work differentiates itself with three unique features:
first, the proposed approach is data-driven and free of assumptions, important for new discoveries in understanding
ASD as well as other neurodevelopmental disorders. Second, we concentrate our analyses on the differences in eye
movement patterns between healthy people and those with
ASD. An image selection method based on Fisher scores allows feature learning with the most discriminative contents,
leading to efficient and accurate diagnoses. Third, we leverage the recent advances in deep neural networks for both
prediction and visualization. Experimental results show the
superior performance of our method in terms of multiple
evaluation metrics used in diagnostic tests.

DNN
ASD
Figure 1. An overview of our experimental and classification
paradigms. Subjects freely observe a selection of natural-scene
images, while their eye movements being recorded. Discriminative features encoding social and nonsocial information are extracted from a deep neural network of visual attention, and integrated across images to predict the subjects’ ASD risk.

attention network is so pervasive in the brain that many
neurodevelopmental disorders are associated with atypical
attention towards visual stimuli [4]. However, current neurobehavioral studies of attention depend on contrived visual
stimuli and structured laboratory tasks targeting particular
hypotheses, which constrains the generalizability of these
studies.
To address the long-lasting issues in the diagnosis of
ASD, we propose to leverage the pervasiveness of visual attention in the brain and the learning ability of DNNs. Driven
by DNNs, computational models of attention have shown
notable progress in recent years, encoding rich semantics
and predicting human attention remarkably well in complex
natural scenes. As ASD exhibits atypical gaze patterns toward social stimuli [32, 13, 31], the capability of DNNs in
encoding high-level semantics and social contents is particularly suitable for identifying people with ASD.
Specifically, we propose a new diagnostic paradigm
with natural scene viewing. Subjects’ eye movements are
recorded and analyzed quantitatively with a DNN model.
With the goal of effective and efficient diagnoses, our
method selects the most discriminative images by ranking
their Fisher scores and learns the most discriminative features by creating and analyzing a difference map of eye fix13267

