Curriculum Domain Adaptation for Semantic Segmentation of Urban Scenes
Yang Zhang1 , Philip David2 , and Boqing Gong1
1

2

Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
Computational and Information Sciences Directorate, U.S. Army Research Laboratory
yangzhang@knights.ucf.edu, philip.j.david4.civ@mail.mil, bgong@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
During the last half decade, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have triumphed over semantic segmentation,
which is a core task of various emerging industrial applications such as autonomous driving and medical imaging.
However, to train CNNs requires a huge amount of data,
which is difficult to collect and laborious to annotate. Recent advances in computer graphics make it possible to
train CNN models on photo-realistic synthetic data with
computer-generated annotations. Despite this, the domain
mismatch between the real images and the synthetic data
significantly decreases the models’ performance. Hence we
propose a curriculum-style learning approach to minimize
the domain gap in semantic segmentation. The curriculum
domain adaptation solves easy tasks first in order to infer
some necessary properties about the target domain; in particular, the first task is to learn global label distributions
over images and local distributions over landmark superpixels. These are easy to estimate because images of urban
traffic scenes have strong idiosyncrasies (e.g., the size and
spatial relations of buildings, streets, cars, etc.). We then
train the segmentation network in such a way that the network predictions in the target domain follow those inferred
properties. In experiments, our method significantly outperforms the baselines as well as the only known existing
approach to the same problem.

1. Introduction
This paper is concerned with domain adaptation for semantic image segmentation of urban scenes, i.e., assigning a
category label to every pixel of an image or video frame [6].
Our interest in this problem is partially due to the exciting
vision of autonomous driving, where understanding complex inner-city traffic scenes is an essential module and seCode: https://github.com/YangZhang4065/AdaptationSeg.
Extended version: https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.09465.

mantic segmentation is one of its key constituents [12, 19].
Machine learning methods for automatic semantic segmentation require massive amounts of high-quality annotated imagery in order to produce effective classifiers that
generalize well to novel scenes. However, annotating training imagery for semantic segmentation is a very cumbersome task for humans. Cordts et al. report that the annotation and quality control take more than 1.5 hours on a single
image of the Cityscapes dataset [12]. Besides, it is very difficult and time-consuming to collect imagery that depicts
the large number of variabilities possible of urban scenes in
different countries, seasons, and lighting conditions, etc.
To overcome both shortcomings, simulated urban environments may be used to automatically generate large
amounts of annotated training imagery. This, however, introduces a new problem, that of domain mismatch between
the source (simulated) domain and the target (real) domain.
Figure 2 illustrates some examples drawn from the synthetic
SYNTHIA [48] dataset and the real Cityscapes [12] dataset.
It is readily apparent that there are significant visual differences between the two datasets. Domain adaptation techniques [48, 53, 27] may be used by machine learning methods to bridge this gap between the two domains.
In computer vision, learning domain-invariant features
has been a prevalent and successful strategy to tackle the
discrepancy between two domains, mainly for classification
and regression problems [41, 43]. The core idea is to infer
a new feature space such that the marginal distributions of
the source domain (S) and the target domain (T) are about
the same, i.e., PS (Z) ≈ PT (Z). Furthermore, the prediction function P (Y |Z) from that space is assumed to be the
same across the domains so that one can leverage the rich
labeled data in the source domain to train classifiers that
generalize well to the target. It is hard to verify the assumption, but the work along this line is rich and has led
to impressive practical results regardless, such as the algorithms using linear transformation [22, 23, 15, 55], kernel
methods [40, 20, 2, 31], and the recent deep learning meth12020

