Multi-stage Multi-recursive-input Fully Convolutional Networks for Neuronal
Boundary Detection

1

Wei Shen1,2 , Bin Wang1 , Yuan Jiang1∗, Yan Wang2 , Alan Yuille2
Key Laboratory of Specialty Fiber Optics and Optical Access Networks, Shanghai University
2
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University
wei.shen@t.shu.edu.cn,{wangbin418,jy9387}@outlook.com,{wyanny.9,alan.l.yuille}@gmail.com

Abstract
In the field of connectomics, neuroscientists seek to identify cortical connectivity comprehensively. Neuronal
boundary detection from the Electron Microscopy (EM) images is often done to assist the automatic reconstruction of
neuronal circuit. But the segmentation of EM images is a
challenging problem, as it requires the detector to be able
to detect both filament-like thin and blob-like thick membrane, while suppressing the ambiguous intracellular structure. In this paper, we propose multi-stage multi-recursiveinput fully convolutional networks to address this problem.
The multiple recursive inputs for one stage, i.e., the multiple side outputs with different receptive field sizes learned
from the lower stage, provide multi-scale contextual boundary information for the consecutive learning. This design
is biologically-plausible, as it likes a human visual system
to compare different possible segmentation solutions to address the ambiguous boundary issue. Our multi-stage networks are trained end-to-end. It achieves promising results on two public available EM segmentation datasets,
the mouse piriform cortex dataset and the ISBI 2012 EM
dataset.

1. Introduction
A central theme of neuroscience is to understand how a
brain’s functions are related to its neuronal structure [23].
This is difficult because of the small size of neurons and
the extremely high packing density of the neuropil, e.g.,
neurons densely packed axons and dendrites [13]. Recent advances in high-throughput serial section electron microscopy (EM) have made possible the imaging of large
volumes of neuronal tissue at high resolution, allowing neuroscience experts to reconstruct neuronal circuits and study
the interconnections of neurons [38]. However, analysis of
a large number of EM images by expert annotators is labo∗ equal contribution with the second author

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Neuronal structure segmentation: an EM image (a) and
the ground truths for its neuronal boundary detection result (b) and
segmentation result (c), respectively.

rious and even impractical [13], which drives the demand
for efficient automated neuronal circuit reconstruction approaches.
Serial section EM produces a stack of 2D images by cutting sections of brain tissue. Due to the anisotropic resolutions of in-plane and out-of-plane, most neuronal circuit reconstruction approaches follow the following pipeline: (1)
neuronal boundary detection on each 2D image, (2) neuronal structure segmentation based on the 2D boundary
map, and (3) linking the neuronal segments across 2D images into a 3D reconstruction result.
This paper focuses on neuronal boundary detection on
2D images from serial section EM, also called membrane
detection, which is the essential first step of the reconstruction pipeline. The challenges of this problem, as can be
seen from Fig. 1, mainly lie in the following aspects: (1)
The variation of the membranal thickness is large, as thin as
a filament to as thick as a blob. (2) The noise of EM acquisition makes the membrane contrast to be low, inducing some
membranal boundaries are even invisible. (3) The presence
of confounding structures, such as mitochondria and vesicles, also increases the difficulty in membrane detection.
Driven by the rapid process of deep neural networks, more and more deep learning based methods have been
proposed for neuronal boundary detection on EM images,
achieving considerable progress [8, 5, 11, 28, 21]. Howev-

2391

