Space-Time Localization and Mapping
Minhaeng Lee, Charless C. Fowlkes
Dept. of Computer Science, University of California, Irvine
{minhaenl, fowlkes}@ics.uci.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of building a spatiotemporal model of the world from a stream of time-stamped
data. Unlike traditional models for simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) and structure-from-motion (SfM)
which focus on recovering a single rigid 3D model, we
tackle the problem of mapping scenes in which dynamic
components appear, move and disappear independently of
each other over time. We introduce a simple generative
probabilistic model of 4D structure which specifies location,
spatial and temporal extent of rigid surface patches by local Gaussian mixtures. We fit this model to a time-stamped
stream of input data using expectation-maximization to estimate the model structure parameters (mapping) and the
alignment of the input data to the model (localization).
By explicitly representing the temporal extent and observability of surfaces in a scene, our method yields superior
localization and reconstruction relative to baselines that
assume a static 3D scene. We carry out experiments on
both synthetic RGB-D data streams as well as challenging
real-world datasets, tracking scene dynamics in a human
workspace over the course of several weeks.

1. Introduction
A strategic question for scene understanding is how to
leverage large repositories of images, video and other sensor data acquired over an extended period of time in order
to analyze the content of a particular image. For static rigid
scenes, a classic approach is to use visual SLAM, structurefrom-motion, and multi-view stereo techniques to build up
an explicit model of the scene geometry and appearance.
These methods are well developed and have been scaled up
to increasingly large problems in modeling outdoor and indoor scenes (see e.g., [1, 32, 10, 20, 9, 3]).
Such a geometric approach to scene understanding can
make strong predictions about a novel test image including the camera pose (via feature matching and camera localization) and the appearance of points or surface patches
projected into the image. However, reconstruction-based
analysis typically neglects dynamic objects that change over

Figure 1. Raw measurements (pointclouds) captured at different
times are aligned and probabilistically merged into a single 4D
model that describes the spatio-temporal geometry of the scene.
Model fitting reasons about occlusion, inferring complete surfaces
even when they may not have been occluded at some times. The
resulting integrated space-time map supports further analysis such
as change detection and segmentation of dynamic objects.

time and are treated as outliers with respect to the estimation of a single rigid scene model. This problem becomes more acute as data is integrated over longer periods
of time, during which an increasing proportion of objects in
the scene may move non-rigidly. For example, people move
on the time-scale of seconds while furnishings may shift on
the time-scale of days and architecture and landscapes over
years.
In this paper, we investigate how the scope of such techniques can be extended by registering observations to a 4D
reconstruction that explicitly represents geometric changes
over time. We focus specifically on space-time mapping
of indoor scenes where RGB-D sensors provide streams of
high-quality geometric data and odometry over short time
intervals and limited fields of view, but data acquired, e.g.
on different days, is inconsistent due to changes in the
scene. The key inferential challenge is thus distinguishing sensor noise and reconstruction errors from genuine
changes in the scene geometry.
We describe a simple generative probabilistic model for
4D structure in which surface patches, specified by a spatial location, orientation and temporal extent, generate point
and normal observations over time. These observations are
13912

