Active Decision Boundary Annotation with Deep Generative Models
Miriam Huijser
Aiir Innovations
Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Jan C. van Gemert
Delft University of Technology
Delft, The Netherlands

https://aiir.nl/

http://jvgemert.github.io/

Abstract
This paper is on active learning where the goal is to
reduce the data annotation burden by interacting with a
(human) oracle during training. Standard active learning
methods ask the oracle to annotate data samples. Instead,
we take a profoundly different approach: we ask for annotations of the decision boundary. We achieve this using a
deep generative model to create novel instances along a 1d
line. A point on the decision boundary is revealed where the
instances change class. Experimentally we show on three
data sets that our method can be plugged into other active
learning schemes, that human oracles can effectively annotate points on the decision boundary, that our method is
robust to annotation noise, and that decision boundary annotations improve over annotating data samples.

1. Introduction
If data is king, then annotation labels are its crown jewels. Big image data sets are relatively easy to obtain; it’s
the ground truth labels that are expensive [9, 24]. With the
huge success of deep learning methods critically depending
on large annotated datasets, there is a strong demand for
reducing the annotation effort [17, 20, 25, 27, 29].
In active learning [31] the goal is to train a good predictor while minimizing the human annotation effort for large
unlabeled data sets. During training, the model can interact
with a human oracle who provides ground truth annotations
on demand. The challenge is to have the model automatically select a small set of the most informative annotations
so that prediction performance is maximized.
In this paper we exploit the power of deep generative
models for active learning. Active learning methods [22, 31,
35] typically ask the oracle to label an existing data sample.
Instead, we take a radically different approach: we ask the
oracle to directly annotate the decision boundary itself. To
achieve this, we first use all unlabeled images to learn a Kdimensional embedding. In this K-dimensional embedding
we select a 1-dimensional query line and employ a deep

Figure 1: Active decision boundary annotation using a deep
generative model. In a K-dimensional feature space (top), a
1-dimensional query line (blue) is converted to a row of images (bottom) by generating visual samples along the line.
The oracle annotates where the generated samples change
classes (red point). This point lies close to the decision
boundary and we use that point to improve classification.

generative model to generate visual samples along this line.
We visualize the 1-dimensional line as an ordered row of
images and simply ask the oracle to visually annotate the
point where the generated visual samples changes classes.
Since the generated images are ordered, the oracle does not
need to examine and annotate each and every image, merely
identifying the change point is enough. The point between
two samples of different classes is a point that lies close to
the decision boundary and we use that point to improve the
classification model. In figure 1 we show an illustration of
our approach.

5286

