Learning Discriminative Latent Attributes for Zero-Shot Classification
Huajie Jiang1,2,3 , Ruiping Wang1 , Shiguang Shan1 , Yi Yang4 , Xilin Chen1
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, CAS, Shanghai, 200050, China
3
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, 200031, China
4
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd., Beijing, 100085, China
huajie.jiang@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {wangruiping, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn, yangyi16@huawei.com

Abstract
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) aims to transfer knowledge
from observed classes to the unseen classes, based on the
assumption that both the seen and unseen classes share
a common semantic space, among which attributes enjoy
a great popularity. However, few works study whether
the human-designed semantic attributes are discriminative
enough to recognize different classes. Moreover, attributes
are often correlated with each other, which makes it less desirable to learn each attribute independently. In this paper,
we propose to learn a latent attribute space, which is not
only discriminative but also semantic-preserving, to perform the ZSL task. Specifically, a dictionary learning framework is exploited to connect the latent attribute space with
attribute space and similarity space. Extensive experiments
on four benchmark datasets show the effectiveness of the
proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Visual recognition has made tremendous progress in the
past few years with the rapid growing of data scales and
progressing of classification methods. However, traditional
approaches to visual recognition are mainly based on supervised learning, which needs large numbers of labeled
samples to obtain a high performance classification model.
It is well known that collecting large scale of labeled samples is difficult, especially when the required labels are finegrained, which hinders further development of visual recognition. It is therefore important and desirable to develop
recognition systems that can recognize categories with few
or no labeled samples, thus ZSL approaches attract more
and more attentions in the past few years.
Inspired by the ability of humans to recognize unseen objects, ZSL aims to recognize categories that have never been

seen before [17, 9]. A general assumption for ZSL is that
both the seen and unseen classes share a common semantic
space, where the samples and class prototypes are projected, to perform the recognition task. In terms of different
mid-level representations exploited in the learning process,
current ZSL approaches can be categorized into four groups. The first group is attribute-based methods, which use
attributes to build up the relationships between the seen
and unseen classes [17, 9, 43, 13]. For example, attributes,
such as black and furry, are shared among different animals.
The cross-category property of attributes makes it possible
to transfer knowledge from the seen classes to the unseen
classes. The second group is text-based approaches, which
automatically mine the relationships of different classes via
ample text corpus [7, 10, 3, 30]. These approaches reduce
the human labor for defining attributes, thus ZSL can be
applied to large scale settings. The third one is based on
class similarity, which directly mines the similarities between the seen and unseen classes to bridge up their relationships [23, 22, 24, 44]. The similarities may be derived
from the hierarchical category structure or from the semantic descriptions of each class. The last group is to combine
different mid-level representations to learn more robust
relationships [11, 12, 19, 15]. These works build upon a
common idea that different mid-level representations will
catch complementary information of the data, which can be
used to reduce the domain difference between the seen and
unseen classes.
In this paper, we focus on the attribute-based approach.
Traditional process for such methods mainly focuses on
how to learn the semantic embeddings or what strategy
to utilize to perform the recognition task. However, there
are three aspects which are merely considered in previous
works, as is shown in Figure 1. First, whether the humandesigned semantic attributes are discriminative enough to
recognize different classes. Second, whether it is reasonable to learn each attribute independently since attributes

4223

