BAM! The Behance Artistic Media Dataset for Recognition Beyond Photography
Michael J. Wilber1,2
Chen Fang1
John Collomosse1
1
Adobe Research

Hailin Jin1
Aaron Hertzmann1
Serge Belongie2
2
Cornell Tech

Photography

Abstract

Dog

Score: 0.99

Score: 0.99

Score: 0.99

Score: 0.99

Score: 0.01

Score: 0.01

Score: 0.01

Score: 0.34

Score: 0.02

Score: 0.01

Score: 0.03

Score: 0.01

Score: 0.07

Score: 0.00

Score: 0.01

Score: 0.02

Score: 0.00

Score: 0.01

Score: 0.01

Score: 0.01

Score: 0.28

Score: 0.02

Score: 0.01

Score: 0.02

Pencil
Oil paint

“Art is an effort to create, beside the real world, a
more humane world.” – André Maurois
Recent advances in Computer Vision have yielded accuracy
rivaling that of humans on a variety of object recognition
tasks. However, most work in this space is focused on understanding photographic imagery of everyday scenes. For
example, the widely-used COCO dataset [19] was created by
“gathering images of complex everyday scenes containing
common objects in their natural context.” Outside of everyday photography, there exists a diverse, relatively unexplored
space of artistic imagery, offering depictions of the world
as reinterpreted through artwork. Besides being culturally
valuable, artwork spans broad styles that are not found in
everyday photography and thus are not available to current
machine vision systems. For example, current object classifiers trained on ImageNet and Pascal VOC are frequently

Cat

Vector art

Introduction

Watercolor

1

Bird

Comic

Computer vision systems are designed to work well within
the context of everyday photography. However, artists often
render the world around them in ways that do not resemble
photographs. Artwork produced by people is not constrained
to mimic the physical world, making it more challenging for
machines to recognize.
This work is a step toward teaching machines how to categorize images in ways that are valuable to humans. First, we
collect a large-scale dataset of contemporary artwork from
Behance, a website containing millions of portfolios from
professional and commercial artists. We annotate Behance
imagery with rich attribute labels for content, emotions, and
artistic media. Furthermore, we carry out baseline experiments to show the value of this dataset for artistic style
prediction, for improving the generality of existing object
classifiers, and for the study of visual domain adaptation.
We believe our Behance Artistic Media dataset will be a
good starting point for researchers wishing to study artistic
imagery and relevant problems. This dataset can be found
at https://bam-dataset.org/

Bicycle

Figure 1. State of the art object detectors such as SSD trained on
Pascal VOC can reliably detect objects in everyday photographs
(top row), but do not generalize to other kinds of artistic media
(see scores under each image). In this work, we create a largescale artistic dataset spanning a breadth of styles, media, and
emotions. We can use this dataset to improve the generality of
object classifiers—our object classifier’s scores are above 0.95 for
all these images.

unable to recognize objects when they are depicted in artistic
media (Fig. 1). Modeling artistic imagery can increase the
generality of computer vision models by pushing beyond the
limitations of photographic datasets.

1202

