High Order Tensor Formulation for Convolutional Sparse Coding
Adel Bibi and Bernard Ghanem
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
adel.bibi@kaust.edu.sa, bernard.ghanem@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Convolutional sparse coding (CSC) has gained attention
for its successful role as a reconstruction and a classification tool in the computer vision and machine learning community. Current CSC methods can only reconstruct singlefeature 2D images independently. However, learning multidimensional dictionaries and sparse codes for the reconstruction of multi-dimensional data is very important, as it
examines correlations among all the data jointly. This provides more capacity for the learned dictionaries to better
reconstruct data. In this paper, we propose a generic and
novel formulation for the CSC problem that can handle an
arbitrary order tensor of data. Backed with experimental
results, our proposed formulation can not only tackle applications that are not possible with standard CSC solvers,
including colored video reconstruction (5D- tensors), but it
also performs favorably in reconstruction with much fewer parameters as compared to naive extensions of standard
CSC to multiple features/channels.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Sparse Coding (CSC) is an important building block for a plethora of applications ranging from
image and video compression to deep convolutional networks [17]. To name a few, it has been successfully applied
in visual object tracking [28], image and video processing
[7, 2, 6], computational imaging [9], low- and mid-level feature learning [5], high-level vision problems [26, 27] and
even line drawings [23]. It can be argued that the success
of CSC may be biologically inspired, since there exists evidence linking CSC to how images are formed in the human visual system [22]. In principle, images are formed
due to the firing of a sparse number of receptive fields in the
human brain. This can be represented mathematically as
a sum of convolutional operators firing at sparse locations.
Mathematically, the standard CSC problem is formulated as
follows:
N

K

K

X
X
1X
kyn −
dk ∗ xnk k22 + λ
kxnk k1
xk ,dk ∀k 2
(1)
n
k
k
min

s.t. kdk k22 ≤ 1 ∀k = 1, ..., K

where * denotes 2D circular convolution, yn is the image
to be reconstructed, xnk is the k th sparse code for the nth image yn , and dk is the k th filter to be learned. The penalty
parameter λ > 0 controls the trade off between good reconstruction and code sparsity. Problem (1) is similar in
essence and form to the standard dictionary learning objective [1, 20]. However, the main difference lies in modeling
how an image is reconstructed. While CSC assumes that
an image is a sum of convolution responses between filters
dk and sparse maps xnk , dictionary learning reconstructs an
image as a sparse number of linear (unstructured) combinations of general dictionary elements [16, 20, 21].
Problem (1) is biconvex and non-smooth. Thus, finding efficient solvers remains a challenge. However, there
have been several works in the literature that address this
challenge. For instance, the work of [4, 15] uses Parseval’s
theorem to transform the objective completely into the frequency domain. By introducing auxiliary variables to separate the coding from the dictionary learning subproblem, the
joint optimization is solved using the Alternating Direction
Method of Multipliers (ADMM). Heide et al. [8] solves the
CSC problem by using a classical fixed point method, where
one alternates between optimizing for the sparse codes and
the dictionaries independently. For each subproblem (sparse coding/dictionary learning), ADMM can be used on
the underlying convex optimization. Bibi et al. [3] also proposed a way to solve one of the subproblems efficiently.
However, due to the nature of the problem and its difficulty, learning multi-dimensional dictionaries (e.g. collections of colored images, colored videos, hyperspectral images, or in general videos represented by features of multiple sources) and their sparse codes to reconstruct multidimensional data is fundamental but remains a challenge.
Joint treatment of features acquired from multiple sources
(e.g. spectral images, HOG features, and colors) often leads
to better performance when compared to treating them separately due to the high order correlations between features.
This is evident for instance in some previous work on face
recognition [24], and robust PCA [19] to name a few. In this
paper, we propose a generic new formulation to the CSC
problem in the tensor domain. The proposed model relies
on a relatively recent tensor factorization strategy (called tSVD) tailored to third-order tensors [12, 11]. We extend this

1772

