Directionally Convolutional Networks for 3D Shape Segmentation
Haotian Xu, Ming Dong, Zichun Zhong
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University
Detroit, MI, USA
htxu@wayne.edu, mdong@wayne.edu, zichunzhong@wayne.edu

Abstract
Previous approaches on 3D shape segmentation mostly
rely on heuristic processing and hand-tuned geometric descriptors. In this paper, we propose a novel 3D shape representation learning approach, Directionally Convolutional
Network (DCN), to solve the shape segmentation problem.
DCN extends convolution operations from images to the
surface mesh of 3D shapes. With DCN, we learn effective shape representations from raw geometric features, i.e.,
face normals and distances, to achieve robust segmentation.
More specifically, a two-stream segmentation framework is
proposed: one stream is made up by the proposed DCN
with the face normals as the input, and the other stream
is implemented by a neural network with the face distance
histogram as the input. The learned shape representations
from the two streams are fused by an element-wise product. Finally, Conditional Random Field (CRF) is applied
to optimize the segmentation. Through extensive experiments conducted on benchmark datasets, we demonstrate
that our approach outperforms the current state-of-the-arts
(both classic and deep learning-based) on a large variety of
3D shapes.

1. Introduction
Segmentation over 3D shapes, also known as compositional part-based reasoning on 3D shapes, plays an important role in computer graphics and computer vision. It has
been applied to various applications, such as 3D modeling
[32], 3D object detection [17, 27], 3D scene understanding [13], and human pose estimation [24]. In the past few
years, many methods have been proposed to segment 3D
shapes into semantic parts. Among these approaches, they
either rely on heuristic processing and hand-engineering geometric features [2, 19], or apply co-segmentation schemes
based on geometric characteristics of 3D shapes [26, 14].
More recently, (convolutional) neural networks have been
applied to 3D shape segmentation [31, 9].
Inspired by the remarkable success of applying Convolu-

tional Neural Network (CNN) in image recognition tasks, a
few approaches have been proposed to extent convolution to
graphs [5, 8, 7], most of which operate convolutions in the
spectral domain - taking convolution as a linear operator in
the Fourier space of a graph. However, as mentioned in [7],
a convolution ﬁlter deﬁned in the spectral domain is not naturally localized and the translations are very costly. For approaches that deﬁne convolution in the spatial domain, they
require relatively weak regularity assumptions on the graph
and utilize the advantage of graphs, i.e., having localized
neighborhoods. However, the method in [5] only works for
a given domain as eigenbases vary arbitrarily from shape to
shape.
In this paper, we propose Directionally Convolutional
Network (DCN) that extends convolution operations from
images to the surface mesh in the spatial domain. As a special case of graphs, polygon meshes inherit the advantage
of being natural to deﬁne localized neighborhoods. Furthermore, we introduce a two-stream framework combining
proposed DCN and a neural network (NN) for segmentation
of 3D shapes. Instead of fusing the two streams by a simple
concatenation, we take our framework as an approximation
of a directed graph and combine the probabilities inferred
by the two streams with an element-wise product. Finally,
Conditional Random Field (CRF) is applied to optimize the
surface mesh segmentation. The main contributions of this
paper are summarized as follows:
• By deﬁning rotation-invariant convolution and pooling
operation on the surface of 3D shapes, we learn effective shape representations from raw geometric features, i.e., face normals and distances, to achieve robust segmentation of 3D shapes.
• Based on the proposed DCN, we introduce a twostream framework (shown in Fig. 1) to classify each
face of a given mesh into predeﬁned semantic parts.
Our approach achieves state-of-the-art segmentation
results on a large variety of 3D shapes.
In the rest of the paper, we ﬁrst review related work in
Section 2. Then, we describe details of DCN in Section 3.
12698

