Infinite Latent Feature Selection:
A Probabilistic Latent Graph-Based Ranking Approach
Giorgio Roffo
University of Glasgow

Simone Melzi
University of Verona

Umberto Castellani
University of Verona

Giorgio.Roffo@Glasgow.ac.uk

Simone.Melzi@univr.it

Umberto.Castellani@univr.it

Alessandro Vinciarelli
University of Glasgow
Alessandro.Vinciarelli@Glasgow.ac.uk

Abstract
Feature selection is playing an increasingly significant
role with respect to many computer vision applications
spanning from object recognition to visual object tracking.
However, most of the recent solutions in feature selection
are not robust across different and heterogeneous set of
data. In this paper, we address this issue proposing a robust probabilistic latent graph-based feature selection algorithm that performs the ranking step while considering
all the possible subsets of features, as paths on a graph,
bypassing the combinatorial problem analytically. An appealing characteristic of the approach is that it aims to discover an abstraction behind low-level sensory data, that is,
relevancy. Relevancy is modelled as a latent variable in a
PLSA-inspired generative process that allows the investigation of the importance of a feature when injected into an
arbitrary set of cues. The proposed method has been tested
on ten diverse benchmarks, and compared against eleven
state of the art feature selection methods. Results show that
the proposed approach attains the highest performance levels across many different scenarios and difficulties, thereby
confirming its strong robustness while setting a new state of
the art in feature selection domain.

1. Introduction
Performance of machine learning methods is heavily dependent on the choice of features on which they are applied. Different features can entangle and hide the different explanatory factors of variation behind the data. Feature Selection (FS) aims at improving the performance of a
prediction system, allowing faster and more cost-effective
models, while providing a better understanding of the inherent regularities in data. In the recent computer vision
literature there are many scenarios where FS is a crucial op-

eration [5, 30, 10, 13, 24, 28]. From multiview face recognition [13] where FS is used to speed up the multiview face
recognition process and to maintain the generalization performance, to object recognition [30], until real-time visual
object tracking [28, 25] where FS dynamically identifies
discriminative features that help in handling the appearance
variability of the target by improving tracking performance.
In this paper, we propose a probabilistic latent graphbased feature selection algorithm that performs the ranking
step by considering all the possible subsets of features exploiting the convergence properties of power series of matrices. We map the feature selection problem to an affinity
graph (e.g., feature ≈ node), and then we consider a subset
of features as a path connecting set of nodes. An appealing characteristic of the approach is that the importance of
a given feature is modelled as a conditional probability of a
latent variable and features, namely P (z|f ). Our approach
aims to model an important hidden variable behind data,
that is, relevancy in features. Raw values are observable
while relevancy to a particular task is not (e.g., in classification), therefore, relevancy is modelled as an abstract latent
variable. In particular, our approach consists of three main
parts:
• Pre-processing: a quantization process is applied on
raw feature distributions ~xi , mapping their values to
a countable nominal smaller set of tokens. The preprocessing step assigns a descriptor fi to each raw feature ~xi .
• Graph-Weighting: we build an undirected fullyconnected graph, where nodes correspond, one by one,
to each feature fi , and each weighted edge among
fi
fj models the probability that features xi
and xj are relevant. Weights are learnt automatically by a learning framework based on a variation of
the probabilistic latent semantic analysis (PLSA) technique [21], which models the probability of each co11398

