Chained Cascade Network for Object Detection
Wanli Ouyang1,2 , Kun Wang1 , Xin Zhu1 , Xiaogang Wang1
1. The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2. The University of Sydney
{wlouyang, kwang, xzhu, xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Cascade is a widely used approach that rejects obvious
negative samples at early stages for learning better classiﬁer and faster inference. This paper presents chained cascade network (CC-Net). In this CC-Net, there are many cascade stages. Preceding cascade stages are placed at shallow layers. Easy hard examples are rejected at shallow layers so that the computation for deeper or wider layers is not
required. In this way, features and classiﬁers at latter stages
handle more difﬁcult samples with the help of features and
classiﬁers in previous stages. It yields consistent boost in
detection performance on PASCAL VOC 2007 and ImageNet for both fast RCNN and Faster RCNN. CC-Net saves
computation for both training and testing. Code is available
on https://github.com/wk910930/ccnn.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental computer vision task.
It differs from image classiﬁcation in that the number of
background samples (image regions not belonging to any
object class of interest) is much larger than the number of
object samples. This leads to the undesirable imbalance in
the number of samples for different classes during training.
In order to handle the imbalance problem from the background samples, bootstrapping, cascade, and hard negative mining have been developed [32, 4, 34]. In these approaches, classiﬁer learning is divided into multiple stages.
In each stage, only a subset of background samples are
used for training. The classiﬁers at earlier stages handle
easier samples while the classiﬁers at latter stages handle
more difﬁcult samples. Bootstrapping and hard negative
mining aim at learning more accurate classiﬁer. In comparison, cascade improves both accuracy and speed of the
detection process by rejecting easy background samples at
both training and testing time. The essence of cascade is
to learn more discriminative classiﬁers by using multi-stage
classiﬁers. Classiﬁers at early stages discard large number
of easy negative samples so that classiﬁers at latter stage
can focus on handling more difﬁcult examples. Motivated
by these approaches, we propose a CC-Net to learn features
and classiﬁers with multiple stage. The more discriminative

Figure 1. Motivation of the chained cascade ConvNet in rejecting large number of easy background samples for faster speed and
more discriminative features.

features and classiﬁers are used for handling more difﬁcult
examples as the network goes deeper or wider.
Deep ConvNets have led to signiﬁcant improvement in
accuracy for object detection [11, 10]. Based on a baseline
network, adding deeper layers [30] or branches for making
the network wider [9, 41, 1] were found to improve accuracy for object detection and classiﬁcation. But this also
increases computational time for both training and testing.
Empirical results in [29] show that very large batch size
for ConvNet provides improvement in detection accuracy,
but leads to increase in training time. In order to reduce
the computational complexity from more training samples
and more complex networks, we design a cascaded network structure. This network has many stages for rejecting
easy samples within a single CNN. When an easy sample
is rejected at a shallow layer, it need not go through deeper
layers, for which the computation and memory are not required. With this design, the huge number of training samples can be used but the memory and time for training and
testing are still acceptable by rejecting large number of easy
examples at earlier cascade stages.
11938

