Multi-modal Factorized Bilinear Pooling with Co-Attention Learning
for Visual Question Answering
Zhou Yu† , Jun Yu†∗, Jianping Fan‡ , Dacheng Tao§
Key Laboratory of Complex Systems Modeling and Simulation,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Hangzhou Dianzi University, P. R. China
‡
Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, USA
§
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of IT, FEIT, The University of Sydney, Australia
†

yuz@hdu.edu.cn, yujun@hdu.edu.cn, jfan@uncc.edu, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Visual question answering (VQA) is challenging because
it requires a simultaneous understanding of both the visual
content of images and the textual content of questions. The
approaches used to represent the images and questions in a
fine-grained manner and questions and to fuse these multimodal features play key roles in performance. Bilinear
pooling based models have been shown to outperform traditional linear models for VQA, but their high-dimensional
representations and high computational complexity may
seriously limit their applicability in practice. For multimodal feature fusion, here we develop a Multi-modal Factorized Bilinear (MFB) pooling approach to efficiently and
effectively combine multi-modal features, which results in
superior performance for VQA compared with other bilinear pooling approaches. For fine-grained image and question representation, we develop a ‘co-attention’ mechanism
using an end-to-end deep network architecture to jointly
learn both the image and question attentions. Combining
the proposed MFB approach with co-attention learning in
a new network architecture provides a unified model for
VQA. Our experimental results demonstrate that the single
MFB with co-attention model achieves new state-of-theart performance on the real-world VQA dataset. Code
available at https://github.com/yuzcccc/mfb.

1. Introduction
Thanks to recent advances in computer vision and natural language processing, computers are expected to be able
to automatically understand the semantics of images and
natural languages in the near future. Such advances have
∗ Jun Yu is the corresponding author

also stimulated new research topics like image-text retrieval
[35, 37], image captioning [5, 34], and visual question
answering [3, 19].
Compared with image-text retrieval and image captioning (which just require the underlying algorithms to search
or generate a free-form text description for a given image),
visual question answering (VQA) is a more challenging
task that requires fine-grained understanding of the semantics of both the images and the questions as well as supports
complex reasoning to predict the best-matching answer
correctly. In some aspects, the VQA task can be treated as a
generalization of image captioning and image-text retrieval.
Thus building effective VQA algorithms, which can achieve
close performance like human beings, is an important step
towards enabling artificial intelligence in general.
Existing VQA approaches usually have three stages: (1)
representing the images as visual features and questions as
textual features; (2) combining these multi-modal features
to obtain fused image-question features; (3) using the
integrated image-question features to learn a multi-class
classifier and to predict the best-matching answer. Deep
neural networks (DNNs) are effective and flexible, many
existing approaches model the three stages in one DNN
model and train the model in an end-to-end fashion through
back-propagation. In the three stages, feature representation and multi-modal feature fusion particular affect VQA
performance.
With respect to multi-modal feature fusion, most existing
approaches simply use linear models for multi-modal feature fusion (e.g., concatenation or element-wise addition)
to integrate the image’s visual feature with the question’s
textual feature [39, 18]. Since multi-modal feature distributions may vary dramatically, the integrated image-question
representations obtained by such linear models may not be
sufficiently expressive to fully capture complex associations
between the visual features from images and the textual
11821

