A Spatiotemporal Oriented Energy Network for Dynamic Texture Recognition
Isma Hadji
York University, Toronto

Richard P. Wildes
York University, Toronto

hadjisma@cse.yorku.ca

wildes@cse.yorku.ca

Abstract
This paper presents a novel hierarchical spatiotemporal orientation representation for spacetime image analysis. It is designed to combine the beneﬁts of the multilayer
architecture of ConvNets and a more controlled approach
to spacetime analysis. A distinguishing aspect of the approach is that unlike most contemporary convolutional networks no learning is involved; rather, all design decisions
are speciﬁed analytically with theoretical motivations. This
approach makes it possible to understand what information
is being extracted at each stage and layer of processing as
well as to minimize heuristic choices in design. Another
key aspect of the network is its recurrent nature, whereby
the output of each layer of processing feeds back to the input. To keep the network size manageable across layers, a
novel cross-channel feature pooling is proposed. The multilayer architecture that results systematically reveals hierarchical image structure in terms of multiscale, multiorientation properties of visual spacetime. To illustrate its utility,
the network has been applied to the task of dynamic texture recognition. Empirical evaluation on multiple standard
datasets shows that it sets a new state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Hierarchical representations play an important role in
computer vision [30]. The challenge of extracting useful information (e.g. objects, materials and environmental layout) from images has led to incremental recovery
of progressively more abstracted representations. Convolutional networks (ConvNets) provide an interesting contemporary example of this paradigm yielding state-of-theart results on a range of classiﬁcation and regression tasks,
e.g. [18, 36, 43, 8]. While such learning-based approaches
show remarkable performance, they typically rely on massive amounts of training data and the exact nature of their
representations often remains unclear. Deeper theoretical
understanding should lessen dependence on data-driven design, which is especially important when training data is
limited. In complement, the present work explores a more
controlled approach to network realization. A small vocab-

ulary of theory motivated, analytically deﬁned ﬁltering operations are repeatedly cascaded to yield hierarchical representations of input imagery. Although the same operations
are applied repeatedly, different information is extracted at
each layer as the input changes due to the previous layer’s
operations. Since the primitive operations are speciﬁed analytically, they do not require training data and the resulting representations are readily interpretable. Further, the
network yields state-of-the-art results on the important and
challenging task of dynamic texture recognition.
Previous work pursuing controlled approaches to hierarchical network realization variously relied on biological inspiration and analytic principles. Most biologicallybased approaches mimic the multilayered architecture of
the visual cortex with cascades of simple and complex cells
[29, 24, 16]. Typically, these approaches still use learning
and leave open questions regarding the theoretical basis of
their designs. More theoretically driven approaches typically focus on network architecture optimization, e.g. the
number of ﬁlters/layer or the number of learned weights
[19, 9]. Other work made use of predetermined ﬁlters at all
layers, as learned via PCA [4] or over a basis of 2D derivatives [14]. Two commonalities appear across these efforts.
First, they address only a single aspect of their architecture,
while assuming all others are ﬁxed. Second, they rely on
learning in optimization. More closely related to the present
work is ScatNet [3]. This network is rigorously deﬁned to
increase invariance to signal deformations via hierarchical
convolution with ﬁlters of different frequency tunings. In its
restricted application to 2D spatial images, ScatNet bases
its design on optimization with respect to 2D invariances.
In contrast, the present approach considers 3D spacetime
images, which leads to a spatiotemporal orientation analysis for extracting varying dynamic signal properties across
levels, including invariance maximization via a multiscale
network. Moreover, while the present approach analytically speciﬁes the number of ﬁlters/layer, ScatNet’s choice
of wavelets limits it from analytically specifying the number of ﬁlters/layer, which instead are chosen empirically.
Dynamic texture recognition also has received much attention. Here, features used can be largely categorized as

3066

