Active Learning for Human Pose Estimation
Buyu Liu

Vittorio Ferrari

University of Edinburgh

University of Edinburgh

buyu.liu@ed.ac.uk

vittorio.ferrari@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Annotating human poses in realistic scenes is very time
consuming, yet necessary for training human pose estimators. We propose to address this problem in an active learning framework, which alternates between requesting the
most useful annotations among a large set of unlabelled
images, and re-training the pose estimator. To this end,
(1) we propose an uncertainty estimator specific for body
joint predictions, which takes into account the spatial distribution of the responses of the current pose estimator on
the unlabelled images; (2) we propose a dynamic combination of influence and uncertainty cues, where their weights
vary during the active learning process according to the reliability of the current pose estimator; (3) we introduce a
computer assisted annotation interface, which reduces the
time necessary for a human annotator to click on a joint
by discretizing the image into regions generated by the current pose estimator. Experiments using the MPII and LSP
datasets with both simulated and real annotators show that
(1) the proposed active selection scheme outperforms several baselines; (2) our computer-assisted interface can further reduce annotation effort; and (3) our technique can
further improve the performance of a pose estimator even
when starting from an already strong one.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation, the localization of human body
joints, has enjoyed substantial attention. Starting from classical pictorial structures [2, 12, 14], recent state-of-the-art
approaches employ convolutional networks [36, 55, 47, 6].
These methods aim to learn discriminative patterns that enable to distinguish patches around body joints from the rest
of the image. This requires good training data, but data collection is particularly time-intensive for human pose estimation, as annotators are typically asked to click on 14 joints
per person [1]. The reference analysis paper [1] suggests a
reasonable annotation rate of one pose per minute.
Weakly supervised learning [9] and active learning [38,
8] have been proposed to address data collection problem

for several tasks, such as image classification [22, 20, 35],
object detection [51, 57] , object recognition [21, 13] and semantic segmentation [49, 27, 44, 16]. However, the problem
remains largely unaddressed for human pose estimation.
In this paper, we propose the first active learning approach for human pose estimation (Fig. 1). We follow the
general scheme of active learning: an active learner automatically selects a subset of unlabelled data. After that, human annotators label the selected data. Finally, the learner
updates the pose estimator with the labelled data, and the
process iterates. Since the goal of active learning is to maximize performance while minimizing annotation effort, we
focus on two main elements in the scheme: active selection
and human annotation procedures.
For active selection, we first explore various individual
cues to measure the informativeness of as-yet unlabelled
images. We first adapt classical active learning cues to the
human pose estimation task, such as highest model probability [25, 26], best v.s second best [37, 20], and influence [17, 42]. In addition, we propose an uncertainty measure which takes into account the spatial distribution of the
model’s response on an image, coined multiple peak entropy. This cue provides a better estimation of the images
where the model is uncertain on. Moreover, we propose a
dynamic way to combine the influence and uncertainty cues,
where their weights vary during the active learning process.
During the early selection iterations when the pose estimator only sees little annotated data, the influence cues play
a more important role. Later, as the model gets better, our
scheme gradually switches to rely more on uncertainty. Our
weighting term approximates the expected reliability of the
current pose estimator on unlabelled images, and its value
increases as the estimator gets better.
To further reduce annotation effort, we propose a computer assisted interface to help the annotator to rapidly click
on a body joint (Fig. 5). The main idea is to discretize the
image space into large regions, each associated with a single candidate point for the true location of the joint. Thanks
to this, the annotator no longer needs to click exactly on
the joint, but just anywhere inside the associated region. To
find the set of candidate points, we use the full 2D distribu14363

