Real Time Eye Gaze Tracking with 3D Deformable Eye-Face Model
Kang Wang
Qiang Ji
ECSE Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
110 8th Street, Troy, NY, USA
{wangk10, jiq}@rpi.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction

correspond to similar gaze positions/directions, from which
different mapping functions can be learned to perform gaze
estimation. However, these traditional methods cannot handle free head movement, as eye appearance/features might
be similar under different gaze directions and head poses.
Several methods [15, 23, 33, 24, 32] have been proposed to
compensate head movement. But they typically require a
large amount of training data involving different poses or
rely on additional data to learn a correction model. Differently, 3D model-based methods perform gaze estimation based
on a 3D geometric eye model, which mimics the structure
and function of human vision system. They can be further
divided into two categories based on their hardware systems.
Methods from first category [1, 3, 26, 9, 14, 20, 29, 27] depend on their complex hardware system, including IR lights,
stereo vision system or 3D sensors to perform 3D gaze estimation. However, the practical utility of these methods
is significantly limited due to complex system setup and
sensitivity to environmental settings. Methods from second
category [2, 25, 29, 31, 11, 12] perform 3D gaze estimation
with a simple web-camera. However, these methods either
have strong assumptions, cannot apply in practice or cannot
give good gaze estimation accuracy. For more information
regarding different gaze estimation techniques, we suggest
readers refer to [10].

Eye gaze tracking is to predict the gaze directions or
where human looks in real time. Since eye gaze reflects human’s cognitive process [16] (attention or interest), various
gaze estimation techniques have been proposed and applied
in different fields. In Human Computer Interaction field,
eye gaze can replace traditional inputs or serve as additional
input to help better interactions with the computer. Besides,
more and more games start supporting gaze input from eye
tracker to enhance the gaming experience [22]. Furthermore,
eye tracking data can also help research and analysis in marketing, advertisement, psychology, etc.
There are two main types of gaze estimation techniques:
2D appearance-based and 3D model-based. The key idea
of appearance/feature based methods [5, 6, 17, 13, 4] builds on the assumption that similar eye appearances/features

To build a simple, robust, accurate and real time eye tracking system, we focus on 3D model-based gaze estimation
with a single web-camera. To achieve our goals, a new gaze
estimation framework based on 3D eye-face model is proposed to effectively perform 3D gaze estimation from 2D
facial landmarks. The gaze estimation framework also includes the offline learned DEFM and an efficient calibration
algorithm. Given DEFM, individual 3D eye-face models from any new subjects can be effectively reconstructed,
without the need to provide subject-dependent 3D data or
additional hardware. Through the unified calibration procedure, reconstruction of individual 3D eye-face model as well
as estimation of personal eye parameters can be achieved
simultaneously.

3D model-based gaze estimation methods are widely explored because of their good accuracy and ability to handle
free head movement. Traditional methods with complex
hardware systems (Eg. infrared lights, 3D sensors, etc.)
are restricted to controlled environments, which significantly limit their practical utilities. In this paper, we propose
a 3D model-based gaze estimation method with a single
web-camera, which enables instant and portable eye gaze
tracking. The key idea is to leverage on the proposed 3D
eye-face model, from which we can estimate 3D eye gaze
from observed 2D facial landmarks. The proposed system
includes a 3D deformable eye-face model that is learned
offline from multiple training subjects. Given the deformable
model, individual 3D eye-face models and personal eye parameters can be recovered through the unified calibration
algorithm. Experimental results show that the proposed
method outperforms state-of-the-art methods while allowing
convenient system setup and free head movement. A real
time eye tracking system running at 30 FPS also validates
the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed method.

11003

