Predicting Human Activities Using Stochastic Grammar
Siyuan Qi1 , Siyuan Huang1 , Ping Wei2,1 , and Song-Chun Zhu1
1
University of California, Los Angeles, USA
2
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
{syqi, huangsiyuan}@ucla.edu pingwei@xjtu.edu.cn sczhu@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a novel method to predict future human activities from partially observed RGB-D videos. Human activity prediction is generally difficult due to its nonMarkovian property and the rich context between human
and environments. We use a stochastic grammar model to
capture the compositional structure of events, integrating
human actions, objects, and their affordances. We represent
the event by a spatial-temporal And-Or graph (ST-AOG).
The ST-AOG is composed of a temporal stochastic grammar
defined on sub-activities, and spatial graphs representing
sub-activities that consist of human actions, objects, and
their affordances. Future sub-activities are predicted using the temporal grammar and Earley parsing algorithm.
The corresponding action, object, and affordance labels are
then inferred accordingly. Extensive experiments are conducted to show the effectiveness of our model on both semantic event parsing and future activity prediction.

1. Introduction
Consider the image from a video shown in Figure 1(a).
A modern computer vision algorithm might reliably detect
a human pose and some key objects in the scene: a chair, a
monitor, a cup, a microwave and a water cooler. However,
we as observers are able to reason beyond the current situation. We can predict what the possible future states are to
some extent, and we can even evaluate how strong that belief is – a human can easily predict which state is the most
likely future state from Figure 1(c).
The underlying reasoning of the future is more complicated than appearance analysis. The observer needs to understand (i) what happened and what is happening, (ii) what
the goal of the agent is, (iii) which object(s) the agent needs
to achieve the goal, and (iv) how the agent will perform the
task. Based on this rationality, we address the problem of
event understanding and human activity prediction from the
following two perspectives: (i) a learning algorithm should
discover the hierarchical/compositional structure of events,

Figure 1: What is he going to do? (a)(b) Input RGB-D video
frames. (c) Activity prediction: human action with interacting objects, and object affordances (how the agent will
perform the task). The red skeleton is the current observation. The magenta, green and blue skeletons and interacting
objects are possible future states.
and (ii) an inference algorithm should recover the hierarchical structure given the past observations, and be able to
predict the future based on the understanding.
We believe the task of human activity prediction is important for two main reasons. First, the ability to make predictions is key for intelligent systems and robots to perform
assistive activities. Second, predicting the future human
activities requires deep understanding of human activities.
Activity prediction enables the robot to do better task planning. There are attempts that have been made to address
this task in both the computer vision [9, 32, 1, 8, 20, 16, 23]
and the robotics community [11, 7, 39, 12, 33].
In this paper, we aim to design a model that can (i) learn
the hierarchical structure of human activities from videos,
11164

