Least Squares Generative Adversarial Networks
Xudong Mao1 Qing Li1
Raymond Y.K. Lau3 Zhen Wang4
2

Haoran Xie2
Stephen Paul Smolley5

1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
Department of Mathematics and Information Technology, The Education University of Hong Kong
3
Department of Information Systems, City University of Hong Kong
4
Center for Optical Imagery Analysis and Learning, Northwestern Polytechnical University
5
CodeHatch Corp.
xudonmao@gmail.com, itqli@cityu.edu.hk, hrxie2@gmail.com
raylau@cityu.edu.hk, zhenwang0@gmail.com, steve@codehatch.com

Abstract
Unsupervised learning with generative adversarial networks (GANs) has proven hugely successful. Regular GANs
hypothesize the discriminator as a classifier with the sigmoid cross entropy loss function. However, we found that
this loss function may lead to the vanishing gradients problem during the learning process. To overcome such a problem, we propose in this paper the Least Squares Generative Adversarial Networks (LSGANs) which adopt the least
squares loss function for the discriminator. We show that
minimizing the objective function of LSGAN yields minimizing the Pearson χ2 divergence. There are two benefits
of LSGANs over regular GANs. First, LSGANs are able to
generate higher quality images than regular GANs. Second,
LSGANs perform more stable during the learning process.
We evaluate LSGANs on LSUN and CIFAR-10 datasets and
the experimental results show that the images generated by
LSGANs are of better quality than the ones generated by
regular GANs. We also conduct two comparison experiments between LSGANs and regular GANs to illustrate the
stability of LSGANs.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has launched a profound reformation and
even been applied to many real-world tasks, such as image
classification [7], object detection [27] and segmentation
[18]. These tasks obviously fall into the scope of supervised
learning, which means that a lot of labeled data are provided for the learning processes. Compared with supervised
learning, however, unsupervised learning tasks, such as
generative models, obtain limited impact from deep learning. Although some deep generative models, e.g. RBM
[8], DBM [28] and VAE [14], have been proposed, these

models face the difficulty of intractable functions or the difficulty of intractable inference, which in turn restricts the
effectiveness of these models.
Recently, Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [6]
have demonstrated impressive performance for unsupervised learning tasks. Unlike other deep generative models
which usually adopt approximation methods for intractable
functions or inference, GANs do not require any approximation and can be trained end-to-end through the differentiable networks. The basic idea of GANs is to simultaneously train a discriminator and a generator: the discriminator aims to distinguish between real samples and generated
samples; while the generator tries to generate fake samples
as real as possible, making the discriminator believe that
the fake samples are from real data. So far, plenty of works
have shown that GANs can play a significant role in various tasks, such as image generation [21], image superresolution [16], and semi-supervised learning [29].
In spite of the great progress for GANs in image generation, the quality of generated images by GANs is still limited for some realistic tasks. Regular GANs adopt the sigmoid cross entropy loss function for the discriminator [6].
We argue that this loss function, however, will lead to the
problem of vanishing gradients when updating the generator using the fake samples that are on the correct side of the
decision boundary, but are still far from the real data. As
Figure 1(b) shows, when we use the fake samples (in magenta) to update the generator by making the discriminator
believe they are from real data, it will cause almost no error because they are on the correct side, i.e., the real data
side, of the decision boundary. However, these samples are
still far from the real data and we want to pull them close
to the real data. Based on this observation, we propose the
Least Squares Generative Adversarial Networks (LSGANs)
which adopt the least squares loss function for the discrim-

2794

