Joint Bi-layer Optimization for Single-image Rain Streak Removal
Lei Zhu1,3 , Chi-Wing Fu1,3 , Dani Lischinski2 , and Pheng-Ann Heng1,3
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 The Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
3
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality and Human Interaction Technology,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{lzhu, cwfu, pheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, danix@mail.huji.ac.il
Abstract
We present a novel method for removing rain streaks from a
single input image by decomposing it into a rain-free background layer B and a rain-streak layer R. A joint optimization process is used that alternates between removing
rain-streak details from B and removing non-streak details
from R. The process is assisted by three novel image priors. Observing that rain streaks typically span a narrow
range of directions, we first analyze the local gradient statistics in the rain image to identify image regions that are
dominated by rain streaks. From these regions, we estimate
the dominant rain streak direction and extract a collection
of rain-dominated patches. Next, we define two priors on
the background layer B, one based on a centralized sparse
representation and another based on the estimated rain direction. A third prior is defined on the rain-streak layer R,
based on similarity of patches to the extracted rain patches.
Both visual and quantitative comparisons demonstrate that
our method outperforms the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Computer vision methods generally assume a clear image
as input for processing and scene understanding. However, rain streaks, when present, tend to obstruct and blur the
scene [19], thereby distorting the image content and degrading the accuracy of visual analysis [5].
Several methods have been proposed to remove rain streaks
in images. They are typically classified by their input type.
Video-based methods [11, 34, 1, 2, 24, 33] leverage the rich
temporal information across frames to locate and remove rain
streaks, while single-image methods [15, 16, 5, 26, 14, 21,
19] require the use of image priors to recover the underlying
background scene, e.g., dictionary-based sparse prior [15, 26,
14, 21], low-rank prior [5], nonlocal self-similarity prior [16],
and GMM-based layer prior [19].

(a) Input rain image

(b) Result of Luo et al. [21]

(c) Result of Li et al. [19]

(d) Our result

Figure 1: Rain streak removal on a real photo.
Compared with video-based methods, it is much more challenging to remove rain streaks given only a single image.
Although existing single-image methods can improve the
overall scene visibility, they tend to either oversmooth the
background image details, or retain a significant amount of
rain streaks in the results. This is demonstrated in Fig. 1,
which shows de-rained results produced using two state-ofthe-art methods [21, 19] next to our result.
The goal of single-image rain streak removal is to decompose an input image I into two layers: a background image
B, which is rain-free, and a rain image R, which contains
only rain streaks. To achieve this, we develop a joint bi-layer
optimization method that alternatively processes the two layers, where we alternatively smooth the background layer to
push rain streaks from B to R, and smooth the rain layer to
push background details from R back to B. Then, we can
improve the preservation of background details in B, which
is the optimization output. Although several priors on B and
R have been proposed in previous work, they usually have
limited capability to differentiate background details from
rain streaks, especially for heavy rain conditions. For example, the Gaussian mixture models (GMM) of Li et al. [19],

2526

