Learning Blind Motion Deblurring
Patrick Wieschollek1,2

Michael Hirsch2
Hendrik P.A. Lensch1

Bernhard Schölkopf2

1

2

University of Tübingen
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

previous methods

our result

Figure 1. From a sequence of blurry inputs (lower row) our learning-based approach for blind burst-deblurring reconstructs fine details,
which are not recovered by recent state-of-the-art methods like FBA [6]. Both methods feature similar run-time.

Abstract
As handheld video cameras are now commonplace and
available in every smartphone, images and videos can be
recorded almost everywhere at anytime. However, taking
a quick shot frequently yields a blurry result due to unwanted camera shake during recording or moving objects in
the scene. Removing these artifacts from the blurry recordings is a highly ill-posed problem as neither the sharp image
nor the motion blur kernel is known. Propagating information between multiple consecutive blurry observations can
help restore the desired sharp image or video. In this work,
we propose an efficient approach to produce a significant
amount of realistic training data and introduce a novel recurrent network architecture to deblur frames taking temporal information into account, which can efficiently handle
arbitrary spatial and temporal input sizes.

1. Introduction
Videos captured by handheld devices usually contain motion blur artifacts caused by a combination of camera shake
(ego-motion) and dynamic scene content (object motion).
With a fixed exposure time any movement during recording causes the sensor to observe an averaged signal from
different points in the scene. A reconstruction of the sharp
frame from a blurry observation is a highly ill-posed prob-

lem, denoted as blind or non-blind deconvolution depending
on whether camera-shake information is known or not.
In video and image burst deblurring the reconstruction process for a single frame can make use of additional data from
neighboring frames. However, the problem is still challenging as each frame might encounter a different camera shake
and the frames might not be aligned.
For deconvolution of a static scene neural networks have
been successfully applied using single frame [2, 21, 22] and
multi-frame deblurring [30, 33, 5].
All recent network architectures for multi-frame and video
deblurring [30, 24, 17, 2] require the input to match a fixed
temporal and spatial size. Handling arbitrary spatial dimensions is theoretically possible by fully convolutional networks as done in [24], but they rely on a sliding window
approach during inference due to limited memory on the
GPU. For these approaches, the reconstruction of one frame
is not possible by aggregating the information of longer sequences than the network was trained for.
In contrast, our approach is a deblurring system that can
deal with arbitrary lengths of sequences while featuring a
fully convolutional network that can process full resolution
video frames at once. Due to its small memory footprint it
removes the need for sliding window approaches during inference, thus drastically accelerating the deblurring process.
For processing arbitrary sequences we rely on a recurrent
scheme. While convolutional LSTMs [18] offer a straight1231

