SHaPE: A Novel Graph Theoretic Algorithm for Making Consensus-based
Decisions in Person Re-identification Systems
Arko Barman
University of Houston
4800 Calhoun Road, Houston TX 77004

Shishir K. Shah
University of Houston
4800 Calhoun Road, Houston TX 77004

abarman@uh.edu

sshah@central.uh.edu

Abstract
Person re-identification is a challenge in video-based
surveillance where the goal is to identify the same person
in different camera views. In recent years, many algorithms
have been proposed that approach this problem by designing suitable feature representations for images of persons or
by training appropriate distance metrics that learn to distinguish between images of different persons. Aggregating the
results from multiple algorithms for person re-identification
is a relatively less-explored area of research. In this paper, we formulate an algorithm that maps the ranking process in a person re-identification algorithm to a problem
in graph theory. We then extend this formulation to allow for the use of results from multiple algorithms to make
a consensus-based decision for the person re-identification
problem. The algorithm is unsupervised and takes into account only the matching scores generated by multiple algorithms for creating a consensus of results. Further, we
show how the graph theoretic problem can be solved by
a two-step process. First, we obtain a rough estimate of
the solution using a greedy algorithm. Then, we extend the
construction of the proposed graph so that the problem can
be efficiently solved by means of Ant Colony Optimization,
a heuristic path-searching algorithm for complex graphs.
While we present the algorithm in the context of person reidentification, it can potentially be applied to the general
problem of ranking items based on a consensus of multiple
sets of scores or metric values.

1. Introduction
The application of computer vision in video-based
surveillance and forensics has gained much popularity in
recent years [31]. Among different challenges within that
context, person re-identification has been particularly challenging to solve due to a number of reasons – changes in
appearance of a person due to change in viewpoint, pose, il-

lumination, and occlusion. Moreover, the visual appearance
of different persons often appear to be similar due to similar
clothing or prevalence of common clothing styles.
The problem of person re-identification can be formally
stated as – given a gallery of images of a number of persons, a probe image of a person from another viewpoint
is to be matched with the corresponding gallery image of
the same person. Person re-identification algorithms proposed till date have focused on learning the appearance
of different persons [14, 24] and distance metric learning [21, 27]. While designing discriminative features that
are able to distinguish between the appearances of different persons [14, 24] is a common feature representation approach, progress has also been made towards extraction of
features through the application of deep learning [1, 19].
Performance of person re-identification algorithms has
improved steadily over the years. However, the accuracy
rates for person re-identification systems are not adequate
for implementation in automated video surveillance in the
real world. A simple yet effective way to boost the performance of person re-identification systems is to explore the
possibility of enhancing the performance of existing algorithms by combining results from multiple algorithms. The
utility of this direction of research cannot be overemphasized since the advent of new algorithms will only serve to
further enhance the results by feeding results from existing
and future algorithms into these aggregating techniques[2].
In this paper, we show how the process of ranking gallery
images, in terms of their similarity scores with a probe image, can be mapped to a path searching problem in a graph.
This mapping is then extended to include the scenario when
there are multiple sets of scores from different algorithms
instead of a single set of scores from just one algorithm.
This mapping allows us to make decisions on a person reidentification problem based on a consensus of results from
multiple algorithms. Finally, we propose a two-step method
for solving the formulated graph problem. The overall approach of mapping the ranking process to a graph, and its
proposed two-step solution is denoted as SHaPE (Shortest

1115

