Deep Cropping via Attention Box Prediction and Aesthetics Assessment
Wenguan Wang, and Jianbing Shen∗
Beijing Lab of Intelligent Information Technology,
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, China

Abstract
We model the photo cropping problem as a cascade of
attention box regression and aesthetic quality classification,
based on deep learning. A neural network is designed that
has two branches for predicting attention bounding box and
analyzing aesthetics, respectively. The predicted attention
box is treated as an initial crop window where a set of
cropping candidates are generated around it, without missing important information. Then, aesthetics assessment is
employed to select the final crop as the one with the best
aesthetic quality. With our network, cropping candidates
share features within full-image convolutional feature maps, thus avoiding repeated feature computation and leading
to higher computation efficiency. Via leveraging rich data
for attention prediction and aesthetics assessment, the proposed method produces high-quality cropping results, even
with the limited availability of training data for photo cropping. The experimental results demonstrate the competitive
results and fast processing speed (5 fps with all steps).

1. Introduction
Consider Fig. 1 (a). How can we determine an appropriate crop for this picture? It seems to be a natural choice
that people first define a crop that covers the desired or important region, and then, iteratively adjust the position, size
and ratio of the initial crop window until achieving visualquality-inspired result. This determining-adjusting cropping strategy brings two advantages: (1) considering both
attention and aesthetics in a cascaded way; and (2) high
computation efficiency since the searching space of the best
crop is only limited to the surrounding of the initial crop
area. Interestingly, however, most previous cropping approaches are proceeded in another way. They usually generate a large number of sliding windows with various ratios
∗ Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen (shenjianbing@bit.edu.cn).
This work was supported in part by the National Basic Research Program
of China (973 Program) (No. 2013CB328805), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61272359), and the Fok Ying-Tong Education
Foundation for Young Teachers. Specialized Fund for Joint Building Program of Beijing Municipal Education Commission.

Figure 1: (a)-(c) Flowchart of our method. (d) Conventional methods apply sliding-judging cropping strategy, which
is time-consuming and violates natural cropping procedure.
(e) Our method works as a cascade of attention-aware crop
candidates generation and aesthetics-based crop window selection, which handles photo cropping in a more natural
manner and is achieved by a neural network.

and sizes over all the positions, and find the optimal subview
via repeatedly computing attention scores [29, 40, 47, 3], or
analyzing aesthetics [32, 48] for all the sliding windows.
This sliding-judging strategy, as depicted in Fig. 1 (d), is
companied with heavy computation load, since the searching space would span all the possible subviews of the whole
image. Besides, compared with repeatedly calculating attention and/or aesthetics scores over all the crop windows,
arranging these two items in a sequential order would be a
more reasonable and time-saving choice.

2186

