Exploiting Multi-Grain Ranking Constraints for Precisely Searching
Visually-similar Vehicles
Ke Yan1,2 , Yonghong Tian1,2∗, Yaowei Wang3 , Wei Zeng1,2 , Tiejun Huang1,2
National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, School of EE&CS,
Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, China
3
Department of Electronic Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
1

{keyan, yhtian, weizeng, tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn;yaoweiwang@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Precise search of visually-similar vehicles poses a great
challenge in computer vision, which needs to find exactly
the same vehicle among a massive vehicles with visually
similar appearances for a given query image. In this paper, we model the relationship of vehicle images as multiple grains. Following this, we propose two approaches
to alleviate the precise vehicle search problem by exploiting multi-grain ranking constraints. One is Generalized
Pairwise Ranking, which generalizes the conventional pairwise from considering only binary similar/dissimilar relations to multiple relations. The other is Multi-Grain based
List Ranking, which introduces permutation probability to
score a permutation of a multi-grain list, and further optimizes the ranking by the likelihood loss function. We implement the two approaches with multi-attribute classification in a multi-task deep learning framework. To further facilitate the research on precise vehicle search, we
also contribute two high-quality and well-annotated vehicle
datasets, named VD1 and VD2, which are collected from
two different cities with diverse annotated attributes. As
two of the largest publicly available precise vehicle search
datasets, they contain 1,097,649 and 807,260 vehicle images respectively. Experimental results show that our approaches achieve the state-of-the-art performance on both
datasets.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development and popularization of security systems, there is a growing need for precise vehicle
search from a huge number of images captured by various
surveillance cameras. Given a query vehicle image, precise
∗ Corresponding author: Yonghong Tian

Figure 1. Some vehicle images. The first two rows exhibit vehicle
images of different cars while the last two rows show some images
of the same car.

vehicle search aims at finding out all instances of that vehicle. Intuitively, license plate recognition can be used to
solve this problem under the assumption that license plate
number is unique and recognisable for each vehicle. Unfortunately, such an assumption does not hold in some practical situations as the license plate can be easily removed, occluded or faked [1]. Precise vehicle search based on visual
features can thus serve as a significant alternative approach
to steadily identify a vehicle by taking vehicle’s visual appearances into consideration. However, different cars may
have similar visual appearances, such as the same color and
the same vehicle model (product year and type). An illustration of such a phenomenon is displayed in Fig.1, where
the four vehicles in the second row have nearly the same ap-

562

