Understanding and Mapping Natural Beauty
Scott Workman1

Richard Souvenir2

Nathan Jacobs1

scott@cs.uky.edu

souvenir@temple.edu

jacobs@cs.uky.edu

1

2

University of Kentucky

Temple University

Abstract
While natural beauty is often considered a subjective
property of images, in this paper, we take an objective approach and provide methods for quantifying and predicting
the scenicness of an image. Using a dataset containing hundreds of thousands of outdoor images captured throughout
Great Britain with crowdsourced ratings of natural beauty,
we propose an approach to predict scenicness which explicitly accounts for the variance of human ratings. We demonstrate that quantitative measures of scenicness can benefit
semantic image understanding, content-aware image processing, and a novel application of cross-view mapping,
where the sparsity of ground-level images can be addressed
by incorporating unlabeled overhead images in the training
and prediction steps. For each application, our methods for
scenicness prediction result in quantitative and qualitative
improvements over baseline approaches.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in learning with large-scale image collections have led to methods that go beyond identifying objects and their interactions toward quantifying seemingly
subjective high-level properties of the scene. For example, Isola et al. [6] explore image memorability, finding that
memorability is a stable property of images that can be predicted based on the image attributes and features. Other
similar high-level image properties include photographic
style [28], virality [4], specificity [7], and humor [3]. Quantifying such properties facilitates new applications in image
understanding.
In this paper we consider “scenicness”, or the natural
beauty of outdoor scenes. Despite the popularity of the saying “beauty lies in the eye of the beholder,” research shows
that beauty is not purely subjective [12]. For example, consider the images in Figure 1; mountainous landscapes captured from an elevated position are consistently rated as
more beautiful by humans than images of power transmission towers.

Figure 1: Most observers agree that images of mountains
are more scenic than power lines. Our work seeks to automatically quantify “scenicness” and demonstrate applications in image understanding and mapping.

Understanding the perception of landscapes has been
an active research area (see [41] for a comprehensive review) with real-world importance. For example, McGranahan [19] derives a natural amenities index and shows that
rural population change is strongly related to the attractiveness of a place to live, as well as an area’s popularity for
retirement or recreation. Seresinhe et al. [26] show that inhabitants of more beautiful environments report better overall health. Runge et al. [24] characterize locations by their
visual attributes and describe a system for scenic route planning. Lu et al. [16] recover cues from millions of geotagged
photos to suggest customized travel routes.
Recently, a number of algorithms have been developed
to automatically interpret high-level properties of images.
Laffont et al. [11] introduce a set of transient scene attributes and train regressors for estimating them in novel images. Lorenzo et al. [21] use a convolutional neural network
to estimate urban perception from a single image. Deza and
Parikh [4] study the phenomenon of image virality. Similarly, a significant amount of work has sought to under15589

