Surface Registration via Foliation
Xiaopeng Zhenga,c , Chengfeng Wenb , Na Leia,c,d,∗ , Ming Mab , Xianfeng Gub,d
a

DUT-RU International School of Information Science and Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116620, China
b
Computer Science Department, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook 11794 NY, USA
c
Key Laboratory for Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning Province, Dalian 116620, China
d
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Imaging Technology, Capital Normal University, Beijing 100048, China
shawnxpzheng@gmail.com, chwen@cs.stonybrook.edu,
∗

Corresponding:nalei@dlut.edu.cn, Jacksoftwarecas@gmail.com, gu@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
This work introduces a novel surface registration method
based on foliation. A foliation decomposes the surface into
a family of closed loops, such that the decomposition has
local tensor product structure. By projecting each loop to
a point, the surface is collapsed into a graph. Two homeomorphic surfaces with consistent foliations can be registered by first matching their foliation graphs, then matching
the corresponding leaves.
This foliation based method is capable of handling surfaces with complicated topologies and large non-isometric
deformations, rigorous with solid theoretic foundation, easy
to implement, robust to compute. The result mapping is diffeomorphic. Our experimental results show the efficiency
and efficacy of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Surface registration plays a fundamental role in computer vision, it has a broad range of applications, such as
3D face recognition [12], shape retrieval [14], brain cortical surface registration [22], image registration [31], high
resolution tracking of non-rigid motion [53] and so on.
In the past decades, researchers have intensively investigated various surface registration approaches [11, 32], such
as ICP method [7, 4, 15, 43, 51, 21], dense mapping method
[25, 58, 42, 33], graph matching method [18, 20, 27, 8, 9,
37], parameterizatoin based method [3, 44, 52, 57, 10, 55,
1, 49], functional based method [41, 24, 34, 45] and many
other methods (e.g. [7, 12, 36]). Although surface registration techniques have been advanced greatly, it still remains
challenging to handle surfaces with complicated topologies
and large non-isometric deformations.
In order to tackle these challenges, this work proposes
a novel method to establish diffeomorphisms between surfaces with complicated topologies, surface registration via

foliation.
C1

C1

Γ2
C3

Γ1
C2

C2

Γ1

Γ2
C3

Figure 1. Foliations on a genus two surface and their corresponding projection graphs.

1.1. Proposed Approach
Foliation Fig. 1 shows the concept of foliation. Intuitively, a surface foliation decomposes the surface into a family
of non-intersecting loops. Each loop is called a leaf. All the
homotopic leaves form a cylinder, the whole surface is decomposed into cylinders {C1 , C2 , C3 }, different cylinders
intersect at critical leaves (red leaves Γ1 , Γ2 ), three cylinders meet at the singularities ({z1 , z2 }). We can shrink each
leaf to a point to “project” the whole surface into a graph,
where each cylinder is mapped to an arc, each critical leaf to
a node. Furthermore, the number of leaves on each cylinder
defines the length of the arc. The graph with the arc length
represents the foliation.
Furthermore, the mapping from the foliation to the corresponding graph is a generalized harmonic map. Inversely, under some mild conditions, given a graph with the arc
length, the harmonic map from the surface to the graph induces a foliation.
Registration Based on Foliation Fig. 2 shows our registration algorithmic pipeline. Given two genus g surfaces, we automatically compute 3g − 3 cutting loops on

938

