Surface Normals in the Wild
Weifeng Chen2
Donglai Xiang1∗
Jia Deng2
1
2
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA
xdl13thu@gmail.com, {wfchen,jiadeng}@umich.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of single-image depth estimation
for images in the wild. We collect human annotated surface
normals and use them to help train a neural network that
directly predicts pixel-wise depth. We propose two novel
loss functions for training with surface normal annotations.
Experiments on NYU Depth, KITTI, and our own dataset
demonstrate that our approach can significantly improve
the quality of depth estimation in the wild.

1. Introduction
Single-image depth estimation is an important computer vision problem that has the potential to majorly boost
higher-level tasks such as object recognition and scene understanding. However, despite extensive research [26, 10,
25, 1, 9, 22, 32, 34, 18, 6, 29, 27, 2], single-image depth
estimation remains difficult. In particular, it remains difficult to estimate depth for unconstrained images of arbitrary scenes, because, as prior work [7] has pointed out, existing RGB-D datasets used to train current systems were
collected by depth sensors. As a result, they consist of a
few specific types of indoor and outdoor scenes. Systems
trained on these datasets thus cannot generalize to images
“in the wild” of arbitrary scenes and compositions.
Recent work by Chen et al. [7] made an attempt to estimate depth for images “in the wild”: they collected human annotations of relative depth—the depth ordering of
two points—for random Internet images and use the annotations to train a deep network that directly predicts metric
depth. Chen et al. showed that it is possible to improve
depth estimation for images in the wild by using human annotations of depth. In particular, they showed that while it
is difficult to obtain absolute metric depth (per-pixel depth
values) from humans, it is nonetheless feasible to collect indirect, qualitative depth annotations such as relative depth,
and use such annotations to learn to estimate metric depth.
This strategy does not rely on depth sensors and can work

with arbitrary images; it thus has the potential to significantly advance depth estimation in the wild.
One limitation of the work by Chen et al. [7], however,
is that annotations of relative depth do not capture all information that is perceptually important. In particular, relative
depth is invariant to monotonic transformations of metric
depth, meaning that there can be two scenes that are perceptually very different yet are indistinguishable in terms
of relative depth. For example, it is possible to bend, wiggle, or tilt a straight line without affecting relative depth
(Fig. 2). In other words, relative depth does not capture
important perceptual properties such as continuity, surface
orientation, and curvature. As a result, systems trained on
relative depth will not necessarily recover depth that is perceptually faithful in all aspects.
In this paper, we build on the work of Chen et al. [7]
and address the limitation by introducing surface normals
as an additional type of indirect depth annotation. Surface
normals carry important information on 3D geometry: they
encode the local orientation of surfaces and the derivatives
of depth. In fact, absent depth discontinuities, given dense
surface normals, it is possible to recover full metric depth up
to scaling and translation. This suggests that annotations of
surface normals can eliminate a significant amount of ambiguity in relative depth and result in better depth estimation.
In addition, it has been well documented in human vision
research that humans perceive surface orientation with a remarkable degree of consistency [20]. This suggests that it
could be feasible to collect human annotations for images
in the wild.
We consider two questions: how to crowdsource annotations of surface normals, and how to use surface normal
annotations to help train a network that predicts per-pixel
metric depth. To crowdsource surface normals, we develop
a UI that allows a user to annotate a surface normal by adjusting a virtual arrow and a virtual tangent plane. This UI
allows human annotators to reliably estimate surface normals. With this UI we introduce a dataset called “Surface
Normals in the Wild” (SNOW), which consists of surface
normal annotations collected from 60,052 Flickr images.1
1 Code and data are available on www.umich.edu/

∗ Work done while a visiting student at the University of Michigan.

˜wfchen/.

1557

