Unsupervised Video Understanding by Reconciliation of Posture Similarities
Timo Milbich, Miguel Bautista, Ekaterina Sutter, Björn Ommer
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing
IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany
{timo.milbich, miguel.bautista, ekaterina.sutter, björn.ommer}@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
Understanding human activity and being able to explain
it in detail surpasses mere action classification by far in
both complexity and value. The challenge is thus to describe an activity on the basis of its most fundamental constituents, the individual postures and their distinctive transitions. Supervised learning of such a fine-grained representation based on elementary poses is very tedious and does
not scale. Therefore, we propose a completely unsupervised
deep learning procedure based solely on video sequences,
which starts from scratch without requiring pre-trained networks, predefined body models, or keypoints. A combinatorial sequence matching algorithm proposes relations between frames from subsets of the training data, while a CNN
is reconciling the transitivity conflicts of the different subsets to learn a single concerted pose embedding despite
changes in appearance across sequences. Without any manual annotation, the model learns a structured representation
of postures and their temporal development. The model not
only enables retrieval of similar postures but also temporal
super-resolution. Additionally, based on a recurrent formulation, next frames can be synthesized.

1. Introduction
The ability to understand human actions is of cardinal
importance for our interaction with another. Explaining the
activity of another person by observing only individual postures and their temporal transitions in a sequence of video
frames has been a long-standing challenge in Computer Vision. There are numerous applications in problems like activity indexing and search [42, 38, 27], action prediction
[22, 45], behavior understanding and transfer [35, 33, 7],
abnormality detection [3], and action synthesis and video
generation [12, 46, 4, 37]. Our goal is to learn human activity on the finest accessible level, i.e., individual poses,
by capturing characteristic postures and the distinctive transitions between them solely based on videos without requiring any manual supervision or pre-defined body models. The underlying deep learning approach is unsupervised

Figure 1. Visualizing all frames of all long-jump sequences using
the learnt posture representation φ. Similar frames across different
sequences and repetitions across time are mapped nearby, yielding
a concise rendering of the overall activity with its characteristic
gait cycles. Moreover, intermediate frames can be synthesized (top
right) as well as future frames of a sequence (visualized by nearest
neighbors from training set (right)).

and starts from scratch with only the video data and without
requiring tedious user input or pre-trained networks. Our
approach to activity understanding, summarized in Fig. 1
(cf. Supplementary1 ),exhibits the following characteristics:
Unsupervised: The most prominent paradigm to video
understanding has been supervised action classification
[22], since labeling finer entities such as individual poses
[1] is tedious. Action classification typically utilizes
wholistic models and a discriminative approach is trained
to classify actions into discrete classes. As a result, such
approaches model actions globally in terms of their overall most salient differences, rather than capturing the subtle changes of human posture over time (the clothing of a
person may suffcice to discriminate running from diving).
Model-free: Multiple works have modeled activity and pos1 Video material demonstrating the different applications can be found
under https://hciweb.iwr.uni-heidelberg.de/compvis/
research/tmilbich_iccv17

4394

