BodyFusion: Real-time Capture of Human Motion and Surface Geometry
Using a Single Depth Camera
Tao Yu12 , Kaiwen Guo2 , Feng Xu2 , Yuan Dong2 , Zhaoqi Su2 , Jianhui Zhao1 , Jianguo Li3 ,
Qionghai Dai2 , Yebin Liu2
1
Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
Intel Labs China, Beijing, China

Abstract
We propose BodyFusion, a novel real-time geometry
fusion method that can track and reconstruct non-rigid
surface motion of a human performance using a single
consumer-grade depth camera. To reduce the ambiguities
of the non-rigid deformation parameterization on the surface graph nodes, we take advantage of the internal articulated motion prior for human performance and contribute
a skeleton-embedded surface fusion (SSF) method. The key
feature of our method is that it jointly solves for both the
skeleton and graph-node deformations based on information of the attachments between the skeleton and the graph
nodes. The attachments are also updated frame by frame
based on the fused surface geometry and the computed deformations. Overall, our method enables increasingly denoised, detailed, and complete surface reconstruction as
well as the updating of the skeleton and attachments as
the temporal depth frames are fused. Experimental results
show that our method exhibits substantially improved nonrigid motion fusion performance and tracking robustness
compared with previous state-of-the-art fusion methods. We
also contribute a dataset for the quantitative evaluation of
fusion-based dynamic scene reconstruction algorithms using a single depth camera.

1. Introduction
Recently, volumetric depth fusion methods for dynamic
scene reconstruction, such as DynamicFusion [27], VolumeDeform [18] and Fusion4D [11], have attracted considerable attentions from both academia and industry in the
fields of computer vision and computer graphics. The dynamic fusion module in such a reconstruction method enables quality improvements over temporal reconstruction
models in terms of both the accuracy and completeness
of the surface geometry. This beneficial achievement fur-

Figure 1: Our system and real-time reconstruction results.

ther enables reconstruction systems to bypass the need for
a complete model template and allows them to be operated
in real time for VR/AR applications such as holoportation
[28]. Among all of these works, fusion methods using a
single depth camera [27, 18] are low in cost and easy to
set up and therefore show more promise for popularization.
However, current techniques based on a single depth camera
are still restricted to handling slow and controlled motions
because of their relative lack of observations (single view),
computational resources (real time) and geometry priors (no
template).
Aiming at a more robust real-time fusion method for
dynamic scenes, we make two observations. On the one
hand, the human body is usually the core element of many
non-rigid dynamic scene in which we are interested. On
the other hand, as indicated by previous works [14], human motion largely follows articulated structures, and thus,
articulated motions (in terms of the skeleton) can be extracted from non-rigid motion as a prior, and used to constrain any large non-rigid deformations to be consistent
with the skeletal joints, thereby reducing the optimization
space and the range of physically plausible deformations.
Based on these observations, we propose BodyFusion, i.e.,
a skeleton-embedded surface fusion (SSF) approach, to improve the reconstruction quality of a dynamic human motion. Our SSF method jointly optimizes on the skeleton
and the graph-nodes for dynamic surface fusion. Note that
in our method, the articulated skeleton is automatically de1910

