Joint Discovery of Object States and Manipulation Actions
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac∗ †

Josef Sivic∗ † ‡

Ivan Laptev∗ †

Simon Lacoste-Julien§

Abstract
Many human activities involve object manipulations
aiming to modify the object state. Examples of common
state changes include full/empty bottle, open/closed door,
and attached/detached car wheel. In this work, we seek to
automatically discover the states of objects and the associated manipulation actions. Given a set of videos for a particular task, we propose a joint model that learns to identify
object states and to localize state-modifying actions. Our
model is formulated as a discriminative clustering cost with
constraints. We assume a consistent temporal order for the
changes in object states and manipulation actions, and introduce new optimization techniques to learn model parameters without additional supervision. We demonstrate successful discovery of seven manipulation actions and corresponding object states on a new dataset of videos depicting
real-life object manipulations. We show that our joint formulation results in an improvement of object state discovery
by action recognition and vice versa.

1. Introduction
Many of our activities involve changes in object states.
We need to open a book to read it, to cut bread before eating it and to lighten candles before taking out a birthday
cake. Transitions of object states are often coupled with
particular manipulation actions (open, cut, lighten). Moreover, the success of an action is often signified by reaching
the desired state of an object (whipped cream, ironed shirt)
and avoiding other states (burned shirt). Recognizing object states and manipulation actions is, hence, expected to
become a key component of future systems such as wearable automatic assistants or home robots helping people in
their daily tasks.
Human visual system can easily distinguish different
states of objects, such as open/closed bottle or full/empty
coffee cup [8]. Automatic recognition of object states and
∗ Département dinformatique de l’ENS, École normale supérieure,

CNRS, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France.
† INRIA
‡ Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at the
Czech Technical University in Prague.
§ Department of CS & OR (DIRO), Université de Montréal, Montréal.

Figure 1: We automatically discover object states such as
empty/full coffee cup along with their corresponding manipulation actions by observing people interacting with the
objects.
state changes, however, presents challenges as it requires
distinguishing subtle changes in object appearance such as
the presence of a cap on the bottle or screws on the car tire.
Despite much work on object recognition and localization,
recognition of object states has received only limited attention in computer vision [22].
One solution to recognizing object states would be to
manually annotate states for different objects, and treat the
problem as a supervised fine-grained object classification
task [14, 15]. This approach, however, presents two problems. First, we would have to decide a priori on the set of
state labels for each object, which can be ambiguous and not
suitable for future tasks. Second, for each label we would
need to collect a large number of examples, which can be
very costly.
In this paper we propose to discover object states directly
from videos with object manipulations. As state changes are
often caused by specific actions, we attempt to jointly discover object states and corresponding manipulations. In our
setup we assume that two distinct object states are temporally separated by a manipulation action. For example, the
empty and full states of a coffee cup are separated by the
“pouring coffee” action, as shown in Figure 1. Equipped
with this constraint, we develop a clustering approach that
12127

