Single Image Action Recognition using Semantic Body Part Actions
Zhichen Zhao1 , Huimin Ma1∗, Shaodi You2,3
1
Tsinghua University, 2 DATA61-CSIRO, 3 Australian National University
{zhaozc14@mails., mhmpub@}tsinghua.edu.cn, shaodi.you@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel single image action
recognition algorithm based on the idea of semantic part
actions. Unlike existing part-based methods, we argue that
there exists a mid-level semantic, the semantic part action;
and human action is a combination of semantic part actions and context cues. In detail, we divide human body into
seven parts: head, torso, arms, hands and lower body. For
each of them, we define a few semantic part actions (e.g.
head: laughing). Finally, we exploit these part actions to
infer the entire body action (e.g. applauding). To make the
proposed idea practical, we propose a deep network-based
framework which consists of two subnetworks, one for part
localization and the other for action prediction. The action
prediction network jointly learns part-level and body-level
action semantics and combines them for the final decision.
Extensive experiments demonstrate our proposal on semantic part actions as elements for entire body action. Our
method reaches mAP of 93.9% and 91.2% on PASCAL VOC
2012 and Stanford-40, which outperforms the state-of-theart by 2.3% and 8.6%.

1. Introduction
Single image action recognition is a core computer vision task which aims to identify the human action in still
images where location prior is provided. It enables better performance of image captioning [27], image and video
analysis [23], human-computer interactions [3] and etc.
Early single image action recognition methods exploit cues such as interactive objects [11], part appearance [10, 14], template matching [5, 28] and spatial relationships [32]. Among them, part-based methods [10, 14,
32] are most successful, which extract appearance features
from body parts. Recently, benefiting from deep neutral networks [22, 12], part-based methods have obtained promising results.
However, there exists a semantic gap between part ap∗ corresponding author

head
looking down
left arm
curving down
right arm
curving down

right hand
half holding

torso
normal
lower body

left hand
half holding

standing

existing part-based methods:
our method:

drinking
pouring liquid

Figure 1. Inferring body action by semantic part actions. Previously part-based method [32] mis-classifies the action as “drinking” only because of the hands holding bottles. Our method, however, makes the correct prediction “pouring liquid” by noticing
semantic part actions that his head is lowered and two arms are
curving down.

pearance and body actions. Most existing methods use deep
neural network as a black box and bridges such gap. Unfortunately, part appearance might be weakly associated with
body actions. We show an example in Fig.1, the hand holding a bottle makes the action be mislabeled as “drinking”
by previous part-based method [32], his head appearance of
“wearing glasses” can hardly correct this action to be “pouring liquid”.
We argue that there exists a mid-level semantic which
essentially connects part appearance and body action. We
name it the semantic part action. Referring to the example
in Fig.1, by noticing the semantic part actions that the man’s
head is looking down and his arms are curving down, one
might infer that he is actually “pouring liquid” rather than
“drinking”.
In this paper, we focus on exploiting semantic part actions to improve body action recognition. To this end, we
propose a novel single image action recognition framework.
As illustrated in Fig.2, first, we locate body parts (head,
torso, arms, hands and lower body) using a key-point pre-

3391

