Identity-Aware Textual-Visual Matching with Latent Co-attention
Shuang Li, Tong Xiao, Hongsheng Li∗ , Wei Yang, and Xiaogang Wang∗
Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{sli,xiaotong,hsli,wyang,xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Textual-visual matching aims at measuring similarities
between sentence descriptions and images. Most existing methods tackle this problem without effectively utilizing identity-level annotations. In this paper, we propose an
identity-aware two-stage framework for the textual-visual
matching problem. Our stage-1 CNN-LSTM network learns
to embed cross-modal features with a novel Cross-Modal
Cross-Entropy (CMCE) loss. The stage-1 network is able to
efficiently screen easy incorrect matchings and also provide
initial training point for the stage-2 training. The stage-2
CNN-LSTM network refines the matching results with a latent co-attention mechanism. The spatial attention relates
each word with corresponding image regions while the latent semantic attention aligns different sentence structures
to make the matching results more robust to sentence structure variations. Extensive experiments on three datasets
with identity-level annotations show that our framework
outperforms state-of-the-art approaches by large margins.

1. Introduction
Identifying correspondences and measuring similarities
between natural language descriptions and images is an important task in computer vision and has many applications,
including text-image embedding [21, 35, 32, 26, 16], zeroshot learning [25, 27, 7], and visual QA [3, 8, 41, 24, 19].
We call such a general problem textual-visual matching,
which has drawn increasing attention in recent years. The
task is challenging because the complex relations between
language descriptions and image appearance are highly
non-linear and there exist large variations or subtle variations in image appearance for similar language descriptions.
There have been large scale image-language datasets and
deep learning techniques [18, 13, 3, 36, 10] proposed for
textual-visual matching, which considerably advanced research progress along this direction. However, identitylevel annotations provided in benchmark datasets are ignored by most existing methods when performing matching
across textual and visual domains.
∗ Corresponding authors

Identity 1

A woman dressed in
white with black belt.

Identity 2

A young lady is wearing
black suit and high hells.

Identity 3

The girl wears a blue
jacket and black dress.

Figure 1. Learning deep features for textual-visual matching with
identity-level annotations. Utilizing identity-level annotations
could jointly minimize intra-identity discrepancy and maximize
inter-identity discrepancy, and thus results in more discriminative
feature representations.

In this paper, we propose a two-stage framework for
identity-aware textual-visual matching, which consists of
two deep neural networks. The stage-1 network learns
identity-aware feature representations of images and language descriptions by introducing a Cross-Modal CrossEntropy (CMCE) loss to effectively utilize identity-level annotations for feature learning (see Figure 1). After training, it provides initial matching results and also serves as
the initial point for training stage-2 network. The stage-2
deep neural network employs a latent co-attention mechanism that jointly learns the spatial attention and latent semantic attention to match salient image regions and latent
semantic concepts for textual-visual affinity estimation.
Our stage-1 network consists of a CNN and a LSTM
for learning textual and visual feature representations. The
objective is to minimize the feature distances between descriptions and images belonging to the same identities. The
stage-1 network utilizes a specialized CMCE loss with dynamic buffers, which implicitly minimizes intra-identity
feature distances and maximize inter-identity feature distances over the entire dataset instead of just small minibatches. In contrast, for the pairwise or triplet loss functions, the probability of sampling hard negative samples
during training decreases quadratically or cubically as the
number of training sample increases.

1890

