Weakly Supervised Manifold Learning for Dense Semantic Object
Correspondence
Utkarsh Gaur
University of California Santa Barbara

B. S. Manjunath
University of California Santa Barbara

utkarsh.gaur@cs.ucsb.edu

manj@ece.ucsb.edu

Abstract
The goal of the semantic object correspondence problem
is to compute dense association maps for a pair of images
such that the same object parts get matched for very different appearing object instances. Our method builds on
the recent findings that deep convolutional neural networks
(DCNNs) implicitly learn a latent model of object parts even
when trained for classification. We also leverage a key correspondence problem insight that the geometric structure
between object parts is consistent across multiple object instances. These two concepts are then combined in the form
of a novel optimization scheme. This optimization learns
a feature embedding by rewarding for projecting features
closer on the manifold if they have low feature-space distance. Simultaneously, the optimization penalizes feature
clusters whose geometric structure is inconsistent with the
observed geometric structure of object parts. In this manner, by accounting for feature space similarities and feature
neighborhood context together, a manifold is learned where
features belonging to semantically similar object parts cluster together. We also describe transferring these embedded
features to the sister tasks of semantic keypoint classification and localization task via a Siamese DCNN. We provide qualitative results on the Pascal VOC 2012 images and
quantitative results on the Pascal Berkeley dataset where we
improve on the state of the art by over 5% on classification
and over 9% on localization tasks.

1. Introduction
The semantic object correspondence problem has garnered considerable attention in the vision community in
recent times. The objective of this problem is to densely
match objects that belong to the same semantic category but
are completely different in visual appearance space. Figure 1 shows an example of two semantically similar objects
namely the California quail and the sharp-shinned hawk.
The bottom row shows the dense correspondence map for
these two images as computed by our method. To bring out
the correctly matched object parts we have drawn lines be-

Figure 1. Dense semantic correspondence map for a pair of images visualized through color mapping. The foreground of the left
image was artificially colored to mark different semantic regions.
The color of the right image was generated by mapping the color
of the best matched point on the left image.

tween them across the two instances. All object parts such
as head (red), tail(blue) back(purple/magenta), flank(green)
are correctly matched by our method based on the images’
class label alone. More examples of what we consider semantically similar objects are shown in figure 2 blocks 1-4.
Object instances in the natural world appear very different due to a combination of factors including different type
(Siamese vs. tabby cat, monorail vs. bullet train, fighter
vs. passenger aircraft), pose and viewpoint. Due to the
vast variance in the appearance of these instances, traditional hand-crafted feature descriptors such as SIFT[19] or
SURF[1] cannot readily match them at the object-part level.
Finding semantic object correspondence is an important
problem. A variety of applications can benefit from the
matching and recognizing of dense object parts and their
geometric structure. Examples of such applications include
semantic keypoint classification and localization problem,
object part segmentation and complex activity recognition.
Unfortunately, there are no true ground-truth datasets
11735

