An Analysis of Visual Question Answering Algorithms
Kushal Kafle
Christopher Kanan∗
Rochester Institute of Technology
Rochester, New York
kk6055,kanan@rit.edu

Abstract
In visual question answering (VQA), an algorithm must
answer text-based questions about images. While multiple datasets for VQA have been created since late 2014,
they all have flaws in both their content and the way algorithms are evaluated on them. As a result, evaluation
scores are inflated and predominantly determined by answering easier questions, making it difficult to compare different methods. In this paper, we analyze existing VQA algorithms using a new dataset called the Task Driven Image Understanding Challenge (TDIUC), which has over 1.6
million questions organized into 12 different categories. We
also introduce questions that are meaningless for a given
image to force a VQA system to reason about image content. We propose new evaluation schemes that compensate
for over-represented question-types and make it easier to
study the strengths and weaknesses of algorithms. We analyze the performance of both baseline and state-of-the-art
VQA models, including multi-modal compact bilinear pooling (MCB), neural module networks, and recurrent answering units. Our experiments establish how attention helps
certain categories more than others, determine which models work better than others, and explain how simple models
(e.g. MLP) can surpass more complex models (MCB) by
simply learning to answer large, easy question categories.

1. Introduction
In open-ended visual question answering (VQA) an algorithm must produce answers to arbitrary text-based questions about images [21, 3]. VQA is an exciting computer
vision problem that requires a system to be capable of many
tasks. Truly solving VQA would be a milestone in artificial
intelligence, and would significantly advance human computer interaction. However, VQA datasets must test a wide
range of abilities for progress to be adequately measured.
VQA research began in earnest in late 2014 when the
∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1: A good VQA benchmark tests a wide range of
computer vision tasks in an unbiased manner. In this paper,
we propose a new dataset with 12 distinct tasks and evaluation metrics that compensate for bias, so that the strengths
and limitations of algorithms can be better measured.

DAQUAR dataset was released [21]. Including DAQUAR,
six major VQA datasets have been released, and algorithms
have rapidly improved. On the most popular dataset, ‘The
VQA Dataset’ [3], the best algorithms are now approaching 70% accuracy [5] (human performance is 83%). While
these results are promising, there are critical problems with
existing datasets in terms of multiple kinds of biases. Moreover, because existing datasets do not group instances into
meaningful categories, it is not easy to compare the abilities
of individual algorithms. For example, one method may excel at color questions compared to answering questions requiring spatial reasoning. Because color questions are far
more common in the dataset, an algorithm that performs
well at spatial reasoning will not be appropriately rewarded
for that feat due to the evaluation metrics that are used.
Contributions: Our paper has four major contributions
aimed at better analyzing and comparing VQA algorithms:
1) We create a new VQA benchmark dataset where questions are divided into 12 different categories based on the
task they solve; 2) We propose two new evaluation metrics
that compensate for forms of dataset bias; 3) We balance
the number of yes/no object presence detection questions to
11965

