Learning-based Cloth Material Recovery from Video
Shan Yang, Junbang Liang, Ming C. Lin
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{alexyang,liangjb,lin}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Image and video understanding enables better reconstruction of the physical world. Existing methods focus
largely on geometry and visual appearance of the reconstructed scene. In this paper, we extend the frontier in image understanding and present a method to recover the material properties of cloth from a video. Previous cloth material recovery methods often require markers or complex
experimental set-up to acquire physical properties, or are
limited to certain types of images or videos. Our approach
takes advantages of the appearance changes of the moving
cloth to infer its physical properties. To extract information
about the cloth, our method characterizes both the motion
and the visual appearance of the cloth geometry. We apply the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and the Long
Short Term Memory (LSTM) neural network to material recovery of cloth from videos. We also exploit simulated data
to help statistical learning of mapping between the visual
appearance and material type of the cloth. The effectiveness
of our method is demonstrated via validation using both the
simulated datasets and the real-life recorded videos.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in virtual reality (VR) make it possible to recreate a vivid virtual world that can be captured as
a collection of images or a video sequence. Better understanding of the physical scene can further assist in the virtual reconstruction of the real world by incorporating more
realistic motion and physical interaction of virtual objects.
With the introduction of the deep neural network and advances in image understanding, object detection and recognition have achieved an unprecedented level of accuracy.
Capturing the physical properties of the objects in the environment can further provide a more realistic human-scene
interaction. For example, in a virtual try-on system for
clothing, it is critical to use material properties that correctly reflect the garment behavior; physical recreation of
the fabric not only gives a compelling visual simulacrum
of the cloth, but also affects how the garment feels and fits

Figure 1. Learning-based cloth material prediction and material cloning results. (a) learning samples generated using the
state-of-art physically-based cloth simulator Arcsim[38] (b) example real-life cloth motion videos presented in[6] (c) simulated skirt
with the material type predicted from the real-life video in (b) using the learned model from samples presented in (a).

on the body. In this paper, we propose a novel method of
extracting physical information from videos in a way analogous to how humans perceive physical systems in an image
or a video using “mental simulations” [11].
The key intuition behind our method is that the visual
appearance of a piece of moving cloth encodes the intrinsic material characteristics. We use the parameters of the
14383

