Unsupervised object segmentation in video by
efficient selection of highly probable positive features
Emanuela Haller1,2 and Marius Leordeanu1,2
1

2

University Politehnica of Bucharest, Romania
Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy, Romania
haller.emanuela@gmail.com marius.leordeanu@imar.ro

Abstract
We address an essential problem in computer vision, that
of unsupervised foreground object segmentation in video,
where a main object of interest in a video sequence should
be automatically separated from its background. An efficient solution to this task would enable large-scale video
interpretation at a high semantic level in the absence of the
costly manual labeling. We propose an efficient unsupervised method for generating foreground object soft masks
based on automatic selection and learning from highly
probable positive features. We show that such features
can be selected efficiently by taking into consideration the
spatio-temporal appearance and motion consistency of the
object in the video sequence. We also emphasize the role
of the contrasting properties between the foreground object and its background. Our model is created over several stages: we start from pixel level analysis and move to
descriptors that consider information over groups of pixels combined with efficient motion analysis. We also prove
theoretical properties of our unsupervised learning method,
which under some mild constraints is guaranteed to learn
the correct classifier even in the unsupervised case. We
achieve competitive and even state of the art results on the
challenging Youtube-Objects and SegTrack datasets, while
being at least one order of magnitude faster than the competition. We believe that the strong performance of our
method, along with its theoretical properties, constitute a
solid step towards solving unsupervised discovery in video.

in many real-world applications, as large datasets of unlabeled videos could be collected at a relatively low cost.
There are several different published approaches for unsupervised learning and discovery of the salient object in
video [20, 12, 17, 16], but most have a high computational
cost. In general, algorithms for unsupervised mining and
clustering are expected to be computationally expensive due
to the inherent combinatorial nature of the problem [7].

1. Introduction

In this paper we address the computational cost challenge and propose a method that is both accurate and fast.
We achieve our goal based on a key insight: we focus on
selecting and learning from features that are highly correlated with the presence of the object of interest and can be
rapidly selected and computed. Note: in this paper, when
referring to highly probable positive features, we use ”feature” to indicate a feature vector sample, not a feature type.
While we do not require these features to cover all instances
and parts of the object of interest (we could expect low recall), we show that it is possible to find, in the unsupervised
case, positive features with high precision (a large number
of those selected are indeed true positives). Then we prove
theoretically that we can reliably train an object classifier
using sets of positive and negative samples, both selected
in an unsupervised way, as long as the set of features considered to be positive has high precision, regardless of the
recall, if certain conditions are met (and they are often met
in practice). We present an algorithm that can effectively
and rapidly achieve this task in practice, in an unsupervised
way, with state-of-the art results in difficult experiments,
while being at least 10x faster than its competition. The
proposed method outputs both the soft-segmentation of the
main object of interest as well as its bounding box. Two
examples are shown in Figure 1.

Unsupervised learning in video is a very challenging
task in computer vision. Fully solving this problem would
shed new light on our understanding of intelligence from a
scientific perspective. It would also have a strong impact

While we do not make any assumption about the type
of object present in the video, we do expect the sequence to
contain a single salient object, as our method performs foreground soft-segmentation and doesn’t expect videos with no

5085

