Summarization and classification of wearable camera streams by learning the
distributions over deep features of out-of-sample image sequences
Alessandro Perina
WDG Core Data - Microsoft Corp.

Sadegh Mohammadi
PAVIS Dept. - Italian Institute of Technology

alperina@microsoft.com

sadegh.pub@gmail.com

Nebojsa Jojic
Microsoft Research
jojic@microsoft.com

Vittorio Murino
PAVIS Dept. - Italian Institute of Technology
and University of Verona
vittorio.murino@iit.it

Abstract
A popular approach to training classifiers of new image classes
is to use lower levels of a pre-trained feed-forward neural network
and retrain only the top. Thus, most layers simply serve as highly
nonlinear feature extractors. While these features were found useful for classifying a variety of scenes and objects, previous work
also demonstrated unusual levels of sensitivity to the input especially for images which are veering too far away from the training
distribution. This can lead to surprising results as an imperceptible change in an image can be enough to completely change the
predicted class. This occurs in particular in applications involving
personal data, typically acquired with wearable cameras (e.g., visual lifelogs), where the problem is also made more complex by the
dearth of new labeled training data that make supervised learning
with deep models difficult. To alleviate these problems, in this paper we propose a new generative model that captures the feature
distribution in new data. Its latent space then becomes more representative of the new data, while still retaining the generalization
properties. In particular, we use constrained Markov walks over a
counting grid for modeling image sequences, which not only yield
good latent representations, but allow for excellent classification
with only a handful of labeled training examples of the new scenes
or objects, a scenario typical in lifelogging applications.

1. Introduction
Visual lifelogging refers to the process of seamessly collecting
visual data by means of wearable cameras, and it is intended to
capture the bearer’s visual experience of over long and continuous periods of time [4]. Visual lifelogs are recorded for personal
consumption or just for fun, although they also offered valuable
streams in medical applications, such as aids in elderly memory
lacks [6], or dietary analysis [21].
Lifelogging cameras have recently become available to the
consumer market: examples are YoCam, Autographer, Narrative,
EE CaptureCam. Unlike traditional cameras, these devices are

characterized by a passive record-it-all approach and by a low temporal resolution (LTH), automatically shooting a photo every 1030 seconds.A popular approach to training classifiers of new image
classes is to use lower levels of a pre-trained feed-forward neural
network and retrain only the top. Thus, most layers simply serve
as highly nonlinear feature extractors. While these features were
found useful for classifying a variety of scenes and objects, previous work also demonstrated unusual levels of sensitivity to the
input especially for images which are veering too far away from
the training distribution. This can lead to surprising results as an
imperceptible change in an image can be enough to completely
change the predicted class. This occurs in particular in applications involving personal data, typically acquired with wearable
cameras (e.g., visual lifelogs), where the problem is also made
more complex by the dearth of new labeled training data that make
supervised learning with deep models difficult. To alleviate these
problems, in this paper we propose a new generative model that
captures the feature distribution in new data. Its latent space then
becomes more representative of the new data, while still retaining the generalization properties. In particular, we use constrained
Markov walks over a counting grid for modeling image sequences,
which not only yield good latent representations, but allow for excellent classification with only a handful of labeled training examples of the new scenes or objects, a scenario typical in lifelogging
applications.
With increasing amounts of visual data collected, a manual
use of visual lifelogs to infer meaningful knowledge concerning
people’s lives becomes a tedious task. This has opened up a new
line of research in computer vision that tackle lifelogging, including automated life story creation [18], summarization [15], action
or location recognition [24], or understanding social interactions
[8, 1].
Despite of significant work in this area, automated visual analysis of such collections of personal data still remains an open problem mainly because of i) challenging imaging conditions such as
blurring and motion artifacts due to the loose attachment of the
camera to clothes, ii) abrupt lighting variations, severe occlusions
or presence of non-informative frames due to the non-intentional

14326

