Leveraging Weak Semantic Relevance for Complex Video Event Classification
Chao Li, Jiewei Cao, Zi Huang, Lei Zhu
The University of Queensland
Australia

Heng Tao Shen
UESTC
China

{c.li1, j.cao3}@uq.edu.au, huang@itee.uq.edu.au

shenhengtao@hotmail.com

leizhu0608@gmail.com

Abstract
Existing video event classification approaches suffer
from limited human-labeled semantic annotations. Weak semantic annotations can be harvested from Web-knowledge
without involving any human interaction. However such
weak annotations are noisy, thus can not be effectively utilized without distinguishing its reliability. In this paper, we
propose a novel approach to automatically maximize the
utility of weak semantic annotations (formalized as the semantic relevance of video shots to the target event) to facilitate video event classification. A novel attention model
is designed to determine the attention scores of video shots,
where the weak semantic relevance is considered as attentional guidance. Specifically, our model jointly optimizes
two objectives at different levels. The first one is the classification loss corresponding to video-level groundtruth labels,
and the second is the shot-level relevance loss corresponding to weak semantic relevance. We use a long short-term
memory (LSTM) layer to capture the temporal information
carried by the shots of a video. In each timestep, the LSTM
employs the attention model to weight the current shot under the guidance of its weak semantic relevance to the event
of interest. Thus, we can automatically exploit weak semantic relevance to assist video event classification. Extensive
experiments have been conducted on three complex largescale video event datasets i.e., MEDTest14, ActivityNet and
FCVID. Our approach achieves the state-of-the-art classification performance on all three datasets. The significant
performance improvement upon the conventional attention
model also demonstrates the effectiveness of our model.

1. Introduction
Video event classification is widely applied in many realworld applications, such as security surveillance, humancomputer interaction, etc. It has been becoming one of the
most significant research problems in computer vision, multimedia, and artificial intelligence communities [18, 45, 44,

Web-knowledge

Weak Semantic Relevance

LSTM
0.1

...

LSTM
0.8

...

LSTM

Attention
0.7

...

LSTM
0.5

Fishing:

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed framework. Our
framework first harvests weak semantic knowledge from
Web-knowledge, then uses it as a weak guidance to the attention model. The LSTM layer then employ the attention
model to assign attention score for each shot in a video.

14, 41, 2]. The big intra-class variation in visual content is
a major challenge for video event classification. On the one
hand, most of the events (e.g., “birthday party”, “wedding
ceremony”) have unconstrained content which includes various entities (e.g., objects, people, animals) with diverse interactions. On the other hand, even for the videos illustrating the same event, they may have very different visual
appearances. For instance, with regard to “repairing an appliance”, the appliance could be a television in black or a
washing machine with white paint. The above facts lead to
big intra-class variation in visual content for an event. To alleviate this variation, high quality semantic annotations are
in demand.
Essentially, a video consists of a sequence of shots. Generally, not all the shots are relevant to the event represented
by the video. A natural way to evaluate the importance of a
13647

