Offline Handwritten Signature Modeling and Verification Based on Archetypal
Analysis
Elias N. Zois1, Ilias Theodorakopoulos2 and George Economou2
1

Athens Technological & Educational Inst.
Agiou Spiridonos Str., 12243 Egaleo, Greece

2

University of Patras
Rio, 24504, Greece.

{iltheodorako, economou}@upatras.gr

ezois@teiath.gr

Abstract
The handwritten signature is perhaps the most
accustomed way for the acknowledgement of the consent
of an individual or the authentication of the identity of a
person in numerous transactions. In addition, the
authenticity of a questioned offline or static handwritten
signature still poses a case of interest, especially in
forensic related applications. A common approach in
offline signature verification system is to apply several
predetermined image analysis models. Consequently, any
offline signature sample which originates from either
authentic persons or forgers, utilizes a fixed feature
extraction base. In this proposed study, the feature space
and the corresponding projection values depend on the
training samples only; thus the proposed method can be
found useful in forensic cases. In order to do so, we
reenter a groundbreaking unsupervised learning method
named archetypal analysis, which is connected to effective
data analysis approaches such as sparse coding. Due to
the fact that until recently there was no efficient
implementation publicly available, archetypal analysis
had only few cases of use. However, a fast optimization
scheme using an active set strategy is now available. The
main goal of this work is to introduce archetypal analysis
for offline signature verification. The output of the
archetypal analysis of few reference samples is a set of
archetypes which are used to form the base of the feature
space. Then, given a set of archetypes and a signature
sample under examination archetypal analysis and
average pooling provides the corresponding features. The
promising performance of the proposed approach is
demonstrated with the use of an evaluation method which
employs the popular CEDAR and MCYT75 signature
datasets.

1. Introduction
Biometric characteristics have been found to be
utilizable in numerous conditions which eventually require
the authentication of a person or evidence of his/hers

5514

deliberate consent [1]. In general, they can be partitioned
into two main groups. The first addresses the verification
of one person’s physical attendance; physiological
biometric traits like face [2], fingerprint [3] and iris [4] are
typically utilized. The second group usually addresses the
confirmation of either the attendance of a person or
his/hers deliberate consent on a transaction; behavioral
traits are usually employed like handwriting [5, 6]. The
most acknowledged mean for validating the identity of a
person is the handwritten signature. It is a private motoric
pattern shaped from a potential mixture of letters and/or an
intricate flourish [7]. The production of the signature is the
combined result of a person's individual motoric process as
it is portrayed by a trace onto a sheet of paper or an
electronic device.
Signatures are a part of behavioral traits; hence they are
carriers of intrinsic ambiguity. They are different even
when they are created from the same person [6]. Upon
request, forensic document examiners (FDEs) provide a
justified estimation concerning the genuineness or not of a
sample under question [8]. Automated signature
verification (ASV/SV) systems [6] have been also
employed in order to facilitate the verification of an
individual with the use of machine vision and pattern
recognition (PR) techniques. Bridging the gap between
FDEs and ASVs presents several obstacles to overcome, as
there are numerous terminologies and modalities which the
PR and FDEs communities are treating in a dissimilar way
[9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14].
A key issue of an SV system is the feature extraction
procedure, which converts the input signature image into a
set of numbers-features that eventually form now a new
feature space. This conversion preferably must preserve all
the essential intrapersonal information, which is vital for
the subsequent verification step. A substantial amount
regarding feature extraction methods depends on the
utilization of global and/or local signature descriptors [15].
In particular, local features tend to exploit statistics
between the pixels-members of the signature image.
During the preceding decade, a variety of methods which
employ local feature analysis for offline SV has been
presented with notable results for verification tasks [16],
[17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28]. An

