VPGNet: Vanishing Point Guided Network for Lane and Road Marking
Detection and Recognition
Seokju Lee†
Namil Kim†
†

Junsik Kim†
Tae-Hee Lee‡

Jae Shin Yoon† Seunghak Shin† Oleksandr Bailo†
Hyun Seok Hong‡ Seung-Hoon Han‡ In So Kweon†
‡

Robotics and Computer Vision Lab., KAIST

Samsung Electronics DMC R&D Center

{sjlee,jskim2,jsyoon,shshin,obailo,nikim}@rcv.kaist.ac.kr
{th810.lee,hyunseok76.hong,luoes.han}@samsung.com, iskweon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a unified end-to-end trainable
multi-task network that jointly handles lane and road marking detection and recognition that is guided by a vanishing
point under adverse weather conditions. We tackle rainy
and low illumination conditions, which have not been extensively studied until now due to clear challenges. For example, images taken under rainy days are subject to low illumination, while wet roads cause light reflection and distort
the appearance of lane and road markings. At night, color
distortion occurs under limited illumination. As a result, no
benchmark dataset exists and only a few developed algorithms work under poor weather conditions. To address this
shortcoming, we build up a lane and road marking benchmark which consists of about 20,000 images with 17 lane
and road marking classes under four different scenarios:
no rain, rain, heavy rain, and night. We train and evaluate
several versions of the proposed multi-task network and validate the importance of each task. The resulting approach,
VPGNet, can detect and classify lanes and road markings,
and predict a vanishing point with a single forward pass.
Experimental results show that our approach achieves high
accuracy and robustness under various conditions in realtime (20 fps). The benchmark and the VPGNet model will
be publicly available 1 .

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving is a large system that consists of
various sensors and control modules. The first key step for
robust autonomous driving is to recognize and understand
the environment around a subject. However, simple recognition of obstacles and understanding of geometry around
a vehicle is insufficient. There are traffic regulations dictated by traffic symbols such as lane and road markings that
1 https://github.com/SeokjuLee/VPGNet

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Examples of our lane and road markings detection
results in: (a) complex city scene; (b) multiple road markings; (c) night scene; (d) rainy condition. Yellow region is
the vanishing area. Each class label is annotated in white.
should be complied with. Moreover, for an algorithm to be
applicable to autonomous driving, it should be robust under
diverse environments and perform in real-time.
However, research on lane and road marking detection
thus far has been limited to fine weather conditions. Handcrafted feature based methods exploit edge, color or texture information for detection, which results in a performance drop when the algorithm is tested under challenging weather and illumination conditions. Likewise, methods based on a combination of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and hand-crafted features face the same challenge. Recently, a few CNN based approaches have been
developed to tackle the problem in an end-to-end fashion including learning-based algorithms. They demonstrate good
performance on benchmarks and in real road scenes, but are
still limited to fine weather and simple road conditions.
The lack of public lane and road marking datasets is an-

1947

