Predicting Visual Exemplars of Unseen Classes for Zero-Shot Learning
Soravit Changpinyo
U. of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA

Wei-Lun Chao
U. of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA

Fei Sha
U. of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA

schangpi@usc.edu

weilun@usc.edu

feisha@usc.edu

Abstract
Leveraging class semantic descriptions and examples of
known objects, zero-shot learning makes it possible to train
a recognition model for an object class whose examples are
not available. In this paper, we propose a novel zero-shot
learning model that takes advantage of clustering structures
in the semantic embedding space. The key idea is to impose the structural constraint that semantic representations
must be predictive of the locations of their corresponding
visual exemplars. To this end, this reduces to training multiple kernel-based regressors from semantic representationexemplar pairs from labeled data of the seen object categories. Despite its simplicity, our approach significantly
outperforms existing zero-shot learning methods on standard benchmark datasets, including the ImageNet dataset
with more than 20,000 unseen categories.

1. Introduction
A series of major progresses in visual object recognition
can largely be attributed to learning large-scale and complex models with a huge number of labeled training images.
There are many application scenarios, however, where collecting and labeling training instances can be laboriously
difficult and costly. For example, when the objects of interest are rare (e.g., only about a hundred of northern hairynosed wombats alive in the wild) or newly defined (e.g.,
images of futuristic products such as Tesla’s Model S), not
only the amount of the labeled training images but also the
statistical variation among them is limited. These restrictions do not lead to robust systems for recognizing such objects. More importantly, the number of such objects could
be significantly greater than the number of common objects.
In other words, the frequencies of observing objects follow
a long-tailed distribution [37, 51].
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) has since emerged as a promising paradigm to remedy the above difficulties. Unlike supervised learning, ZSL distinguishes between two types of
classes: seen and unseen, where labeled examples are avail-

able for the seen classes only. Crucially, zero-shot learners
have access to a shared semantic space that embeds all categories. This semantic space enables transferring and adapting classifiers trained on the seen classes to the unseen ones.
Multiple types of semantic information have been exploited
in the literature: visual attributes [11, 17], word vector representations of class names [12, 39, 27], textual descriptions
[10, 19, 32], hierarchical ontology of classes (such as WordNet [26]) [2, 21, 45], and human gazes [15].
Many ZSL methods take a two-stage approach: (i) predicting the embedding of the image in the semantic space;
(ii) inferring the class labels by comparing the embedding
to the unseen classes’ semantic representations [11, 17, 28,
39, 47, 13, 27, 21]. Recent ZSL methods take a unified
approach by jointly learning the functions to predict the semantic embeddings as well as to measure similarity in the
embedding space [1, 2, 12, 35, 49, 50, 3]. We refer the readers to the descriptions and evaluation on these representative
methods in [44].
Despite these attempts, zero-shot learning is proved to
be extremely difficult. For example, the best reported accuracy on the full ImageNet with 21K categories is only 1.5%
[3], where the state-of-the-art performance with supervised
learning reaches 29.8% [6]1 .
There are at least two critical reasons for this. First, class
semantic representations are vital for knowledge transfer
from the seen classes to unseen ones, but these representations are hard to get right. Visual attributes are humanunderstandable so they correspond well with our object
class definition. However, they are not always discriminative [29, 47], not necessarily machine detectable [9, 13], often correlated among themselves (“brown” and “wooden”’)
[14], and possibly not category-independent (“fluffy” animals and “fluffy” towels) [5]. Word vectors of class names
have shown to be inferior to attributes [2, 3]. Derived from
texts, they have little knowledge about or are barely aligned
with visual information.
1 Comparison between the two numbers is not entirely fair due to different training/test splits. Nevertheless, it gives us a rough idea on how huge
the gap is. This observation has also been shown on small datasets [4].

13476

