Temporal Superpixels Based on Proximity-Weighted Patch Matching
Se-Ho Lee
Korea University

Won-Dong Jang
Korea University

Chang-Su Kim
Korea University

seholee@mcl.korea.ac.kr

wdjang@mcl.korea.ac.kr

changsukim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
A temporal superpixel algorithm based on proximityweighted patch matching (TS-PPM) is proposed in this
work. We develop the proximity-weighted patch matching (PPM), which estimates the motion vector of a superpixel robustly, by considering the patch matching distances
of neighboring superpixels as well as the target superpixel.
In each frame, we initialize superpixels by transferring the
superpixel labels of the previous frame using PPM motion
vectors. Then, we update the superpixel labels of boundary
pixels, based on a cost function, composed of color, spatial, contour, and temporal consistency terms. Finally, we
execute superpixel splitting, merging, and relabeling to regularize superpixel sizes and reduce incorrect labels. Experiments show that the proposed algorithm outperforms the
state-of-the-art conventional algorithms significantly.

1. Introduction
Superpixel segmentation divides an image into a set of
meaningful regions. It reduces the number of image primitives greatly to execute computer vision techniques efficiently. Superpixels are used in various vision tasks, e.g. image segmentation [16], video object segmentation [10], and
saliency detection [23]. While many superpixel methods for
static images have been proposed [1, 8, 12–15, 17, 19, 25, 33,
34], there are a relatively small number of temporal superpixel methods for video processing [1, 5, 12, 22, 26].
In general, both superpixel and temporal superpixel
methods divide an image into superpixels by minimizing
cost functions, which make each superpixel belong to a single object and not overlap with other objects. However, if
a superpixel method is applied to each frame in a video
sequence independently, the resultant superpixels may be
temporally inconsistent. Thus, temporal superpixel methods [1, 5, 12, 22, 26] use color or motion information of
neighboring frames to generate temporally consistent superpixels. In particular, to reflect object movements, [5, 12, 22]
exploit optical flow information between frames. However,
extracting optical flow information requires high computa-

tional complexity.
In this work, we propose a temporal superpixel algorithm
based on proximity-weighted patch matching (TS-PPM).
First, we perform the proximity-weighted patch matching (PPM) to estimate superpixel motion vectors efficiently.
In PPM, to determine the motion vector of a superpixel,
we consider the patch matching distances of neighboring
superpixels, as well as that of the target superpixel. We
then sum up those matching distances using the proximity between the target and neighboring superpixels. Second, we initialize the superpixel label of each pixel in
a frame, by mapping the superpixel labels in the previous frames using the PPM motion vectors. Third, we refine the initial superpixels by updating the superpixel labels of boundary pixels iteratively based on a cost function. Finally, we perform superpixel splitting, merging,
and relabeling to prevent irregular superpixel sizes and incorrect labeling. Experimental results show that the proposed TS-PPM algorithm outperforms the conventional algorithms [1, 5, 8, 12–15, 17, 19, 22, 25, 26, 33, 34], while demanding lower computational complexity than most of the
conventional algorithms. Furthermore, we demonstrate that
the proposed algorithm is applicable to video object segmentation [10, 11, 20] and saliency detection [27, 32].
This paper has three main contributions.
∙ We propose PPM that robustly estimates the motion
vector of a superpixel using the information in neighboring superpixels, as well as the target superpixel.
∙ We develop the temporal superpixel labeling scheme,
based on the cost function, which enforces superpixels
to be temporally consistent.
∙ The proposed algorithm shows remarkable performances on the superpixel datasets [6, 18, 24] and is applicable to many computer vision tasks.

2. Related Work
2.1. Superpixel Methods
Many superpixel methods have been proposed. Levinshtein et al. [13] proposed Turbopixels, which initializes

3610

