Learned Multi-Patch Similarity
Wilfried Hartmann1
Silvano Galliani1
Michal Havlena2
Luc Van Gool3,4
Konrad Schindler1
1

Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
2
Vuforia, PTC, Vienna, Austria
3
4
CVL, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
PSI, KU Leuven, Belgium

Abstract
Estimating a depth map from multiple views of a scene
is a fundamental task in computer vision. As soon as
more than two viewpoints are available, one faces the very
basic question how to measure similarity across >2 image patches. Surprisingly, no direct solution exists, instead it is common to fall back to more or less robust averaging of two-view similarities. Encouraged by the success of machine learning, and in particular convolutional
neural networks, we propose to learn a matching function
which directly maps multiple image patches to a scalar similarity score. Experiments on several multi-view datasets
demonstrate that this approach has advantages over methods based on pairwise patch similarity.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction from two or more images of the same
scene is a central problem in computer vision. Assuming that the camera poses are already known, the problem
reduces to (multi-view) stereo matching, i.e., establishing
dense point correspondences between the images, which
can then be converted to 3D points by triangulating the
corresponding rays. The core of stereo matching itself is
a function to measure the similarity between points in different images, respectively between the points surrounding
image patches. Once such a similarity measure is available,
it can be computed for a list of different putative correspondences to find the one with the highest similarity.
For the classic two-view stereo case, the definition of a
similarity function is comparatively straight-forward: transform the image intensities of the two patches such that
more similar ones end up closer to each other, according to some pre-defined distance metric. Many methods
have been proposed, including simple sum-of-squared differences, (inverse) normalized cross-correlation to afford

Figure 1. Multi-view depth estimation. A conventional, pairwise
similarity like ZNCC (top) is unable to find the correct depth in
corrupted regions, e.g. specular reflections; whereas the proposed
multi-view similarity (bottom) can predict correct depth values.

invariance against linear brightness changes, and even more
robust measures like the Hamming distance between Census descriptors. More recently it has also been proposed
to learn the distance metric discriminatively from matching
and non-matching training examples.
In practice, multi-view stereo is often the method of
choice, since the higher redundancy and larger number of
viewpoints allows for more robust 3D reconstruction. A
host of rather successful multi-view stereo methods exist
(see benchmark results such as [12, 18, 19, 22]). Surprisingly, these methods in fact have no mechanism to measure
the similarity between >2 image patches that form a putative multi-view correspondence. Instead, they heuristically
form a consensus over the pair-wise similarities, or a subset of them (most often the similarities from all other stereo
partners to a “reference image” in which the depth map is

1586

