Jointly Recognizing Object Fluents and Tasks in Egocentric Videos
Yang Liu1∗ , Ping Wei2,1∗ , and Song-Chun Zhu1
1
University of California, Los Angeles, USA
2
Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
yangliu2014@ucla.edu, pingwei@xjtu.edu.cn, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of jointly recognizing object fluents and tasks in egocentric videos. Fluents
are the changeable attributes of objects. Tasks are goaloriented human activities which interact with objects and
aim to change some attributes of the objects. The process
of executing a task is a process to change the object fluents
over time. We propose a hierarchical model to represent
tasks as concurrent and sequential object fluents. In a task,
different fluents closely interact with each other both in spatial and temporal domains. Given an egocentric video,
a beam search algorithm is applied to jointly recognizing
the object fluents in each frame, and the task of the entire
video. We collected a large scale egocentric video dataset
of tasks and fluents. This dataset contains 14 categories of
tasks, 25 object classes, 21 categories of object fluents, 809
video sequences, and approximately 333,000 video frames.
The experimental results on this dataset prove the strength
of our method.

1. Introduction
Egocentric vision has attracted a growing attention with
the advance of wearable camera technologies, such as smart
glasses and virtual reality headsets. The wearable cameras
mounted on the head enable a user to record the videos from
the first-person view while performing daily tasks.
Two significant issues related to egocentric vision are
recognizing tasks and recognizing object fluents. A task
is a goal-oriented human activity which interacts with the
objects in an environment and changes some attributes of
the objects, such as mop floor, make coffee, and microwave
food. A fluent is a time-varying attribute of an object or
a group of objects, and its values are the specific states of
the attribute [8, 19], as shown in Fig. 1. For example, a
floor’s fluent takes the values dirty and clean over time as
the floor is mopped. In our work, fluents are divided into
∗ Yang Liu and Ping Wei are co-first authors.

mug: empty

mug: full

monitor: off

monitor: on

drawer: closed

drawer: open

book: closed

book: open

floor: dirty

floor: clean

lid, coffee can:
fastened

lid, coffee can:
unfastened

blackboard,
eraser: contacting

blackboard,
eraser: apart

microwave,
food: containing

microwave,
food: separate

Figure 1. Illustration of unary and binary object fluents. The blue
italic words describe the object fluents.

unary fluents and binary fluents. A unary fluent describes
the attribute of a single object, such as dirty to the floor and
full to the mug. A binary fluent describes the attribute of two objects as a whole, such as fastened to a lid and a coffee
can, contacting to a blackboard and an eraser, etc.
One of the most widely-used cues for activity recognition in egocentric videos is the appearance information
of related objects [5, 6, 20]. However, in complex goaloriented tasks, the appearance of the same object often dramatically changes in different phases of the tasks, which
may mislead object appearance based activity recognition.
For example in Fig. 1, the appearance of the drawer is vastly
different before and after the drawer is opened. This phenomenon motivates us to explore new methods to model and
recognize tasks.
12924

