VegFru: A Domain-Specific Dataset for Fine-grained Visual Categorization
Saihui Hou, Yushan Feng and Zilei Wang
Department of Automation, University of Science and Technology of China
{saihui, fyushan}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zlwang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel domain-specific dataset named VegFru for fine-grained visual categorization
(FGVC). While the existing datasets for FGVC are mainly
focused on animal breeds or man-made objects with limited labelled data, VegFru is a larger dataset consisting of
vegetables and fruits which are closely associated with the
daily life of everyone. Aiming at domestic cooking and food
management, VegFru categorizes vegetables and fruits according to their eating characteristics, and each image contains at least one edible part of vegetables or fruits with the
same cooking usage. Particularly, all the images are labelled hierarchically. The current version covers vegetables
and fruits of 25 upper-level categories and 292 subordinate
classes. And it contains more than 160,000 images in total
and at least 200 images for each subordinate class. Accompanying the dataset, we also propose an effective framework
called HybridNet to exploit the label hierarchy for FGVC.
Specifically, multiple granularity features are first extracted
by dealing with the hierarchical labels separately. And then
they are fused through explicit operation, e.g., Compact Bilinear Pooling, to form a unified representation for the ultimate recognition. The experimental results on the novel
VegFru, the public FGVC-Aircraft and CUB-200-2011 indicate that HybridNet achieves one of the top performance
on these datasets. The dataset and code are available at
https://github.com/ustc-vim/vegfru.

1. Introduction
In computer vision, fine-grained visual categorization
(FGVC) refers to categorizing objects into subordinate
classes, e.g., breeds of birds or dogs. Compared to generic classification [6], FGVC needs to handle more subtle
inter-class difference and larger intra-class variation of objects, thus requiring more discriminative and robust image representation. Recent years have witnessed the resurrection of deep convolutional neural network (DCNN),
which holds state-of-the-art performance of various visual tasks [8, 25, 5]. The top-performing methods for

Figure 1. Sample images in VegFru. Top: vegetable images. Bottom: fruit images. Best viewed electronically.

FGVC [9, 36, 37] are also built upon DCNN and the training
is data-hungry. However, the data with fine-grained labels
is usually insufficient, e.g., in CUB-200-2011 [28] there are
only about 30 training images for each class. And the existing datasets for FGVC are mainly focused on domains of
animal breeds, e.g., birds [28] and dogs [11], or man-made
objects, e.g., cars [13] and aircrafts [18]. As the saying
goes, hunger breeds discontent. In modern life, increasing
attention has been paid to how to go on a balanced and nutritious diet. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is
still no public dataset specially designed for recognizing the
raw food materials and recommending appropriate recipes
for individuals.
In this work, aiming at domestic cooking and food
management, we introduce a novel domain-specific dataset named VegFru, which consists of vegetables and fruits
that are closely associated with people’s diet. In VegFru,
vegetables and fruits are categorized according to their eating characteristics, e.g., different edible parts of a certain
vegetable or fruit, such as leaf and root, are classified into separate subordinate classes. And the objects in each
image are the raw food materials, while the images that
contain cooked food whose raw materials are indistinguishable are filtered out. Currently, the dataset covers vegetables and fruits of 25 upper-level categories and 292 subordinate classes1 , which has taken in all species in common.
And it contains more than 160,000 images in total and at
1 The upper-level category and subordinate class are respectively denoted as sup-class and sub-class in the following.

541

