DeepSetNet: Predicting Sets with Deep Neural Networks
S. Hamid Rezatofighi Vijay Kumar B G Anton Milan
Ehsan Abbasnejad Anthony Dick Ian Reid
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Australia
Vector

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have shown state-of-the-art performance on many computer vision problems, including semantic segmentation [33], visual tracking [31], image captioning [21], scene classification [22], and object detection [27]. However, traditional convolutional architectures
require a problem to be formulated in a certain way: in particular, they are designed to predict a vector (or a matrix,
or a tensor in a more general sense), that is either of a fixed
length or whose size depends on the input (cf . fully convolutional architectures).
For example, consider the task of scene classification
where the goal is to predict the label (or category) of a given
image. Modern approaches typically address this by a series
of convolutional layers, followed by a number of fully connected layers, which are finally mapped to predict a fixedsized vector [22, 39, 41]. The length of the predicted vector corresponds to the number of candidate categories, e.g.
1,000 for the ImageNet challenge [37]. Each element is a
score or probability of a particular category, and the final
prediction is a probability distribution over all categories.
This strategy is perfectly admissible if one expects to find

I

CNN

CNN

person
pizza
car

CNN

sheep
bike
person
book
pizza
bird
scissors
car
oven
bowl
apple

This paper addresses the task of set prediction using
deep learning. This is important because the output of many
computer vision tasks, including image tagging and object
detection, are naturally expressed as sets of entities rather
than vectors. As opposed to a vector, the size of a set is
not fixed in advance, and it is invariant to the ordering of
entities within it. We define a likelihood for a set distribution and learn its parameters using a deep neural network.
We also derive a loss for predicting a discrete distribution
corresponding to set cardinality. Set prediction is demonstrated on the problem of multi-class image classification.
Moreover, we show that the proposed cardinality loss can
also trivially be applied to the tasks of object counting and
pedestrian detection. Our approach outperforms existing
methods in all three cases on standard datasets.

Set

Figure 1: Left: Traditional CNNs learn parameters θ ∗ to
predict a fixed vector Y . Right: In contrast, we propose to
train a separate CNN to learn a parameter vector w∗ , which
is used to predict the set cardinality of a particular output.
exactly one or at least the same number of categories across
all images. However, natural images typically show multiple entities (e.g. table, pizza, person, etc.), and what is
perhaps more important, this number differs from image to
image. During evaluation, this property is not taken into account. The ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) only counts an error if the “true” label is
not among the top-5 candidates. Another strategy to account for multiple classes is to fix the number to a certain
value for all test instances, and report precision and recall
by counting false positive and false negative predictions, as
was done in [15, 47]. Arguably, both methods are suboptimal because in a real-world scenario, where the correct
labelling is unknown, the prediction should in fact not only
rank all labels according to their likelihood of being present,
but also to report how many objects (or labels) are actually
present in one particular image. Deciding how many objects
are present in an image is a crucial part of human perception and scene understanding but is missing from our current evaluation of automated image understanding methods.
As a second example, let us consider pedestrian detec15247

