Robust Object Tracking based on Temporal and Spatial Deep Networks
Zhu Teng† , Junliang Xing‡ , Qiang Wang‡ , Congyan Lang† , Songhe Feng† , Yi Jin†
†
‡

School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China

{zteng,cylang,shfeng,yjin}@bjtu.edu.cn, jlxing@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, wangqiang2015@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Recently deep neural networks have been widely employed to deal with the visual tracking problem. In this
work, we present a new deep architecture which incorporates the temporal and spatial information to boost the
tracking performance. Our deep architecture contains three
networks, a Feature Net, a Temporal Net, and a Spatial
Net. The Feature Net extracts general feature representations of the target. With these feature representations, the
Temporal Net encodes the trajectory of the target and directly learns temporal correspondences to estimate the object state from a global perspective. Based on the learning
results of the Temporal Net, the Spatial Net further refines
the object tracking state using local spatial object information. Extensive experiments on four of the largest tracking
benchmarks, including VOT2014, VOT2016, OTB50, and
OTB100, demonstrate competing performance of the proposed tracker over a number of state-of-the-art algorithms.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is a fundamental problem in computer vision and can be applied in many practical systems
like video surveillance [13], vehicle navigation [53], and
human-machine interaction [35]. One common setting for
this problem is that a bounding box of a target is provided
in the ﬁrst frame and the tracking objective is to predict locations of the target in subsequent frames. Although lots of
efforts have been devoted into this problem and extensive
studies are conducted in the past decades [4, 59], it still remains a very difﬁcult problem due to challenges like scale
variation, fast motion, occlusions, deformation, and background cluttering [58].
In order to overcome different kinds of challenges and
achieve robust tracking results, previous works generally focus on some of the most important components in a
visual tracking system, such as robust object appearance
representation [20, 22, 40, 44], sophisticated object motion
model [29, 30, 34], and adaptive object model updating

[9, 39, 46]. Conventional methods design the tracking observation model using different representations, some of the
most typical ones include the subspace representation [46],
the sparse representation [24, 40, 63], the structured representation [20, 27], and the correlation ﬁlter based representation [22, 61]. Recently the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based representations have been employed in
many computer vision problems [18, 28, 36, 42, 55] due to
its strong representation power and vast modeling capacity. Inspired by these successes, we in this work design a
Temporal-Spatial Network (TSN) model to deal with different kinds of challenges in visual tracking.
As the power of deep learning models generally comes
into effect when a large amount of labeled training samples are applied, it is not straightforward to directly deploy
a deep learning model into an online visual tracking algorithm, because the only labeled sample for object tracking
problem is the target annotated in the ﬁrst frame. Previous deep learning model based tracking algorithms need
numerous labeled videos to learn the feature representations through ofﬂine training [21, 42]. For example, the
MDNet tracker [42] pre-trains a deep model via a number of video sequences from similar tracking benchmarks and ﬁne-tunes the learned model online using the target
benchmark sequence. It sets the best performance on the
OTB benchmark. However, its ofﬂine pre-training on similar tracking benchmarks takes too much time and prone to
over-ﬁtting. The GOTURN tracker [21] only employs an
ofﬂine pre-trained model to perform online tracking. It thus
learns the appearance adaptation only from a limited adjacent frames rather than a reasonable interpretation on time
series of a video. In the design of our TSN model, we do
not perform ofﬂine training from similar tracking benchmarks but instead learn and ﬁne-tune the model online from
sampled historical targets. Our feature extraction network
is directly picked from an off-the-shelf deep models (e.g.,
VGG model [49] trained on ImageNet [47]) without further
pre-training on similar tracking benchmarks.
To learn a complex inter-frame and intra-frame relationship, the PROST method [48] employs optical ﬂow based
11144

