Interpretable Explanations of Black Boxes by Meaningful Perturbation
Ruth C. Fong
University of Oxford

Andrea Vedaldi
University of Oxford

ruthfong@robots.ox.ac.uk

vedaldi@robots.ox.ac.uk

flute: 0.9973

flute: 0.0007

Learned Mask

Abstract
As machine learning algorithms are increasingly applied
to high impact yet high risk tasks, such as medical diagnosis or autonomous driving, it is critical that researchers
can explain how such algorithms arrived at their predictions. In recent years, a number of image saliency methods
have been developed to summarize where highly complex
neural networks “look” in an image for evidence for their
predictions. However, these techniques are limited by their
heuristic nature and architectural constraints.
In this paper, we make two main contributions: First, we
propose a general framework for learning different kinds
of explanations for any black box algorithm. Second, we
specialise the framework to find the part of an image most
responsible for a classifier decision. Unlike previous works,
our method is model-agnostic and testable because it is
grounded in explicit and interpretable image perturbations.

1. Introduction
Given the powerful but often opaque nature of modern black box predictors such as deep neural networks [4,
5], there is a considerable interest in explaining and understanding predictors a-posteriori, after they have been
learned. This remains largely an open problem. One
reason is that we lack a formal understanding of what it
means to explain a classifier. Most of the existing approaches [19, 16, 8, 7, 9, 19], etc., often produce intuitive
visualizations; however, since such visualizations are primarily heuristic, their meaning remains unclear.
In this paper, we revisit the concept of “explanation” at
a formal level, with the goal of developing principles and
methods to explain any black box function f , e.g. a neural
network object classifier. Since such a function is learned
automatically from data, we would like to understand what
f has learned to do and how it does it. Answering the
“what” question means determining the properties of the
map. The “how” question investigates the internal mechanisms that allow the map to achieve these properties. We
focus mainly on the “what” question and argue that it can

Figure 1. An example of a mask learned (right) by blurring an
image (middle) to suppress the softmax probability of its target
class (left: original image; softmax scores above images).

be answered by providing interpretable rules that describe
the input-output relationship captured by f . For example,
one rule could be that f is rotation invariant, in the sense
that “f (x) = f (x′ ) whenever images x and x′ are related
by a rotation”.
In this paper, we make several contributions. First, we
propose the general framework of explanations as metapredictors (sec. 2), extending [18]’s work. Second, we identify several pitfalls in designing automatic explanation systems. We show in particular that neural network artifacts
are a major attractor for explanations. While artifacts are
informative since they explain part of the network behavior, characterizing other properties of the network requires
careful calibration of the generality and interpretability of
explanations. Third, we reinterpret network saliency in our
framework. We show that this provides a natural generalization of the gradient-based saliency technique of [15] by
integrating information over several rounds of backpropagation in order to learn an explanation. We also compare
this technique to other methods [15, 16, 20, 14, 19] in terms
of their meaning and obtained results.

2. Related work
Our work builds on [15]’s gradient-based method, which
backpropagates the gradient for a class label to the image layer. Other backpropagation methods include DeConvNet [19] and Guided Backprop [16, 8], which builds off
of DeConvNet [19] and [15]’s gradient method to produce
sharper visualizations.
Another set of techniques incorporate network activations into their visualizations: Class Activation Mapping
13429

