Quantitative evaluation of confidence measures in a machine learning world
Matteo Poggi, Fabio Tosi, Stefano Mattoccia
University of Bologna
Department of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI)
Viale del Risorgimento 2, Bologna, Italy
{matteo.poggi8, fabio.tosi5, stefano.mattoccia}@unibo.it

Abstract
Confidence measures aim at detecting unreliable depth
measurements and play an important role for many purposes and in particular, as recently shown, to improve
stereo accuracy. This topic has been thoroughly investigated by Hu and Mordohai in 2010 (and 2012) considering 17 confidence measures and two local algorithms on
the two datasets available at that time. However, since then
major breakthroughs happened in this field: the availability
of much larger and challenging datasets, novel and more
effective stereo algorithms including ones based on deep
learning and confidence measures leveraging on machine
learning techniques. Therefore, this paper aims at providing an exhaustive and updated review and quantitative
evaluation of 52 (actually, 76 considering variants) stateof-the-art confidence measures - focusing on recent ones
mostly based on random-forests and deep learning - with
three algorithms on the challenging datasets available today. Moreover we deal with problems inherently induced by
learning-based confidence measures. How are these methods able to generalize to new data? How a specific training improves their effectiveness? How more effective confidence measures can actually improve the overall stereo accuracy?

1. Introduction
Although depth from stereo still represents an open problem [5, 23, 37], in recent years this field has seen notable improvements concerning the effectiveness of such algorithms
(e.g., [47, 40]) and confidence measures, aimed at detecting
unreliable disparity assignments, proved to be very effective cues when plugged in stereo vision pipelines as shown
in [41, 28, 31, 40]. However, shortcomings of stereo algorithms have been emphasized by the availability of very
challenging datasets with ground-truth such as KITTI 2012
(K12) [5], KITTI 2015 (K15) [23] and Middlebury 2014
(M14) [37]. Thus, the ability to reliably predict failures of a

stereo algorithm by means of a confidence measure is fundamental and many approaches have been proposed for this
purpose. Hu and Mordohai [13] exhaustively reviewed confidence measures available at that time, with two variants of
a standard local algorithm, and defined a very effective metric to evaluate their effectiveness on the small and mostly
unrealistic dataset [39] with ground-truth available. However, since then there have been major breakthroughs in this
field:
• Novel and more reliable confidence prediction methods, in particular those based on random-forests [8, 41,
28, 31] and deep learning [32, 40]
• Much larger datasets with ground-truth depicting very
challenging and realistic scenes acquired in indoor
[37] and outdoor environments [5, 23]
• Novel and more effective stereo algorithms, some
leveraging on deep learning techniques [47, 22], more
and more often coupled with confidence measures
[40, 31, 28]. Moreover, in recent years, SGM [9] became the preferred disparity optimization method for
most state-of-the-art stereo algorithms (e.g., [47, 40])
Considering these facts, we believe that this field deserves a further and deeper analysis. Therefore, in this paper
we aim at i) extending and updating the taxonomy provided
in [13] including novel confidence measure and in particular those based on machine learning techniques, ii) exhaustively assessing their performance on the larger and much
more challenging datasets [23, 37] available today, iii) understanding the impact of training data on the effectiveness
of confidence measures based on machine learning, iv) assessing their performance when dealing with new data and
state-of-the-art stereo algorithms, v) and evaluating their behavior when plugged into a state-of-the-art stereo pipeline.
Although our focus is mostly on approaches based on
machine learning, for completeness, we include in our taxonomy and evaluation any available confidence measure.
15228

