Learning Compact Geometric Features
Marc Khoury
UC Berkeley

Qian-Yi Zhou
Intel Labs
60

Abstract

1. Introduction
Local geometric descriptors represent the local geometry around a point in a point cloud. They play a central role
in geometric registration, which supports diverse applications in robotics and 3D vision [16] and underpins modern
3D reconstruction pipelines [42]. To enable accurate and
efficient registration, the descriptor must possess a number
of properties [12]. First, it should map the local geometry
to a vector in a Euclidean space Rn ; such Euclidean representations support efficient geometric search structures and
nearest-neighbor queries. Second, the descriptor should be
discriminative: nearest neighbors in feature space should
correspond to points with genuinely similar local neighborhoods. Third, the representation should be compact, with
a small dimensionality n: this supports fast spatial search.
Finally, the representation should be robust to artifacts that
are commonly encountered in real data, such as noise and
missing regions.
The design of local geometric descriptors has been the
subject of intensive study for the past two decades. Many
hand-crafted descriptors have been designed and evaluated [19, 11, 25, 27]. Nevertheless, no existing descriptor
jointly satisfies the desiderata of high discriminative ability, compactness, and robustness [12]. Part of the challenge

50
Precision (%)

We present an approach to learning features that represent the local geometry around a point in an unstructured point cloud. Such features play a central role in geometric registration, which supports diverse applications
in robotics and 3D vision. Current state-of-the-art local
features for unstructured point clouds have been manually
crafted and none combines the desirable properties of precision, compactness, and robustness. We show that features
with these properties can be learned from data, by optimizing deep networks that map high-dimensional histograms
into low-dimensional Euclidean spaces. The presented approach yields a family of features, parameterized by dimension, that are both more compact and more accurate than
existing descriptors.

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

CGF-32

40
30 CGF-12
20
10
0 1
10

10 2
Dimensionality

10 3

CGF
FPFH
PFH
RoPS
SHOT
SI
USC

Figure 1. Our approach yields a family of Compact Geometric
Features (CGF), parameterized by dimension. This figure illustrates the performance of CGF on the SceneNN test set. Our features are both more compact and more precise than the baselines.
The horizontal axis (dimensionality) is on a logarithmic scale.

is the difficulty of optimizing the parameters of a highdimensional feature representation by hand.
In this paper, we present an approach to learning local
geometric features from data. Our descriptor applies directly to unstructured point clouds and does not require a
clean and consistent surface parameterization [5], a volumetric representation [41], or the synthesis of auxiliary
depth images [35]. Our features support nearest-neighbor
queries in a Euclidean space, which allows establishing
dense correspondences across point sets in near-linear time,
in contrast to the quadratic complexity required by pairwise matching networks. We thus obtain the first learned
geometric feature that can serve as a drop-in replacement for state-of-the-art hand-crafted features in existing
pipelines [16, 42].
We show that the presented approach yields descriptors that are both more discriminative and more compact
than state-of-the-art hand-crafted features. An illustration
is provided in Figure 1. Experiments demonstrate that our
Compact Geometric Features (CGF) yield more accurate
matches at lower query times. When CGF is used on the
standard Redwood benchmark for geometric registration,
with no training or fine-tuning on that dataset, it yields the
highest recall reported on the benchmark to date.
1153

