Deep Generative Adversarial Compression Artifact Removal
Leonardo Galteri, Lorenzo Seidenari, Marco Bertini, Alberto Del Bimbo
MICC, University of Florence
https://www.micc.unifi.it/

Abstract
Compression artifacts arise in images whenever a lossy
compression algorithm is applied. These artifacts eliminate
details present in the original image, or add noise and small
structures; because of these effects they make images less
pleasant for the human eye, and may also lead to decreased
performance of computer vision algorithms such as object
detectors. To eliminate such artifacts, when decompressing
an image, it is required to recover the original image from
a disturbed version. To this end, we present a feed-forward
fully convolutional residual network model trained using a
generative adversarial framework. To provide a baseline,
we show that our model can be also trained optimizing the
Structural Similarity (SSIM), which is a better loss with respect to the simpler Mean Squared Error (MSE).
Our GAN is able to produce images with more photorealistic details than MSE or SSIM based networks. Moreover
we show that our approach can be used as a pre-processing
step for object detection in case images are degraded by
compression to a point that state-of-the art detectors fail.
In this task, our GAN method obtains better performance
than MSE or SSIM trained networks.

1. Introduction
Image and video compression algorithms are commonly
used to reduce the dimension of media files, to lower their
storage requirements and transmission time. These algorithms often introduce compression artifacts, such as blocking, posterizing, contouring, blurring and ringing effects,
as shown in Fig. 1. Typically, the larger the compression
factor, the stronger is the image degradation due to these
artifacts. However, simply using images with low compression is not always a feasible solution: images used
in web pages need to be compressed as much as possible
to speed up page load to improve user experience. Many
types of video/image streams are necessarily requiring lowbandwidth, e.g. for drones, surveillance and wireless sensor
networks. Also in tasks such as entertainment video streaming, like Netflix, there is need to reduce as much as possi-

Figure 1: Left: A JPEG compressed image with two highlights of degraded regions. Right: our reconstruction where
both regions are consistently sharper and most artifacts are
removed. Best viewed in color on computer screen.
ble the required bandwidth, to avoid network congestions
and to reduce costs. So far, the problem of compression
artifact removal has been treated using many different techniques, from optimizing DCT coefficients [41] to adding
additional knowledge about images or patch models [20];
however the very vast majority of the many works addressing the problem have not considered convolutional neural
networks (CNN). To the best of our knowledge CNNs have
been used recently to address artifact reduction only in two
works [5, 31], while another work has addressed just image
denoising [40]. These techniques have been successfully
applied to a different problem of image reconstruction, that
is super-resolution, to reconstruct images from low resolution, adding missing details to down-sampled images [17].
In this work we address the problem of artifact removal
using convolutional neural networks. The proposed approach can be used as a post-processing technique applied
to decompressed images, and thus can be applied to different compression algorithms such as JPEG, intra-frame coding of H.264/AVC and H.265/HEVC.
To evaluate the quality of reconstructed images, after artifact removal, there is need to evaluate both subjective and
objective assessments. The former are important since most
of the time a human will be the ultimate consumer of the
compressed media. The latter are important since obtain14826

