Associative Domain Adaptation
Philip Haeusser1,2

Thomas Frerix1

Alexander Mordvintsev2

Daniel Cremers1

haeusser@in.tum.de

thomas.frerix@tum.de

moralex@google.com

cremers@tum.de

1

Dept. of Informatics, TU Munich

2

Google, Inc.

Abstract
We propose associative domain adaptation, a novel technique for end-to-end domain adaptation with neural networks, the task of inferring class labels for an unlabeled target domain based on the statistical properties of a labeled
source domain. Our training scheme follows the paradigm
that in order to effectively derive class labels for the target domain, a network should produce statistically domain
invariant embeddings, while minimizing the classification
error on the labeled source domain. We accomplish this
by reinforcing associations between source and target data
directly in embedding space. Our method can easily be
added to any existing classification network with no structural and almost no computational overhead. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on various benchmarks and achieve state-of-the-art results across the board
with a generic convolutional neural network architecture
not specifically tuned to the respective tasks. Finally, we
show that the proposed association loss produces embeddings that are more effective for domain adaptation compared to methods employing maximum mean discrepancy
as a similarity measure in embedding space.

1. Introduction
Since the publication of LeNet [14] and AlexNet [13],
a methodological shift has been observable in the field of
computer vision. Deep convolutional neural networks have
proved to solve a growing number of problems [28, 7, 29,
27, 6, 17]. On the downside, due to a large amount of model
parameters, an equally rapidly growing amount of labeled
data is needed for training, such as ImageNet [21], comprising millions of labeled training examples. This data may be
costly to obtain or even nonexistent.
In this paper, we focus on an approach to train neural networks with a minimum of labeled data: domain adaptation.
We refer to domain adaptation as the task to train a model
on labeled data from a source domain while minimizing test
error on a target domain, for which no labels are available
at training time.

Figure 1: Associative domain adaptation. In order to maximize classification accuracy on an unlabeled target domain, the discrepancy between neural network embeddings
of source and target samples (red and blue, respectively)
is reduced by an associative loss (→), while minimizing a
classification error on the labeled source domain.

1.1. Domain adaptation
In more formal terms, we consider a source domain Ds = {xsi , yis }i=1,...,ns and a target domain
Dt = {xti , yit }i=1,...,nt . Here, xsi ∈ RNs , xti ∈ RNt
are the data vectors and yis ∈ C, yit ∈ C the respective labels, where the target labels {yit }i=1,...,nt are not available
for training. Note that for domain adaption it is assumed
that source and target domains are associated with the same
label space, while Ds and Dt are drawn from distributions
Ps and Pt , which are assumed to be different, i.e. the source
and target distribution have different joint distributions of
data X and labels Y , Ps (X, Y ) 6= Pt (X, Y ).
The value of domain adaptation has even more increased
with generative tools producing synthetic datasets. The idea
is compelling: rather than labeling vast amounts of realworld data, one renders a similar but synthetic dataset that is
automatically labeled. With an effective method for domain
adaptation it becomes possible to train models without the
need for one single labeled target example at training time.

2765

