Recognition of Action Units in the Wild
with Deep Nets and a New Global-Local Loss
C. Fabian Benitez-Quiroz

Yan Wang
Dept. Electrical and Computer Engineering
The Ohio State University

Aleix M. Martinez

{benitez-quiroz.1,wang.9021,martinez.158}@osu.edu

Abstract
Most previous algorithms for the recognition of Action
Units (AUs) were trained on a small number of sample images. This was due to the limited amount of labeled data
available at the time. This meant that data-hungry deep
neural networks, which have shown their potential in other
computer vision problems, could not be successfully trained
to detect AUs. A recent publicly available database with
close to a million labeled images has made this training
possible. Image and individual variability (e.g., pose, scale,
illumination, ethnicity) in this set is very large. Unfortunately, the labels in this dataset are not perfect (i.e., they
are noisy), making convergence of deep nets difficult. To
harness the richness of this dataset while being robust to
the inaccuracies of the labels, we derive a novel globallocal loss. This new loss function is shown to yield fast
globally meaningful convergences and locally accurate results. Comparative results with those of the EmotioNet challenge demonstrate that our newly derived loss yields superior recognition of AUs than state-of-the-art algorithms.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are proven algorithms in object
detection and classification [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. However, this
advantage is only evident when a large number of annotated
images is available.
The present paper addresses the problem of learning to
detect Action Units (AUs) in images of facial expressions
of emotion “in the wild.” AUs are the observable anatomical facial movements defining a facial expression [6]. Each
observable anatomical facial movement is given a unique
number. For example, AU 1 is used to define the upper
movement of the inner section of the eyebrows, and AU 12
the pulling of the corners of the lips.
Manually annotating AUs in images is cumbersome and
can only be done by trained professionals [7]. This has lim-

ited the number of manually labeled images available to
researchers, with the largest datasets only including thousands of samples [8, 9, 10]. These labeled images do not
provide enough image variability (illumination, pose, occlusions) and ethnicity to take advantage of the richness of
possible functions (VC-dimensionality) represented in deep
nets [11].
Recently an AU-annotated set of about a million images
of facial expressions in the wild was made available [12]. A
large number of images were annotated with AUs 1, 2, 4, 5,
6, 9, 12, 17, 25 and 26. These images include the necessary
image and individual variability needed to harness the richness of functional representation of deep neural networks.
Unfortunately, the labels of the images in this dataset
are given by an algorithm developed by the authors of the
database. This yields inaccurate annotations – according to
the authors of this database, the annotations are about 81%
correct. These inaccuracies causes major convergence problems in deep nets.
In this paper, we derive a new global-local (GL) loss
that can circumvent this problem of inaccurate labels while
yielding accurate recognition results.
Previous loss functions used either a global or local approach [13, 14, 15]. Global approaches take advantage of
the overall structure of the object, yielding fast model to image fitting and globally consistent results. Thus, global loss
functions facilitate convergence, but yield less accurate results. Local loss functions yield significantly more accurate
results, but require large numbers of very accurate labels to
converge.
Our newly derived GL-loss combines the idea of a local loss function, to emphasize the importance of accurate
detections/recognitions, with a global loss, to yield a fast,
meaningful convergence.
We use this newly derived criterion on deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs). A schematic comparison
of a typical CNN versus ours, which employs our derived
GL-criterion (GL-CNN), is shown in Figure 1. The resulting algorithm can be trained in a few hours. After training,
13970

