A discriminative view of MRF pre-processing algorithms
Chen Wang1,2
Charles Herrmann2
Ramin Zabih1,2
1
2
Google Research
Cornell University
{chenwang, cih, rdz}@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
While Markov Random Fields (MRFs) are widely used
in computer vision, they present a quite challenging inference problem. MRF inference can be accelerated by preprocessing techniques like Dead End Elimination (DEE) [8]
or QPBO-based approaches [18, 24, 25] which compute the
optimal labeling of a subset of variables. These techniques
are guaranteed to never wrongly label a variable but they
often leave a large number of variables unlabeled. We address this shortcoming by interpreting pre-processing as a
classification problem, which allows us to trade off false
positives (i.e., giving a variable an incorrect label) versus
false negatives (i.e., failing to label a variable). We describe
an efficient discriminative rule that finds optimal solutions
for a subset of variables. Our technique provides both perinstance and worst-case guarantees concerning the quality
of the solution. Empirical studies were conducted over several benchmark datasets. We obtain a speedup factor of 2 to
12 over expansion moves [4] without preprocessing, and on
difficult non-submodular energy functions produce slightly
lower energy.

1. Pre-processing for MRF inference
We address the inference problem for pairwise Markov
Random Fields (MRFs) defined over n variables x =
(x1 , . . . , xn ), where each xi is labeled from a discrete label set L. The MRF can be viewed as a graph G = (V, E)
with a neighborhood system N : V 7→ 2V . To compute the
MAP estimate we minimize the energy
E(x) =

X

i∈V

θi (xi ) +

X

θij (xi , xj )

(1)

(i,j)∈E

where θi and θij are unary terms and pairwise terms. MRFs
are widely used in applications such as image segmentation,
stereo, etc [14, 40]. Unfortunately the MRF inference problem is NP-hard even when |L| = 2 (i.e. binary labels) [22].
Many algorithms involve some kind of pre-processing
phase that seeks to determine the value of a subset of vari-

ables, thus reducing the complexity of the remaining combinatorial search problem. Pre-processing methods are commonly used in conjunction with graph cuts, a technique that
achieves strong performance on both binary and multilabel
MRF inference [40]. Graph cuts handle binary MRFs by reduction to min-cut, which is then solved via max-flow (see
[3, 9] for reviews). The most widely used graph cut methods
for multi-label MRFs are move-making techniques, which
generate a new proposal at each iteration and reduce the
multi-label problem into a series of binary subproblems
(should each variable stick with the old label or switch to the
proposed label) and then solved by max-flow/min-cut. Popular algorithms in this family include expansion moves [4]
and their generalization to fusion moves [27].
The best known pre-processing methods are Dead End
Elimination (DEE) [8] and QPBO [3, 21], but there are a
number of others [18, 24, 25, 35, 36, 39, 42]. (Similar approaches are used for other NP-hard problems, a prominent
example is Davis-Putnam’s pure literal rule for SAT [7].)
The key weakness of such methods is that they are inherently conservative, since they only label variables whose
value can be determined in every global minimum. Yet the
MRFs that occur in computer vision are so large that in
practice we almost never compute the actual global minimum.1 As a result, a pre-processing step that is carefully
designed to never prune the global minimum is followed by
a search step that almost never finds the global minimum.
Our fundamental observation is that the pre-processing step
can be viewed as a classification problem, and that existing pre-processing methods are designed to avoid false positives (i.e., to never label a variable incorrectly), at the cost
of many false negatives (i.e., variables that are left unlabeled). By revisiting this tradeoff we can design techniques
where the combination of the pre-processing step and the
search step leads to better overall performance, especially
on the most difficult problems.
As an example, consider a tiny 8-connected binary MRF
with 9 variables (pixels), and suppose we wish to determine
by pre-processing that the center pixel should be labeled
with 0. In order to soundly compute this by DEE or QPBO,
1 See [12, 29] for rare counterexamples.

5504

