SafetyNet: Detecting and Rejecting Adversarial Examples Robustly
Jiajun Lu, Theerasit Issaranon, David Forsyth
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
{jlu23, issaran1, daf}@illinois.edu
Abstract
We describe a method to produce a network where current methods such as DeepFool have great difficulty producing adversarial samples. Our construction suggests some
insights into how deep networks work. We provide a reasonable analyses that our construction is difficult to defeat,
and show experimentally that our method is hard to defeat
with both Type I and Type II attacks using several standard
networks and datasets. This SafetyNet architecture is used
to an important and novel application SceneProof, which
can reliably detect whether an image is a picture of a real
scene or not. SceneProof applies to images captured with
depth maps (RGBD images) and checks if a pair of image
and depth map is consistent. It relies on the relative difficulty of producing naturalistic depth maps for images in
post processing. We demonstrate that our SafetyNet is robust to adversarial examples built from currently known attacking approaches.

1. Introduction
Adversarial examples are images with tiny, imperceptible perturbations that fool a classifier into predicting the
wrong labels with high confidence. x denotes the input to
some classifier, which is a natural example and has label
l. A variety of constructions [9, 14, 20, 25] can generate
an adversarial example a(x) to make the classifier label it
m 6= l. This is interesting, because || a(x) − x ||2 is so small
that we would expect a(x) to be labelled l.
Adversarial examples are a persistent problem of classification neural networks, and of many other classification schemes. Adversarial examples are easy to construct [30, 22, 3], and there are even universal adversarial
perturbations [19]. Adversarial examples are important for
practical reasons, because one can construct physical adversarial examples, suggesting that neural networks in current
status are unusable in some image classification applications (e.g. imagine a small physical modification that could
reliably get a stop sign classified as a go faster sign [25, 16]).
Adversarial examples are important for conceptual reasons

Quantized RBF-SVM
Detector
Input Images (RGB or RGBD)

VGG19 Classifier

Fc7

Figure 1: SafetyNet consists of a conventional classifier (in
our experiments, either VGG19 or ResNet) with an RBFSVM that uses discrete codes computed from late stage ReLUs to detect adversarial examples. We show that (a) SafetyNet detects adversarial examples reliably, even if they are
produced by methods not represented in the detectors’ training set and (b) it is very difficult to produce examples that
are both misclassified and slip past SafetyNet’s detector.

too, because an explanation of why adversarial examples
are easy to construct could cast some light on the inner life
of neural networks. The absence of theory means it is hard
to defend against adversarial examples (for example, distillation was proposed as a defense [26], but was later shown
to not work [2]).
Adversarial example constructions (e.g., line search
along the gradient [9]; LBFGS on an appropriate cost [30];
DeepFool [20]) all rely on the gradient of the network, but it
is known that using the gradient of another similar network
is sufficient [25], so concealing the gradient does not work
as a defense for current networks. An important puzzle is
that networks that generalize very well remain susceptible
to adversarial examples [30]. Another important puzzle is
that examples that are adversarial for one network tend to
be adversarial for another as well [30, 15, 27]. Some network architectures appear to be robust to adversarial examples [13], which still need more empirical verification. At
least some adversarial attacks appear to apply to many distinct networks [19].
We denote the probability distribution of examples by
P (X). At least in the case of vision, P (X) has support on
1446

