Constrained Convolutional Sparse Coding for Parametric Based Reconstruction
Of Line Drawings
Sara Shaheen, Lama Affara, and Bernard Ghanem
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
sara.shaheen@kaust.edu.sa, lama.affara@kaust.edu.sa, beranrd.ghanem@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Convolutional sparse coding (CSC) plays an essential role
in many computer vision applications ranging from image
compression to deep learning. In this work, we spot the
light on a new application where CSC can effectively serve,
namely line drawing analysis. The process of drawing a line
drawing can be approximated as the sparse spatial localization of a number of typical basic strokes, which in turn can
be cast as a non-standard CSC model that considers the line
drawing formation process from parametric curves. These
curves are learned to optimize the fit between the model and
a specific set of line drawings. Parametric representation of
sketches is vital in enabling automatic sketch analysis, synthesis and manipulation. A couple of sketch manipulation
examples are demonstrated in this work. Consequently, our
novel method is expected to provide a reliable and automatic method for parametric sketch description. Through experiments, we empirically validate the convergence of our
method to a feasible solution.

1. Introduction
Sketch vectorization, which is defined as representing a sketch as a number of connected parameterized curves, is
of great demand in the graphics community. It enables sketch transformations that are invariant to scale and nonrigid body transformations. It also fuels various applications related to sketch style manipulation, analysis and synthesis [21]. Previous work on those topics tends to avoid
the non-trivial geometric solutions of sketch vectorization
[20] and replaces it with some manual interaction to access
strokes of sketches (strokes are the building blocks of a sketch). This involves pre-processing steps such as building large libraries of strokes or digitally collecting sketches
using the Wacome device [10, 19]. As such, utilizing existing modern computing algorithms for automatic sketch
parametric representation is a valuable contribution to the
graphics research community.
In this work, we propose an extension to the formulation of

the well-known convolutional sparse coding (CSC) model,
such that it can better model the reconstruction process of
line drawings. This can be done by constraining the filters
in CSC to a pre-defined group of parametric curves. This
results in learned filters that, in their content, describe the
sketch geometrically as a set of curves. Such representation
can be utilized for sketch vectorization. We believe that our
work is the first to introduce geometry constraints to the
standard CSC formulation.
CSC represents an image by a sum of convolutional responses generated from image filters and sparse maps.
These filters constitute a CSC dictionary D = {d1 , .., dK },
and when convolved with their corresponding sparse maps Z = {z1 , .., zK }, the image is reconstructed. Given an
input image x, the CSC optimization is described in Eq (1).
K

K

k=1

k=1

X
X
1
||x −
dk ∗ zk ||22 + β
||zk ||1
dk ,zk ∀k 2

arg min

(1)

s.t. ||dk ||22 ≤ 1 ∀k ∈ {1, ..., K}

CSC approximates how sketches are drawn. If the filters
in the dictionary are generated from actual parametric
strokes, then the summation of convolution responses
between these filters and the sparse maps specify where
in the image a stroke emerges and the set of filters reflect
what the response (stroke) will look like. We believe
that this model approximates how an artist would draw
a sketch; however, a more accurate depiction of this
process would be to replace the summation with a spatially
localized max operation (representing a union instead of a
sum). Unfortunately, this higher fidelity model makes the
optimization significantly harder to do, although it could
still be solved using standard fixed point (alternating) optimization techniques popularly used for bi-convex problems.
To validate our choice of CSC for the task of line drawing
analysis, we conducted a user experiment. Using a Wacom
and a stylus pen, three artists are asked to freely draw a
given sketch. We parse the Wacom data files containing
the sketches and divide the sketches into square areas of
14424

