FLaME: Fast Lightweight Mesh Estimation using Variational Smoothing on
Delaunay Graphs
W. Nicholas Greene
Nicholas Roy
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{wng,nickroy}@csail.mit.edu

Figure 1: Fast Lightweight Mesh Estimation: FLaME generates 3D mesh reconstructions from monocular images in real-time onboard
computationally constrained platforms. The key to the approach is a graph-based variational optimization framework that allows for the
mesh to be efficiently smoothed and refined. The top row of images (from left to right) show the meshes computed onboard a small
autonomous robot flying at 3.5 meters-per-second as it avoids a tree. The bottom row shows the current frame (left), the collision-free plan
in pink (middle), and the dense depthmap generated from the mesh (right) for each timestep along the approach.

Abstract
We propose a lightweight method for dense online
monocular depth estimation capable of reconstructing 3D
meshes on computationally constrained platforms. Our
main contribution is to pose the reconstruction problem as a
non-local variational optimization over a time-varying Delaunay graph of the scene geometry, which allows for an
efficient, keyframeless approach to depth estimation. The
graph can be tuned to favor reconstruction quality or speed
and is continuously smoothed and augmented as the camera
explores the scene. Unlike keyframe-based approaches, the
optimized surface is always available at the current pose,
which is necessary for low-latency obstacle avoidance.
FLaME (Fast Lightweight Mesh Estimation) can generate mesh reconstructions at upwards of 230 Hz using less
than one Intel i7 CPU core, which enables operation on
size, weight, and power-constrained platforms. We present
results from both benchmark datasets and experiments running FLaME in-the-loop onboard a small flying quadrotor.

1. Introduction
Estimating dense 3D geometry from 2D images taken
from a moving monocular camera is a fundamental problem in computer vision with a wide range of applications
in robotics and augmented reality (AR). Though the visual
tracking component of monocular simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) has reached a certain level of
maturity over the last ten years [13, 9, 12, 10, 8, 14, 15], efficiently reconstructing dense environment representations
for autonomous navigation or AR on small size-weight-andpower (SWaP) constrained platforms (such as mobile robots
and smartphones) is still an active research front. Current
approaches either transmit information to a groundstation
for processing [28, 1, 5], sacrifice density [7, 6, 10, 14],
run at significantly reduced framerates [21, 22], or limit
the reconstruction volume to small scenes [16] or to past
keyframes [11], all of which restrict their utility in practice,
especially for mobile robot navigation. In this paper, we
propose a novel monocular depth estimation pipeline that

4686

