Segmentation-Aware Convolutional Networks Using Local Attention Masks
Adam W. Harley
Carnegie Mellon University

Konstantinos G. Derpanis
Ryerson University

Iasonas Kokkinos
Facebook AI Research

aharley@cmu.edu

kosta@ryerson.ca

iasonask@fb.com

Abstract
We introduce an approach to integrate segmentation information within a convolutional neural network (CNN).
This counter-acts the tendency of CNNs to smooth information across regions and increases their spatial precision.
To obtain segmentation information, we set up a CNN to
provide an embedding space where region co-membership
can be estimated based on Euclidean distance. We use
these embeddings to compute a local attention mask relative to every neuron position. We incorporate such masks
in CNNs and replace the convolution operation with a
“segmentation-aware” variant that allows a neuron to selectively attend to inputs coming from its own region. We
call the resulting network a segmentation-aware CNN because it adapts its filters at each image point according to
local segmentation cues, while at the same time remaining fully-convolutional. We demonstrate the merit of our
method on two widely different dense prediction tasks, that
involve classification (semantic segmentation) and regression (optical flow). Our results show that in semantic segmentation we can replace DenseCRF inference with a cascade of segmentation-aware filters, and in optical flow we
obtain clearly sharper responses than the ones obtained
with comparable networks that do not use segmentation. In
both cases segmentation-aware convolution yields systematic improvements over strong baselines.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have recently
made rapid progress in pixel-wise prediction tasks, including depth prediction [15], optical flow estimation [14], and
semantic segmentation [47, 9, 34]. This progress has been
built on the remarkable success of CNNs in image classification tasks [29, 50] – indeed, most dense prediction models are based closely on architectures that were successful
in object recognition. While this strategy facilitates transfer
learning, it also brings design elements that are incompatible with dense prediction.
By design CNNs typically produce feature maps and pre-

Embed

Mask

Embed

Filter

Normalized ﬁlter response

Mask

Filter

≈

Normalized ﬁlter response

Figure 1: Segmentation-aware convolution filters are invariant to backgrounds. We achieve this in three steps: (i) compute segmentation cues for each pixel (i.e., “embeddings”),
(ii) create a foreground mask for each patch, and (iii) combine the masks with convolution, so that the filters only process the local foreground in each image patch.
dictions that are smooth and low-resolution, resulting from
the repeated pooling and subsampling stages in the network architecture, respectively. These stages play an important role in the hierarchical consolidation of features,
and widen the higher layer effective receptive fields. The
low-resolution issue has received substantial attention: for
instance methods have been proposed for replacing the
subsampling layers with resolution-preserving alternatives
such as atrous convolution [9, 58, 43], or restoring the lost
resolution via upsampling stages [39, 34]. However, the
issue of smoothness has remained relatively unexplored.
Smooth neuron outputs result from the spatial pooling (abstraction) of information across different regions. This can
be useful for in high-level tasks, but can degrade accuracy
on per-pixel prediction tasks where rapid changes in activation may be required e.g. around region boundaries, or
motion discontinuities.
15038

