Learning Hand Articulations by Hallucinating Heat Distribution
Chiho Choi

Sangpil Kim
Karthik Ramani
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA

{chihochoi, kim2030, ramani}@purdue.edu

Abstract
We propose a robust hand pose estimation method by
learning hand articulations from depth features and auxiliary modality features. As an additional modality to depth
data, we present a function of geometric properties on the
surface of the hand described by heat diffusion. The proposed heat distribution descriptor is robust to identify the
keypoints on the surface as it incorporates both the local
geometry of the hand and global structural representation
at multiple time scales. Along this line, we train our heat
distribution network to learn the geometrically descriptive
representations from the proposed descriptors with the fingertip position labels. Then the hallucination network is
guided to mimic the intermediate responses of the heat distribution modality from a paired depth image. We use the
resulting geometrically informed responses together with
the discriminative depth features estimated from the depth
network to regularize the angle parameters in the refinement network. To this end, we conduct extensive evaluations to validate that the proposed framework is powerful
as it achieves state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Rapid advances in human-computer interaction interfaces have been promising a realistic environment for gaming and entertainment in the last few years. However, a
comprehensive hand tracking technology that would enhance virtual and augmented reality experiences still does
not exist. Extensive and lengthy researches [20, 17, 35, 23,
28, 18, 4, 19, 26, 7, 36] have been directed toward identifying (i) the articulation complexity of the hand, (ii) selfsimilarity and self-occlusion of the fingers, and (iii) data
acquisition artifacts such as depth noise. Although these research efforts have provided a coarse interpretation of hand
movements, the current hand pose estimation approaches
do not include: (i) an understanding of the geometric consistency of complex kinematic poses of the articulated hand
and (ii) an additional input modality (besides a single depth

image) to produce a better estimation model. In this paper,
we demonstrate that better hand pose estimation can be attainable when these gaps are addressed.
We propose a promising method for 3D hand pose estimation that achieves performance higher than or comparable to the state-of-the-arts. Specifically, we exploit a convolutional neural network (ConvNet) model which can extract
the property of heat distribution over a 3D hand mesh model
from a single depth image. The proposed method incorporates a heat distribution network to learn a geometrically
informative representation of hand articulations as an additional modality. At training time, our modality hallucination network takes as input a depth image and is trained to
capture the corresponding heat distribution modality. Thus,
our method produces both the depth and heat distribution
features from a single depth image at test time.
With the boom of interest in deep learning, 3D hand pose
estimation is increasingly becoming a part of the learning
and development processes of mid-level features learned
from a large dataset. In view of this, previous approaches
have been proposed for estimating hand poses by incorporating a prior model [18], regressing heatmap features from
a single view [35] and multiple views [7], synthesizing a
hand pose in a closed loop [19], and training cascaded networks following the structural hierarchy of the hand [26]
using a convolutional neural network architecture. Different from these approaches which operate in a single depth
modality input, we follow the success of a multi-modal
learning framework [9, 37] which uses complementary features of the different modalities. To address it, we employ a
function of geometric properties on the surface of the hand
described by heat distribution as an additional modality to
depth data.
The behavior of heat diffusion on the surface of a shape
has generally been considered to be geometric features by
analyzing a shape operator computed from the heat kernel
matrix. The operator investigates the local geometry of the
shape at small time scales and captures the global structure
at large scales to be insensitive to non-rigid deformation,
topological changes, and noise present in 3D models. Con13104

