Image Super-Resolution Using Dense Skip Connections
Tong Tong, Gen Li, Xiejie Liu, Qinquan Gao
Imperial Vision Technology
Fuzhou, China
{ttraveltong,ligen,liu.xiejie,gqinquan}@imperial-vision.com

Abstract
Recent studies have shown that the performance of
single-image super-resolution methods can be significantly
boosted by using deep convolutional neural networks. In
this study, we present a novel single-image super-resolution
method by introducing dense skip connections in a very
deep network. In the proposed network, the feature maps of
each layer are propagated into all subsequent layers, providing an effective way to combine the low-level features
and high-level features to boost the reconstruction performance. In addition, the dense skip connections in the network enable short paths to be built directly from the output to each layer, alleviating the vanishing-gradient problem of very deep networks. Moreover, deconvolution layers
are integrated into the network to learn the upsampling filters and to speedup the reconstruction process. Further, the
proposed method substantially reduces the number of parameters, enhancing the computational efficiency. We evaluate the proposed method using images from four benchmark datasets and set a new state of the art.

1. Introduction
The recovery of a high resolution (HR) image from a low
resolution (LR) version is a highly ill-posed problem since
the mapping from LR to HR space can have multiple solutions. When the upscaling factor is large, it becomes very
challenging to recover the high-frequency details in image
super-resolution (SR). Many SR techniques assume that the
high-frequency information is redundant and can be accurately predicted from the low-frequency data. Therefore,
it is important to collect useful contextual information in
large regions from LR images so that sufficient knowledge
can be captured for recovering the high-frequency details in
HR images.
Recent works [11, 12] have successfully used very deep
convolutional neural networks (CNN) to perform single image super-resolution (SISR), and significant improvements
over shallow CNN structures [2] have been observed. One

benefit from using deeper networks is that larger receptive
field takes more contextual information from LR images
to predict data in HR images. However, it is challenging
to effectively train a very deep CNN due to the vanishinggradient problem. One good solution to this problem is the
use of skip connections, which create short paths from top
layers to bottom layers. This helps the flow of information
and gradient through the network, making it easy to train. In
addition, in previous works [2, 11], only high-level features
at top layers were used in the reconstruction of HR images.
The features at low levels can potentially provide additional
information to reconstruct the high-frequency details in HR
images. Image SR may benefit from the collective knowledge of features at different levels. Moreover, previous
studies [8, 7] have shown that redundant feature maps are
learnt in different layers of deep networks. The reuse of feature maps from bottom layers is helpful for reducing feature
redundancy, thus learning more compact CNN models.
In this work, we propose a novel super-resolution
method termed SRDenseNet in which the dense connected
convolutional networks were employed. The introduction of dense connections improves the flow of information through the network, alleviating the gradient vanishing
problem. In addition, it allows the reuse of feature maps
from preceding layers, avoiding the re-learning of redundant features. Different from previous works, we utilized
the dense skip connections to combine the low-level features and high-level features in order to provide rich information for the SR reconstruction. Further, deconvolution
layers were integrated to recover the image details and to
speedup the reconstruction process. The proposed method
has been evaluated on four publicly available benchmark
datasets and outperforms the current state-of-the-art approaches.

2. Related work
2.1. Single image super-resolution
Many SISR methods have been developed in computer
vision community. A detailed review of these methods can
14799

