DeepContext: Context-Encoding Neural Pathways for
3D Holistic Scene Understanding
Yinda Zhang1
1

Mingru Bai1

Princeton University

2

Pushmeet Kohli2,5

DeepMind

3

Shahram Izadi3,5

PerceptiveIO

Abstract
3D context has been shown to be extremely important
for scene understanding, yet very little research has been
done on integrating context information with deep neural
network architectures. This paper presents an approach to
embed 3D context into the topology of a neural network
trained to perform holistic scene understanding. Given a
depth image depicting a 3D scene, our network aligns the
observed scene with a predefined 3D scene template, and
then reasons about the existence and location of each object
within the scene template. In doing so, our model recognizes multiple objects in a single forward pass of a 3D convolutional neural network, capturing both global scene and
local object information simultaneously. To create training
data for this 3D network, we generate partially synthetic
depth images which are rendered by replacing real objects
with a repository of CAD models of the same object category1 . Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of our algorithm compared to the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Understanding indoor scene in 3D space is critically
useful in many applications, such as indoor robotics, augmented reality. To support this task, the goal of this paper
is to recognize the category and the 3D location of furniture
from a single depth image.
Context has been successfully used to handle this challenging problem in many previous works. Particularly,
holistic scene context models, which integrate both the bottom up local evidence and the top down scene context, have
achieved superior performance [6, 23, 24, 48, 49]. However, they suffer from a severe drawback that the bottom up
and top down stages are run separately. The bottom up stage
using only the local evidence needs to generate a large quantity of noisy hypotheses to ensure a high recall, and the top
down inference usually requires combinatorial algorithms,
such as belief propagation or MCMC, which are compu1 Code and dataset are available at http://deepcontext.cs.princeton.edu.

Part of this work is done when Yinda Zhang was an intern at Microsoft
Research, Jianxiong Xiao was at Princeton University, Pushmeet Kohli and
Shahram Izadi were at Microsoft Research.

4

AutoX

Sleeping Area

5

Jianxiong Xiao1,4

Microsoft Research

Office Area Lounging Area Table & Chairs

bed
dresser
dresser with mirror
nightstand
ottoman
table
chair

lamp
garbage bin
endtable
speaker

coffee table
monitor

Figure 1. Example of canonical scene templates (top view) and
the natural images they represent. We learn four scene templates from SUN-RGBD[32]. Each scene template encodes the
canonical layout of a functional area.

tationally expensive in a noisy solution space. Therefore,
the whole combined system can hardly achieve a reasonably optimal solution efficiently and robustly.
Inspired by the success of deep learning, we propose
a 3D deep convolutional neural network architecture that
jointly leverages local appearance and global scene context
efficiently for 3D scene understanding.
Designing a deep learning architecture to encode context for scene understanding is challenging. Unlike an object whose location and size can be represented with a fixed
number of parameters, a scene could involve unknown number of objects and thus requires variable dimensionality to
represent, which is hard to incorporate with convolutional
neural network with a fixed architecture. Also, although
holistic scene models allow flexible context, they require
common knowledge to manually predefine relationship between objects, e.g. the relative distance between bed and
nightstands. As a result, the model may unnecessarily encode weak context, ignore important context, or measure
context in an over simplified way.
To solve these issues, we propose and learn a scene representation encoded in scene templates. A scene template
contains a super set of objects with strong contextual correlation that could possibly appear in a scene with relatively
constrained furniture arrangements. It allows a prediction
11192

