Blur-Invariant Deep Learning for Blind-Deblurring
T M Nimisha

Akash Kumar Singh

A N Rajagopalan

ee13d037@ee.iitm.ac.in

ee12b072@ee.iitm.ac.in

raju@ee.iitm.ac.in

Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, India

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate deep neural networks for
blind motion deblurring. Instead of regressing for the motion blur kernel and performing non-blind deblurring outside of the network (as most methods do), we propose a
compact and elegant end-to-end deblurring network. Inspired by the data-driven sparse-coding approaches that
are capable of capturing linear dependencies in data, we
generalize this notion by embedding non-linearities into
the learning process. We propose a new architecture for
blind motion deblurring that consists of an autoencoder
that learns the data prior, and an adversarial network that
attempts to generate and discriminate between clean and
blurred features. Once the network is trained, the generator learns a blur-invariant data representation which when
fed through the decoder results in the final deblurred output.

1. Introduction
Motion blur is an inevitable phenomenon under long exposure times. With mobile cameras becoming ubiquitous,
there is an increasing need to invert the blurring process to
recover a clean image. However, it is well-known that the
problem of blur inversion is quite ill-posed. Many methods exist [40] that rely on information from multiple frames
captured using video or burst mode and work by harnessing
the information from these frames to solve for the underlying original (latent) image. Single image blind-deblurring
is considerably more challenging as the blur kernel as well
as the latent image must be estimated from just one observation. It is this problem that we attempt to solve here.
Early works [5, 27, 19] assumed space-invariant blur
and iteratively solved for the latent image and blur kernel. Although these convolutional models are simple and
straight forward to analyze using FFTs, they fail to account for space-variant blur caused by non-linear camera
motion or dynamic objects or depth-varying scenes. Nevertheless, even in such situations local patch-wise convolutional model can be employed to achieve deblurring. Instead of using a patch-wise model, works such as [32, 15]

take the space-variant blur formation model itself into consideration. But the deblurring process becomes highly illposed as it must now estimate blur kernel at each pixel position along with the underlying image intensities. For planar scenes or under pure camera rotations, the methods in
[32, 10] circumvent this issue by modeling the global camera motion using homographies.
Major efforts have also gone into designing priors that
are apt for the underlying clean image and the blur kernel
to regularize the inversion process and ensure convergence
during optimization. The most widely used priors are total
variational regularizer [4, 25], sparsity prior on image gradients, l1 /l2 image regularization [17], the unnatural l0 prior
[37] and the very recent dark channel prior [23] for images.
Even though such prior-based optimization schemes have
shown promise, the extent to which a prior is able to perform under general conditions is questionable [17]. Some
priors (such as the sparsity prior on image gradient) even
tend to favor blurry results [19]. In a majority of situations,
the final result requires a judicious selection of the prior, its
weightage, as well as tuning of other parameters. Depending on the amount of blur, these values need to be adjusted
so as to strike the right balance between over-smoothing and
ringing in the final result. Such an effect is depicted in Fig.
1. Note that the results fluctuate with the weightage selected
for the prior. These results correspond to the method of [23]
with varying weights for dark channel prior (λ), l0 prior (µ)
and the TV prior (λT V ). Furthermore, these methods are
iterative and quite time-consuming.
Dictionary learning is a data-driven approach and has
shown good success for image restoration tasks such as denoising, super-resolution and deblurring [1, 39, 38]. Research has shown that sparsity helps to capture higher-order
correlations in data, and sparse codes are well-suited for
natural images [20]. Lou et al. [38] have proposed a
dictionary replacement technique for deblurring of images
blurred with a Gaussian kernel of specific variance. The authors of [33] adopt this concept to learn a pair of dictionaries jointly from blurred as well as clean image patches with
the constraint that the sparse code be invariant to blur. They
were able to show results for space-invariant motion deblur14752

