Higher-Order Minimum Cost Lifted Multicuts for Motion Segmentation
Margret Keuper
Data and Web Science Group
University of Mannheim, Germany
keuper@uni-mannheim.de

Abstract
Most state-of-the-art motion segmentation algorithms
draw their potential from modeling motion differences of
local entities such as point trajectories in terms of pairwise
potentials in graphical models. Inference in instances of
minimum cost multicut problems defined on such graphs allows to optimize the number of the resulting segments along
with the segment assignment. However, pairwise potentials
limit the discriminative power of the employed motion models to translational differences. More complex models such
as Euclidean or affine transformations call for higher-order
potentials and a tractable inference in the resulting higherorder graphical models. In this paper, we (1) introduce a
generalization of the minimum cost lifted multicut problem
to hypergraphs, and (2) propose a simple primal feasible
heuristic that allows for a reasonably efficient inference in
instances of higher-order lifted multicut problem instances
defined on point trajectory hypergraphs for motion segmentation. The resulting motion segmentations improve over
the state-of-the-art on the FBMS-59 dataset.

1. Introduction
Motion segmentation, i.e. the task of segmenting all
moving objects visible in a video, is a long-standing task
in computer vision [5, 25, 30, 26, 34]. On a low level, it
requires an accurate estimation and adequate comparison of
the point-wise observable motion. At the same time, the
number of independently moving objects has to be inferred
and all points have to be correctly assigned to a motion segment. While spectral clustering approaches have been used
traditionally in this field [5, 34, 13], correlation clustering,
also referred to as minimum cost multicut problem, has recently proven successful on this task [20].
In fact, correlation clustering differs in the objective
function from spectral clustering approaches since it does
not prefer balanced cuts. At the same time, it directly optimizes for the right number of objects, such that there is no
need for a separate model selection. As spectral clustering,

MCe [20]

proposed

Figure 1. Motion segmentation result for a sequence with two consistently moving objects under scaling (the man and the horse next
to him). The higher-order lifted multicut model allows for a more
precise segmentation.

the objective function of the minimum cost multicut problem is defined by edge costs. Unlike the spectral clustering
scenario, these edge costs can have any real value and thus
explicitly model attractive and repulsive terms in the objective function.1
The formulation of the minimum cost lifted multicut
model in [21] facilitates the definition of such costs between
any two nodes, even if they are not connected in the original graph. This generalization of the cost function allowed
multicut formulations to match the state-of-the-art in image
segmentation and has shown its benefits for multiple target
tracking [35].
One of the key challenges in motion segmentation is to
disambiguate between different objects moving according
to the same motion model as illustrated in Fig. 1. This is
comparable to the difficulty in image segmentation when
different objects have similar color and texture. Lifted Multicuts can dissolve such ambiguities appropriately for image
segmentation [21]. In this paper, we show that the same is
1 Variants of spectral clustering explicitly incorporating (soft) repulsive
terms have been proposed in for example [8, 11].

14242

