MUTAN: Multimodal Tucker Fusion for Visual Question Answering
Hedi Ben-younes 1,2 ∗
Remi Cadene 1∗
Matthieu Cord 1
Nicolas Thome 3
1
Sorbonne University, UPMC, CNRS, LIP6, 2 Heuritech, 3 CNAM
hedi.ben-younes@lip6.fr, remi.cadene@lip6.fr, matthieu.cord@lip6.fr, nicolas.thome@cnam.fr

Abstract
Bilinear models provide an appealing framework for
mixing and merging information in Visual Question Answering (VQA) tasks. They help to learn high level associations between question meaning and visual concepts in
the image, but they suffer from huge dimensionality issues.
We introduce MUTAN, a multimodal tensor-based
Tucker decomposition to efficiently parametrize bilinear interactions between visual and textual representations. Additionally to the Tucker framework, we design a low-rank
matrix-based decomposition to explicitly constrain the interaction rank. With MUTAN, we control the complexity of
the merging scheme while keeping nice interpretable fusion
relations. We show how the Tucker decomposition framework generalizes some of the latest VQA architectures, providing state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Multimodal representation learning for text and image
has been extensively studied in recent years. Currently, the
most popular task is certainly Visual Question Answering
(VQA) [19, 2]. VQA is a complex multimodal task which
aims at answering a question about an image. A specific
benchmark has been first proposed [19], and large scale
datasets have been recently collected [21, 2, 31], enabeling
the development of more powerful models.
To solve this problem, precise image and text models are
required and, most importantly, high level interactions between these two modalities have to be carefully encoded
into the model in order to provide the correct answer. This
projection from the unimodal spaces to a multimodal one
is supposed to extract and model the relevant correlations
between the two spaces. Besides, the model must have the
ability to understand the full scene, focus its attention on the
relevant visual regions and discard the useless information
regarding the question.
Bilinear models are powerful approaches for the fusion
problem in VQA because they encode full second-order
∗ Equal contribution

Figure 1: The proposed MUTAN model uses a Tucker decomposition of the image/question correlation tensor, which
enables modeling rich and accurate multi-modal interactions. For the same input image, we show the result of the
MUTAN fusion process when integrated into an attention
mechanism [28]: we can see that the regions with larger attention scores (in red) indicate a very fine understanding of
the image and question contents, enabling MUTAN to properly answer the question (see detailed maps in experiments
section).
interactions. They currently hold state-of the-art performances [5, 8]. The main issue with these bilinear models
is related to the number of parameters, which quickly becomes intractable with respect to the input and output dimensions. Therefore, current bilinear approaches must be
simplified or approximated by reducing the model complexity: in [5], the authors sacrifice trainability by using a handcrafted multi-modal projection, while a global tensor rank
constraint is applied in [8], reducing correlations to a simple element-wise product.
In this work, we introduce a new architecture called MUTAN (Figure 2), which focuses on modeling fine and rich
interactions between image and textual modalities. Our approach is based on a Tucker decomposition [24] of the correlation tensor, which is able to represent full bilinear interactions, while maintaining the size of the model tractable.
The resulting scheme allows us to explicitly control the
model complexity, and to choose an accurate and interpretable repartition of the learnable parameters.

2612

