Hide-and-Seek: Forcing a Network to be Meticulous for
Weakly-supervised Object and Action Localization
Krishna Kumar Singh and Yong Jae Lee
University of California, Davis

Abstract
We propose ‘Hide-and-Seek’, a weakly-supervised
framework that aims to improve object localization in images and action localization in videos. Most existing
weakly-supervised methods localize only the most discriminative parts of an object rather than all relevant parts,
which leads to suboptimal performance. Our key idea is
to hide patches in a training image randomly, forcing the
network to seek other relevant parts when the most discriminative part is hidden. Our approach only needs to
modify the input image and can work with any network designed for object localization. During testing, we do not
need to hide any patches. Our Hide-and-Seek approach obtains superior performance compared to previous methods
for weakly-supervised object localization on the ILSVRC
dataset. We also demonstrate that our framework can be
easily extended to weakly-supervised action localization.

1. Introduction
Weakly-supervised approaches have been proposed for
various visual classification and localization tasks including object detection [55, 13, 9, 41, 3, 50, 43, 8, 32, 61, 40],
semantic segmentation [33, 26] and visual attribute localization [2, 53, 57, 52, 39]. The main advantage of weaklysupervised learning is that it requires less detailed annotations compared to the fully-supervised setting, and therefore
has the potential to use the vast weakly-annotated visual
data available on the Web. For example, weakly-supervised
object detectors can be trained using only image-level labels
(‘dog’ or ‘no dog’) without any object location annotations.
Existing weakly-supervised methods identify discriminative patterns in the training data that frequently appear in
one class and rarely in the remaining classes. This is done
either explicitly by mining discriminative image regions or
features [55, 13, 9, 41, 3, 42, 43, 8, 40] or implicitly by analyzing the higher-layer activation maps produced by a deep
network trained for image classification [38, 32, 61]. However, due to intra-category variations or relying only on a
classification objective, these methods often fail to identify
the entire extent of the object and instead localize only the

Full image

Randomly hidden patches

Figure 1. Main idea. (Top row) A network tends to focus on the
most discriminative parts of an image (e.g., face of the dog) for
classification. (Bottom row) By hiding images patches randomly,
we can force the network to focus on other relevant object parts in
order to correctly classify the image as ’dog’.

most discriminative part.
Recent work tries to address this issue of identifying only
the most discriminative part. Song et al. [43] combine multiple co-occurring discriminative regions to cover a larger
extent of the object. While multiple selections ensure larger
coverage, it does not guarantee selection of less discriminative patches of the object in the presence of many highly
discriminative ones. Singh et al. [40] use motion cues and
transfer tracked object boxes from weakly-labeled videos
to the images. However, this approach requires additional
weakly-labeled videos, which may not always be available.
Finally, Zhou et al. [61] replace max pooling with global average pooling after the final convolution layer of an image
classification network. Since average pooling aggregates
activations across an entire feature map, it encourages the
network to look beyond the most discriminative part (which
would suffice for max pooling). However, the network can
still avoid finding less discriminative parts if identifying a
few highly-discriminative parts can lead to accurate classification performance, as shown in Figure 1(top row).
Main Idea. In this paper, we take a radically different
approach to this problem. Instead of making algorithmic
13524

