The Pose Knows: Video Forecasting by Generating Pose Futures
Jacob Walker, Kenneth Marino, Abhinav Gupta, and Martial Hebert
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{jcwalker, kdmarino, abhinavg, hebert}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Current approaches to video forecasting attempt to generate videos directly in pixel space using Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) or Variational Autoencoders
(VAEs). However, since these approaches try to model all
the structure and scene dynamics at once, in unconstrained
settings they often generate uninterpretable results. Our insight is that forecasting needs to be done first at a higher
level of abstraction. Specifically, we exploit human pose detectors as a free source of supervision and break the video
forecasting problem into two discrete steps. First we explicitly model the high level structure of active objects in the
scene (humans) and use a VAE to model the possible future movements of humans in the pose space. We then use
the future poses generated as conditional information to a
GAN to predict the future frames of the video in pixel space.
By using the structured space of pose as an intermediate
representation, we sidestep the problems that GANs have in
generating video pixels directly. We show through quantitative and qualitative evaluation that our method outperforms
state-of-the-art methods for video prediction.

1. Introduction
Consider the image in Figure 1. Given the context of
the scene and perhaps a few past frames of the video, we
can infer what likely action this human will perform. This
man is outside in the snow with skis. What is he going to
do in the near future? We can infer he will move his body
forward towards the viewer. Visual forecasting is a fundamental part of computer vision with applications ranging from human computer interaction to anomaly detection.
If computers can anticipate events before they occur, they
can better interact in a real-time environment. Forecasting
may also serve as a pretext task for representation learning [6, 47, 48].
Given this goal of forecasting, how do we proceed? How
can we predict events in a data-driven way without relying
on explicit semantic classes or human-labeled data? In or-

(a) Input Clip

(b) Start Pose

(c) Future Pose

(d) Future Video

Figure 1: In this paper, we train a generative model that
takes in (a) an initial clip with (b) a detected pose. Given
this information, we generate different motions in (c) pose
space using a Variational Autoencoder and utilize a Generative Adversarial Network to generate (d) pixels of the
forecast video. Best seen in video.
der to forecast, we first must determine what is active in the
scene. Second, we then need to understand how the structure of the active object will deform and move over time.
Finally, we need to understand how the pixels will change
given the action of the object. All of these steps have a level
of uncertainty; however, the second step may have far more
uncertainty than the other two. In Figure 1, we can already
tell what is active in this scene, the skier, and given a description of the man’s motion, we can give a good guess as
to how that motion will play out at the pixel level. He is
wearing dark pants and a red coat, so we would expect the
colors of his figure to still be fairly coherent throughout the
motion. However, the way he skis forward is fairly uncertain. He is moving towards the viewer, but he might move
to the left or right as he proceeds. Models that either try
to directly forecast pixels [27, 33, 42, 47, 54] or pixel motion [9,30,48,50,55] are forced to perform all of these tasks
simultaneously. What makes the problem harder for a com13332

