SubUNets: End-to-end Hand Shape and Continuous Sign Language Recognition
Necati Cihan Camgoz
University of Surrey
Guildford, UK

Simon Hadfield
University of Surrey
Guildford, UK

Oscar Koller
RWTH Aachen University, Germany

Richard Bowden
University of Surrey
Guildford, UK

n.camgoz@surrey.ac.uk

s.hadfield@surrey.ac.uk

koller@cs.rwth-aachen.de

r.bowden@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a novel deep learning approach to solve
simultaneous alignment and recognition problems (referred
to as “Sequence-to-sequence” learning). We decompose the
problem into a series of specialised expert systems referred
to as SubUNets. The spatio-temporal relationships between
these SubUNets are then modelled to solve the task, while
remaining trainable end-to-end.
The approach mimics human learning and educational
techniques, and has a number of significant advantages. SubUNets allow us to inject domain-specific expert knowledge
into the system regarding suitable intermediate representations. They also allow us to implicitly perform transfer
learning between different interrelated tasks, which also allows us to exploit a wider range of more varied data sources.
In our experiments we demonstrate that each of these properties serves to significantly improve the performance of the
overarching recognition system, by better constraining the
learning problem.
The proposed techniques are demonstrated in the challenging domain of sign language recognition. We demonstrate
state-of-the-art performance on hand-shape recognition (outperforming previous techniques by more than 30%). Furthermore, we are able to obtain comparable sign recognition
rates to previous research, without the need for an alignment
step to segment out the signs for recognition.

1. Introduction
Perception is a hierarchical process; our understanding
of the world as a whole, is based on recognising different
parts of the world and understanding their spatio-temporal
interactions. As an example, for recognising human actions we not only recognise where the different body parts
are located, but how they move relative to each other and
in relation to surrounding objects. More generally, most
spatio-temporal learning problems can be broken down into
meaningful “subunit” problems. However, the subunits often
have complex, unsynchronised, causal relationships, making
it very challenging to model them jointly.

Figure 1. Overview of a SubUNet and its building blocks. In this
example our input sequences are hand patch videos and target
sequences are hand shape classes. Hand-Icons from [31].

Until recent years, most spatio-temporal computer vision techniques have extracted hand-crafted intermediate
representations and then used classical temporal modelling
approaches such as Hidden Markov Models and Conditional
Random Fields [35]. The emergence of modern deep learning
methods [30, 13, 34] has removed the need for such tailored
representations and enabled systems to implicitly learn both
the spatial and the temporal features. However, the disadvantage of deep learning is that it can be difficult to encode
expert knowledge (such as suitable subunits or intermediate
representations). This is especially true when dealing with
sequence-to-sequence modelling problems, where the different subunits may not be synchronised with each other and
can exhibit complex causal relationships.

3056

