A Two-Streamed Network for Estimating Fine-Scaled
Depth Maps from Single RGB Images

1

Jun Li1,2 , Reinhard Klein1 and Angela Yao1
University of Bonn, 2 National University of Defense Technology
lij, rk, yao@cs.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
Estimating depth from a single RGB image is an illposed and inherently ambiguous problem. State-of-the-art
deep learning methods can now estimate accurate 2D depth
maps, but when the maps are projected into 3D, they lack local detail and are often highly distorted. We propose a fastto-train two-streamed CNN that predicts depth and depth
gradients, which are then fused together into an accurate
and detailed depth map. We also define a novel set loss over
multiple images; by regularizing the estimation between a
common set of images, the network is less prone to overfitting and achieves better accuracy than competing methods. Experiments on the NYU Depth v2 dataset shows that
our depth predictions are competitive with state-of-the-art
and lead to faithful 3D projections.

1. Introduction
Estimating depth for common indoor scenes from
monocular RGB images has widespread applications in
scene understanding, depth-aware image editing or rerendering, 3D modelling, robotics, etc. Given a single RGB
image as input, the goal is to predict a dense depth map for
each pixel. Inferring the underlying depth is an ill-posed
and inherently ambiguous problem. In particular, indoor
scenes have large texture and structural variations, heavy
object occlusions and rich geometric detailing, all of which
contributes to the difficulty of accurate depth estimation.
The use of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) has
greatly improved the accuracy of depth estimation techniques [7, 8, 14, 16, 17, 19, 23, 29]. Rather than coarsely
approximating the depth of large structures such as walls
and ceilings, state-of-the-art networks [7, 16] benefit from
using pre-trained CNNs and can capture fine-scaled items
such as furniture and home accessories. The pinnacle of
success for depth estimation is the ability to generate realistic and accurate 3D scene reconstructions from the estimated depths. Faithful reconstructions should be rich with

local structure; detailing becomes especially important in
applications derived from the reconstructions such as object recognition and depth-aware image re-rendering and or
editing. Despite the impressive evaluation scores of recent
works [7, 16] however, the estimated depth maps still suffer
from artifacts at finer scales and have unsatisfactory alignments between surfaces. These distortions are especially
prominent when projected into 3D (see Figure 1).
Other CNN-based end-to-end applications such as semantic segmentation [4, 21] and normal estimation [1, 7]
face similar challenges of preserving local details. The repeated convolution and pooling operations are critical for
capturing the entire image extent, but simultaneously shrink
resolution and degrade the detailing. While up-convolution
and feature map concatenation strategies [6, 16, 21, 22]
have been proposed to improve resolution, output map
boundaries often still fail to align with image boundaries.
As such, optimization measures like bilateral filtering [2] or
CRFs [4] yield further improvements.
It is with the goal of preserving detailing that we motivate our work on depth estimation. We want to benefit
from the accuracy of CNNs, but avoid the degradation of
resolution and detailing. First, we ensure network accuracy
and generalization capability by introducing a novel set image loss. This loss is defined jointly over multiple images,
where each image is a transformed version of an original
image via standard data augmentation techniques. The set
loss considers not only the accuracy of each transformed
image’s output depth, but also has a regularization term to
minimize prediction differences within the set. Adding this
regularizer greatly improves the depth accuracy and reduces
RMS error by approximately 5%. As similar data augmentation approaches are also used in other end-to-end frameworks, e.g. for semantic segmentation and normal estimation, we believe that the benefits of the set loss will carry
over to these applications as well.
We capture scene detailing by considering information
contained in depth gradients. We postulate that local structure can be better encoded with first-order derivative terms
than the absolute depth values. Perceptually, it is sharp
13372

