Show, Adapt and Tell: Adversarial Training of Cross-domain Image Captioner
Tseng-Hung Chen† , Yuan-Hong Liao† , Ching-Yao Chuang† , Wan-Ting Hsu† , Jianlong Fu‡ , Min Sun†
†

Department of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
‡
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China

{tsenghung@gapp, andrewliao11@gapp, cychuang@gapp, hsuwanting@gapp, sunmin@ee}.nthu.edu.tw
jianf@microsoft.com

Abstract
Impressive image captioning results are achieved in domains with plenty of training image and sentence pairs
(e.g., MSCOCO). However, transferring to a target domain
with significant domain shifts but no paired training data
(referred to as cross-domain image captioning) remains
largely unexplored. We propose a novel adversarial training procedure to leverage unpaired data in the target domain. Two critic networks are introduced to guide the captioner, namely domain critic and multi-modal critic. The
domain critic assesses whether the generated sentences are
indistinguishable from sentences in the target domain. The
multi-modal critic assesses whether an image and its generated sentence are a valid pair. During training, the critics and captioner act as adversaries – captioner aims to
generate indistinguishable sentences, whereas critics aim
at distinguishing them. The assessment improves the captioner through policy gradient updates. During inference,
we further propose a novel critic-based planning method to
select high-quality sentences without additional supervision
(e.g., tags). To evaluate, we use MSCOCO as the source domain and four other datasets (CUB-200-2011, Oxford-102,
TGIF, and Flickr30k) as the target domains. Our method
consistently performs well on all datasets. In particular, on
CUB-200-2011, we achieve 21.8% CIDEr-D improvement
after adaptation. Utilizing critics during inference further
gives another 4.5% boost.

1. Introduction
Datasets with large corpora of “paired” images and sentences have enabled the latest advance in image captioning. Many novel networks [9, 21, 17, 33] trained with
these paired data have achieved impressive results under a
domain-specific setting – training and testing on the same
domain. However, the domain-specific setting creates a
huge cost on collecting “paired” images and sentences in
each domain. For real world applications, one will prefer
a “cross-domain” captioner which is trained in a “source”

Source Caption
(MSCOCO)

Target Caption
(CUB-200)

Generated Caption
before adapt
after adapt

Source Ground Truth

Target Ground Truth

A family of ducks
swimming in the
water.

This bird has wings
that are brown and
has red eyes.

A hummingbird
close to a flower
trying to eat.

A small bird with
orange flank and a
long thin black bill.

Generated (before adapt)
A duck floating on
top of a lake .

Generated (after adapt)
This bird has brown
wings and red eyes.

Figure 1: We propose a cross-domain image captioner that can
adapt the sentence style from source to target domain without the
need of paired image-sentence training data in the target domain.
Left panel: Sentences from MSCOCO mainly focus on location,
color, size of objects. Right panel: Sentences from CUB-200 describe the parts of birds in detail. Bottom panel shows our generated sentences before and after adaptation.

domain with paired data and generalized to other “target”
domains with very little cost (e.g., no paired data required).
Training a high-quality cross-domain captioner is challenging due to the large domain shift in both the image and
sentence spaces. For instance, MSCOCO [23] mostly consists of images of large scene with more object instances,
whereas CUB-200-2011 [34] (shortened as CUB-200 in the
following) consists of cropped birds images. Moreover,
sentences in MSCOCO typically describe location, color
and size of objects, whereas sentences in CUB-200 describe
parts of birds in detail (Fig. 1). In this case, how can one ex1521

