Towards a Visual Privacy Advisor:
Understanding and Predicting Privacy Risks in Images
Tribhuvanesh Orekondy

Bernt Schiele

Mario Fritz

Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus
Saabrücken, Germany
{orekondy,schiele,mfritz}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

User Judgment

Abstract
With an increasing number of users sharing information
online, privacy implications entailing such actions are a
major concern. For explicit content, such as user profile
or GPS data, devices (e.g. mobile phones) as well as web
services (e.g. facebook) offer to set privacy settings in order
to enforce the users’ privacy preferences.
We propose the first approach that extends this concept
to image content in the spirit of a Visual Privacy Advisor.
First, we categorize personal information in images into 68
image attributes and collect a dataset, which allows us to
train models that predict such information directly from images. Second, we run a user study to understand the privacy
preferences of different users w.r.t. such attributes. Third,
we propose models that predict user specific privacy score
from images in order to enforce the users’ privacy preferences. Our model is trained to predict the user specific privacy risk and even outperforms the judgment of the users,
who often fail to follow their own privacy preferences on
image data.

1. Introduction
As more people obtain access to the internet, a large
amount of personal information becomes accessible to e.g.
other users, web service providers and advertisers. To
counter these problems, more and more devices (e.g. mobile
phone) and web services (e.g. facebook) are equipped with
mechanisms where the user can specify privacy settings to
comply with his/her personal privacy preference.
While this has proven useful for explicit and textual information, we ask how this concept can generalize to visual content. While users can be asked (as we also do in
our study) to specify how comfortable they are releasing a
certain type of image content, the actual presence of such

Visual Privacy Advisor

credit card,
face, gender,
skin colour, ...
Privacy
Attributes

Privacy
Preferences

Privacy
Risk

Figure 1: Users often fail to enforce their privacy preferences when sharing images online. We propose a first Visual
Privacy Advisor to provide user-specific privacy feedback.

content is implicit in the image and not readily available for
a privacy preference enforcing mechanism nor the user. In
fact – as our study shows – people frequently misjudge the
privacy relevant information content in an image – which
leads to the failure of enforcing their own privacy preferences.
Hence, we work towards a Visual Privacy Advisor (Figure 1) that helps users enforce their privacy preferences and
prevents leakage of private information. We approach this
complex problem by first making personal information explicit by categorizing personal information into 68 image
attributes. Based on such attribute predictions and user privacy preferences, we infer a privacy score that can be used
to prevent unintentional sharing of information. Our model
is trained to predict the user specific privacy risk and interestingly, it outperforms human judgment on the same images.
Our main contributions in this paper are as follows:
(i) To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to formulate the problem of identifying a diverse set of personal information in images and personalizing predictions to users
based on their privacy preferences (ii) We provide a sizable
13686

