Universal Adversarial Perturbations Against Semantic Image Segmentation
Jan Hendrik Metzen
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Robert Bosch GmbH

Mummadi Chaithanya Kumar
University of Freiburg

janhendrik.metzen@de.bosch.com

chaithu0536@gmail.com

Thomas Brox
University of Freiburg

Volker Fischer
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Robert Bosch GmbH

brox@cs.uni-freiburg.de

volker.fischer@de.bosch.com

Abstract
While deep learning is remarkably successful on perceptual tasks, it was also shown to be vulnerable to adversarial perturbations of the input. These perturbations denote
noise added to the input that was generated specifically to
fool the system while being quasi-imperceptible for humans.
More severely, there even exist universal perturbations that
are input-agnostic but fool the network on the majority of
inputs. While recent work has focused on image classification, this work proposes attacks against semantic image segmentation: we present an approach for generating (universal) adversarial perturbations that make the network yield a
desired target segmentation as output. We show empirically
that there exist barely perceptible universal noise patterns
which result in nearly the same predicted segmentation for
arbitrary inputs. Furthermore, we also show the existence
of universal noise which removes a target class (e.g., all
pedestrians) from the segmentation while leaving the segmentation mostly unchanged otherwise.

1. Introduction
While deep learning has led to significant performance
increases for numerous visual perceptual tasks [10, 14, 20,
25] and is relatively robust to random noise [6], several
studies have found it to be vulnerable to adversarial perturbations [24, 9, 17, 22, 2]. Adversarial attacks involve
generating slightly perturbed versions of the input data that
fool the classifier (i.e., change its output) but stay almost
imperceptible to the human eye. Adversarial perturbations
transfer between different network architectures, and networks trained on disjoint subsets of data [24]. Furthermore,
Papernot et al. [18] showed that adversarial examples for
a network of unknown architecture can be constructed by
training an auxiliary network on similar data and exploiting
the transferability of adversarial examples.

(a) Image

(b) Prediction

(c) Adversarial Example

(d) Prediction

Figure 1. The upper row shows an image from the validation set
of Cityscapes and its prediction. The lower row shows the image
perturbed with universal adversarial noise and the resulting prediction. Note that the prediction would look very similar for other
images when perturbed with the same noise (see Figure 3).

Prior work on adversarial examples focuses on the task
of image classification. In this paper, we investigate the effect of adversarial attacks on tasks involving a localization
component, more specifically: semantic image segmentation. Semantic image segmentation is an important methodology for scene understanding that can be used for example
for automated driving, video surveillance, or robotics. With
the wide-spread applicability in those domains comes the
risk of being confronted with an adversary trying to fool the
system. Thus, studying adversarial attacks on semantic segmentation systems deployed in the physical world becomes
an important problem.
Adversarial attacks that aim at systems grounded in the
physical world should be physically realizable and inconspicuous [22]. One prerequisite for physical realizability is
that perturbations do not depend on the specific input since
this input is not known in advance when the perturbations
(which need to be placed in the physical world) are deter-

2755

