TURN TAP: Temporal Unit Regression Network for Temporal Action Proposals
Jiyang Gao1∗ Zhenheng Yang1∗ Chen Sun2
1
University of Southern California

Kan Chen1 Ram Nevatia1
2
Google Research

{jiyangga, zhenheny, kanchen, nevatia}@usc.edu,

chensun@google.com

Abstract
Temporal Action Proposal (TAP) generation is an important problem, as fast and accurate extraction of semantically important (e.g. human actions) segments from
untrimmed videos is an important step for large-scale video
analysis. We propose a novel Temporal Unit Regression
Network (TURN) model. There are two salient aspects of
TURN: (1) TURN jointly predicts action proposals and refines the temporal boundaries by temporal coordinate regression; (2) Fast computation is enabled by unit feature
reuse: a long untrimmed video is decomposed into video
units, which are reused as basic building blocks of temporal proposals. TURN outperforms the previous state-of-theart methods under average recall (AR) by a large margin
on THUMOS-14 and ActivityNet datasets, and runs at over
880 frames per second (FPS) on a TITAN X GPU. We further apply TURN as a proposal generation stage for existing
temporal action localization pipelines, it outperforms stateof-the-art performance on THUMOS-14 and ActivityNet.

1. Introduction
We address the problem of generating Temporal Action
Proposals (TAP) in long untrimmed videos, akin to generation of object proposals in images for rapid object detection. As in the case for objects, the goal is to make action
proposals have high precision and recall, while maintaining
computational efficiency.
There has been considerable work in action classification task where a “trimmed” video is classified into one of
specified categories [24, 29]. There has also been work
on localizing the actions in a longer, “untrimmed” video
[6, 23, 35, 33], i.e. temporal action localization. A straightforward way to use action classification techniques for localization is to use temporal sliding windows, however there
is a trade-off between density of the sliding windows and
computation time. Taking cues from the success of pro∗ indicates equal contributions.

Timeline

ground truth

sliding window prediction

location refinement

Figure 1. Temporal action proposal generation from a long
untrimmed video. We propose a Temporal Unit Regression Network (TURN) to jointly predict action proposals and refine the
location by temporal coordinate regression.

posal frameworks in object detection tasks [7, 21], there has
been recent work for generating temporal action proposals
in videos [23, 4, 2] to improve the precision and accelerate
the speed of temporal localization.
State-of-the-art methods [23, 2] formulate TAP generation as a binary classification problem (i.e. action vs.
background) and apply sliding window approach as well.
Denser sliding windows usually would lead to higher recall rates at the cost of computation time. Instead of basing on sliding windows, Deep Action Proposals (DAPs) [4]
uses a Long Short-term Memory (LSTM) network to encode video streams and infer multiple action proposals inside the streams. However, the performance of average recall (AR), which is computed by the average of recall at
temporal intersection over union (tIoU) between 0.5 and 1,
suffers at small number of predicted proposals compared
with the sliding window based method [23] 1 .
To achieve high temporal localization accuracy and efficient computation cost, we propose to use temporal boundary regression. Boundary regression has been a successful
practice for object localization, as in [21]. However, temporal boundary regression for actions has not been attempted
in the past work.
We present a novel method for fast TAP generation: Temporal Unit Regression Network (TURN). A long

3628

