Joint Layout Estimation and Global Multi-View Registration
for Indoor Reconstruction
Jeong-Kyun Lee∗1 , Jaewon Yea∗2 , Min-Gyu Park3 , and Kuk-Jin Yoon1
1

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, GIST, Gwangju, South Korea
2
LG Electronics, Incheon, South Korea
3
Korea Electronics Technology Institute, Seongnam, South Korea
{leejk,kjyoon}@gist.ac.kr, jaewon.yea@lge.com, mpark@keti.re.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel method to jointly solve
scene layout estimation and global registration problems
for accurate indoor 3D reconstruction. Given a sequence
of range data, we first build a set of scene fragments using
KinectFusion and register them through pose graph optimization. Afterwards, we alternate between layout estimation and layout-based global registration processes in iterative fashion to complement each other. We extract the scene
layout through hierarchical agglomerative clustering and
energy-based multi-model fitting in consideration of noisy
measurements. Having the estimated scene layout in one
hand, we register all the range data through the global iterative closest point algorithm where the positions of 3D
points that belong to the layout such as walls and a ceiling
are constrained to be close to the layout. We experimentally verify the proposed method with the publicly available
synthetic and real-world datasets in both quantitative and
qualitative ways.

1. Introduction
The popularization of low-cost consumer depth cameras
has made a new perspective of solving various computer
vision problems. Especially, with various depth sensors, simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) and 3D reconstruction [9, 27] have shown visually compelling results
compared to conventional image-based approaches in an indoor environment. This is because the consumer depth camera robustly acquires depth measurements where the conventional image-based approaches frequently fail to estimate accurate depth, e.g., due to poorly textured regions. In
this paper, we narrow our attention to the complete 3D re∗ Denote equal contribution.

Figure 1. Comparison of the proposed method (right) with the
state-of-the-art method [9] (left). With the aid of the scene layout,
the proposed method preserves important structures of the scene
such as walls and a floor.

construction problem in an indoor environment using range
measurements acquired from a consumer depth camera.
KinectFusion [27], one of the pioneering works, showed
that a real-world object as well as an indoor scene can
be reconstructed in real-time with GPU acceleration. It
exploits the iterative closest point (ICP) algorithm [4] to
track 6-DoF poses and the volumetric surface representation scheme with signed distance functions [12] to fuse 3D
measurements. A number of following studies [9, 41, 43]
have tackled the limitation of KinectFusion; as the scale
of a scene increases, it is hard to completely reconstruct
the scene due to the drift problem of the ICP algorithm as
well as the large memory consumption of volumetric integration. To scale up the KinectFusion algorithm, Whelan et
al. [41] presented a spatially extended KinectFusion, named
1162

