Octree Generating Networks:
Efficient Convolutional Architectures for High-resolution 3D Outputs
Maxim Tatarchenko1

Alexey Dosovitskiy1,2

Thomas Brox1

tatarchm@cs.uni-freiburg.de

adosovitskiy@gmail.com

brox@cs.uni-freiburg.de

1

2

University of Freiburg

Abstract
dense

We present a deep convolutional decoder architecture
that can generate volumetric 3D outputs in a compute- and
memory-efficient manner by using an octree representation.
The network learns to predict both the structure of the octree, and the occupancy values of individual cells. This
makes it a particularly valuable technique for generating
3D shapes. In contrast to standard decoders acting on regular voxel grids, the architecture does not have cubic complexity. This allows representing much higher resolution
outputs with a limited memory budget. We demonstrate this
in several application domains, including 3D convolutional
autoencoders, generation of objects and whole scenes from
high-level representations, and shape from a single image.

1. Introduction
Up-convolutional1 decoder architectures have become
a standard tool for tasks requiring image generation [9,
27, 20] or per-pixel prediction [25, 8]. They consist of
a series of convolutional and up-convolutional (upsampling+convolution) layers operating on regular grids, with
resolution gradually increasing towards the output of the
network. The architecture is trivially generalized to volumetric data. However, because of cubic scaling of computational and memory requirements, training up-convolutional
decoders becomes infeasible for high-resolution threedimensional outputs.
Poor scaling can be resolved by exploiting structure in
the data. In many learning tasks, neighboring voxels on a
voxel grid share the same state — for instance, if the voxel
grid represents a binary occupancy map or a multi-class
labeling of a three-dimensional object or a scene. In this
case, data can be efficiently represented with octrees — data
structures with adaptive cell size. Large regions of space
sharing the same value can be represented with a single
1 Also known as deconvolutional

Intel Labs

Octree
level 1

Octree
level 2

323

643

Octree
level 3

1283

Figure 1. The proposed OGN represents its volumetric output as an
octree. Initially estimated rough low-resolution structure is gradually refined to a desired high resolution. At each level only a sparse
set of spatial locations is predicted. This representation is significantly more efficient than a dense voxel grid and allows generating
volumes as large as 5123 voxels on a modern GPU in a single forward pass.

large cell of an octree, resulting in savings in computation
and memory compared to a fine regular grid. At the same
time, fine details are not lost and can still be represented by
small cells of the octree.
We present an octree generating network (OGN) - a convolutional decoder operating on octrees. The coarse structure of the network is illustrated in Figure 1. Similar to a
usual up-convolutional decoder, the representation is gradually convolved with learned filters and up-sampled. The
difference is that, starting from a certain layer in the network, dense regular grids are replaced by octrees. Therefore, the OGN predicts large uniform regions of the output
space already at early decoding stages, saving the computation for the subsequent high-resolution layers. Only regions
containing fine details are processed by these more computationally demanding layers.
In this paper, we focus on generating shapes represented
as binary occupancy maps. We thoroughly compare OGNs
to standard dense nets on three tasks: auto-encoding shapes,
generating shapes from a high-level description, and reconstructing 3D objects from single images. OGNs yield the
same accuracy as conventional dense decoders while consuming significantly less memory and being much faster at

2088

