PUnDA: Probabilistic Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
for Knowledge Transfer Across Visual Categories
Behnam Gholami1 , Ognjen (Oggi) Rudovic2 , Vladimir Pavlovic1
1

Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA
2
MIT Media Lab, Cambridge, MA, USA
{bb510,vladimir}@cs.rutgers.edu, orudovic@mit.edu

Abstract

Cross-domain Adaptation
Φ

This paper introduces a probabilistic latent variable
model to address unsupervised domain adaptation problems.
Specifically, we tackle the task of categorization of visual
input from different domains by learning projections from
each domain to a latent (shared) space jointly with the classifier in the latent space, which simultaneously minimizes
the domain disparity while maximizing the classifier’s discriminative power. Furthermore, the non-parametric nature
of our adaptation model makes it possible to infer the latent
space dimension automatically from data. We also develop
a novel regularized Variational Bayes (VB) algorithm for
efficient estimation of the model parameters. We compare
the proposed model with the state-of-the-art methods for the
tasks of visual domain adaptation using both handcrafted
and deep-net features. Our experiments show that even with
a simple softmax classifier, our model outperforms several
state-of-the-art methods that take advantage of more sophisticated classification schemes.

1. Introduction
Traditional machine learning algorithms assume that the
training and test data are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.), coming from the same underlying distribution [41]. However, in real-world data, this assumption rarely
holds due to a number of artifacts, such as different types of
noise, changes in object view, etc. This inevitably introduces
different types of biases in the observed data sampled during
the training and test stage.
Domain Adaptation (DA) approaches [11, 17, 31, 37, 2,
22, 26, 47] have been proposed to compensate for these effects. The goal of DA is to leverage the knowledge from
one domain to improve the model’s performance on another
domain. One way to reduce the adverse effects of the domain shift is to use an extensive set of labeled training data
(i.e., the source domain), hoping that these will eventually

W

Φ’

Caltech 10

Amazon

Domain A - supervised

Ι

Complex
Feature
Extractor
(e.g., DNN)

x

Domain A’ - unsupervised

s

y

y’

s’

x’

Complex
Feature
Extractor
(e.g., DNN)

Ι’

Figure 1. The overview of the proposed PUnDA approach. We
jointly learn the mapping Φ and Φ′ linking the original domain
features x and x′ to the matched subspaces s and s′ , automatically
inferring the subspace dimension, and the cross-domain classifier
W . Both domains use the same (pretrained) feature extractors (e.g.,
DNNs). Target domain A′ does not rely on labels. Details of the
model are specified in Fig. 2.

contain data from a distribution similar to that of the test
data (i.e., the target domain). The most representative examples of this are the recent trends in deep learning, which
have shown great improvements in the performance of supervised learning tasks due to the available substantial amount
of labeled data [30, 13, 20]. However, obtaining labels is
labor-intensive and expensive if one is to label training data
across all possible domains. More importantly, due to the
inherent bias within different datasets [43, 38], using a large
amount of (labeled) training data does not warrant a better
performance by these models. In this case, DA methods
are a good choice as they can smartly leverage the available
information across domains to correct for the domain shift,
reducing the need for large amount of labeled data, while
also correcting for differences in the distributions of the input
features (covariate shift).
Based on their learning assumptions, existing DA methods can be divided into two categories: (semi)supervised
DA [27, 9, 28, 45], and unsupervised DA [18, 16, 3, 13,
31, 32]. The former assumes that in addition to the labeled
data of the source domain, some labeled data from the target
domain are also available for training/adapting the classi13581

