Learning Uncertain Convolutional Features for Accurate Saliency Detection
Pingping Zhang Dong Wang Huchuan Lu∗ Hongyu Wang Baocai Yin
Dalian University of Technology, China
jssxzhpp@mail.dlut.edu.cn {wdice,lhchuan,whyu,ybc}@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have delivered superior performance in many computer vision tasks.
In this paper, we propose a novel deep fully convolutional
network model for accurate salient object detection. The
key contribution of this work is to learn deep uncertain convolutional features (UCF), which encourage the robustness
and accuracy of saliency detection. We achieve this via introducing a reformulated dropout (R-dropout) after specific
convolutional layers to construct an uncertain ensemble of
internal feature units. In addition, we propose an effective
hybrid upsampling method to reduce the checkerboard artifacts of deconvolution operators in our decoder network.
The proposed methods can also be applied to other deep
convolutional networks. Compared with existing saliency
detection methods, the proposed UCF model is able to incorporate uncertainties for more accurate object boundary
inference. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed saliency model performs favorably against state-ofthe-art approaches. The uncertain feature learning mechanism as well as the upsampling method can significantly
improve performance on other pixel-wise vision tasks.

1. Introduction
Saliency detection targets to identify the most important
and conspicuous objects or regions in an image. As a preprocessing procedure in computer vision, saliency detection
has greatly beneﬁted many practical applications such as
object retargeting [6, 40], scene classiﬁcation [37], semantic
segmentation [34] and visual tracking [29, 14]. Although
signiﬁcant progress has been made [15, 1, 30, 21, 33, 46],
saliency detection remains very challenging due to complex
factors in real world scenarios. In this work we focus on the
task of improving robustness of saliency detection models,
which has been ignored in the literature.
Previous saliency detection methods utilize several handcrafted visual features and heuristic priors. Recently, deep
∗ Prof.Lu is the corresponding author.

(a) Feature Visualization [7]

(b) Generative Adversarial Example [35]

(c) Saliency Detection [45]

(d) Semantic Segmentation [31]
Figure 1. Examples of the checkerboard artifacts in pixel-wise vision tasks using deep CNNs. High resolution to see better.

learning based methods become more and more popular,
and have set the benchmark on many datasets [27, 49, 3].
Their superior performance is partly attributed to the strong
representation power in modeling object appearances and
varied scenarios. However, existing methods fail to provide
a probabilistic interpretability of the “black-box” learning
in deep neural networks, and mainly enjoy the models’ exceptional performance. A reasonable probabilistic interpretation can provide relational conﬁdences alongside predictions and make the prediction system into a more robust
one [10]. In addition, since the uncertainty is a natural part
of any predictive system, modeling the uncertainty is of crucial importance. For instance, the object boundary strongly
affects the prediction accuracy of a saliency model, it is desirable that the model can provide meaningful uncertainties

212

