Understanding Low- and High-Level Contributions to Fixation Prediction
Matthias Kümmerer, Thomas S.A. Wallis, Leon A. Gatys, Matthias Bethge
University of Tübingen, Centre for Integrative Neuroscience
{matthias.kuemmerer,thomas.wallis,leon.gatys,matthias}@bethgelab.org

Figure 1: Representative examples for fixation prediction. Fixations are colored depending on whether they are better predicted by the
high-level deep object features (DeepGaze II) model (blue) or the low-level intensity contrast features (ICF) model (red). This separates
the images into areas where fixations are better predicted by high-level and low-level image features respectively. DeepGaze II is very good
at predicting the human tendency to look at text and faces (first and second image), while ICF is better at predicting fixations driven by
low-level contrast (third image). In particular, DeepGaze II fails if fixations are primarily driven by low-level features, although high-level
features like text are present in the image (fourth image).

Abstract
Understanding where people look in images is an important problem in computer vision. Despite significant research, it remains unclear to what extent human fixations
can be predicted by low-level (contrast) compared to highlevel (presence of objects) image features. Here we address this problem by introducing two novel models that
use different feature spaces but the same readout architecture. The first model predicts human fixations based on
deep neural network features trained on object recognition.
This model sets a new state-of-the art in fixation prediction by achieving top performance in area under the curve
metrics on the MIT300 hold-out benchmark (AUC = 88%,
sAUC = 77%, NSS = 2.34). The second model uses purely
low-level (isotropic contrast) features. This model achieves
better performance than all models not using features pretrained on object recognition, making it a strong baseline
to assess the utility of high-level features. We then evaluate
and visualize which fixations are better explained by lowlevel compared to high-level image features. Surprisingly
we find that a substantial proportion of fixations are better explained by the simple low-level model than the stateof-the-art model. Comparing different features within the
same powerful readout architecture allows us to better understand the relevance of low- versus high-level features in
predicting fixation locations, while simultaneously achieving state-of-the-art saliency prediction.

1. Introduction
Humans make several eye movements per second, fixating their high-resolution fovea on things they want to see.
Understanding the factors that guide these eye movements
is therefore an important component of understanding how
humans process visual information and thus has a wide
range of applications in image processing. In computer vision this problem is framed as saliency prediction1 : predicting human fixation locations for a given image [21, 26, 25].
Saliency prediction performance has rapidly improved in
the last few years, driven by the advent of models based on
pre-trained deep neural networks. The models make use of
convolutional filters that have been learned on other tasks,
most notably object recognition in the ImageNet dataset
[10]. The success of these saliency prediction models suggests that the high-level image features encoded by deep
networks (e.g. sensitivity to faces, objects and text) are extremely useful to predict human fixation locations.
Despite recent advances, state-of-the-art models remain
below the gold standard model of predicting one human’s
fixations from all others. Given the success of deep learning approaches, it may be tempting to believe that achieving gold standard performance simply requires employing
even deeper, more abstracted feature sets. Here, we instead
suggest that saliency prediction models may be neglecting
low-level image features (local contrast) and overweighting
1 Note that the term saliency prediction is sometimes also used in different context not related to eye movements.

4789

