Reasoning about Fine-grained Attribute Phrases using Reference Games
Jong-Chyi Su∗

Chenyun Wu∗
Huaizu Jiang
Subhransu Maji
University of Massachusetts, Amherst

{jcsu,chenyun,hzjiang,smaji}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
We present a framework for learning to describe finegrained visual differences between instances using attribute
phrases. Attribute phrases capture distinguishing aspects
of an object (e.g., “propeller on the nose” or “door near
the wing” for airplanes) in a compositional manner. Instances within a category can be described by a set of these
phrases and collectively they span the space of semantic attributes for a category. We collect a large dataset of such
phrases by asking annotators to describe several visual differences between a pair of instances within a category. We
then learn to describe and ground these phrases to images
in the context of a reference game between a speaker and a
listener. The goal of a speaker is to describe attributes of an
image that allows the listener to correctly identify it within
a pair. Data collected in a pairwise manner improves the
ability of the speaker to generate, and the ability of the listener to interpret visual descriptions. Moreover, due to the
compositionality of attribute phrases, the trained listeners
can interpret descriptions not seen during training for image retrieval, and the speakers can generate attribute-based
explanations for differences between previously unseen categories. We also show that embedding an image into the
semantic space of attribute phrases derived from listeners
offers 20% improvement in accuracy over existing attributebased representations on the FGVC-aircraft dataset.

1. Introduction
Attribute-based representations have been used for describing instances within a basic-level category as they often
share a set of high-level properties. These attributes serve
as basis for human-centric tasks such as retrieval and categorization [47, 23, 36], and for generalization to new categories based on a description of their attributes [12, 11, 39,
25]. However, most prior work has relied on a fixed set of
attributes designed by experts. This limits their scalability
to new domains since collecting expert annotations are expensive, and results in models that are less robust to noisy
open-ended descriptions provided by a non-expert user.
∗ Authors contributed equally

Speaker
Red plane
Facing right
In the air
Closed cockpit
White and green
Propeller spinning

vs.
vs.
vs.
vs.
vs.

Facing left
On the ground
Open cockpit
White and blue color
Propeller stopped

Listener

Figure 1. Left: Each annotation in our dataset consists of five pairs
of attribute phrases. Right: A reference game played between a
speaker who describes an attribute of an image within a pair and a
listener whose goal is to pick the right one.

Instead of discrete attributes this work investigates the use
of attribute phrases for describing instances. Attribute
phrases are short sentences that describe a unique semantic visual property of an object (e.g., “red and white color”,
“wing near the top”). Like captions, they can describe properties in a compositional manner, but are typically shorter
and only capture a single aspect. Like attributes, they are
modular, and can be combined in different ways to describe instances within a category. Their compositionality allows the expression of large number of properties in
a compact manner. For example, colors of objects, or their
parts, can be expressed by combining color terms (e.g., “red
and white”, “green and blue”, etc.). A collection of these
phrases constitutes the semantic space of describable attributes and can be used as a basis for communication between a human and computer for various tasks.
We begin by collecting a dataset of attribute phrases by
asking annotators to describe five visual differences between random pairs of airplanes from the OID airplane
dataset [44]. Each difference is of the form “P1 vs. P2 ”
with phrases P1 and P2 corresponding to the properties of
the left and right image respectively (Figure 1). By collecting multiple properties at a time we obtain a diverse set
of describable attributes. Moreover, phrases collected in a
contrastive manner reveal attributes that are better suited for
fine-grained discrimination. The two phrases in a comparison describe the same underlying attribute (e.g., round nose
and pointy nose both describe the shape), and reflect an axis

418

