Sparse Exact PGA on Riemannian Manifolds
Monami Banerjee1 , Rudrasis Chakraborty1 , and Baba C. Vemuri1
1
Department of CISE, University of Florida, FL 32611, USA
1

{monamie.b, rudrasischa, baba.vemuri}@gmail.com

Abstract
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a widely popular dimensionality reduction technique for vector-valued
inputs. In the past decade, a nonlinear generalization of
PCA, called the Principal Geodesic Analysis (PGA) was developed to tackle data that lie on a smooth manifold. PGA
suffers from the same problem as PCA in that, in both the
methods, each Principal Component (PC) is a linear combination of the original variables. This makes it very difficult to interpret the PCs especially in high dimensions.
This lead to the introduction of sparse PCA (SPCA) in the
vector-space input case. In this paper, we present a novel
generalization of SPCA, called sparse exact PGA (SEPGA)
that can cope with manifold-valued input data and respect
the intrinsic geometry of the underlying manifold. Sparsity
has the advantage of not only easy interpretability but also
computational efficiency. We achieve this by formulating
the PGA problem as a minimization of the projection error in conjunction with sparsity constraints enforced on the
principal vectors post isomorphic mapping to Rm , where
m is the dimension of the manifold on which the data reside. Further, for constant curvature smooth manifolds, we
use analytic formulae for the projection error leading to an
efficient solution to the SEPGA problem. We present extensive experimental results demonstrating the performance
of SEPGA in achieving very good sparse principal components without sacrificing the accuracy of reconstruction.
This makes SEPGA accurate and efficient in representing
manifold-valued data.

1. Introduction
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [14] is a widely
used data-processing and dimensionality reduction technique with numerous applications in Science and Engineering. Given an N × m data matrix, where N is the number
of m-dimensional data vectors, PCA seeks a linear combination of the original variables such that the data variance
is maximized along these derived variables. Each Principal
Component (PC) is a linear combination of all the m vari-

ables where each coefficient in the combination is typically
nonzero. This makes each PC difficult to interpret as each
PC is a linear combination of all of the m variables. This is
a serious drawback of PCA (see [31] for more discussion on
this issue). In order to overcome this drawback, researchers
[31, 15] proposed a sparse PCA (sPCA) where each principal vector is sparse, and hence not only the dimension of
the data gets reduced but the number of explicitly used variables are also small. The effectiveness of sparse principal
vectors can be demonstrated with a simple example. Let the
data points lie in R3 and we want to choose two principal
vectors, so a PCA algorithm can choose a set of two orthogonal vectors in R3 , say {v1 , v2 }, such that the data variance
in the subspace, V , spanned by {v1 , v2 } is maximized. Let
the set of {v1 , v2 } for which the data variance in V is maximized be denoted by U . If V is spanned by say (0, 1, 0)
and (1, 0, 0), we want these two vectors to be selected as
the principal vectors instead of some {v1 , v2 } ∈ U . This
is because, the former are most natural and also sparse. In
section 2, we present another toy example for further illustration.
PCA further requires data to lie in a vector space. However, with the advent of new sensing technologies and
higher compute power, manifold-valued data have become
widely popular in many fields including Computer Vision,
Medical Imaging and Machine Learning. This motivated
researchers to generalize PCA to the manifold-valued data
setting. A nonlinear version of PCA, called the principal
geodesic analysis (PGA) was introduced in [9] for data lying on a Riemannian Manifold. Since the objective function
of PGA is nonlinear, Fletcher et al., proposed a linearized
version [9]. This linearized version, henceforth referred to
as PGA, though computationally efficient, lacks in performance accuracy when the data variance is high. This motivated researchers [25, 4] to solve the objective function
of PGA exactly, instead of solving a linearized version of
the objective function as in [9]. But, the exact objective
function formulation in [25], hereafter referred to as exact
PGA, involves solving a hard optimization problem which
makes exact PGA infeasible even for moderate data size or
dimension. Recently, authors in [4] presented a solution to
15010

