CVAE-GAN: Fine-Grained Image Generation through Asymmetric Training
Jianmin Bao1 ,
1

Dong Chen2 ,

Fang Wen2 ,

Houqiang Li1 ,

University of Science and Technology of China

jmbao@mail.ustc.edu.cn

2

Gang Hua2

Microsoft Research

{doch, fangwen, ganghua}@microsoft.com

lihq@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
We present variational generative adversarial networks, a general learning framework that combines a variational auto-encoder with a generative adversarial network,
for synthesizing images in fine-grained categories, such as
faces of a specific person or objects in a category. Our
approach models an image as a composition of label and
latent attributes in a probabilistic model. By varying the
fine-grained category label fed into the resulting generative
model, we can generate images in a specific category with
randomly drawn values on a latent attribute vector. Our
approach has two novel aspects. First, we adopt a cross entropy loss for the discriminative and classifier network, but
a mean discrepancy objective for the generative network.
This kind of asymmetric loss function makes the GAN training more stable. Second, we adopt an encoder network to
learn the relationship between the latent space and the real image space, and use pairwise feature matching to keep
the structure of generated images. We experiment with natural images of faces, flowers, and birds, and demonstrate
that the proposed models are capable of generating realistic and diverse samples with fine-grained category labels.
We further show that our models can be applied to other
tasks, such as image inpainting, super-resolution, and data
augmentation for training better face recognition models.

1. Introduction
Building effective generative models of natural images is
one of the key problems in computer vision. It aims to generate diverse realistic images by varying some latent parameters according to the underlying natural image distributions. Therefore, a desired generative model is necessitated to
capture the underlying data distribution. This is often a very
difficult task, since a collection of image samples may lie on
a very complex manifold. Nevertheless, recent advances in
deep convolutional neural networks have spawned a series
of deep generative models [14, 12, 8, 31, 29, 34, 15, 4, 33, 6]
that have made tremendous progress, largely due to the capability of deep networks in learning representations.
Building on top of the success of these recent works, we want to go one step further to generate images of
fine-grained object categories. For example, we want to

sunflower

lotus

oriole

starling

Hathaway

Leonardo

Cheryl Hines

Jet Li

Figure 1. Synthesized images using our CVAE-GAN model at
high resolution (128×128) for different classes. The generated
samples are realistic and diverse within a class.

be able to synthesize images for a specific identity (Figure 1), or produce a new image of a specified species of
flowers or birds, and so on. Inspired by CVAE [34] and
VAE/GAN [15], we propose a general learning framework
that combines a variational auto-encoder with a generative
adversarial network under a conditioned generative process
to tackle this problem.
However, we find this naı̈ve combination insufficient in
practice. The results from VAE are usually blurry. The discriminator can easily classify them as “fake”, even though
they sometimes look remarkably good for face images, the
gradient vanishing problem still exists. Thus, the generated
images are very similar to the results from using VAE alone.
In this paper, we propose a new objective for the generator. Instead of using the same cross entropy loss as the
discriminator network, the new objective requires the generator to generate data that minimize the ℓ2 distance of the
mean feature to the real data. For multi-class image generation, the generated samples of one category also need to
match the average feature of real data of that category, since
the feature distance and the separability are positively correlated. It solves the gradient vanishing problem to a certain
extent. This kind of asymmetric loss function can partially help prevent the mode collapse problem that all outputs
moving toward a single point, making the training of GAN
more stable.
Although using mean feature matching will reduce the
chance of mode collapse, it does not completely solve the
problem. Once mode collapse occurs, the gradient descent

2745

