Truncating Wide Networks using Binary Tree Architectures
Yan Zhang† , Mete Ozay† , Shuohao Li†‡ and Takayuki Okatani†§
†

Tohoku University, ‡ National University of Defense Technology, § RIKEN Center for AIP
{zhang,mozay,lishuohao,okatani}@vision.is.tohoku.ac.jp

Abstract
Concatenation
Contactenation

In this paper, we propose a binary tree architecture
to truncate architecture of wide networks by reducing the
width of the networks. More precisely, in the proposed architecture, the width is incrementally reduced from lower
layers to higher layers in order to increase the expressive capacity of networks with a less increase on parameter size. Also, in order to ease the gradient vanishing
problem, features obtained at different layers are concatenated to form the output of our architecture. By employing the proposed architecture on a baseline wide network,
we can construct and train a new network with same depth
but considerably less number of parameters. In our experimental analyses, we observe that the proposed architecture enables us to obtain better parameter size and accuracy trade-off compared to baseline networks using various
benchmark image classification datasets. The results show
that our model can decrease the classification error of a
baseline from 20.43% to 19.22% on Cifar-100 using only
28% of parameters that the baseline has. Code is available
at https://github.com/ZhangVision/bitnet.

1. Introduction
Recently, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved
impressive results for many image classification tasks [5,
6, 14, 18, 23, 25, 26, 27]. Various architectures of DNNs
have been proposed in order to improve classification accuracy. One approach used to improve accuracy of a DNN
is to widen each layer while keeping the depth unchanged.
For instance, it is empirically shown in [28] that a wide but
relatively shallow DNN can obtain an accuracy comparable to a narrow but relatively deep DNN on several classification tasks. There are two crucial benefits of wideshallow DNNs. First, they usually run faster than narrowdeep DNNs on parallel computing devices, e.g. GPUs, as
illustrated in [28]. Also, a deep DNN with many layers may
suffer from the gradient vanishing problem. Reducing the
depth can ease this problem as shown in [7]. However, pa-

output

256

output

32

32
256
64

input

256

forward propagation
backward propagation

128

644

128

input

block
layer

Figure 1. Left: A conventional architecture [5]. Right: Proposed
binary tree architecture. Arrows indicate flow of data. The numbers depicted in the rectangle denote the width of the layer. Depth
of both architectures is 3, and their output width is 256. Our architecture has considerably less number of parameters.

rameter size of DNNs may significantly increase with respect to improvement of accuracy by widening each layer.
In this paper, we address a problem of improvement of
the parameter size and accuracy trade-off of the aforementioned wide-shallow DNNs. Specifically, given a baseline
wide-shallow DNN, we aim to construct and train a new
DNN equipped with the following two desirable properties:
1) The depth of the new DNN is not greater than that of the
baseline wide-shallow DNN so that it can keep the aforementioned two benefits, and 2) the new DNN can achieve
comparable accuracy using relatively less number of parameters compared to the baseline DNN, or can achieve better
accuracy by using the same number of parameters that the
baseline DNN has.
Toward this end, we propose a binary tree architecture
for implementation of DNNs with a better trade-off. An
illustrative comparison of our proposed binary tree architecture and conventional architectures [5, 28] is given in
Figure 1. In conventional architectures, layers having same
width (number of channels) are sequentially stacked. In the
proposed binary tree architecture, the width of the k th layer
D
, where D is the width of the first layer (k = 1, inis 2k−1

2097

