Learning Bag-of-Features Pooling for Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
Nikolaos Passalis and Anastasios Tefas
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
Thessaloniki, Greece
passalis@csd.auth.gr, tefas@aiia.csd.auth.gr

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are well established models capable of achieving state-of-the-art classification accuracy for various computer vision tasks. However, they are becoming increasingly larger, using millions
of parameters, while they are restricted to handling images of fixed size. In this paper, a quantization-based
approach, inspired from the well-known Bag-of-Features
model, is proposed to overcome these limitations. The proposed approach, called Convolutional BoF (CBoF), uses
RBF neurons to quantize the information extracted from
the convolutional layers and it is able to natively classify
images of various sizes as well as to significantly reduce
the number of parameters in the network. In contrast to
other global pooling operators and CNN compression techniques the proposed method utilizes a trainable pooling
layer that it is end-to-end differentiable, allowing the network to be trained using regular back-propagation and to
achieve greater distribution shift invariance than competitive methods. The ability of the proposed method to reduce the parameters of the network and increase the classification accuracy over other state-of-the-art techniques is
demonstrated using three image datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are powerful well-known models used for various computer vision tasks, ranging from image classification [24], to visual question answering [18]. Their great success in difficult large-scale recognition problems, such as classifying
the images of the ImageNet dataset [24], established them
as the model of choice for the aforementioned tasks, displacing other models that were previously used, such as the
Bag-of-Features (BoF) model, also known as the Bag-ofVisual-Words (BoVW) model [12].
CNNs are composed of a feature extraction layer followed by a fully connected layer that acts as a classifier.
The feature extraction layer is further composed of a se-

ries of convolutional layers and pooling layers. Many different combinations of convolution and pooling operators
have been proposed [8, 7, 13, 26]. The feature maps extracted from the last convolutional/pooling layer are flatten
into a vector which is subsequently fed to the fully connected layer. Regardless the details of the used architecture,
all the CNNs share the same fundamental principle: the parameters of the feature extraction layer are not fixed, but
they are learned using back-propagation, just as any other
parameter of the network.
Despite their great success, most of the proposed CNN
formulations are unable to handle arbitrary sized images, as
they operate on a fixed input size, restricting the CNN into
accepting images of a specific size and leading to a constant
cost for feed-forwarding the network (the number of floating point operations (FLOPs) needed to feed-forward the
network depends on the size of the input image). This is because the dimensionality of the (flattened) output of the feature extraction layer depends on the size of the input image.
Therefore, an already trained CNN cannot be directly deployed in a lower computational resource scenario, i.e., an
embedded real-time system on a drone or a mobile device,
or adapt to the available computational resources, without
completely replacing the fully connected layer and retraining it. Furthermore, flattening the extracted feature maps
leads to tremendously large fully connected layers. For example, for the VGG-16 network [26], 90% of the network’s
parameters are needed for just three fully connected layers,
while only 10% of the parameters are actually spent on its
13 convolutional layers used for the feature extraction. The
reason for this is the large number of the extracted feature
maps (512 feature maps of size 7x7).
There were some attempts to overcome the aforementioned limitations by using global pooling operators that
ensure that the output of the feature extraction layer has
fixed length [7, 21]. Even though these global pooling operators can be used to provide scale invariance and allow
the network to operate with arbitrary sized images, it was
experimentally established (Section 4) that the accuracy of
the network is reduced when the input image size is altered.

5755

