Focusing Attention: Towards Accurate Text Recognition in Natural Images
Zhanzhan Cheng1

Fan Bai2
Yunlu Xu3
Gang Zheng1
Shiliang Pu1
Shuigeng Zhou2*
1
2
Hikvision Research Institute, China; Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information
Processing and School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China;
3
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China
{chengzhanzhan;zhenggang3;pushiliang}@hikvision.com;
{baif13;sgzhou}@fudan.edu.cn; xuyunlu1030@163.com

Abstract
Scene text recognition has been a hot research topic in
computer vision due to its various applications. The state
of the art is the attention-based encoder-decoder framework
that learns the mapping between input images and output
sequences in a purely data-driven way. However, we observe that existing attention-based methods perform poorly
on complicated and/or low-quality images. One major reason is that existing methods cannot get accurate alignments
between feature areas and targets for such images. We call
this phenomenon “attention drift”. To tackle this problem, in this paper we propose the FAN (the abbreviation
of Focusing Attention Network) method that employs a focusing attention mechanism to automatically draw back the
drifted attention. FAN consists of two major components:
an attention network (AN) that is responsible for recognizing character targets as in the existing methods, and a focusing network (FN) that is responsible for adjusting attention by evaluating whether AN pays attention properly on
the target areas in the images. Furthermore, different from
the existing methods, we adopt a ResNet-based network to
enrich deep representations of scene text images. Extensive
experiments on various benchmarks, including the IIIT5k,
SVT and ICDAR datasets, show that the FAN method substantially outperforms the existing methods.

ploys attention-mechanism for character recognition, and
achieves substantial performance improvement [18, 25].
Usually, an attention-based text recognizer is designed
as an encoder-decoder framework. In the encoding stage,
an image is transformed into a sequence of feature vectors by CNN/LSTM [25], and each feature vector corresponds to a region in the input image. In this paper, we
call such regions attention regions. In the decoding stage,
the attention network (AN) first computes alignment factors [3] by referring to the history of target characters and
the encoded feature vectors for generating the synthesis vectors (also called glimpse vectors), thus achieves the alignments between the attention regions and the corresponding
ground-truth-labels [3, 5]. Then, a recurrent neural network
(RNN) is used to generate the target characters based on the
glimpse vectors and the history of target characters.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

1. Introduction
Scene text recognition has attracted much research interest of the computer vision community [11, 21, 24]. Recognizing scene text is of great significance for scene understanding. Despite several decades of research on Optical
Character Recognition (OCR), recognizing texts from natural images is still a challenging task. The state of the art em*Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Examples of complicated / low-quality images. Subfigures (a) - (f) represent normal, complex background, blur, incomplete, different-size and abnormal font images, respectively.

Motivation. We all know that in real scene text recognition tasks, many images are complicated (e.g. distorted or
overlapping characters, characters of different fonts, sizes
and colors, and complex backgrounds) or low quality (due

5076

