Centered Weight Normalization
in Accelerating Training of Deep Neural Networks
Lei Huang† Xianglong Liu†∗ Yang Liu† Bo Lang† Dacheng Tao‡
†
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, P.R.China
‡
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of IT, FEIT, The University of Sydney, Australia
{huanglei, xlliu, blonster, langbo}@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Training deep neural networks is difficult for the pathological curvature problem. Re-parameterization is an effective way to relieve the problem by learning the curvature
approximately or constraining the solutions of weights with
good properties for optimization. This paper proposes to reparameterize the input weight of each neuron in deep neural
networks by normalizing it with zero-mean and unit-norm,
followed by a learnable scalar parameter to adjust the norm
of the weight. This technique effectively stabilizes the distribution implicitly. Besides, it improves the conditioning
of the optimization problem and thus accelerates the training of deep neural networks. It can be wrapped as a linear
module in practice and plugged in any architecture to replace the standard linear module. We highlight the benefits
of our method on both multi-layer perceptrons and convolutional neural networks, and demonstrate its scalability and
efficiency on SVHN, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet
datasets.

1. Introduction
Recently, deep neural networks have achieved grand
success across a broad range of applications, e.g., image classiﬁcation, speech recognition and object detection
[33, 35, 14, 36, 7, 25]. Neural networks typically are composed of stacked layers, and the transformation between
layers consists of linear mapping with learnable parameters,
in which each neuron computes a weighted sum over its inputs and adds a bias term, and followed by an element-wise
nonlinear activation. The stacked structure endows a neural network learning feature hierarchies with features from
higher levels formed by the composition of lower level features. Further, deep architectures provide neural networks powerful representation capacity of learning complicated
functions that can represent high-level abstractions.
∗ Corresponding author

While the deep and complex structure enjoys appealing advantages, it also makes learning difﬁcult. Indeed,
many explanations for the difﬁculty of deep learning have
been explored, such as the problem of vanishing and exploding gradients [2] , internal covariate shift [16], and
the pathological curvature [20]. To address these problems, various studies such as ﬁnely weight initialization
[19, 9, 13, 29, 21], normalization of internal activation
[16, 4], and sophistic optimization methods have been proposed accordingly [20, 12, 11].
Our work is dedicated to the problem of pathological
curvature [20], i.e. the condition number of the Hessian matrix of the objective function is low at the optimum regions [28], which makes learning extremely difﬁcult via ﬁrst
order stochastic gradient descent. Several studies [12, 11]
recently have attempted to use the pre-conditioning techniques to improve the conditioning of the cost curvature.
However, these methods introduce too much overhead and
are not convenient to be applied.
An alternative track to facilitate the optimization
progress is the transformation of parameterization space of
a model [1], which is called re-parameterization. The motivation of re-parameterization is that there may be various
equivalent ways to parameterize the same model, some of
which are much easier to optimize than others [28]. Therefore, exploring good ways of parameterizing neural networks [6, 28] are essentially important in training deep neural networks.
Inspired by the practical trick that weights are sampled
from a distribution with zero mean and a standard deviation
for initialization [19, 9, 13], in this paper we propose to constrain the input weight of each neuron with zero mean and
unit norm by re-parameterization during the course of training, followed by a learnable scalar parameter to adjust the
norm of the input weight. We use proxy parameters and perform gradient updating on these proxy parameters by backpropagating the gradient information through the normalization process (Figure 1). By introducing this process, the
summed input of each neuron is more likely to possess the
12803

