Attributes2Classname: A discriminative model for attribute-based
unsupervised zero-shot learning
Berkan Demirel1,3 , Ramazan Gokberk Cinbis2 , Nazli Ikizler-Cinbis3
1

HAVELSAN Inc., 2 Bilkent University, 3 Hacettepe University
bdemirel@havelsan.com.tr, gcinbis@cs.bilkent.edu.tr, nazli@cs.hacettepe.edu.tr

Abstract
We propose a novel approach for unsupervised zero-shot
learning (ZSL) of classes based on their names. Most existing unsupervised ZSL methods aim to learn a model for
directly comparing image features and class names. However, this proves to be a difficult task due to dominance
of non-visual semantics in underlying vector-space embeddings of class names. To address this issue, we discriminatively learn a word representation such that the similarities
between class and combination of attribute names fall in
line with the visual similarity. Contrary to the traditional
zero-shot learning approaches that are built upon attribute
presence, our approach bypasses the laborious attributeclass relation annotations for unseen classes. In addition,
our proposed approach renders text-only training possible,
hence, the training can be augmented without the need to
collect additional image data. The experimental results
show that our method yields state-of-the-art results for unsupervised ZSL in three benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) enables identification of
classes that are not seen before by means of transferring
knowledge from seen classes to unseen classes. This knowledge transfer is usually done via utilizing prior information from various auxiliary sources, such as attributes (e.g.
[20, 12, 27, 5, 35, 6, 4]), class hierarchies (e.g. [27]), vectorspace embeddings of class names (e.g. [35, 4, 6]) and textual descriptions of classes (e.g. [22, 10]). Among these,
attributes stand out as an excellent source of prior information: (i) thanks to their visual distinctiveness, it is possible to build highly accurate visual recognition models of attributes; (ii) being linguistically descriptive, attributes can
naturally be used to encode classes in terms of their visual appearances, functional affordances or other human-

Stripe

Head
Gorilla
Zebra

Discriminative
word embeddings

Tail

Long Leg

Cow
Panda
Zero-shot classes with
unknown attributes

Figure 1: We propose a zero-shot recognition model based
on attribute and class names. Unlike most other attributebased methods, our approach avoids the laborious attributeclass relations at test time, by discriminatively learning
a word-embedding space for predicting the unseen class
name, based on combinations of attribute names.
understandable aspects.
Almost all attribute-based ZSL works, however, have
an important disadvantage: attribute-class relations need
to be precisely annotated not only for the seen (training)
classes, but also for the unseen (zero-shot) classes (e.g.
[12, 20, 27, 5]). This usually involves collecting finegrained information about attributes and classes, which is
a time-consuming and error-prone task limiting the scalability of the approaches to a great extent.
Several recent studies explore other sources of prior information to alleviate the need of collecting annotations
at test time. These approaches rely on readily available
sources like word embeddings and/or semantic class hierarchies, hence, do not require dedicated annotation efforts.
We simply refer to these as unsupervised ZSL. Such approaches, however, exclude attributes at the cost of exhibiting a lower recognition performance [4].
Towards combining the practical merit of unsupervised
ZSL with the recognition power of attribute-based meth-

1232

