Look, Perceive and Segment: Finding the Salient Objects in Images
via Two-stream Fixation-Semantic CNNs
Xiaowu Chen1 , Anlin Zheng1 , Jia Li1,2∗ , Feng Lu1,2
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
2

International Research Institute for Multidisciplinary Science, Beihang University

Abstract
Recently, CNN-based models have achieved remarkable
success in image-based salient object detection (SOD). In
these models, a key issue is to find a proper network
architecture that best fits for the task of SOD. Toward
this end, this paper proposes two-stream fixation-semantic
CNNs, whose architecture is inspired by the fact that salient
objects in complex images can be unambiguously annotated
by selecting the pre-segmented semantic objects that receive
the highest fixation density in eye-tracking experiments. In
the two-stream CNNs, a fixation stream is pre-trained on
eye-tracking data whose architecture well fits for the task
of fixation prediction, and a semantic stream is pre-trained
on images with semantic tags that has a proper architecture
for semantic perception. By fusing these two streams into
an inception-segmentation module and jointly fine-tuning
them on images with manually annotated salient objects,
the proposed networks show impressive performance in
segmenting salient objects. Experimental results show that
our approach outperforms 10 state-of-the-art models (5
deep, 5 non-deep) on 4 datasets.

1. Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD) in images and videos
is one of the key steps in many vision tasks like robot
navigation [5] and object recognition [34]. For imagebased SOD, there are two major tasks that need to be
addressed, including popping-out salient objects as a whole
and suppressing all probable distractors. Actually, the two
tasks are somehow complementary that inherently lead to
the trade-off between recall and precision in image-based
SOD. Considering that salient objects may be sometimes
embedded in cluttered background and share some visual
attributes with certain distractors, SOD remains a challenging task especially in such complex scenes.
Towards image-based SOD, hundreds of models have
* Corresponding Author: Jia Li (E-mail: jiali@buaa.edu.cn)

Figure 1. Salient objects can be accurately detected by our twostream fixation-semantic CNNs, which simulate the process that
salient objects are unambiguously annotated by combining human
fixation density maps with semantic segmentation results [23].

been proposed in the past decade, among which the frameworks gradually evolve from heuristic [1, 4, 33] to learningbased [27, 15, 38]. Compared with the heuristic models,
the learning-based models can make better use of complex
features and thus often demonstrate better performance. In
particular, with the presence of large-scale datasets [28, 44,
20] for image-based SOD, high-dimensional features and
complex feature-saliency mapping functions can be directly
learned from data by utilizing Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). For example, Kuen et al. [19] adopted an
end-to-end convolution-deconvolution framework to obtain
an initial saliency map and then iteratively refined it by recurrent attentional networks. He et al. [9] learned heuristic
contrast features from two superpixel sequences by using
CNNs, and such features were then fused to infer the final
saliency map. Lee et al. [7] extracted a 26, 675d descriptor
for each superpixel and fed it into several cascaded fullyconnected (FC) layers so as to identify whether a superpixel
is salient or not. With the powerful features and complex
mapping functions learned from data, deep models [7, 21,
41, 24, 47, 18] often significantly outperform heuristic
models that adopt hand-crafted features (e.g., local/global
contrast [26], Gabor response [15] and dissimilarity from
image boundary [46]) and classic learning algorithms (e.g.,
random forest [15], multi-instance learning [42], bootstrap
learning [39]).
4321
1050

