TALL: Temporal Activity Localization via Language Query
Jiyang Gao1
Chen Sun2
Zhenheng Yang1
Ram Nevatia1
1
2
University of Southern California
Google Research
{jiyangga, zhenheny, nevatia}@usc.edu,

Abstract
This paper focuses on temporal localization of actions
in untrimmed videos. Existing methods typically train classifiers for a pre-defined list of actions and apply them in
a sliding window fashion. However, activities in the wild
consist of a wide combination of actors, actions and objects; it is difficult to design a proper activity list that meets
users’ needs. We propose to localize activities by natural
language queries. Temporal Activity Localization via Language (TALL) is challenging as it requires: (1) suitable design of text and video representations to allow cross-modal
matching of actions and language queries; (2) ability to locate actions accurately given features from sliding windows
of limited granularity. We propose a novel Cross-modal
Temporal Regression Localizer (CTRL) to jointly model text
query and video clips, output alignment scores and action
boundary regression results for candidate clips. For evaluation, we adopt TaCoS dataset, and build a new dataset for
this task on top of Charades by adding sentence temporal
annotations, called Charades-STA. We also build complex
sentence queries in Charades-STA for test. Experimental
results show that CTRL outperforms previous methods significantly on both datasets.

1. Introduction
Activities in the wild consist of a diverse combination
of actors, actions and objects over various periods of time.
Earlier work focused on classification of video clips that
contained a single activity, i.e. where the videos were
trimmed. Recently, there has also been significant work in
localizing activities in longer, untrimmed videos [30, 15].
One major limitation of existing action localization methods is that they are restricted to pre-defined list of actions.
Although the lists of activities can be relatively large [2],
they still face difficulty in covering complex activity questions, for example, “A person runs to the window and then
look out.” , as shown in Figure 1. Hence, it is desirable to
use natural language queries to localize activities. Use of
natural language not only allows for an open set of activi-

chensun@google.com

Language Query:
A person runs to the window and then look out

9.3 s

14.4 s

Figure 1. Temporal activity localization via language query in an
untrimmed video.

ties but also natural specification of additional constraints,
including objects and their properties as well as relations
between the involved entities. We propose the task of Temporal Activity Localization via Language (TALL): given a
temporally untrimmed video and a natural language query,
the goal is to determine the start and end times for the described activity inside the video.
For traditional temporal action localization, most current
approaches [30, 15, 26, 34, 35] apply activity classifiers
trained with optical flow-based methods [33, 28] or Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [29, 32] in a sliding
window fashion. A direct extension to support natural language query is to map the queries into a discrete label space.
However, it is non-trivial to design a label space which has
enough coverage for such activities without losing useful
details in users’ queries.
To go beyond discrete activity labels, one possible solution is to embed visual features and sentence features into
a common space [10, 13, 18]. However, for temporal localization of activities, it is unclear what a proper visual
model to extract visual features for retrieval is, and how
to achieve high precision of predicted start/end time. Although one could densely sample sliding windows at different scales, doing so is not only computationally expensive but also makes the alignment task more challenging,
as the search space increases. An alternative to dense sampling is to adjust the temporal boundaries of proposals by
learning regression parameters; such an approach has been
successful for object localization, as in [23]. However, tem-

5267

