From RGB to Spectrum for Natural Scenes
via Manifold-based Mapping
Yan Jia1 , Yinqiang Zheng2 , Lin Gu2 , Art Subpa-Asa3 , Antony Lam4 , Yoichi Sato5 , Imari Sato2
1

RWTH Aachen University, Germany 2 National Institute of Informatics, Japan
3
Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan 4 Saitama University, Japan 5 University of Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
Spectral analysis of natural scenes can provide much
more detailed information about the scene than an ordinary
RGB camera. The richer information provided by hyperspectral images has been beneficial to numerous applications, such as understanding natural environmental changes
and classifying plants and soils in agriculture based on
their spectral properties. In this paper, we present an efficient manifold learning based method for accurately reconstructing a hyperspectral image from a single RGB image captured by a commercial camera with known spectral
response. By applying a nonlinear dimensionality reduction technique to a large set of natural spectra, we show
that the spectra of natural scenes lie on an intrinsically low
dimensional manifold. This allows us to map an RGB vector to its corresponding hyperspectral vector accurately via
our proposed novel manifold-based reconstruction pipeline.
Experiments using both synthesized RGB images using hyperspectral datasets and real world data demonstrate our
method outperforms the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Spectral analysis of natural scenes can provide much
more detailed information about the scene than an ordinary
RGB camera. The richer information provided by hyperspectral imaging has been beneficial to numerous applications in agriculture and land health surveillance, such as understanding natural environmental changes and classifying
plants and soils based on their spectral properties. Most
general approaches to imaging the spectra of a scene capture narrowband hyperspectral image stacks at consecutive
wavelengths. A number of optical elements are required to
achieve this task, and commercially available hyperspectral
imaging cameras are often expensive and tend to suffer from
spatial, spectral, and temporal resolution issues.

The goal of this work is providing a cost-efficient solution for hyperspectral imaging that can reconstruct the
spectra of a natural scene from a single RGB image captured by a camera with known spectral response. Obviously,
the transformation from RGB to spectra is a three-to-many
mapping and thus cannot be unambiguously determined unless some prior knowledge about the transformation is introduced. Indeed, there is existing work that establishes
such priors. In the field of spectral reflectance recovery, researchers have examined large sets of spectral reflectance
distributions and their corresponding RGB vectors in order to learn how to map from RGB to spectra. Examples
include radial basis function (RBF) network mapping [23]
and constrained sparse coding [2]. More recently, Arad and
Shahar used a large sparse dictionary of spectra and corresponding RGB projections that could then be used as a
basis to map RGB vectors to spectra [3]. However, existing
approaches directly operate on the RGB space without explicitly exploring the data structure of spectral information,
thus requiring a large amount of data for training.
We propose a two-step manifold-based mapping and reconstruction pipeline to reconstruct the spectra from a single RGB image. We start by investigating the intrinsic dimensionality of the spectra of natural scenes. By applying a
nonlinear dimensionality reduction technique to a large set
of natural spectra, we show that the spectra of natural scenes
lie on an intrinsically low dimensional manifold. Based on
the derived manifold, we learn an accurate nonlinear mapping from RGB to the 3D embedding. By doing so, we
reduce the problem of the three-to-many mapping (RGB to
spectrum) to a well-conditioned and compact three-to-three
mapping (RGB to 3D embedding of spectra). Compared to
previous proposed approaches that aim to solve the three-tomany mapping directly, the three-to-three mapping allows
us to train a more accurate model. After mapping to the 3D
embedding, the original spectrum can be recovered using a
manifold-based reconstruction technique.
14705

