Predicting Deeper into the Future of Semantic Segmentation
Pauline Luc1,2∗

Natalia Neverova1∗

Camille Couprie1
Jakob Verbeek2
Yann LeCun1,3
1
Facebook AI Research
2
Inria Grenoble, Laboratoire Jean Kuntzmann, Université Grenoble Alpes
3
New York University

{paulineluc,nneverova,coupriec,yann}@fb.com

jakob.verbeek@inria.fr

Abstract
The ability to predict and therefore to anticipate the future is an important attribute of intelligence. It is also of
utmost importance in real-time systems, e.g. in robotics or
autonomous driving, which depend on visual scene understanding for decision making. While prediction of the raw
RGB pixel values in future video frames has been studied
in previous work, here we introduce the novel task of predicting semantic segmentations of future frames. Given a
sequence of video frames, our goal is to predict segmentation maps of not yet observed video frames that lie up to a
second or further in the future. We develop an autoregressive convolutional neural network that learns to iteratively
generate multiple frames. Our results on the Cityscapes
dataset show that directly predicting future segmentations
is substantially better than predicting and then segmenting
future RGB frames. Prediction results up to half a second
in the future are visually convincing and are much more accurate than those of a baseline based on warping semantic
segmentations using optical flow.

1. Introduction
Prediction and anticipation of future events is a key
component of intelligent decision-making [36]. Building
smarter robotic systems and autonomous vehicles implies
making decisions based on the analysis of the current situation and hypotheses made on what could happen next [8].
While humans can predict vehicle or pedestrian trajectories
effortlessly and at the reflex level, it remains an open challenge for current computer vision systems. Besides the long
term goal of learning a good representation allowing machines to reason about future events, an application which
directly benefits from our work is autonomous driving. In
this domain, approaches are either based on a number of
∗ These authors contributed equally

car
car
car

car

person

rider
person

person

car

person

motorcycle

Figure 1: Our models learn semantic-level scene dynamics to predict semantic segmentations of unobserved future
frames given several past frames.
semantic decompositions such as road and obstacle detection, or directly learn a mapping from visual input to driving
instructions end-to-end. Recent work from Mobileye [34]
demonstrated an advantage of the semantic abstraction approach in lowering the required amount of training data and
decreasing the probability of failure. Other work [33] uses
future prediction to facilitate long-term planning problems
and forms a direct motivation for our work.
The task of predicting future RGB video frames given
preceding ones is interesting to assess if current vision systems are able to reason about future events, and it has recently received significant attention [19, 28, 32, 35]. Modeling raw RGB intensities is, however, overly complicated
as compared to predicting future high-level scene properties, while the latter is sufficient for many applications.
Such high-level future prediction has been studied in vari-

648

