Adversarial PoseNet:
A Structure-aware Convolutional Network for Human Pose Estimation∗

1

Yu Chen1 Chunhua Shen2 Xiu-Shen Wei3 Lingqiao Liu2 Jian Yang1
2
3
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
University of Adelaide
Nanjing University

Abstract
Original Images

For human pose estimation in monocular images, joint
occlusions and overlapping upon human bodies often result
in deviated pose predictions. Under these circumstances, biologically implausible pose predictions may be produced. In
contrast, human vision is able to predict poses by exploiting
geometric constraints of joint inter-connectivity. To address
the problem by incorporating priors about the structure of
human bodies, we propose a novel structure-aware convolutional network to implicitly take such priors into account
during training of the deep network. Explicit learning of
such constraints is typically challenging. Instead, we design
discriminators to distinguish the real poses from the fake
ones (such as biologically implausible ones). If the pose
generator (G) generates results that the discriminator fails
to distinguish from real ones, the network successfully learns
the priors.
To better capture the structure dependency of human body
joints, the generator G is designed in a stacked multi-task
manner to predict poses as well as occlusion heatmaps. Then,
the pose and occlusion heatmaps are sent to the discriminators to predict the likelihood of the pose being real. Training
of the network follows the strategy of conditional Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs). The effectiveness of the proposed network is evaluated on two widely used human pose
estimation benchmark datasets. Our approach significantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods and almost always
generates plausible human pose predictions.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation is a key step in understanding the
actions of people in images and videos. Understanding of a
person’s limb articulation location is very helpful for highlevel vision tasks like human tracking, action recognition,
and also serves as a fundamental tool in fields such as humancomputer interaction applications. It is a challenging task
∗ This work was done when Y. Chen and X.-S. Wei were visiting University of Adelaide. C. Shen and J. Yang are the corresponding authors.

Pose predictions
without Structure

Structure-aware
pose predictions

Figure 1: Motivation. We show the importance of strongly enforcing
priors about the human body structure during training of DCNNs for
pose estimation. Learning without using such priors generates inaccurate
results.

due to high flexibility of body limbs, self and outer occlusion,
various camera angles, etc.
Recently, significant improvements have been achieved
on this topic by using Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
(DCNNs) [31, 30, 32, 6, 34, 20, 4]. These approaches mainly
follow the strategy of regressing heatmaps of body parts using DCNNs. These regression models have shown great
ability of learning better feature representations. However,
for body parts with heavy occlusions (especially from body
parts of surrounding people) and background which seems
similar to body parts, DCNNs may have difficulty in regressing accurate heatmaps.
Human vision is capable of learning the variety and limitless of human body shape structures from observations.
Even under extreme occlusions, we can infer the potential
poses and negative the implausible ones. It is, however,
very challenging to incorporate such priors about human
body structures into DCNNs, because, as pointed out in [31],
the low-level mechanics of DCNNs is typically difficult to
interpret, and DCNNs are most capable of learning features.
As a consequence, an unreasonable human pose may be
produced by a standard DCNN. As shown in Fig. 1, in challenging test cases with heavy occlusions, standard DCNNs
tend to perform poorly. To solve this problem, priors about
the structure of the body joints must be considered. The

1212

