Unsupervised learning from video
to detect foreground objects in single images

1

Ioana Croitoru1
Simion-Vlad Bogolin1
Marius Leordeanu1,2
2
Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy
University ”Politehnica” of Bucharest
ioana.croi@gmail.com

vladbogolin@gmail.com

Abstract
Unsupervised learning from visual data is one of the
most difficult challenges in computer vision. It is essential
for understanding how visual recognition works. Learning
from unsupervised input has an immense practical value, as
huge quantities of unlabeled videos can be collected at low
cost. Here we address the task of unsupervised learning to
detect and segment foreground objects in single images. We
achieve our goal by training a student pathway, consisting
of a deep neural network that learns to predict, from a single
input image, the output of a teacher pathway that performs
unsupervised object discovery in video. Our approach is
different from the published methods that perform unsupervised discovery in videos or in collections of images at test
time. We move the unsupervised discovery phase during the
training stage, while at test time we apply the standard feedforward processing along the student pathway. This has a
dual benefit: firstly, it allows, in principle, unlimited generalization possibilities during training, while remaining fast
at testing. Secondly, the student not only becomes able to
detect in single images significantly better than its unsupervised video discovery teacher, but it also achieves state of
the art results on two current benchmarks, YouTube Objects
and Object Discovery datasets. At test time, our system is
two orders of magnitude faster than other previous methods.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised learning is one of the most difficult and
intriguing problems in computer vision and machine learning today. Researchers believe that unsupervised learning from video could help decode hard questions regarding the nature of intelligence and learning. As unlabeled
videos are easy to collect at low cost, solving this task
would bring a great practical value in vision and robotics.
Recent unsupervised methods follow two directions. One
is to learn powerful features in an unsupervised way and

marius.leordeanu@imar.ro

then use them in a classic supervised learning scheme in
combination with different classifiers, such as SVMs or
CNNs [31, 24, 22]. In very recent work [28], developed
independently from ours, a deep network learns, from an
unsupervised system using motion cues in video, image
features that are applied to several transfer learning tasks.
The second main approach to unsupervised learning is to
discover, at test time, common patterns in unlabeled data
using clustering, feature matching or data mining formulations [11, 7, 40]. Unsupervised learning in video is also
related to co-segmentation [13, 18, 36, 14, 20, 43, 37] and
weakly supervised localization [9, 25, 39]. Earlier methods
are based on local feature matching and detection of their
co-occurrence patterns [41, 40, 21, 27, 23], while more recent ones [15, 33] discover object tubes by linking candidate bounding boxes between frames with or without refining their location. Traditionally, the task of unsupervised
learning from image sequences, has been formulated as a
feature matching or data clustering optimization problem,
which is computationally very expensive.
Our system is presented in Figure 1. We have an unsupervised training stage, in which a student deep neural
network (Figure 2) learns frame by frame from an unsupervised teacher, which performs object segmentation in
videos, to produce similar object masks in single images.
The teacher method takes advantage of the consistency in
appearance, shape and motion manifested by objects in
video. In this way, it discovers objects in the video and produces a foreground segmentation for each individual frame.
Then, the student network tries to imitate for each frame the
output of the teacher, while having as input only a single image - the current frame. The teacher pathway is much simpler in structure, but it has access to information over time.
In contrast, the student is much deeper in structure, but has
access only to one image. Thus, the information discovered
by the teacher in time is captured by the student in depth,
over neural layers of abstraction. In experiments, we show
a very encouraging fact: the student easily learns to outperform its teacher and discovers by itself general knowledge about the shape and appearance properties of objects,

4335

