Online Multi-Object Tracking Using CNN-based Single Object Tracker with
Spatial-Temporal Attention Mechanism
Qi Chu1,3 , Wanli Ouyang2,3 , Hongsheng Li3 , Xiaogang Wang3 , Bin Liu1 , Nenghai Yu1,∗
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 University of Sydney
3
Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
kuki@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {wlouyang,hsli,xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, {flowice,ynh}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a CNN-based framework for
online MOT. This framework utilizes the merits of single
object trackers in adapting appearance models and searching for target in the next frame. Simply applying single
object tracker for MOT will encounter the problem in computational efficiency and drifted results caused by occlusion. Our framework achieves computational efficiency by
sharing features and using ROI-Pooling to obtain individual
features for each target. Some online learned target-specific
CNN layers are used for adapting the appearance model
for each target. In the framework, we introduce spatialtemporal attention mechanism (STAM) to handle the drift
caused by occlusion and interaction among targets. The
visibility map of the target is learned and used for inferring
the spatial attention map. The spatial attention map is then
applied to weight the features. Besides, the occlusion status
can be estimated from the visibility map, which controls the
online updating process via weighted loss on training samples with different occlusion statuses in different frames. It
can be considered as temporal attention mechanism. The
proposed algorithm achieves 34.3% and 46.0% in MOTA
on challenging MOT15 and MOT16 benchmark dataset respectively.

1. Introduction
Tracking objects in videos is an important problem in
computer vision which has attracted great attention. It
has various applications such as video surveillance, human
computer interface and autonomous driving. The goal of
multi-object tracking (MOT) is to estimate the locations of
multiple objects in the video and maintain their identities
consistently in order to yield their individual trajectories.
MOT is still a challenging problem, especially in crowded
scenes with frequent occlusion, interaction among targets
and so on.
∗ Corresponding author.

#666

#670

#671

#672

#673

#677

Figure 1. An example of drift caused by occlusion of other targets
when directly adopting single object trackers to MOT.

On the other hand, significant improvement has been
achieved on single object tracking problem, sometimes
called “visual tracking” in previous work. Most state-ofthe-art single object tracking methods aim to online learn
a strong discriminative appearance model and use it to find
the location of the target within a search area in next frame
[1, 17, 18, 9]. Since deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) are shown to be effective in many computer vision applications [27, 15, 36, 35, 57, 54], many works
[47, 19, 31, 48] have explored the usage of CNNs to learn
strong discriminative appearance model in single object
tracking and demonstrated state-of-the-art performance recently. An intuitive thought is that applying the CNN based
single object tracker to MOT will make sense.
However, problems are observed when directly using
single object tracking approach for MOT.
First, single object tracker may learn from noisy samples. In single object tracking, the training samples for
learning appearance model are collected online, where labels are based on tracking results. The appearance model
is then used for finding the target in the next frame. When
the target is occluded, the visual cue is unreliable for learning the appearance model. Consequently, the single object
tracker will gradually drift and eventually fail to track the
target. This issue becomes even more severe in MOT due to

4836

