Deep Functional Maps:
Structured Prediction for Dense Shape Correspondence

Emanuele Rodolà
1

Tel Aviv University

2

3,4

Intel

Or Litany1,2
Tal Remez1
Alex Bronstein2,5
Michael Bronstein2,3
3

USI Lugano

4

Sapienza University of Rome

5

Technion

Abstract
We introduce a new framework for learning dense correspondence between deformable 3D shapes. Existing learning based approaches model shape correspondence as a labelling problem, where each point of a query shape receives
a label identifying a point on some reference domain; the
correspondence is then constructed a posteriori by composing the label predictions of two input shapes. We propose a paradigm shift and design a structured prediction
model in the space of functional maps, linear operators that
provide a compact representation of the correspondence.
We model the learning process via a deep residual network
which takes dense descriptor fields defined on two shapes
as input, and outputs a soft map between the two given objects. The resulting correspondence is shown to be accurate on several challenging benchmarks comprising multiple categories, synthetic models, real scans with acquisition
artifacts, topological noise, and partiality.

1. Introduction
3D acquisition technology has made great progress in
the last decade, and is being rapidly incorporated into commercial products ranging from Microsoft Kinect [43] for
gaming, to LIDARs used in autonomous cars. An essential building block for application design in many of these
domains is to recover 3D shape correspondences in a fast
and reliable way. While handling real-world scanning artifacts is a challenge by itself, additional complications
arise from non-rigid motions of the objects of interest (typically humans or animals). Most non-rigid shape correspondence methods employ local descriptors that are designed
to achieve robustness to noise and deformations; however,
relying on such “handcrafted” descriptors can often lead to
inaccurate solutions in practical settings. Partial remedy to
this was brought by the recent line of works on learning
shape correspondence [28, 36, 29, 8, 10, 9, 31]. A key drawback of these methods lies in their emphasis on learning

Figure 1. Correspondence results obtained by our network model
on two pairs from the FAUST real scans challenge. Corresponding
points are assigned the same color. The average error for the left
and right pairs is 5.21cm and 2.34cm respectively. Accurate correspondence is obtained despite mesh “gluing” in areas of contact.

a descriptor that would help in identifying corresponding
points, or on learning a labeling with respect to some reference domain. On the one hand, by focusing on the descriptor, the learning process remains agnostic to the way the final correspondence is computed, and costly post-processing
steps are often necessary in order to obtain accurate solutions from the learned descriptors. On the other hand, methods based on a label space are restricted to a fixed number of
points and rely on the adoption of an intermediate reference
model.
Contribution. In this work we propose a task-driven approach for descriptor learning, by including the computation of the correspondence directly as part of the learning
procedure. Perfect candidates for this task are neural networks, due to their inherent flexibility to the addition of
computational blocks. Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We introduce a new structured prediction model for
shape correspondence. Our framework allows end-to15659

