Video Frame Synthesis using Deep Voxel Flow
Ziwei Liu1
1

Raymond A. Yeh2

Xiaoou Tang1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

2

Yiming Liu3∗ Aseem Agarwala4

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

{lz013,xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
3

yeh17@illinois.edu
4

Pony.AI Inc.

yiming@pony.ai

Abstract
We address the problem of synthesizing new video frames
in an existing video, either in-between existing frames
(interpolation), or subsequent to them (extrapolation). This
problem is challenging because video appearance and motion can be highly complex. Traditional optical-flow-based
solutions often fail where flow estimation is challenging,
while newer neural-network-based methods that hallucinate pixel values directly often produce blurry results. We
combine the advantages of these two methods by training
a deep network that learns to synthesize video frames by
flowing pixel values from existing ones, which we call deep
voxel flow. Our method requires no human supervision, and
any video can be used as training data by dropping, and
then learning to predict, existing frames. The technique
is efficient, and can be applied at any video resolution.
We demonstrate that our method produces results that both
quantitatively and qualitatively improve upon the state-ofthe-art.

1. Introduction
Videos of natural scenes observe a complicated set of
phenomena; objects deform and move quickly, occlude and
dis-occlude each other, scene lighting changes, and cameras
move. Parametric models of video appearance are often
too simple to accurately model, interpolate, or extrapolate
video. None the less, video interpolation, i.e., synthesizing
video frames between existing ones, is a common process in
video and film production. The popular commercial plug-in
Twixtor1 is used both to resample video into new framerates, and to produce a slow-motion effect from regularspeed video. A related problem is video extrapolation;
predicting the future by synthesizing future video frames.
∗ Most of the work was done when Yiming was with Google.
1 http://revisionfx.com/products/twixtor/

Google Inc.

aseemaa@google.com

The traditional solution to these problems estimates
optical flow between frames, and then interpolates or
extrapolates along optical flow vectors. This approach is
“optical-flow-complete”; it works well when optical flow is
accurate, but generates significant artifacts when it is not.
A new approach [24, 21, 28] uses generative convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) to directly hallucinate RGB pixel
values of synthesized video frames. While these techniques
are promising, directly synthesizing RGB values is not yet
as successful as flow-based methods, and the results are
often blurry.
In this paper we aim to combine the strengths of these
two approaches. Most of the pixel patches in video are nearcopies of patches in nearby existing frames, and copying
pixels is much easier than hallucinating them from scratch.
On the other hand, an end-to-end trained deep network is an
incredibly powerful tool. This is especially true for video
interpolation and extrapolation, since training data is nearly
infinite; any video can be used to train an unsupervised deep
network.
We therefore use existing videos to train a CNN in an
unsupervised fashion. We drop frames from the training
videos, and employ a loss function that measures similarity
between generated pixels and the ground-truth dropped
frames. However, like optical-flow approaches our network
generates pixels by interpolating pixel values from nearby
frames. The network includes a voxel flow layer — a perpixel, 3D optical flow vector across space and time in the
input video. The final pixel is generated by trilinear interpolation across the input video volume (which is typically
just two frames). Thus, for video interpolation, the final
output pixel can be a blend of pixels from the previous and
next frames. This voxel flow layer is similar to an optical
flow field. However, it is only an intermediate layer, and its
correctness is never directly evaluated. Thus, our method
requires no optical flow supervision, which is challenging
to produce at scale.

4463

