S3 FD: Single Shot Scale-invariant Face Detector
Shifeng Zhang Xiangyu Zhu Zhen Lei∗ Hailin Shi Xiaobo Wang Stan Z. Li
CBSR & NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{shifeng.zhang,xiangyu.zhu,zlei,hailin.shi,xiaobo.wang,szli}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
This paper presents a real-time face detector, named
Single Shot Scale-invariant Face Detector (S3 FD), which
performs superiorly on various scales of faces with a single
deep neural network, especially for small faces. Specifically, we try to solve the common problem that anchorbased detectors deteriorate dramatically as the objects become smaller. We make contributions in the following
three aspects: 1) proposing a scale-equitable face detection
framework to handle different scales of faces well. We
tile anchors on a wide range of layers to ensure that all
scales of faces have enough features for detection. Besides,
we design anchor scales based on the effective receptive
field and a proposed equal proportion interval principle;
2) improving the recall rate of small faces by a scale compensation anchor matching strategy; 3) reducing the false
positive rate of small faces via a max-out background label. As a consequence, our method achieves state-of-theart detection performance on all the common face detection
benchmarks, including the AFW, PASCAL face, FDDB and
WIDER FACE datasets, and can run at 36 FPS on a Nvidia
Titan X (Pascal) for VGA-resolution images.

1. Introduction
Face detection is the key step of many subsequent facerelated applications, such as face alignment [50, 61], face
recognition [32, 40, 62], face verification [44, 46] and face
tracking [17], etc. It has been well developed over the past
few decades. Following the pioneering work of Viola-Jones
face detector [48], most of early works focus on designing
robust features and training effective classifiers. But these
approaches depend on non-robust hand-crafted features and
optimize each component separately, making the face detection pipeline sub-optimal.
In recent years, convolutional neural network (CNN) has
achieved remarkable successes, ranging from image classification [10, 42, 45] to object detection [8, 23, 26, 37, 38],
∗ Corresponding author

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Reasons behind the problem of anchor-based methods.
(a) Few features: Small faces have few features at detection layer.
(b) Mismatch: Anchor scale mismatches receptive field and both
are too large to fit small face. (c) Anchor matching strategy: The
figure demonstrates the number of matched anchors at different
face scales under current anchor matching method. It reflects that
tiny and outer faces match too little anchors. (d) Background
from small anchors: The two figures have the same resolution.
The left one tiles small anchors to detect the small face and the
right one tiles big anchors to detect the big face. Small anchors
bring about plenty of negative anchors on the background.

which also inspires face detection. On the one hand, many
works [21, 31, 54, 55, 58] have applied CNN as the feature extractor in the traditional face detection framewrok.
On the other hand, face detection is regarded as a special case of generic object detection and lots of methods [3, 15, 43, 49, 59] have inherited valid techniques from
generic object detection method [38]. Following the latter
route, we improve the anchor-based generic object detection
frameworks and propose a state-of-the-art face detector.
Anchor-based object detection methods [26, 38] detect
objects by classifying and regressing a series of pre-set anchors, which are generated by regularly tiling a collection of
boxes with different scales and aspect ratios on the image.

192

