Ensemble Diffusion for Retrieval
Song Bai1∗, Zhichao Zhou1∗ , Jingdong Wang2 , Xiang Bai1†, Longin Jan Latecki3 , Qi Tian4
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 2 Microsoft Research Asia
3
Temple University, 4 University of Texas at San Antonio
{songbai,zzc,xbai}@hust.edu.cn,jingdw@microsoft.com,latecki@temple.edu,qi.tian@utsa.edu

Abstract
As a postprocessing procedure, diffusion process has
demonstrated its ability of substantially improving the performance of various visual retrieval systems. Whereas,
great efforts are also devoted to similarity (or metric) fusion, seeing that only one individual type of similarity cannot fully reveal the intrinsic relationship between objects.
This stimulates a great research interest of considering similarity fusion in the framework of diffusion process (i.e., fusion with diffusion) for robust retrieval.
In this paper, we firstly revisit representative methods
about fusion with diffusion, and provide new insights which
are ignored by previous researchers. Then, observing that
existing algorithms are susceptible to noisy similarities, the
proposed Regularized Ensemble Diffusion (RED) is bundled with an automatic weight learning paradigm, so that
the negative impacts of noisy similarities are suppressed.
At last, we integrate several recently-proposed similarities
with the proposed framework. The experimental results suggest that we can achieve new state-of-the-art performances
on various retrieval tasks, including 3D shape retrieval on
ModelNet dataset, and image retrieval on Holidays and Ukbench dataset.

1. Introduction
Object retrieval is a fundamental yet hot topic in computer vision, which has attracted much attention for decades.
Given a query instance, its target is to find objects sharing similar visual appearances with the query in a large
database. For a long time, it is crucial to design discriminative representations, so that the metric defined on the representations can be robust to common deformations, such as
rotation, occlusion, illumination, etc. Conventionally, Bagof-Words (BoW) is usually employed thanks to the design of local descriptors (e.g., [27] for images, [26, 37] for
∗ indicates equal contributions.
† corresponding author.

shapes, [42, 43, 15, 14] for 3D models). In recent years,
the rapid development of deep learning algorithms and GPU computing platforms has shifted the research attention
to deep-learned features [2, 31, 11, 47, 24], which yield a
remarkable performance boost against conventional handcrafted features.
Nevertheless, the underlying manifold structure is neglected when directly computing the pairwise similarity in
the metric space. To this end, a re-ranking component called
diffusion process (see [10] for a survey) is usually plugged
as a postprocessing step to refine the search results. Diffusion process models the relationship between objects on
graph-based manifold, wherein similarity values are diffused along the geodesic path in an iterative manner.
Meanwhile, different visual similarities generally focus
on different aspects of objects. Thus, it probably occurs
that two objects quite distant in one similarity space may be
close in another. Therefore, enormous efforts are also devoted to similarity fusion for the sake of leveraging complementary nature among those distinct feature modalities. To
inherit the property of manifold-preserving from diffusion
process, fusion is usually reconsidered within the framework of diffusion process, which leads to a new methodology called Fusion with Diffusion.
Existing fusion with diffusion methods either utilize a
naive solution by simply combining the edge weights of
multiple affinity graphs (Sec. 3.1), or consider a homogeneous fusion (Sec. 3.2). However, most of them are susceptible to noisy similarities owing to the lack of weight learning mechanism. To remedy this, we propose a novel fusion
with diffusion method called Regularized Ensemble Diffusion (RED) in Sec. 3.3. Compared with existing diffusion
processes, the contributions of RED are two folds: i) RED
is a theoretically sound and flexible approach to integrate
multiple (more than 2) similarities and learn their weights in the diffusion framework; ii) the weights of similarities
are learned in a totally unsupervised setting, whose essence
is to seek for an optimal weight configuration to maximize
the smoothness of multiple tensor-order graph manifolds.
The validity of those fusion with diffusion methods (both

774

