Boosting Image Captioning with Attributes∗
Ting Yao † , Yingwei Pan ‡ , Yehao Li § , Zhaofan Qiu ‡ , and Tao Mei †
†
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
‡
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
§
Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China
{tiyao, tmei}@microsoft.com, {panyw.ustc, yehaoli.sysu, zhaofanqiu}@gmail.com

Abstract
Automatically describing an image with a natural language has been an emerging challenge in both fields of
computer vision and natural language processing. In this
paper, we present Long Short-Term Memory with Attributes
(LSTM-A) - a novel architecture that integrates attributes
into the successful Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
plus Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) image captioning
framework, by training them in an end-to-end manner. Particularly, the learning of attributes is strengthened by integrating inter-attribute correlations into Multiple Instance
Learning (MIL). To incorporate attributes into captioning,
we construct variants of architectures by feeding image
representations and attributes into RNNs in different ways
to explore the mutual but also fuzzy relationship between
them. Extensive experiments are conducted on COCO image captioning dataset and our framework shows clear improvements when compared to state-of-the-art deep models. More remarkably, we obtain METEOR/CIDEr-D of
25.5%/100.2% on testing data of widely used and publicly
available splits in [10] when extracting image representations by GoogleNet and achieve superior performance on
COCO captioning Leaderboard.

1. Introduction
Accelerated by tremendous increase in Internet bandwidth and proliferation of sensor-rich mobile devices, image data has been generated, published and spread explosively, becoming an indispensable part of today’s big data. This has encouraged the development of advanced techniques for a broad range of image understanding applications. A fundamental issue that underlies the success of
these technological advances is the recognition [8, 26, 28].
Recently, researchers have strived to automatically describe
∗ This work was performed when Yingwei Pan, Yehao Li and
Zhaofan Qiu were visiting Microsoft Research as research interns.

the content of an image with a complete and natural sentence, which has a great potential impact for instance on
robotic vision or helping visually impaired people. Nevertheless, this problem is very challenging, as description generation model should capture not only the objects/scenes presented in the image, but also be capable of expressing how
the objects/scenes relate to each other in a nature sentence.
The main inspiration of recent attempts on this problem
[5, 31, 33] are from the advances by using RNNs in machine
translation [27], which is to translate a text from one language (e.g., English) to another (e.g., Chinese). The basic
idea is to perform a sequence to sequence learning for translation, where an encoder RNN reads the input sequential
sentence, one word at a time till the end of the sentence and
then a decoder RNN is exploited to generate the sentence
in target language, one word at each time step. Following
this philosophy, it is natural to employ a CNN instead of the
encoder RNN for image captioning, which is regarded as an
image encoder to produce image representations.
While encouraging performances are reported, these CNN plus RNN image captioning methods translate directly
from image representations to language, without explicitly
taking more high-level semantic information from images
into account. On the other hand, attributes are properties
observed in images with rich semantic cues and have been
proved to be effective in visual recognition [23]. Therefore,
a valid question is how to incorporate high-level image attributes into CNN plus RNN image captioning architecture
as complementary knowledge in addition to image representations. We investigate particularly in this paper the architectures by exploiting the mutual relationship between
image representations and attributes for enhancing image
description generation. Specifically, to better demonstrate
the impact of simultaneously utilizing the two kinds of representations, we devise variants of architectures by feeding
them into RNN in different placements and moments, e.g.,
leveraging only attributes, inserting image representations
first and then attributes or vice versa, and inputting image
representations/attributes once or at each time step. More-

4894

