Bringing Background into the Foreground:
Making All Classes Equal in Weakly-supervised Video Semantic Segmentation
Fatemeh Sadat Saleh1,2 , Mohammad Sadegh Aliakbarian1,2 , Mathieu Salzmann3 ,
Lars Petersson1,2 , Jose M. Alvarez1,2
1
Australian National University, 2 Smart Vision Systems, CSIRO, 3 CVLab, EPFL
firstname.lastname@data61.csiro.au, mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch

Abstract
Pixel-level annotations are expensive and timeconsuming to obtain. Hence, weak supervision using only
image tags could have a significant impact in semantic
segmentation. Recent years have seen great progress in
weakly-supervised semantic segmentation, whether from
a single image or from videos. However, most existing
methods are designed to handle a single background class.
In practical applications, such as autonomous navigation,
it is often crucial to reason about multiple background
classes. In this paper, we introduce an approach to doing
so by making use of classifier heatmaps. We then develop
a two-stream deep architecture that jointly leverages
appearance and motion, and design a loss based on our
heatmaps to train it. Our experiments demonstrate the
benefits of our classifier heatmaps and of our two-stream
architecture on challenging urban scene datasets and
on the YouTube-Objects benchmark, where we obtain
state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Video semantic segmentation, i.e., the task of assigning
a semantic label to every pixel in video frames, is crucial
for the success of many computer vision applications, such
as video summarization and autonomous navigation. In
this context, fully-supervised methods [25, 52, 47, 53, 22]
have made great progress, particularly with the advent of
deep learning. These methods, however, inherently rely
on having access to large amounts of training videos with
pixel-level ground-truth annotations in every frame. Unfortunately, such annotations are highly time-consuming and
expensive to obtain, and generating realistic synthetic data
to obtain annotations [43, 42] is a challenging task in itself. While semi-supervised techniques [19, 54, 46] mitigate this issue by leveraging partial annotations, they still
require some pixel-level ground-truth.

Figure 1. Overview of our framework. Given only video-level
tags, our weakly-supervised video semantic segmentation network jointly leverages classifier heatmaps and motion information to model both multiple foreground classes and multiple background classes. This is in contrast with most methods that focus
on foreground classes only, thus being inapplicable to scenarios
where differentiating background classes is crucial, such as in autonomous driving.

By contrast, weakly-supervised semantic segmentation
methods [16, 27, 63, 50, 58, 13, 15, 35, 45, 23, 36, 60,
2, 34] rely only on tags. When working with still images [45, 23, 36, 60, 2, 34], tags are typically assumed to be
available in each image, whereas for video-based segmentation [16, 27, 63, 50, 58, 13, 15, 35], tags correspond to entire
videos or video snippets. While recent years have seen great
progress in weakly-supervised semantic segmentation, most
existing methods, whether image- or video-based, have a
major drawback: They focus on foreground object classes
and treat the background as one single entity. However,
having detailed information about the different background
classes is crucial in many practical scenarios, such as autonomous driving, where one needs to differentiate the road
from a grass field.
In this paper, we introduce an approach to weaklysupervised video semantic segmentation that treats all
classes, foreground and background ones, equally (see
Fig 1). To this end, we propose to rely on class-dependent
heatmaps obtained from classifiers trained for image-level

2106

