Practical and Efficient Multi-View Matching
Eleonora Maset, Federica Arrigoni, Andrea Fusiello
DPIA - University of Udine
Via delle Scienze, 208 - Udine (Italy)
maset.eleonora@spes.uniud.it, arrigoni.federica@spes.uniud.it, andrea.fusiello@uniud.it

Abstract
In this paper we propose a novel solution to the multiview matching problem that, given a set of noisy pairwise
correspondences, jointly updates them so as to maximize
their consistency. Our method is based on a spectral decomposition, resulting in a closed-form efficient algorithm,
in contrast to other iterative techniques that can be found
in the literature. Experiments on both synthetic and real
datasets show that our method achieves comparable or superior accuracy to state-of-the-art algorithms in significantly less time. We also demonstrate that our solution can
efficiently handle datasets of hundreds of images, which is
unprecedented in the literature.

1. Introduction
Establishing correspondences between feature sets is a
fundamental problem in computer vision, that lies at the basis of any geometric computation (e.g., structure from motion) and also object recognition and shape analysis. In this
paper we consider the case in which features are extracted
from a collection of images.
The majority of the works on this topic focus on finding
correspondences between two feature sets [14, 11, 13, 12,
15, 20]. However, in many tasks it is often required to find
matches across multiple views. Moreover, recent studies
have suggested that jointly optimizing the correspondences
across the whole dataset can lead to significant improvements when compared to computing matches between pairs
of views in isolation [19, 31], since pairwise matching algorithms can generate noisy and unreliable results.
As a matter of fact, appearance and geometry alone cannot guarantee the correctness of the matches, hence all one
can do is to resort to higher level constraints that arise from
the closed-loop consistency of matching across multiple
views. This is called joint matching or multi-view matching by some authors.
A natural approach to joint matching consists in operating directly in the feature space, namely optimizing a cost

function which explicitly depends on the features extracted
in all the images. Early solutions of this type include the
methods presented in [21, 22, 16, 25]. More recently, the
authors of [6] cast multi-view matching to an image indexing problem, while in [3] a game-theoretical approach is
adopted and the matching problem is expressed as a noncooperative game. Rank constraints are introduced in [18]
for point matching across video frames, and this approach
is extended in [30, 8], where the joint matching problem is
robustly formulated as a low-rank and sparse matrix decomposition.
A different approach is adopted in [19, 7, 2, 31, 28]
where multi-view matching is solved in two steps: first,
matching between pairs of images is performed in isolation; then, such correspondences are improved by globally
optimizing their internal coherence, without relying on the
actual value of the features. In this paper we concentrate
on these methods, for they are faster and less memorydemanding than feature-based ones.
A key concept in this context is that of cycle consistency,
namely the composition of pairwise matches along any loop
should give the identity. This property is exploited in several algorithms to remove outliers among pairwise correspondences [29, 17, 9]. However, in practice, a few number
of consistent cycles may be found due to noise, and considering all the cycles is computationally intractable. It is
shown in some recent works [19, 7, 31] that, if all the pairwise correspondences are collected in a block-matrix, then
cycle consistency can be reduced to the requirement that
such a matrix is positive semidefinite and low-rank. The
authors of [19] express multi-view matching as a synchronization problem, which is approximately solved via spectral decomposition. In [7] a solution based on semidefinite
programming is proposed, which, however, assume total
feature correspondences between all images. Such technique is extended in [2] in order to handle partial correspondences, and theoretical guarantees for exact matching
in the presence of corrupted input are provided, assuming
a certain noise model. In [31] the joint matching problem
is formulated as a low-rank matrix recovery task and the

4568

