Efficient Online Local Metric Adaptation via Negative Samples for Person
Re-Identification
Jiahuan Zhou, Pei Yu, Wei Tang and Ying Wu
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Northwestern University, US
{jzt011, pyi980, wtt450, yingwu}@eecs.northwestern.edu

Abstract
Many existing person re-identification (PRID) methods
typically attempt to train a faithful global metric offline to
cover the enormous visual appearance variations, so as to
directly use it online on various probes for identity matching. However, their need for a huge set of positive training
pairs is very demanding in practice. In contrast to these
methods, this paper advocates a different paradigm: part
of the learning can be performed online but with nominal
costs, so as to achieve online metric adaptation for different input probes. A major challenge here is that no positive training pairs are available for the probe anymore. By
only exploiting easily-available negative samples, we propose a novel solution to achieve local metric adaptation effectively and efficiently. For each probe at the test time, it
learns a strictly positive semi-definite dedicated local metric. Comparing to offline global metric learning, its computational cost is negligible. The insight of this new method
is that the local hard negative samples can actually provide tight constraints to fine tune the metric locally. This
new local metric adaptation method is generally applicable, as it can be used on top of any global metric to enhance
its performance. In addition, this paper gives in-depth theoretical analysis and justification of the new method. We
prove that our new method guarantees the reduction of the
classification error asymptotically, and prove that it actually learns the optimal local metric to best approximate the
asymptotic case by a finite number of training data. Extensive experiments and comparative studies on almost all
major benchmarks (VIPeR, QMUL GRID, CUHK Campus,
CUHK03 and Market-1501) have confirmed the effectiveness and superiority of our method.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (PRID) generally refers to evaluating the similarity of a probe image from an unknown
person against a set of gallery images with known identities. The gallery images may be obtained from different

Figure 1. The overall idea of our proposed online local metric
adaptation approach. Unlike existing methods that learn a single
global metric for all probes, we exploit negative samples to learn
a dedicated local metric for each online probe.

cameras at a different time. This has been a critical yet very
challenging task in video surveillance [25]. The difficulties
are mainly due to the large and complex variations in the
visual appearances of a person under various views, poses,
illumination and occlusion conditions.
Recent attempts were based on learning a visual metric
to better capture the visual similarities [15, 12, 14, 20, 35,
36], and reported encouraging results. The training data for
such metric learning are generally sample pairs: a positive
pair refers to two images of the same identity, and a negative
pair otherwise. These methods typically attempt to train a
faithful global metric offline, hoping to cover the enormous
visual appearance variations so as to directly use it online
for all test probes. Thus they demand a huge set of positive
training pairs. Unfortunately, in practice, although it is relatively easy to collect negative pairs, it is in general difficult
to obtain many positive pairs for a specific person. There-

2420

