Recurrent Models for Situation Recognition
Arun Mallya and Svetlana Lazebnik
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{amallya2,slazebni}@illinois.edu

Abstract
This work proposes Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
models to predict structured ‘image situations’ – actions
and noun entities fulfilling semantic roles related to the action. In contrast to prior work relying on Conditional Random Fields (CRFs), we use a specialized action prediction
network followed by an RNN for noun prediction. Our system obtains state-of-the-art accuracy on the challenging recent imSitu dataset, beating CRF-based models, including
ones trained with additional data. Further, we show that
specialized features learned from situation prediction can
be transferred to the task of image captioning to more accurately describe human-object interactions.

1. Introduction
Recognition of actions and human-object interactions in
still images has been widely studied in computer vision.
Early datasets and approaches focused on identifying a relatively small number of actions, such as 10 in PASCAL
VOC [7] and 40 in the Stanford Dataset [30]. Newer and
larger datasets such as MPII Human Pose [19] have enlarged the number of action classes to around 400. The
COCO-A [21] and HICO [4] datasets aim to recognize interactions between multiple humans, and humans and objects, expanding the scope of recognition to outputs such
as human-riding-bicycle, human-repairing-bicycle, humanriding-horse, etc.
Of late, the focus has shifted to predicting even more
structured outputs, tackling higher-level questions such as
who is doing what and with which object. The recently introduced imSitu Dataset [33] generalizes the task of action
recognition to ‘situation recognition’ — the recognition of
all entities fulfilling semantic roles in an instance of an action performed by a human or non-human actor. Given a
particular action, situations are represented by a set of relevant (semantic role: noun entity) pairs. An example image
and associated situation from imSitu are shown in Fig. 1,
where “a woman arranging flowers in a vase on the countertop” is represented by Action: arranging, {(Agent: woman),
(Item: flowers), (Tool: vase), (Place: countertop)}. As an-

1)
2)
3)

Agent
woman
woman
woman

Verb: arranging
Tool
Item
flowers vase
flowers hand
flowers
∅

Place
countertop
kitchen
inside

RNN
arranging
Fusion
Network

VGG-16
Network

Image

Image

Detected
Person
Box

Image

Figure 1: Each image in imSitu is labeled with an action verb (orange),
and each verb is associated with a unique set of semantic roles (bold black)
which are fulfilled by noun entities present in the image (green). Each
image has multiple annotations to account for the intrinsic ambiguity of the
task. Our approach first uses the fusion network of [16] to predict the action
verb. Then it feeds the verb and a visual feature from a separate network
into an RNN to predict the noun roles in a fixed sequence conditioned on
the action.

other example, “A horse rearing outside” can be mapped to
Action: rearing, {(Agent: horse), (Place: outside)}. imSitu
consists of 504 actions, 1,700 semantic roles, and 11,000
noun entities resulting in around 200,000 unique situations.
Along with the dataset, Yatskar et al. [33, 32] also introduced Conditional Random Field (CRF) models to predict
situations given an image. In our work, we propose and
train Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) to predict such
situations and outperform the previously state of the art
CRFs.
Our use of RNNs for situation prediction is motivated
by their popularity for tasks like image caption generation, where they have proven to be successful at capturing grammar and forming coherent sentences linking multiple concepts. The standard framework for caption generation involves feeding high-level features from a CNN, often
trained for image classification on ImageNet [22], into an
RNN that proceeds to generate one word of the caption at a
time [11, 26, 27, 6, 34]. Situation recognition involves the
prediction of a sequence of noun entities for a particular action, so it can be viewed as a more structured version of the

455

