Interpretable Learning for Self-Driving Cars by Visualizing Causal Attention
Jinkyu Kim and John Canny
EECS, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94709, USA
{jinkyu.kim, canny}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Deep neural perception and control networks are likely
to be a key component of self-driving vehicles. These models need to be explainable - they should provide easy-tointerpret rationales for their behavior - so that passengers,
insurance companies, law enforcement, developers etc., can
understand what triggered a particular behavior. Here we
explore the use of visual explanations. These explanations
take the form of real-time highlighted regions of an image
that causally influence the network’s output (steering control). Our approach is two-stage. In the first stage, we use a
visual attention model to train a convolution network endto-end from images to steering angle. The attention model
highlights image regions that potentially influence the network’s output. Some of these are true influences, but some
are spurious. We then apply a causal filtering step to determine which input regions actually influence the output.
This produces more succinct visual explanations and more
accurately exposes the network’s behavior. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our model on three datasets totaling 16
hours of driving. We first show that training with attention
does not degrade the performance of the end-to-end network. Then we show that the network causally cues on a
variety of features that are used by humans while driving.

1. Introduction
Self-driving vehicle control has made dramatic progress
in the last several years, and many auto vendors have
pledged large-scale commercialization in a 2-3 year time
frame. These controllers use a variety of approaches but
recent successes [3] suggests that neural networks will be
widely used in self-driving vehicles. But neural networks
are notoriously cryptic - both network architecture and hidden layer activations may have no obvious relation to the
function being estimated by the network. An exception to
the rule is visual attention networks [29, 23, 7]. These networks provide spatial attention maps - areas of the image
that the network attends to - that can be displayed in a way
that is easy for users to interpret. They provide their atten-

tion maps instantly on images that are input to the network,
and in this case on the stream of images from automobile
video. As we show from our examples later, visual attention maps lie over image areas that have intuitive influence
on the vehicle’s control signal.
However, attention maps are only part of the story. Attention is a mechanism for filtering out non-salient image
content. But attention networks need to find all potentially
salient image areas and pass them to the main recognition
network (a CNN here) for a final verdict. For instance, the
attention network will attend to trees and bushes in areas
of an image where road signs commonly occur. Just as a
human will use peripheral vision to determine that “there
is something there”, and then visually fixate on the item to
determine what it actually is. That is, the attention model
must not mask out regions that might be important for driving control, but must look at foliage or other stimulae to
determine that they are not street signs or other vehicles.
We therefore post-process the attention network’s output,
clustering it into attention “blobs” and then mask (set the
attention weights to zero) each blob to determine the effect
on the end-to-end network output. Blobs that have a causal
effect on network output are retained while those that do not
are removed from the visual map presented to the user.
Figure 1 shows an overview of our model. Our approach
can be divided into three steps: (1) Encoder: convolutional
feature extraction, (2) Coarse-grained decoder by visual attention mechanism, and (3) Fine-grained decoder: causal
visual saliency detection and refinement of attention map.
Our contributions are as follows:
• We show that visual attention heat maps are suitable
“explanations” for the behavior of a deep neural vehicle controller, and do not degrade control accuracy.
• We show that attention maps comprise “blobs” that can
be segmented and filtered to produce simpler and more
accurate maps of visual saliency.
• We demonstrate the effectiveness of using our model
with three large real-world driving datasets that contain over 1,200,000 video frames (approx. 16 hours).
• We illustrate typical spurious attention sources in driving video and quantify the reduction in explanation
complexity from causal filtering.

2942

