Cross-view Asymmetric Metric Learning
for Unsupervised Person Re-identification
Hong-Xing Yu1,5 , Ancong Wu2 , and Wei-Shi Zheng1,3,4∗
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
4
Collaborative Innovation Center of High Performance Computing, NUDT, China
5
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou, China
1

xKoven@gmail.com, wuancong@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
While metric learning is important for Person reidentification (RE-ID), a significant problem in visual
surveillance for cross-view pedestrian matching, existing
metric models for RE-ID are mostly based on supervised
learning that requires quantities of labeled samples in all pairs of camera views for training. However, this limits
their scalabilities to realistic applications, in which a large
amount of data over multiple disjoint camera views is available but not labelled. To overcome the problem, we propose
unsupervised asymmetric metric learning for unsupervised
RE-ID. Our model aims to learn an asymmetric metric, i.e.,
specific projection for each view, based on asymmetric clustering on cross-view person images. Our model finds a
shared space where view-specific bias is alleviated and thus
better matching performance can be achieved. Extensive
experiments have been conducted on a baseline and five
large-scale RE-ID datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed model. Through the comparison, we show
that our model works much more suitable for unsupervised
RE-ID compared to classical unsupervised metric learning
models. We also compare with existing unsupervised REID methods, and our model outperforms them with notable
margins. Specifically, we report the results on large-scale
unlabelled RE-ID dataset, which is important but unfortunately less concerned in literatures.

1. Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation (RE-ID) is a challenging problem focusing on pedestrian matching and ranking across
non-overlapping camera views. It remains an open problem
∗ Corresponding author

although it has received considerable exploration recently,
in consideration of its potential signiﬁcance in security applications, especially in the case of video surveillance. It
has not been solved yet principally because of the dramatic intra-class variation and the high inter-class similarity.
Existing attempts mainly focus on learning to extract robust
and discriminative representations [33, 23, 19], and learning
matching functions or metrics [38, 14, 18, 22, 19, 20, 26]
in a supervised manner. Recently, deep learning has been
adopted to RE-ID community [1, 32, 28, 27] and has gained
promising results.
However, supervised strategies are intrinsically limited
due to the requirement of manually labeled cross-view training data, which is very expensive [31]. In the context of
RE-ID, the limitation is even pronounced because (1) manually labeling may not be reliable with a huge number of images to be checked across multiple camera views, and more
importantly (2) the astronomical cost of time and money
is prohibitive to label the overwhelming amount of data
across disjoint camera views. Therefore, in reality supervised methods would be restricted when applied to a new
scenario with a huge number of unlabeled data.
To directly make full use of the cheap and valuable unlabeled data, some existing efforts on exploring unsupervised
strategies [8, 35, 29, 13, 21, 24, 30, 12] have been reported,
but they are still not very satisfactory. One of the main reasons is that without the help of labeled data, it is rather difﬁcult to model the dramatic variances across camera views,
such as the variances of illumination and occlusion conditions. Such variances lead to view-speciﬁc interference/bias
which can be very disturbing in ﬁnding what is more distinguishable in matching people across views (see Figure 1).
In particular, existing unsupervised models treat the samples from different views in the same manner, and thus the
effects of view-speciﬁc bias could be overlooked.

994

