Efficient Global 2D-3D Matching for Camera Localization
in a Large-Scale 3D Map
Liu Liu 1,2 , Hongdong Li2,3 and Yuchao Dai1,2
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
2
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
3
Australia Centre for Robotic Vision

1

nwpuliuliu@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {hongdong.li, yuchao.dai}@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Given an image of a street scene in a city, this paper develops a new method that can quickly and precisely
pinpoint at which location (as well as viewing direction)
the image was taken, against a pre-stored large-scale 3D
point-cloud map of the city. We adopt the recently developed 2D-3D direct feature matching framework for this task
[23, 31, 32, 42–44]. This is a challenging task especially for
large-scale problems. As the map size grows bigger, many
3D points in the wider geographical area can be visually
very similar–or even identical–causing severe ambiguities
in 2D-3D feature matching. The key is to quickly and unambiguously find the correct matches between a query image
and the large 3D map. Existing methods solve this problem
mainly via comparing individual features’ visual similarities in a local and per feature manner, thus only local solutions can be found, inadequate for large-scale applications.
In this paper, we introduce a global method which harnesses global contextual information exhibited both within
the query image and among all the 3D points in the map.
This is achieved by a novel global ranking algorithm, applied to a Markov network built upon the 3D map, which
takes account of not only visual similarities between individual 2D-3D matches, but also their global compatibilities (as measured by co-visibility) among all matching pairs
found in the scene. Tests on standard benchmark datasets
show that our method achieved both higher precision and
comparable recall, compared with the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Getting accurate estimation of 6-DoF camera pose from
an image is essential for many computer vision applications
such as robot navigation [15, 37], augmented reality [35,
55], and image-based 3D reconstruction [4,18]. While more
and more consumer-grade cameras are equipped with in-

built GPS sensors which can provide some rough location
estimation, the accuracy is rather coarse (at tens of meters
[12, 57]) and is inadequate for many critical applications.
This paper proposes a new method for image-based camera localization (or IBL in short), against a pre-computed
3D point-cloud map. Our method follows the recently proposed framework of direct 2D-3D matching [23, 31, 32, 42–
44]. Under this framework, camera pose is computed by
directly matching 2D image features (e.g. SIFT [34]) from
the query image to 3D points in the map, then solve a standard camera absolute pose problem via PnP (perspectiven-points). If the 2D-3D matches found are contaminated
by some small portion of outliers (i.e. wrong matches),
RANSAC is conventionally applied to clean up the matches.
However, this “PnP+RANSAC” scheme only works for
small or moderately large problems. When the 3D map is
very large, for example, covering a wide geographical area
of an entire city or even a country, there may have tens of
thousands or millions of 3D map points, which poses two
major challenges to the problem: (1) how to quickly search
(match) within a massive database of millions of 3D points;
and (2) how to accurately find correct matches without suffering from ambiguity. The latter is more critical because,
as the 3D map grows larger, more and more 3D features
(e.g. SIFT) can become visually very similar or even identical due to repetitive structures. As such, one is facing an
extremely difficult task of “finding a particular needle in
a huge haystack containing many other similarly-looking
needles”. Applying RANSAC to this situation is doomed to
fail, because the inlier ratio in the putative matches can be
as low as e.g. ≤ 0.01 [51, 52].
To solve this scalability issue, existing direct 2D-3D
methods often adopt advanced retrieval techniques, such
as “vocabulary tree” and “ratio test” to remove ambiguous
matches [40, 42–44, 47]. However, they do this largely in
a local, sequential fashion on individual per feature basis.
In their methods, the match-or-not decision is only made
12372

