Self-supervised Learning of Pose Embeddings
from Spatiotemporal Relations in Videos
Ömer Sümer∗
Tobias Dencker∗
Björn Ommer
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing
IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany
firstname.lastname@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
Human pose analysis is presently dominated by deep
convolutional networks trained with extensive manual annotations of joint locations and beyond. To avoid the need
for expensive labeling, we exploit spatiotemporal relations
in training videos for self-supervised learning of pose embeddings. The key idea is to combine temporal ordering and
spatial placement estimation as auxiliary tasks for learning pose similarities in a Siamese convolutional network.
Since the self-supervised sampling of both tasks from natural videos can result in ambiguous and incorrect training labels, our method employs a curriculum learning idea
that starts training with the most reliable data samples and
gradually increases the difficulty. To further refine the training process we mine repetitive poses in individual videos
which provide reliable labels while removing inconsistencies. Our pose embeddings capture visual characteristics
of human pose that can boost existing supervised representations in human pose estimation and retrieval. We report quantitative and qualitative results on these tasks in
Olympic Sports, Leeds Pose Sports and MPII Human Pose
datasets.

1. Introduction
The ability to recognize human posture is essential for
describing actions and comes natural to a human being. Different poses in a video form a visual vocabulary similar to
words in text. An important objective of computer vision is
to bring this ability to the computer. Finding similar postures across different videos automatically enables a lot of
different applications like action recognition [3, 4] or video
content retrieval.
So what makes two postures look similar? More formally, a similarity function, which is entailed by a pose
embedding, needs to capture the characteristics of differ∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work.

ent postures, while exhibiting the necessary invariance to
strong intra-class variations. In particular, it should be sensitive to articulation of body parts while being invariant to
illumination, background, clutter, deformations (e.g. facial
expressions) or occlusions. Often human joints are used as
a surrogate for describing similarity, but there are several
issues: First, measuring distances in pose space accurately
and coming up with a non-ambiguous Euclidean embedding
is already a challenging problem. Second, the manual annotation of human joints in larger datasets is expensive and
time-consuming.
Convolutional networks have recently been immensely
helpful to computer vision. The feature hierarchy of such a
network is effectively defined by a cascade of filter banks
that are recursively applied to extract discriminative features for the given task. In this work we take advantage
of convolutional networks to learn pose embeddings from
videos.
In supervised similarity learning we assume that we are
given positive and negative pairs of postures for training.
In this supervised setting convolutional networks excel and
have recently surpassed human performance in some basic
tasks. In contrast unsupervised training of convolutional
networks is still an open problem and currently the focus of
the research community. In this paper we investigate how
to learn a pose representation without labels.
A solution for the problem of missing supervision is
to switch to a related auxiliary task for which label information is available. For this self-supervised strategy several well-known sources of weak supervision have been recently re-visited: among them spatial configuration of natural scenes, inpainting, super-resolution, image colorization,
tracking, ego-motion and even audio. Although there are
many sources available, not all of them are suitable for the
application in pose analysis. We exploit human motion in
videos to make pose similarity apparent and learnable without labels. With an almost infinite supply of video data online exploiting this idea is very attractive.
We propose learning spatiotemporal relations in videos

4298

