Efficient Low Rank Tensor Ring Completion
Wenqi Wang, Vaneet Aggarwal
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN

Shuchin Aeron
Tufts University, Medford, MA

{wang2041, vaneet}@purdue.edu

shuchin@ece.tufts.edu

Abstract

[7, 16] considered the completion of data via an alternating
least square method.

Using the matrix product state (MPS) representation of
the recently proposed tensor ring (TR) decompositions, in
this paper we propose a TR completion algorithm, which is
an alternating minimization algorithm that alternates over
the factors in the MPS representation. This development is
motivated in part by the success of matrix completion algorithms that alternate over the (low-rank) factors. We propose a novel initialization method and analyze the computational complexity of the TR completion algorithm. The numerical comparison between the TR completion algorithm
and the existing algorithms that employ a low rank tensor
train (TT) approximation for data completion shows that
our method outperforms the existing ones for a variety of
real computer vision settings, and thus demonstrates the
improved expressive power of tensor ring as compared to
tensor train.

Although TT format has been widely applied in numerical analysis, its applications to image classification and
completion are rather limited [13, 7, 16]. As outlined in
[18], TT decomposition suffers from the following limitations. Namely, (i) TT model requires rank-1 constraints to
the border factors, (ii) TT ranks are typically small for nearborder factors and large for the middle factors, and (iii) the
multiplications of the TT factors are not permutation invariant. In order to alleviate those drawbacks, a tensor ring (TR)
decomposition has been proposed in [18]. TR decomposition removes the unit rank constraints for the boundary
tensor factors and utilizes a trace operation in the decomposition. The multilinear products between factors also have
no strict ordering and the factors can be circularly shifted
due to the properties of the trace operation. This paper provides novel algorithms for data completion when the data is
modeled as a TR decomposition.

1. Introduction
Tensor decompositions for representing and storing data
have recently attracted considerable attention due to their
effectiveness in compressing data for statistical signal processing [11, 5, 17, 13, 3]. In this paper we focus on Tensor
Ring (TR) decomposition [18] and in particular its relation
to Matrix Product States (MPS) [14] representation for tensor and use it for completing data from missing entries. In
this context our algorithm is motivated by recent work in
matrix completion where under a suitable initialization an
alternating minimization algorithm [10, 8] over the low rank
factors is able to accurately predict the missing data.
Recently, tensor networks, considered as the generalization of tensor decompositions, have emerged as the potentially powerful tools for analysis of large-scale tensor data
[14]. The most popular tensor network is the Tensor Train
(TT) representation, which for an order-d tensor with each
dimension of size n requires O(dnr2 ) parameters, where r
is the rank of each of the factors, and thus allows for the efficient data representation [15]. Tensor train decompositions
have been recently considered in [7, 16] and the authors in

For data completion using tensor decompositions, one of
the key attributes is the notion of the rank. Even though the
rank in TR is a vector, we can assume all ranks to be the
same, unlike that in TT case where the intermediate ranks
are higher, thus providing a single parameter that can be
tuned based on the data and the number of samples available. The use of trace operation in the tensor ring structure brings challenges for completion as compared to that
for tensor train decomposition. The tensor ring structure
is equivalent to a cyclic structure in tensor networks [10],
and understanding this structure can help understand completion for more general tensor networks. In this paper, we
propose an alternating minimization algorithm for the tensor ring completion. The initialization of the algorithm is
an extension of TT approximation algorithm in [15] after
zero-filling the missing data. Further, all the sub-problems
in alternating minimization are converted to efficient least
square problems, thus significantly improving the complexity of each sub-problem. We also analyze the storage and
computational complexity of the proposed algorithm.
We note that, to the best of our knowledge, tensor ring
completion has never been investigated for tensor comple15697

