Scene Categorization with Spectral Features
1

Salman H. Khan1,3 , Munawar Hayat2 and Fatih Porikli3
Data61-CSIRO, 2 University of Canberra, 3 Australian National University

{salman.khan,fatih.porikli}@anu.edu.au, munawar.hayat@canberra.edu.au

Abstract
Spectral signatures of natural scenes were earlier found
to be distinctive for different scene types with varying spatial envelope properties such as openness, naturalness,
ruggedness, and symmetry. Recently, such handcrafted features have been outclassed by deep learning based representations.
This paper proposes a novel spectral description of convolution features, implemented efficiently as a unitary transformation within deep network architectures. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first attempt to use deep learning
based spectral features explicitly for image classification
task. We show that the spectral transformation decorrelates
convolutional activations, which reduces co-adaptation between feature detections, thus acts as an effective regularizer. Our approach achieves significant improvements on
three large-scale scene-centric datasets (MIT-67, SUN-397,
and Places-205). Furthermore, we evaluated the proposed
approach on the attribute detection task where its superior
performance manifests its relevance to semantically meaningful characteristics of natural scenes.

1. Introduction
Scene recognition is a challenging task with a broad
range of applications in content-based image indexing and
retrieval systems. The knowledge about the scene category can also assist in context-aware object detection, action recognition, and scene understanding [29, 64]. Spectral signature of an image has been shown to be distinctive and semantically meaningful for indoor and outdoor
scenes. Initial work from Oliva et al. [37] used power spectrum as a global feature descriptor to characterize scenes.
Later, Torralba and Oliva proposed a spatial envelope model
that estimates the shape of a scene (a.k.a. ‘the gist’) using
the statistics of both global and localized spectral information [36, 54]. However, these global features work only for
categorization of scenes into a general set of classes (e.g.,
beach, highway, forest, and mountain) and fail to tackle
fine-grained scene classification, which involves discriminating highly confusing scene categories with subtle differences (e.g., bus station, train station, and airport).
In this work, we propose to use spectral features obtained from intermediate convolutional layer activations of

-100
-100

Figure 1: t-SNE visualization of gist and spectral features
for the MIT-67 indoor scene dataset. (Best viewed in color)
deep neural networks for scene classification (Fig. 1). We
demonstrate that these feature representations perform surprisingly well for the scene categorization task and result
in significant performance gains. Further, these spectral
features can be used to automatically tag scenes with semantically meaningful attributes (e.g., man-made, dense,
natural). These attributes not only pertain to appearance
based characteristics but also relate to functional and material properties, illustrating that the learned spectral features
can capture meaningful information about a scene, closely
linked with the mid-level, human-interpretable attributes.
Such a global scene-centric representation can be computed
efficiently without involving segmentation, detection, and
grouping procedures. Therefore, it could assist in local image analysis or as an attention mechanism to focus on specific details in complex and cluttered scenes. It is noteworthy to point out that such a visual processing approach is
consistent with the remarkable ability of human visual perception which quickly identifies a scene in its first glance
and uses this information to selectively attend to the salient
scene details at a finer scale [5, 55].
The proposed spectral features are derived from the
learned convolutional activations in a deep neural network
using an orthogonal unitary transformation. Orthogonal
transforms possess decorrelation properties, thus they tend
to concentrate feature energy into only a small number of
coefficients [2]. In terms of decorrelation and energy compaction, Karhunen-Loeve Transform (KLT) provides an optimal solution [1] by identifying the principle directions
(eigenvectors) of the data covariance matrix and projecting the data onto these orthogonal basis to achieve maximal
decorrelation (independence) and energy compaction (concentration). However, a serious drawback of KLT is its high
15638

