Fashion Forward: Forecasting Visual Style in Fashion
Ziad Al-Halah1 *
Rainer Stiefelhagen1
Kristen Grauman2
1
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany
2
The University of Texas at Austin, 78701 Austin, USA
{ziad.al-halah, rainer.stiefelhagen}@kit.edu, grauman@cs.utexas.edu

1. Introduction
“The customer is the final filter. What survives the whole
process is what people wear.” – Marc Jacobs
Fashion is a fascinating domain for computer vision.
Not only does it offer a challenging testbed for fundamental vision problems—human body parsing [42, 43], crossdomain image matching [28, 20, 18, 11], and recognition [5, 29, 9, 21]—but it also inspires new problems that
can drive a research agenda, such as modeling visual compatibility [19, 38], interactive fine-grained retrieval [24, 44],
or reading social cues from what people choose to wear [26,
35, 10, 33]. At the same time, the space has potential for
high impact: the global market for apparel is estimated at
$3 Trillion USD [1]. It is increasingly entwined with online
shopping, social media, and mobile computing—all arenas
where automated visual analysis should be synergetic.
In this work, we consider the problem of visual fashion
forecasting. The goal is to predict the future popularity of
fine-grained fashion styles. For example, having observed
the purchase statistics for all women’s dresses sold on Ama* Work done while first author was a visiting researcher at UT Austin.

Popularity

Style B

What is the future of fashion? Tackling this question from
a data-driven vision perspective, we propose to forecast visual style trends before they occur. We introduce the first
approach to predict the future popularity of styles discovered from fashion images in an unsupervised manner. Using these styles as a basis, we train a forecasting model to
represent their trends over time. The resulting model can
hypothesize new mixtures of styles that will become popular in the future, discover style dynamics (trendy vs. classic), and name the key visual attributes that will dominate
tomorrow’s fashion. We demonstrate our idea applied to
three datasets encapsulating 80,000 fashion products sold
across six years on Amazon. Results indicate that fashion
forecasting benefits greatly from visual analysis, much more
than textual or meta-data cues surrounding products.

Style A

Abstract

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

Figure 1: We propose to predict the future of fashion based on
visual styles.

zon over the last N years, can we predict what salient visual properties the best selling dresses will have 12 months
from now? Given a list of trending garments, can we predict
which will remain stylish into the future? Which old trends
are primed to resurface, independent of seasonality?
Computational models able to make such forecasts
would be critically valuable to the fashion industry, in terms
of portraying large-scale trends of what people will be buying months or years from now. They would also benefit
individuals who strive to stay ahead of the curve in their
public persona, e.g., stylists to the stars. However, fashion forecasting is interesting even to those of us unexcited
by haute couture, money, and glamour. This is because
wrapped up in everyday fashion trends are the effects of
shifting cultural attitudes, economic factors, social sharing,
and even the political climate. For example, the hard-edged
flapper style during the prosperous 1920’s in the U.S. gave
way to the conservative, softer shapes of 1930’s women’s
wear, paralleling current events such as women’s right to
vote (secured in 1920) and the stock market crash 9 years
later that prompted more conservative attitudes [12]. Thus,
beyond the fashion world itself, quantitative models of style
evolution would be valuable in the social sciences.
While structured data from vendors (i.e., recording purchase rates for clothing items accompanied by meta-data
labels) is relevant to fashion forecasting, we hypothesize
that it is not enough. Fashion is visual, and comprehensive
fashion forecasting demands actually looking at the prod1388

