Automatic Spatially-aware Fashion Concept Discovery
Xintong Han1,3
Zuxuan Wu1
Menglong Zhu3
Yuan Li3
1
University of Maryland

Phoenix X. Huang2 Xiao Zhang3
Yang Zhao3
Larry S. Davis1
2
3
Snap Inc.
Google Inc.

{xintong,zxwu,lsd}@umiacs.umd.edu

phoenix@snap.com

Abstract
This paper proposes an automatic spatially-aware concept discovery approach using weakly labeled image-text
data from shopping websites. We first fine-tune GoogleNet
by jointly modeling clothing images and their corresponding descriptions in a visual-semantic embedding space.
Then, for each attribute (word), we generate its spatiallyaware representation by combining its semantic word vector representation with its spatial representation derived
from the convolutional maps of the fine-tuned network. The
resulting spatially-aware representations are further used
to cluster attributes into multiple groups to form spatiallyaware concepts (e.g., the neckline concept might consist
of attributes like v-neck, round-neck, etc). Finally, we decompose the visual-semantic embedding space into multiple concept-specific subspaces, which facilitates structured
browsing and attribute-feedback product retrieval by exploiting multimodal linguistic regularities. We conducted
extensive experiments on our newly collected Fashion200K
dataset, and results on clustering quality evaluation and
attribute-feedback product retrieval task demonstrate the effectiveness of our automatically discovered spatially-aware
concepts.

1. Introduction
The exponential growth of online fashion shopping websites has encouraged techniques that can effectively search
for a desired product from a massive collection of clothing items. However, this remains a particularly challenging problem since, unlike generic objects, clothes are usually subject to severe deformations and demonstrate significant variations in style and texture, and, most importantly,
the long-standing semantic gap between low-level visual
features and high-level intents of customers is very large.
To overcome the difficulty, researchers have proposed interactive search to refine retrieved results with humans in
the loop. Given candidate results, customers can provide

mini midi
maxi
blue
black
red
yellow

sleeveless
short-sleeve
long-sleeve

(a) Concept discovery

increasing dress length

{andypassion,menglong,liyu,yzhao}@google.com

decreasing sleeve length
(b) Structured product browsing

+ mini =

(c) Attribute-feedback product retrieval

Figure 1. (a) We propose a concept discovery approach to automatically cluster spatially-aware attributes into meaningful concepts. The discovered spatially-aware concepts are further utilized
for (b) structured product browsing (visualizing images according
to selected concepts) and (c) attribute-feedback product retrieval
(refining search results by providing a desired attribute).

various feedback, including the relevance of displayed images [20, 4], or tuning parameters like color and texture,
and then results are updated correspondingly. However, relevance feedback is limited due to its slow convergence to
meet the customer requirements. In addition to color and
texture, customers often wish to exploit higher-level features, such as neckline, sleeve length, dress length, etc.
Semantic attributes [13], which have been applied effectively to object categorization [15, 27] and fine-grained
recognition [12] could potentially address such challenges.
They are mid-level representations that describe semantic
properties. Recently, researchers have annotated clothes
with semantic attributes [9, 2, 8, 16, 11] (e.g., material, pattern) as intermediate representations or supervisory signals
to bridge the semantic gap. However, annotating semantic
attributes is costly. Further, attributes conditioned on object parts have achieved good performance in fine-grained
recognition [3, 33], confirming that spatial information is
critical for attributes. This also holds for clothing images.
For example, the neckline attribute usually corresponds to
the top part in images while the sleeve attribute ordinarily
11463

