SSD-6D: Making RGB-Based 3D Detection and 6D Pose Estimation Great Again
Wadim Kehl 1,2,∗ Fabian Manhardt 2,∗ Federico Tombari 2 Slobodan Ilic 2,3 Nassir Navab 2
1
Toyota Research Institute, Los Altos 2 Technical University of Munich 3 Siemens R&D, Munich
wadim.kehl@tri.global

fabian.manhardt@tum.de

Abstract
We present a novel method for detecting 3D model instances and estimating their 6D poses from RGB data in
a single shot. To this end, we extend the popular SSD
paradigm to cover the full 6D pose space and train on synthetic model data only. Our approach competes or surpasses current state-of-the-art methods that leverage RGBD data on multiple challenging datasets. Furthermore, our
method produces these results at around 10Hz, which is
many times faster than the related methods. For the sake
of reproducibility, we make our trained networks and detection code publicly available.1

1. Introduction
While category-level classification and detection from
images has recently experienced a tremendous leap forward
thanks to deep learning, the same has not yet happened for
what concerns 3D model localization and 6D object pose estimation. In contrast to large-scale classification challenges
such as PASCAL VOC [9] or ILSVRC [26], the domain of
6D pose estimation requires instance detection of known 3D
CAD models with high precision and accurate poses, as demanded by applications in the context of augmented reality
and robotic manipulation.
Most of the best performing 3D detectors follow a viewbased paradigm, in which a discrete set of object views
is generated and used for subsequent feature computation
[31, 14]. During testing, the scene is sampled at discrete
positions, features computed and then matched against the
object database to establish correspondences among training views and scene locations. Features can either be an
encoding of image properties (color gradients, depth values, normal orientations) [12, 16, 18] or, more recently, the
result of learning [4, 29, 5, 6, 17]. In either case, the accuracy of both detection and pose estimation hinges on three
aspects: (1) the coverage of the 6D pose space in terms of
viewpoint and scale, (2) the discriminative power of the fea1 https://wadimkehl.github.io/

* The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

tombari@in.tum.de

tures to tell objects and views apart and (3) the robustness
of matching towards clutter, illumination and occlusion.
CNN-based category detectors such as YOLO [25] or
SSD [22] have shown terrific results on large-scale 2D
datasets. Their idea is to inverse the sampling strategy such
that scene sampling is not anymore a set of discrete input
points leading to continuous output. Instead, the input space
is dense on the whole image and the output space is discretized into many overlapping bounding boxes of varying
shapes and sizes. This inversion allows for smooth scale
search over many differently-sized feature maps and simultaneous classification of all boxes in a single pass. In order
to compensate for the discretization of the output domain,
each bounding box regresses a refinement of its corners.
The goal of this work is to develop a deep network for
object detection that can accurately deal with 3D models
and 6D pose estimation by assuming an RGB image as
unique input at test time. To this end, we bring the concept of SSD over to this domain with the following contributions: (1) a training stage that makes use of synthetic 3D
model information only, (2) a decomposition of the model
pose space that allows for easy training and handling of
symmetries and (3) an extension of SSD that produces 2D
detections and infers proper 6D poses.
We argue that in most cases, color information alone can
already provide close to perfect detection rates with good
poses. Although our method does not need depth data, it is
readily available with RGB-D sensors and almost all recent
state-of-the-art 3D detectors make use of it for both feature computation and final pose refinement. We will thus
treat depth as an optional modality for hypothesis verification and pose refinement and will assess the performance of
our method with both 2D and 3D error metrics on multiple
challenging datasets for the case of RGB and RGB-D data.
Throughout experimental results on multiple benchmark
datasets, we demonstrate that our color-based approach is
competitive with respect to state-of-the-art detectors that
leverage RGB-D data or can even outperform them, while
being many times faster. Indeed, we show that the prevalent
trend of overly relying on depth for 3D instance detection is
not justified when using color correctly.
11521

