Beyond Planar Symmetry:
Modeling human perception of reflection and rotation symmetries in the wild
Christopher Funk
Yanxi Liu
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science.
The Pennsylvania State University. University Park, PA. 16802, USA
{funk, yanxi}@cse.psu.edu

Original Image

Abstract
Humans take advantage of real world symmetries for
various tasks, yet capturing their superb symmetry perception mechanism with a computational model remains
elusive. Motivated by a new study demonstrating the extremely high inter-person accuracy of human perceived
symmetries in the wild, we have constructed the first deeplearning neural network for reflection and rotation symmetry detection (Sym-NET), trained on photos from MS-COCO
(Microsoft-Common Object in COntext) dataset with nearly
11K consistent symmetry-labels from more than 400 human
observers. We employ novel methods to convert discrete
human labels into symmetry heatmaps, capture symmetry
densely in an image and quantitatively evaluate Sym-NET
against multiple existing computer vision algorithms. On
CVPR 2013 symmetry competition testsets and unseen MSCOCO photos, Sym-NET significantly outperforms all other
competitors. Beyond mathematically well-defined symmetries on a plane, Sym-NET demonstrates abilities to identify
viewpoint-varied 3D symmetries, partially occluded symmetrical objects, and symmetries at a semantic level.

1. Introduction
From the evolution of plants, insects and mammals, as
well as the earliest pieces of art in 20,000 BCE through the
modern day [20, 26, 64], perfectly symmetrical objects and
scenes are rare while approximate symmetries are readily
observable in both natural and man-made worlds. Perception of such symmetries in the wild has played an instrumental role at different levels of intelligence [10, 13, 20, 21, 52,
56, 57, 71] that function effectively in an otherwise cluttered
and often uncertain world. For decades, among human vision and computer vision researchers alike, the search for
computational models, analytical or biological basis, and
explanations for symmetry perception [28, 39, 65, 70] has
proven to be non-trivial [2, 44, 69].

Symmetry GTs

Predicted

Figure 1. Sample images from the MS-COCO dataset [40]. Symmetry ground-truths (mid-column) are computed from human labels (Figure 2): line segments for reflection symmetry axes and
red dots for rotation symmetry centers. Right column: heatmaps
for predicted symmetries, green for reflection symmetry axes, and
red for rotation symmetry centers.

The mathematical definition of a symmetry transformation g of a set S is clear and simple [9, 44, 75], g(S) = S.
However, how to identify a symmetry in a photo remains
ambiguous [42, 55]. The dilemma is: should a symmetry
g in an image be determined by its mathematical definition
or human perception? Human perception of symmetry can
deviate grossly from 2D pixel-geometry on an image. In
Figure 1: a face profile is perceived as having a reflection
symmetry; a rotation center is identified for half of a round
mirror, and for the highly skewed top-center of an apple;
and a reflection symmetry is labeled between two sitting
people playing with their phones! None of this mixture
of 3D/object prior-based and semantic-level symmetries has
been attempted in existing symmetry detection models.

793

