Structure-measure: A New Way to Evaluate Foreground Maps
Deng-Ping Fan1

Ming-Ming Cheng1 ∗
Yun Liu1
Tao Li1
1
2
CCCE, Nankai University
CRCV, UCF

Ali Borji2

http://dpfan.net/smeasure/

Abstract

1. Introduction
The evaluation of a predicted foreground map against
a ground-truth (GT) annotation map is crucial in evaluating and comparing various computer vision algorithm for
applications such as object detection [6, 8, 24, 40], saliency prediction [5, 20, 42], image segmentation [41], contentbased image retrieval [12, 15, 22], semantic segmentation
[21,45,46] and image collection browsing [10,14,29]. As a
specific example, here we focus on salient object detection
models [4, 6, 7, 16], although the proposed measure is general and can be used for other purposes. It is necessary to
point out that the salient object is not necessary to be foreground object [18].
The GT map is often binary (our assumption here). The
foreground maps are either non-binary or binary. As a re∗ M.M. Cheng (cmm@nankai.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.

3rd

AP

2nd

Our

F bw

AUC

Image

GT

Apps

Foreground map evaluation is crucial for gauging the
progress of object segmentation algorithms, in particular
in the field of salient object detection where the purpose
is to accurately detect and segment the most salient object in a scene. Several widely-used measures such as
Area Under the Curve (AUC), Average Precision (AP) and
the recently proposed Fβω (Fbw) have been used to evaluate the similarity between a non-binary saliency map (SM)
and a ground-truth (GT) map. These measures are based
on pixel-wise errors and often ignore the structural similarities. Behavioral vision studies, however, have shown
that the human visual system is highly sensitive to structures in scenes. Here, we propose a novel, efficient, and
easy to calculate measure known as structural similarity
measure (Structure-measure) to evaluate non-binary foreground maps. Our new measure simultaneously evaluates region-aware and object-aware structural similarity
between a SM and a GT map. We demonstrate superiority of our measure over existing ones using 5 meta-measures
on 5 benchmark datasets.

1st

Figure 1. Inaccuracy of existing evaluation measures. We compare the ranking of saliency maps generated by 3 state-of-the-art
salient object detection algorithms: DISC [11], MDF [27], and MC [48]. According to the application’s ranking (last row; Sec. 5.1),
the blue-border map ranks first, followed by the yellow- and redborder maps. The blue-border map captures the dog’s structure
most accurately, with respect to the GT. The yellow-border map
looks fuzzy although the overall outline of the dog is still present.
The red-border map almost completely destroyed the structure of
the dog. Surprisingly, all of the measures based on pixel-wise errors (first 3 rows) fail to rank the maps correctly. Our new measure
(4th row) ranks the three maps in the right order.

sult, evaluation measures can be classified into two types.
The first type is the binary map evaluation with the common
measures being Fβ -measure [2,13,33] and PASCAL’s VOC
segmentation measure [17]. The second type is the nonbinary map evaluation. Two traditional measures here include AUC and AP [17]. A newly released measure known
as Fbw [36] has been proposed to remedy flaws of AP and
AUC measures (see Sec. 2). Almost all salient objection
detection methods output non-binary maps. Therefore, in
this work we focus on non-binary map evaluation.
It is often desired that the foreground map should contain
the entire structure of the object. Thus, evaluation measures
are expected to tell which model generates a more complete
object. For example, in Fig. 1 (first row) the blue-border

4548

