Multi-task Self-Supervised Visual Learning
Carl Doersch†
†

DeepMind

∗

Andrew Zisserman†,∗

VGG, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford

Abstract
We investigate methods for combining multiple selfsupervised tasks—i.e., supervised tasks where data can be
collected without manual labeling—in order to train a single visual representation. First, we provide an apples-toapples comparison of four different self-supervised tasks
using the very deep ResNet-101 architecture. We then combine tasks to jointly train a network. We also explore lasso
regularization to encourage the network to factorize the
information in its representation, and methods for “harmonizing” network inputs in order to learn a more unified representation. We evaluate all methods on ImageNet
classification, PASCAL VOC detection, and NYU depth
prediction. Our results show that deeper networks work
better, and that combining tasks—even via a naı̈ve multihead architecture—always improves performance. Our best
joint network nearly matches the PASCAL performance of a
model pre-trained on ImageNet classification, and matches
the ImageNet network on NYU depth prediction.

1. Introduction
Vision is one of the most promising domains for unsupervised learning. Unlabeled images and video are available in practically unlimited quantities, and the most prominent present image models—neural networks—are data
starved, easily memorizing even random labels for large image collections [45]. Yet unsupervised algorithms are still
not very effective for training neural networks: they fail
to adequately capture the visual semantics needed to solve
real-world tasks like object detection or geometry estimation the way strongly-supervised methods do. For most vision problems, the current state-of-the-art approach begins
by training a neural network on ImageNet [35] or a similarly
large dataset which has been hand-annotated.
How might we better train neural networks without manual labeling? Neural networks are generally trained via
backpropagation on some objective function. Without labels, however, what objective function can measure how
good the network is? Self-supervised learning answers this
question by proposing various tasks for networks to solve,
where performance is easy to measure, i.e., performance

can be captured with an objective function like those seen
in supervised learning. Ideally, these tasks will be difficult to solve without understanding some form of image
semantics, yet any labels necessary to formulate the objective function can be obtained automatically. In the last few
years, a considerable number of such tasks have been proposed [1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 17, 20, 21, 23, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 31,
39, 40, 42, 43, 46, 47], such as asking a neural network to
colorize grayscale images, fill in image holes, solve jigsaw
puzzles made from image patches, or predict movement in
videos. Neural networks pre-trained with these tasks can
be re-trained to perform well on standard vision tasks (e.g.
image classification, object detection, geometry estimation)
with less manually-labeled data than networks which are
initialized randomly. However, they still perform worse in
this setting than networks pre-trained on ImageNet.
This paper advances self-supervision first by implementing four self-supervision tasks and comparing their performance using three evaluation measures. The self-supervised
tasks are: relative position [7], colorization [46], the “exemplar” task [8], and motion segmentation [27] (described
in section 2). The evaluation measures (section 5) assess a
diverse set of applications that are standard for this area, including ImageNet image classification, object category detection on PASCAL VOC 2007, and depth prediction on
NYU v2.
Second, we evaluate if performance can be boosted by
combining these tasks to simultaneously train a single trunk
network. Combining the tasks fairly in a multi-task learning objective is challenging since the tasks learn at different
rates, and we discuss how we handle this problem in section 4. We find that multiple tasks work better than one, and
explore which combinations give the largest boost.
Third, we identify two reasons why a naı̈ve combination
of self-supervision tasks might conflict, impeding performance: input channels can conflict, and learning tasks can
conflict. The first sort of conflict might occur when jointly
training colorization and exemplar learning: colorization receives grayscale images as input, while exemplar learning
receives all color channels. This puts an unnecessary burden
on low-level feature detectors that must operate across domains. The second sort of conflict might happen when one
12051

