Factorized Bilinear Models for Image Recognition
Yanghao Li1
Naiyan Wang2
Jiaying Liu1∗ Xiaodi Hou2
1
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University 2 TuSimple
lyttonhao@pku.edu.cn

winsty@gmail.com

Abstract
Although Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
have liberated their power in various computer vision tasks,
the most important components of CNN, convolutional layers and fully connected layers, are still limited to linear
transformations. In this paper, we propose a novel Factorized Bilinear (FB) layer to model the pairwise feature interactions by considering the quadratic terms in the transformations. Compared with existing methods that tried to incorporate complex non-linearity structures into CNNs, the
factorized parameterization makes our FB layer only require a linear increase of parameters and affordable computational cost. To further reduce the risk of overfitting of
the FB layer, a specific remedy called DropFactor is devised during the training process. We also analyze the connection between FB layer and some existing models, and
show FB layer is a generalization to them. Finally, we validate the effectiveness of FB layer on several widely adopted
datasets including CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet,
and demonstrate superior results compared with various
state-of-the-art deep models.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [21, 23]
have demonstrated their power in most computer vision
tasks, from image classification [12, 38], object detection [10, 31], to semantic segmentation [27]. The impressive fitting power of a deep net mainly comes from its recursive feature transformations. Most efforts to enhance the
representation power of a deep neural net can be roughly
categorized into two lines. One line of works features on
increasing the depth of the network, namely the number of
non-linear transformations. ResNet [12] is a classic example of such extremely deep network. By using skip connections to overcome the gradients vanishing/exploding and
degradation problems, ResNet achieves significant performance improvements. The other line of efforts aims at en-

liujiaying@pku.edu.cn

xiaodi.hou@gmail.com

hancing the fitting power for each layer. For example, Deep
Neural Decision Forests [19] was proposed to integrate differentiable decision forests as the classifier. In [26], the
authors modeled pairwise feature interactions using explicit
outer product at the final classification layer. The main
drawbacks of these approaches are that they either bring
in large additional parameters (for instance, [26] introduces
250M additional parameters for ImageNet classification)
or have a slow convergence rate ([19] requires 10x more
epochs to converge than a typical GoogLeNet [38]).
In this paper, we propose the Factorized Bilinear (FB)
model to enhance the capacity of CNN layers in a simple
and effective way. At a glance, the FB model can be considered as a generalized approximation of the Bilinear Pooling [26], but with two modifications. First, our FB model
generalizes the original Bilinear Pooling to all convolutional
and fully connected layers. In this way, all computational
layers in CNN could have larger capacity with pairwise interactions. However, under the original settings of Bilinear
Pooling, such generalization will lead to explosion of parameters. To mitigate this problem, we constrain the rank of
all quadratic matrices. This constraint significantly reduces
the number of parameters and computational cost, making
the complexity of FB layer linear with respect to the original conv/fc layer. Furthermore, in order to cope with overfitting, we propose a regularization method called DropFactor
for the FB model. Analogous to Dropout [36], DropFactor
randomly sets some elements of the bilinear terms to zero
during each iteration in the training phase, and uses all of
them in the testing phase.
To summarize, our contributions of this work are threefold:
• We present a novel Factorized Bilinear (FB) model to
consider the pairwise feature interactions with linear
complexity. We further demonstrate that the FB model
can be easily incorporated into convolutional and fully
connected layers.
• We propose a novel method DropFactor for the FB
layers to prevent overfitting by randomly dropping factors in the training phase.

∗ Corresponding author

12079

