Temporal Generative Adversarial Nets with Singular Value Clipping
Masaki Saito∗
Eiichi Matsumoto∗
Shunta Saito
Preferred Networks inc., Japan
{msaito, matsumoto, shunta}@preferred.jp

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a generative model, Temporal
Generative Adversarial Nets (TGAN), which can learn a semantic representation of unlabeled videos, and is capable of
generating videos. Unlike existing Generative Adversarial
Nets (GAN)-based methods that generate videos with a single generator consisting of 3D deconvolutional layers, our
model exploits two different types of generators: a temporal
generator and an image generator. The temporal generator
takes a single latent variable as input and outputs a set of
latent variables, each of which corresponds to an image
frame in a video. The image generator transforms a set of
such latent variables into a video. To deal with instability
in training of GAN with such advanced networks, we adopt
a recently proposed model, Wasserstein GAN, and propose
a novel method to train it stably in an end-to-end manner.
The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our
methods.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised learning of feature representation from a
large dataset is one of the most significant problems in computer vision. If good representation of data can be obtained
from an unlabeled dataset, it could be of benefit to a variety
of tasks such as classification, clustering, and generating new
data points.
There have been many studies regarding unsupervised
learning in the field of computer vision. Their targets are
roughly two-fold; images and videos. As for unsupervised
learning of images, Generative Adversarial Nets (GAN) [5]
have shown impressive results and succeeded to generate
plausible images with a dataset that contains plenty of natural
images [2, 49]. In contrast, unsupervised learning of videos
still has many difficulties compared to images. While recent
studies have achieved remarkable progress [35, 25, 15] in a
problem that predicts future frames from previous frames,
video generation without any clues of data is still a highly
challenging problem. Although the recent study tackled to
∗ Authors contributed equally

address this problem by decomposing it into background
generation and foreground generation, this approach has
a drawback that it cannot generate a scene with dynamic
background due to the static background assumption [44].
To the best of our knowledge, there is no study that tackles
video generation without such assumption and generates
diversified videos like natural videos.
Although a simple approach is to use 3D convolutional
layers for representing the generating process of a video, it
implies that images along x-t plane and y-t plane besides
x-y plane are considered equally, where x and y denote
the spatial dimensions and t denotes the time dimension.
We believe that the nature of time dimension is essentially
different from the spatial dimensions in the case of videos
so that such approach has difficulty on the video generation
problem. The relevance of this assumption has been also
discussed in some recent studies [33, 24, 46] that have shown
good performance on the video recognition task.
Based on the above discussion, in this paper, we extend
an existing GAN model and propose Temporal Generative
Adversarial Net (TGAN) that is capable of learning representation from an unlabeled video dataset and producing a
new video. Unlike the existing video generator that generates videos with 3D deconvolutional layers [44], in our
proposed model the generator consists of two sub networks
called a temporal generator and an image generator (Fig.1).
Specifically, the temporal generator first yields a set of latent
variables, each of which corresponds to a latent variable for
the image generator. Then, the image generator transforms
these latent variables into a video which has the same number of frames as the variables. The model comprised of the
temporal and image generators can not only enable to efficiently capture the time series, but also be easily extended to
frame interpolation.
The typical problem that arises from such advanced networks is the instability of training of GANs. In this paper we
adopt a recently proposed Wasserstein GAN (WGAN) which
tackles the instability, however, we observed that our model
still has sensitivity to a hyperparameter of WGAN. Therefore, to deal with this problem, we propose a novel method
to remove the sensitive hyperparameter from WGAN and
12830

