Unsupervised Learning of Important Objects from First-Person Videos
Gedas Bertasius1 , Hyun Soo Park2 , Stella X. Yu3 , Jianbo Shi1
1
University of Pennsylvania, 2 University of Minnesota, 3 UC Berkeley ICSI
{gberta,jshi}@seas.upenn.edu

hspark@umn.edu

stella.yu@berkeley.edu

Abstract
A first-person camera, placed at a person’s head, captures, which objects are important to the camera wearer.
Most prior methods for this task learn to detect such important objects from the manually labeled first-person data
in a supervised fashion. However, important objects are
strongly related to the camera wearer’s internal state such
as his intentions and attention, and thus, only the person wearing the camera can provide the importance labels.
Such a constraint makes the annotation process costly and
limited in scalability.
In this work, we show that we can detect important objects in first-person images without the supervision by the
camera wearer or even third-person labelers. We formulate
an important detection problem as an interplay between the
1) segmentation and 2) recognition agents. The segmentation agent first proposes a possible important object segmentation mask for each image, and then feeds it to the
recognition agent, which learns to predict an important object mask using visual semantics and spatial features.
We implement such an interplay between both agents via
an alternating cross-pathway supervision scheme inside our
proposed Visual-Spatial Network (VSN). Our VSN consists
of spatial (“where”) and visual (“what”) pathways, one of
which learns common visual semantics while the other focuses on the spatial location cues. Our unsupervised learning is accomplished via a cross-pathway supervision, where
one pathway feeds its predictions to a segmentation agent,
which proposes a candidate important object segmentation
mask that is then used by the other pathway as a supervisory
signal. We show our method’s success on two different important object datasets, where our method achieves similar
or better results as the supervised methods.

1. Introduction
A question “what is where?” attempts to delineate a picture as a spatial arrangement of objects rather than a collection of unordered visual words, which inspires core computer vision tasks such as recognition, segmentation, and
3D reconstruction. This spatial arrangement encodes not

Figure 1: Given an unlabeled set of first-person images our
goal is to find all objects that are important to the camera
wearer. Unlike most prior methods, we do so without using
ground truth importance labels.
only the physical relationship between objects in front of
the camera but also the interactions with the photographer
standing behind the camera1 . A picture is always taken by a
photographer reflecting what is important to her/him, which
provides a strong cue to infer the internal states such as
his/her intent, attention, and emotion. In particular, firstperson videos capture unscripted interactions with scenes
suggesting that the spatial layout is arranged such that the
objects can afford the associated actions, e.g., a cup appears
to be held by right hand from the holder’s point of view.
In this paper, we aim to detect objects that are important
to the photographer from a first-person video. Since importance is a subjective matter, the photographer is the only one
who can identify an important object. However, we conjecture that it is possible to detect important objects without
the supervision by the photographer or even third-person labelers because an important object exhibits common visual
semantics (what it looks like) and a spatial layout (where it
is in the first-person image).
To achieve this goal, we formulate an important object
1 Figure-ground segmentation, and saliency detection are a line of work
that addresses the relationship with the photographer.

11956

