Scale Recovery for Monocular Visual Odometry Using Depth Estimated with
Deep Convolutional Neural Fields
Xiaochuan Yin∗ , Xiangwei Wang∗ , Xiaoguo Du, Qijun Chen
Tongji University
yinxiaochuan@hotmail.com,wangxiangwei.cpp@gmail.com, {1610448, qjchen}@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
Scale recovery is one of the central problems for monocular visual odometry. Normally, road plane and camera
height are specified as reference to recover the scale. The
performances of these methods depend on the plane recognition and height measurement of camera. In this work,
we propose a novel method to recover the scale by incorporating the depths estimated from images using deep convolutional neural fields. Our method considers the whole
environmental structure as reference rather than a specified plane. The accuracy of depth estimation contributes to
the scale recovery. We improve the performance of depth
estimation by considering two consecutive frames and egomotion of camera into our networks. The depth refinement
and scale recovery are obtained iteratively. In this way, our
method can eliminate the scale drift and improve the depth
estimation simultaneously. The effectiveness of our method
is verified on the KITTI dataset for both monocular visual
odometry and depth estimation tasks.

1. Introduction
Visual odometry is the process of estimating the egomotion of the robot from input images. It is one of the core
modules of simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM)
system. Visual odometry using stereo camera has achieved
a great success these years. The reason why stereo visual
odometry is widely applied is that it can estimate a reliable
depth map for transformation matrix calculation. However,
stereo camera will degenerate into a monocular one when
the distance between camera and scene is much larger than
the baseline. Moreover, self-calibration is also required for
stereo visual odometry system after long-term operation in
order to reduce the mechanical vibration encountered in application [5, 23]. Unlike the stereo visual odometry, visual odometry using monocular camera does not suffer from
these problems. Therefore, monocular visual odometry has
∗ Authors contributed equally

Figure 1. 3D reconstruction of street scene with egomotion and
depth estimated by our method.

attracted a lot of attentions in recent years.
Monocular visual odometry algorithms cannot get environment map and robot motion in real scale. Because
the distance between features and camera cannot be measured by triangulation directly. Therefore, monocular visual
odometry faces the problem of scale drift, and the absolute
scale need to be recovered to eliminate it.
To recover the scale, geometry constraints between the
camera and the surroundings are normally used. Previous
methods apply the camera height and the ground surface to
obtain the scale [2, 24, 15]. The camera height is assumed
to be known in advance. In [2], they adopt a texture analysis classifier to extract the ground region, and in this way the
planar homography matrix is calculated to recover the scale
factor. In [24], a combination of several cues within a predefined region of interest (ROI) is used to recover the scale. To
be more robust in different scenes, [15] estimates the ground
geometry with self-learned ground appearance information.
These methods are constrained by limited environmental information. More structural information of environments is
required. In this way, there would not need to set the camera
height and ground plane as the fixed references.
In these years, deep learning has achieved a great success
15870

