Amulet: Aggregating Multi-level Convolutional Features
for Salient Object Detection
Pingping Zhang† Dong Wang† Huchuan Lu†∗ Hongyu Wang† Xiang Ruan‡
‡
†
Dalian University of Technology, China
Tiwaki Co.Ltd
jssxzhpp@mail.dlut.edu.cn {wdice,lhchuan,whyu}@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Fully convolutional neural networks (FCNs) have shown
outstanding performance in many dense labeling problems.
One key pillar of these successes is mining relevant information from features in convolutional layers. However, how
to better aggregate multi-level convolutional feature maps
for salient object detection is underexplored. In this work,
we present Amulet, a generic aggregating multi-level convolutional feature framework for salient object detection.
Our framework ﬁrst integrates multi-level feature maps into multiple resolutions, which simultaneously incorporate
coarse semantics and ﬁne details. Then it adaptively learns
to combine these feature maps at each resolution and predict saliency maps with the combined features. Finally, the
predicted results are efﬁciently fused to generate the ﬁnal
saliency map. In addition, to achieve accurate boundary
inference and semantic enhancement, edge-aware feature
maps in low-level layers and the predicted results of low
resolution features are recursively embedded into the learning framework. By aggregating multi-level convolutional
features in this efﬁcient and flexible manner, the proposed
saliency model provides accurate salient object labeling.
Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that our method
performs favorably against state-of-the-art approaches in
terms of near all compared evaluation metrics.

1. Introduction
Salient object detection, which aims to identify the most
conspicuous objects or regions in an image, has received
considerable amount of attention in recent years. As a preprocessing step in computer vision, saliency detection has
shown a great success in ranges of visual applications, e.g.
object retargeting [7, 38, 40], scene classiﬁcation [35, 33],
visual tracking [4, 29], image retrieval [14, 11] and semantic segmentation [8]. Despite decades of valuable research,
salient object detection still remains an unsolved research
∗ Prof.Lu is the corresponding author.

ruanxiang@tiwaki.com

problem because there are large variety of aspects that can
contribute to deﬁne visual saliency, and it’s hard to combine
all hand-tuned factors or cues in an appropriate way.
Inspired by human visual attention mechanisms, many
early existing methods [17, 12, 10, 19, 46, 47] in salient
object detection leverage low-level visual features (e.g. color, texture and contrast) with heuristic priors to model and
approximate human saliency. These generic techniques are
known to be useful for keeping ﬁne image structures and
reducing computation. Representative methods have set the
benchmark on several saliency detection datasets. However,
such low-level features and priors can hardly capture highlevel semantic knowledge about the object and its surroundings. Thus, these low-level feature based methods are very
far away from distinguishing salient objects from the clutter
background and can not generate satisﬁed predictions.
In recent years, fully convolutional networks (FCNs),
adaptively extracting high-level semantic information from
raw images, have shown impressive results in many dense
labeling tasks, such as image segmentation [28, 31, 6],
generic object extraction [25, 13], pose estimation [48] and
contour detection [45]. Motivated by these achievements,
several attempts to utilize high-level features of FCNs, have
been performed and delivered superior performance in predicting saliency maps [20, 21, 27, 41, 50]. Nevertheless,
these state-of-the-art models mainly focus on the non-linear
combination of high-level features extracted from the last
convolutional layers. Due to the lack of low-level visual information such as object edge, the predicted results of these
methods tend to have poorly localized object boundaries.
From above discussions, we note that 1) how to simultaneously utilize multi-level potential saliency cues, 2) how
to conveniently ﬁnd the optimal multi-level feature aggregation strategy, and 3) how to efﬁciently preserve salient
objects’ boundaries should become the most intrinsic problems in salient object detection. To resolve these problems,
in this paper, we propose a generic aggregating multi-level
convolutional feature framework, namely Amulet, which
effectively utilizes multi-level features of FCNs for salient
object detection.

202

