Nonparametric Variational Auto-encoders for
Hierarchical Representation Learning
Prasoon Goyal1

Zhiting Hu1,2 Xiaodan Liang1 Chenyu Wang2
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Petuum Inc.

Eric P. Xing1,2

{prasoongoyal13,chenyu.wanghao}@gmail.com, {zhitingh,xiaodan1,epxing}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
The recently developed variational autoencoders (VAEs)
have proved to be an effective confluence of the rich representational power of neural networks with Bayesian methods. However, most work on VAEs use a rather simple prior
over the latent variables such as standard normal distribution, thereby restricting its applications to relatively simple phenomena. In this work, we propose hierarchical nonparametric variational autoencoders, which combines treestructured Bayesian nonparametric priors with VAEs, to enable infinite flexibility of the latent representation space.
Both the neural parameters and Bayesian priors are learned
jointly using tailored variational inference. The resulting
model induces a hierarchical structure of latent semantic
concepts underlying the data corpus, and infers accurate
representations of data instances. We apply our model in
video representation learning. Our method is able to discover highly interpretable activity hierarchies, and obtain
improved clustering accuracy and generalization capacity
based on the learned rich representations.

1. Introduction
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [11] are among the
popular models for unsupervised representation learning.
They consist of a standard autoencoder component, that embeds the data into a latent code space by minimizing reconstruction error, and a Bayesian regularization over the latent space, which enforces the posterior of the hidden code
vector matches a prior distribution. These models have
been successfully applied to various representation learning
tasks, such as sentence modeling [3, 8] and image understanding [19, 5].
However, most of these approaches employ a simple
prior over the latent space, which is often the standard normal distribution. Though convenient inference and learning
is enabled, converting the data distribution to such fixed,
single-mode prior distribution can lead to overly simplified representations which lose rich semantics present in
the data. This is especially true in the context of unsupervised learning where large amount of available data with

Z

encoder

decoder

X

X’

Figure 1. Illustration of the nonparametric hierarchical variational
autoencoder. We combines hierarhical Bayesian nonparametric
priors with variational autoencoders.

complex hidden structures is of interest which is unlikely
to be presented in the restricted latent space. For example,
a large video corpus can encode rich human activity with
underlying intricate temporal dependencies and hierarchical relationships. For accurate encoding and new insights
into the datasets, it is desirable to develop new representation learning approaches with great modeling flexibility and
structured interpretability.
In this paper, we propose hierarchical nonparametric
variational autoencoders, which combines Bayesian nonparametric priors with VAEs. Bayesian nonparametric
methods as the code space prior can grow information capacity with the amount and complexity of data, which endows great representational power of the latent code space.
In particular, we employ nested Chinese Restaurant Process
(nCRP) [2], a stochastic process allowing infinitely deep
and branching trees for representing the data. As opposed
to fixed prior distributions in previous work, we learn both
the VAE parameters and the nonparametric priors jointly
from the data, for self-calibrated model capacity. The induced tree hierarchies serve as an aggregated structured
representation of the whole corpus, summarizing the gist
for convenient navigation and better generalization. On the
other hand, each data instance is assigned with a probabil-

5094

