Video Deblurring via Semantic Segmentation and Pixel-Wise Non-Linear Kernel
Wenqi Ren1,2 , Jinshan Pan3 , Xiaochun Cao1,4∗, and Ming-Hsuan Yang5
1
State Key Laboratory of Information Security (SKLOIS), IIE, CAS
2
Tencent AI Lab
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
4
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California, Merced

Abstract
Video deblurring is a challenging problem as the blur
is complex and usually caused by the combination of camera shakes, object motions, and depth variations. Optical
flow can be used for kernel estimation since it predicts motion trajectories. However, the estimates are often inaccurate in complex scenes at object boundaries, which are crucial in kernel estimation. In this paper, we exploit semantic
segmentation in each blurry frame to understand the scene
contents and use different motion models for image regions
to guide optical flow estimation. While existing pixel-wise
blur models assume that the blur kernel is the same as optical flow during the exposure time, this assumption does not
hold when the motion blur trajectory at a pixel is different
from the estimated linear optical flow. We analyze the relationship between motion blur trajectory and optical flow,
and present a novel pixel-wise non-linear kernel model to
account for motion blur. The proposed blur model is based
on the non-linear optical flow, which describes complex motion blur more effectively. Extensive experiments on challenging blurry videos demonstrate the proposed algorithm
performs favorably against the state-of-the-art methods.

(a) Frame t

(b) Frame t + 1

(c) Initial segmentation [9]

(d) Our segmentation

(e) Optical flow [13]

(f) Our optical flow

(g) Deblurred result [13]

(h) Our deblurred result

1. Introduction
The recent years have witnessed significant advances
in image deblurring with numerous applications [26, 43].
However, most deblurring methods are developed for single images [3, 23, 41] and considerably less attention has
been paid to videos [13, 33, 39], where the blur is caused
by camera shakes, object motions, and depth variations, as
illustrated by an example in Figure 1. Due to interacting
and complex motions, video deblurring cannot be modeled
well by conventional uniform [8] or non-uniform blur [38]
models. On the other hand, as most existing methods for

Figure 1. (a)-(b) Consecutive frames. (c) Semantic segmentation
by [9]. (d) Segmentation of by the proposed algorithm, which is
more accurate at the object boundary. (e) Optical flow by [13] from
frame t to t + 1. (f) Optical flow by the proposed algorithm, which
is more accurate around the object and background. (g) Deblurred
result by [13]. (h) Deblurred image by the proposed algorithm.

∗ Corresponding author.

11077

