Soft-NMS – Improving Object Detection With One Line of Code
Navaneeth Bodla*
Bharat Singh*
Rama Chellappa
Larry S. Davis
Center For Automation Research, University of Maryland, College Park
{nbodla,bharat,rama,lsd}@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
Non-maximum suppression is an integral part of the object detection pipeline. First, it sorts all detection boxes on
the basis of their scores. The detection box M with the
maximum score is selected and all other detection boxes
with a significant overlap (using a pre-defined threshold)
with M are suppressed. This process is recursively applied
on the remaining boxes. As per the design of the algorithm,
if an object lies within the predefined overlap threshold, it
leads to a miss. To this end, we propose Soft-NMS, an algorithm which decays the detection scores of all other objects
as a continuous function of their overlap with M. Hence,
no object is eliminated in this process. Soft-NMS obtains
consistent improvements for the coco-style mAP metric on
standard datasets like PASCAL VOC 2007 (1.7% for both RFCN and Faster-RCNN) and MS-COCO (1.3% for R-FCN
and 1.1% for Faster-RCNN) by just changing the NMS algorithm without any additional hyper-parameters. Using
Deformable-RFCN, Soft-NMS improves state-of-the-art in
object detection from 39.8% to 40.9% with a single model.
Further, the computational complexity of Soft-NMS is the
same as traditional NMS and hence it can be efficiently
implemented. Since Soft-NMS does not require any extra
training and is simple to implement, it can be easily integrated into any object detection pipeline. Code for SoftNMS is publicly available on GitHub http://bit.ly/
2nJLNMu.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental problem in computer
vision in which an algorithm generates bounding boxes for
specified object categories and assigns them classification
scores. It has many practical applications in autonomous
driving [6, 9], video/image indexing [28, 22], surveillance
[2, 11] etc. Hence, any new component proposed for the
object detection pipeline should not create a computational
*The first two authors contributed equally to this paper.

0.0?
0.4?

0.80
0.95

Figure 1. This image has two confident horse detections (shown
in red and green) which have a score of 0.95 and 0.8 respectively.
The green detection box has a significant overlap with the red one.
Is it better to suppress the green box altogether and assign it a score
of 0 or a slightly lower score of 0.4?

bottleneck, otherwise it will be conveniently “ignored’ in
practical implementations. Moreover, if a complex module
is introduced which requires re-training of models which
leads to a little improvement in performance, it will also be
ignored. However, if a simple module can improve performance without requiring any re-training of existing models,
it would be widely adopted. To this end, we present a soft
non-maximum suppression algorithm, as an alternative to
the traditional NMS algorithm in the current object detection pipeline.
Traditional object detection pipelines [4, 8] employ a
multi-scale sliding window based approach which assigns
foreground/background scores for each class on the basis
of features computed in each window. However, neighboring windows often have correlated scores (which increases
false positives), so non-maximum suppression is used as
a post-processing step to obtain final detections. With the
advent of deep learning, the sliding window approach was
replaced with category independent region proposals generated using a convolutional neural network. In state-ofthe-art detectors, these proposals are input to a classification sub-network which assigns them class specific scores
15561

