Recurrent Topic-Transition GAN for Visual Paragraph Generation
Xiaodan Liang1 Zhiting Hu1,2 Hao Zhang1,2 Chuang Gan3 Eric P. Xing2
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Petuum Inc. 3 Tsinghua University
{xiaodan1,zhitingh,hao,epxing}@cs.cmu.edu, ganchuang1990@gmail.com

Abstract
A natural image usually conveys rich semantic content
and can be viewed from different angles. Existing image description methods are largely restricted by small
sets of biased visual paragraph annotations, and fail to
cover rich underlying semantics. In this paper, we investigate a semi-supervised paragraph generative framework
that is able to synthesize diverse and semantically coherent paragraph descriptions by reasoning over local semantic regions and exploiting linguistic knowledge. The proposed Recurrent Topic-Transition Generative Adversarial
Network (RTT-GAN) builds an adversarial framework between a structured paragraph generator and multi-level
paragraph discriminators. The paragraph generator generates sentences recurrently by incorporating region-based
visual and language attention mechanisms at each step.
The quality of generated paragraph sentences is assessed
by multi-level adversarial discriminators from two aspects,
namely, plausibility at sentence level and topic-transition
coherence at paragraph level. The joint adversarial training of RTT-GAN drives the model to generate realistic paragraphs with smooth logical transition between sentence topics. Extensive quantitative experiments on image and video
paragraph datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our
RTT-GAN in both supervised and semi-supervised settings.
Qualitative results on telling diverse stories for an image
verify the interpretability of RTT-GAN.

1. Introduction
Describing visual content with natural language is an
emerging interdisciplinary problem at the intersection of
computer vision, natural language processing, and artificial
intelligence. Recently, great advances [18, 3, 4, 31, 24, 33,
22, 21, 36] have been achieved in describing images and
videos using a single high-level sentence, owing to the advent of large datasets [23, 17] pairing images with natural
language descriptions. Despite the encouraging progress
in image captioning [30, 33, 24, 31], most current systems
tend to capture the scene-level gist rather than fine-grained

a) Generic description:
A group of people are sitting around a living
room together. One of the men is wearing black
sleeve shirt and blue pants. A man is sitting
next to the wooden table. A man and woman
are sitting on a couch. There is a brown
wooden table in the room.

b) Personalized descriptions:
There is a man sitting on a wooden chair.
The man with a white remote with white
buttons is wearing a black and white
shirt and jean pants. A woman next to
him has red shirts and red skirts. There
are a man and woman sitting on the floor
next to a wooden table.

A smiling woman is sitting on a couch.
She has yellow short hair and is wearing a
short sleeve shirt. She is holding a white
plate. There is a brown couch in the living
room. In front of her is a wooden table.
There are papers and glasses on the table.

Figure 1. Our RTT-GAN is able to automatically produce generic
paragraph descriptions shown in (a), and personalized descriptions
by manipulating first sentences (highlighted in red), shown in (b).

entities, which largely undermines their applications in realworld scenarios such as blind navigation, video retrieval,
and automatic video subtitling. One of the recent alternatives to sentence-level captioning is visual paragraph generation [11, 16, 34], which aims to provide a coherent and
detailed description, like telling stories for images/videos.
Generating a full paragraph description for an image/video is challenging. First, paragraph descriptions tend
to be diverse, just like different individuals can tell stories
from personalized perspectives. As illustrated in Figure 1,
users may describe the image starting from different viewpoints and objects. Existing methods [16, 34, 19] deterministically optimizing over single annotated paragraph thus
suffer from losing massive information expressed in the image. It is desirable to enable diverse generation through
simple manipulations. Second, annotating images/videos
with long paragraphs is labor-expensive, leading to only
small scale image-paragraph pairs which limits the model
generalization. Finally, different from single-sentence captioning, visual paragraphing requires to capture more detailed and richer semantic content. It is necessary to perform long-term visual and language reasoning to incorporate fine-grained cues while ensuring coherent paragraphs.
To overcome the above challenges, we propose a semisupervised visual paragraph generative model, Recurrent
Topic-Transition GAN (RTT-GAN), which generates diverse and semantically coherent paragraphs by reasoning
over both local semantic regions and global paragraph
13362

