Deep Scene Image Classification with the MFAFVNet
Yunsheng Li
Mandar Dixit
Nuno Vasconcelos
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
yul554@ucsd.edu

mdixit@ucsd.edu

Abstract
The problem of transferring a deep convolutional network trained for object recognition to the task of scene image classification is considered. An embedded implementation of the recently proposed mixture of factor analyzers
Fisher vector (MFA-FV) is proposed. This enables the design of a network architecture, the MFAFVNet, that can be
trained in an end to end manner. The new architecture involves the design of a MFA-FV layer that implements a statistically correct version of the MFA-FV, through a combination of network computations and regularization. When
compared to previous neural implementations of Fisher vectors, the MFAFVNet relies on a more powerful statistical
model and a more accurate implementation. When compared to previous non-embedded models, the MFAFVNet
relies on a state of the art model, which is now embedded
into a CNN. This enables end to end training. Experiments
show that the MFAFVNet has state of the art performance
on scene classification.

1. Introduction
Scene image classification is an important problems for
applications of computer vision such as robotics, image
search, geo-localization, etc. It is also a challenging problem, e.g. object recognition methods do not necessarily
work for scenes. This is because scenes include both a
holistic component, the gist of the scene, and an objectbased component. Furthermore, the object vocabulary is
usually open-ended and it does not suffice to recognize objects, as most scenes are collections of objects in characteristic spatial layouts. There is also a need to model relationships between objects. Historically, this motivated different approaches to scene classification, including holistic
gist descriptors [20] and descriptors based on local features.
Localized approaches included descriptors of contextual relationships between objects [14] or semantics properties such as the objects in the scene [15] or scene attributes [25]. Many of these approaches were based on the

nvasconcelos@ucsd.edu

bag-of-features (BoF) representation, using local features
such as SIFT or HOG [19, 3], combined through a pooling operator. Pooling has a critical role in scene classification, for two reasons. First, there is a need to integrate
object information across the scene. Second, this integration must be invariant to the locations of individual objects,
which can change drastically within the same scene class.
Eventually, sophisticated pooling strategie, such as the vector of locally aggregated descriptors (VLAD) [12] or the
Fisher vector (FV) [23] emerged as the dominant pooling
mechanisms for scene classification.
In recent years, CNNs have become the feature extractors of choice for scene classification. In fact, the implementation of a holistic scene classifier with a CNN is almost trivial. It suffices to train the CNN on whole scene
images. The main challenges are the assembly of a large
dataset of such images and the standard difficulties of training a deep network. These problems have been addressed
in [29], through the assembly of the Places dataset and its
use to train a deep scene classifier. The use of deep objectbased representations for scene classification has, however,
proven more challenging. This is, in great part, because
object-based scene classification is a difficult transfer learning problem. While the ease with which CNNs can be transferred across datasets, by simple finetuning, is one of their
greatest assets for vision, this procedure has its limitations.
The transfer from a localized representation (needed to recognize objects) to a holistic task (classification of whole
scenes) cannot, in general, be solved by simple finetuning.
The previous success of pooling on this type of transfer created a resurgence of interest in the topic within the
deep learning realm. Several authors proposed Fisher vectors or similar pooling mechanisms for features extracted by
object recognition CNNs. Early methods adopted a BoFlike approach, based on the extraction of features from intermediate CNN layers, which were then fed to dictionary
learning methods such as clustering [11] or sparse coding [17] and finally used to implement descriptors such as
the VLAD [11] or Fisher vector [17]. Later, [5] proposed
the semantic Fisher Vector, which extracts features from the

5746

