Unsupervised Representation Learning by Sorting Sequences
Hsin-Ying Lee1
Jia-Bin Huang2
Maneesh Singh3
Ming-Hsuan Yang1
1 University of California, Merced
2 Virginia Tech
3 Verisk Analytics
http://vllab1.ucmerced.edu/˜hylee/OPN/
Abstract
We present an unsupervised representation learning approach using videos without semantic labels. We leverage
the temporal coherence as a supervisory signal by formulating representation learning as a sequence sorting task. We
take temporally shuffled frames (i.e., in non-chronological
order) as inputs and train a convolutional neural network
to sort the shuffled sequences. Similar to comparison-based
sorting algorithms, we propose to extract features from all
frame pairs and aggregate them to predict the correct order. As sorting shuffled image sequence requires an understanding of the statistical temporal structure of images,
training with such a proxy task allows us to learn rich and
generalizable visual representation. We validate the effectiveness of the learned representation using our method as
pre-training on high-level recognition problems. The experimental results show that our method compares favorably
against state-of-the-art methods on action recognition, image classification, and object detection tasks.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) [18] have demonstrated the state-of-the-art performance in visual recognition tasks. The success of CNNs
is primarily driven by millions of manually annotated data
such as the ImageNet [5]. However, this substantially limits the scalability to new problem domains because manual
annotations are often expensive and in some cases scarce
(e.g., labeling medical images requires expertise). In contrast, a vast amount of free unlabeled images and videos are
readily available. It is of great interest to explore strategies
for representation learning by leveraging unlabeled data.
A new unsupervised learning paradigm has recently
emerged as self-supervised learning [32, 42]. Within the
context of deep neural networks, the key idea is to leverage
the inherent structure of raw images and formulate a discriminative or reconstruction loss function to train the network. Examples include predicting the relative patch positions [7], reconstructing missing pixel values conditioned

Figure 1: Representations learning by sequence sorting.
Appearance variations and temporal coherence in videos
offer rich supervisory signals for representation learning.
Given a tuple of randomly shuffled frames (top row) sampled from an input video (middle row), we formulate the sequence sorting task as revealing the underlying chronology
order of the sampled frames (bottom row). While no semantic labels are involved, solving this task requires high-level
understanding of the temporal dynamics of videos. In this
paper, we exploit the statistical temporal structure of images
as our source of supervision.
on the known surrounding [30], or predicting one subset of
the data channels from another (e.g., predicting color channels from a gray image) [20, 43, 44]. Compared to image
data, videos potentially provide much richer information as
they not only consist of large amounts of image samples but
also provide scene dynamics. Recent approaches explore
unlabeled video data to learn feature representation through
egomotion [2, 14], order verification [25, 9], tracking [42],
and future frame prediction [24]. While these surrogate
tasks do not directly use semantic labels, they provide effective supervisory signals as solving these tasks requires
the semantic understanding of the visual data.
In this paper, we propose a surrogate task for selfsupervised learning using a large collection of unlabeled
videos. Given a tuple of randomly shuffled frames, we train
a neural network to sort the images into chronological or1667

