End-to-end Face Detection and Cast Grouping in Movies
Using Erdős-Rényi Clustering
SouYoung Jin1 , Hang Su1 , Chris Stauffer2 , and Erik Learned-Miller1
1
College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts, Amherst
2
Visionary Systems and Research (VSR)

Figure 1: Clustering results from Hannah and Her Sisters. Each unique color shows a particular cluster. It can be seen
that most individuals appear with a consistent color, indicating successful clustering.

Abstract
We present an end-to-end system for detecting and clustering faces by identity in full-length movies. Unlike works
that start with a predefined set of detected faces, we consider the end-to-end problem of detection and clustering
together. We make three separate contributions. First,
we combine a state-of-the-art face detector with a generic
tracker to extract high quality face tracklets. We then introduce a novel clustering method, motivated by the classic
graph theory results of Erdős and Rényi. It is based on the
observations that large clusters can be fully connected by
joining just a small fraction of their point pairs, while just
a single connection between two different people can lead
to poor clustering results. This suggests clustering using a
verification system with very few false positives but perhaps
moderate recall. We introduce a novel verification method,
rank-1 counts verification, that has this property, and use
it in a link-based clustering scheme. Finally, we define a
novel end-to-end detection and clustering evaluation metric
allowing us to assess the accuracy of the entire end-to-end
system. We present state-of-the-art results on multiple video
data sets and also on standard face databases.

1. Introduction
The problem of identifying face images in video and
clustering them together by identity is a natural precursor to
high impact applications such as video understanding and
analysis. This general problem area was popularized in the
paper “Hello! My name is...Buffy” [9], which used text
captions and face analysis to name people in each frame of
a full-length video. In this work, we use only raw video
(with no captions), and group faces by identity rather than
naming the characters. In addition, unlike face clustering
methods that start with detected faces, we include detection
as part of the problem. This means we must deal with false
positives and false negatives, both algorithmically, and in
our evaluation method. We make three contributions:
• A new approach to combining high-quality face detection [15] and generic tracking [31] to improve both
precision and recall of our video face detection.
• A new method, Erdős-Rényi clustering, for large-scale
clustering of images and video tracklets. We argue
that effective large-scale face clustering requires face
verification with fewer false positives, and we introduce rank-1 counts verification, showing that it indeed
achieves better true positive rates in low false positive
regimes. Rank-1 counts verification, used with simple
link-based clustering, achieves high quality clustering
results on three separate video data sets.

Project page: http://souyoungjin.com/erclustering
This research is based in part upon work supported by the Office of the
Director of National Intelligence (ODNI), Intelligence Advanced Research
Projects Activity (IARPA) under contract number 2014-14071600010.
The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and
should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or
endorsements, either expressed or implied, of ODNI, IARPA, or the U.S.
Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental purpose notwithstanding any copyright
annotation thereon.

• A principled evaluation for the end-to-end problem of
face detection and clustering in videos; until now there
has been no clear way to evaluate the quality of such an

5276

