Makeup-Go: Blind Reversion of Portrait Edit∗
Ying-Cong Chen1 Xiaoyong Shen2 Jiaya Jia1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Tencent Youtu Lab
ycchen@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

dylanshen@tencent.com leojia9@gmail.com

Abstract
Virtual face beautification (or markup) becomes common
operations in camera or image processing Apps, which is
actually deceiving. In this paper, we propose the task of
restoring a portrait image from this process. As the first
attempt along this line, we assume unknown global operations on human faces and aim to tackle the two issues of skin
smoothing and skin color change. These two tasks, intriguingly, impose very different difficulties to estimate subtle details and major color variation. We propose a Component
Regression Network (CRN) and address the limitation of using Euclidean loss in blind reversion. CRN maps the edited
portrait images back to the original ones without knowing
beautification operation details. Our experiments demonstrate effectiveness of the system for this novel task.

1. Introduction
Popularity of social networks of Facebook, Snapchat,
and Instagram, and the fast development of smart phones
make it fun to share portraits and selfies online. This trend
also motivates the development of widely used procedures
to automatically beautify faces. The consequence is that
many portraits found online are good looking, but not real.
In this paper, we propose the task of blind reverse of this
unknown beautification process and restore faces similar to
what are captured by cameras. We call this task portrait
beautification reversion, or makeup-go for short.
Scope of Application Virtual beautification is performed
quite differently in software, which makes it impossible to
learn all operations that can be performed to smooth skin,
suppress wrinkle and freckle, adjust tone, to name a few.
To make the problem trackable in a well-constrained space,
we learn from data the automatic process for particular software and then restore images output from it without knowing the exact algorithms. Also, we assume subtle cues still
exists after virtual beutification, even if they are largely sup∗ This work is in part supported by a grant from the Research Grants
Council of the Hong Kong SAR (project No. 413113).

pressed. Also, at this moment, we do not handle geometric
transformation for face-lift.
Difficulty of Existing Solutions Existing restoration
work [36, 32, 28, 30] only handles reversion of known
and/or linear operations. There is no mature study yet
what if several unknown nonlinear operations are coupled
for restoration. The strategy of [11] is to infer the sequence
of operations and then each of them. We however note this
scheme does not work in our task for complicated beautification without knowing candidate operations.
In addition, directly learning reversion by deep neural networks is not trivial. Previous CNN frameworks
only address particular tasks of super-resolution [7, 8, 13],
noise/artifact removal [6], image filtering [18], etc. Learning in these tasks are with some priors, such as the upsampling factors, noise patterns, and filter parameters. Our task
may not give such information and needs to be general.
In terms of network structures, most low-level vision
frameworks stack layers of convolution and nonlinear rectification for regression of the Euclidean loss. This type of
loss is useful for previous tasks such as denoise [6]. But
they are surprisingly not applicable to our problem because
levels of complex changes make it hard to train a network.
We analyze this difficulty below.
Challenge in Our Blind Reversion To show the limitation of existing CNN in our task, we apply state-of-theart VDSR [14], FSRCNN [8] and PSPNet [8], to directly
regress the data after edit. VDSR performs the best among
the three. It is an image-to-image regression network with
L2 loss that achieves high PSNRs in super-resolution. It
successfully learns large-scale information such as skin
color and illumination, as shown in Figure 1.
It is however intriguing to note that many details, especially the region that contains small freckles and wrinkles,
are not well recovered in the final output. In fact, VDSR is
already a deep model with 20 layers – stacking more layers in our experiments does not help regress these subtle
information. This manifests that the network capacity is not
the bottleneck. The main problem, actually, is on employment of the Euclidean loss that makes detailed changes be
14501

