Globally-Optimal Inlier Set Maximisation for
Simultaneous Camera Pose and Feature Correspondence
Dylan Campbell1,2 , Lars Petersson1,2 , Laurent Kneip1 and Hongdong Li1
1
2
Australian National University*
Data61 – CSIRO
{dylan.campbell,lars.petersson,laurent.kneip,hongdong.li}@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Estimating the 6-DoF pose of a camera from a single image relative to a pre-computed 3D point-set is an important
task for many computer vision applications. Perspective-nPoint (PnP) solvers are routinely used for camera pose estimation, provided that a good quality set of 2D–3D feature
correspondences are known beforehand. However, finding
optimal correspondences between 2D key-points and a 3D
point-set is non-trivial, especially when only geometric (position) information is known. Existing approaches to the
simultaneous pose and correspondence problem use local
optimisation, and are therefore unlikely to find the optimal solution without a good pose initialisation, or introduce restrictive assumptions. Since a large proportion of
outliers are common for this problem, we instead propose
a globally-optimal inlier set cardinality maximisation approach which jointly estimates optimal camera pose and
optimal correspondences. Our approach employs branchand-bound to search the 6D space of camera poses, guaranteeing global optimality without requiring a pose prior.
The geometry of SE(3) is used to find novel upper and
lower bounds for the number of inliers and local optimisation is integrated to accelerate convergence. The evaluation empirically supports the optimality proof and shows
that the method performs much more robustly than existing
approaches, including on a large-scale outdoor data-set.

(a) 3D point-set (grey and green), 3D features (black dots) and groundtruth (black), RANSAC (red) and our (blue) camera poses. The groundtruth and our camera poses coincide, whereas the RANSAC pose has a
translation offset and a 180◦ rotation offset. Best viewed in colour.

(b) Panoramic photograph and extracted 2D features (top), building points
projected onto the image using the RANSAC camera pose (middle) and
building points projected using our camera pose (bottom).

Figure 1. Estimating the pose of a calibrated camera from a single image within a large-scale, unorganised 3D point-set captured
by vehicle-mounted laser scanner. Our method solves the absolute pose problem while simultaneously finding feature correspondences, using a globally-optimal branch-and-bound approach with
tight novel bounds on the cardinality of the inlier set.

While hypothesise-and-test frameworks like RANSAC
[13] can mitigate the sensitivity of PnP solvers to outliers
in the correspondence set, few approaches are able to handle the case where 2D–3D correspondences are not known
in advance. Unknown correspondences arise in many circumstances, including the general case of aligning an image
with a textureless 3D point-set or CAD model. While feature extraction techniques provide a relatively robust and
reproducible way to detect interest points such as edges
or corners within each modality, finding correspondences
across the two modalities is much more challenging. Even
when the point-set has sufficient visual information associated with it, such as colour or SIFT features [32], repetitive features, occlusions and perspective distortion make
the correspondence problem non-trivial. Moreover, appear-

1. Introduction
Estimating the pose of a calibrated camera given a set
of 2D points in the camera frame and a set of 3D points
in the world frame, as shown in Figure 1, is a fundamental part of the general 2D–3D registration problem of
aligning an image with a 3D scene or model. When correspondences are known, this becomes the Perspectiven-Point (PnP) problem for which many solutions exist
[16, 26, 23, 18, 22]. Applications include camera localisation and tracking [13, 38, 24], augmented reality [34], motion segmentation [39] and object recognition [19, 36, 2].
* This research is supported by an Australian Government Research Training Program (RTP) Scholarship.

11

