What Actions are Needed for Understanding Human Actions in Videos?
Gunnar A. Sigurdsson Olga Russakovsky Abhinav Gupta
Carnegie Mellon University
github.com/gsig/actions-for-actions

Abstract
What is the right way to reason about human activities?
What directions forward are most promising? In this work,
we analyze the current state of human activity understanding in videos. The goal of this paper is to examine datasets,
evaluation metrics, algorithms, and potential future directions. We look at the qualitative attributes that define activities such as pose variability, brevity, and density. The
experiments consider multiple state-of-the-art algorithms
and multiple datasets. The results demonstrate that while
there is inherent ambiguity in the temporal extent of activities, current datasets still permit effective benchmarking.
We discover that fine-grained understanding of objects and
pose when combined with temporal reasoning is likely to
yield substantial improvements in algorithmic accuracy. We
present the many kinds of information that will be needed
to achieve substantial gains in activity understanding: objects, verbs, intent, and sequential reasoning. The software
and additional information will be made available to provide other researchers detailed diagnostics to understand
their own algorithms.

1. Introduction
Over the last few years, there has been significant advances in the field of static image understanding. There is
absolutely no doubt that we are now closer to solving tasks
such as image classification, object detection, and even semantic segmentation. On the other hand, when it comes to
video understanding we are still struggling to figure out basic questions such as: What is an activity and how should
we represent it? Do activities have well-defined spatial and
temporal extent? What role do goals and intentions play in
defining and understanding activities?
A significant problem in the past has been the absence of
good datasets for activity detection and recognition. Most
of the major advances in the field of object recognition have
come with the creation of generic datasets such as PASCAL [6], ImageNet [3] and COCO [21]. These datasets
helped define the problem scope and the evaluation metrics,

as well as revealed the shortcomings of existing approaches.
On the other hand, historically video datasets such as
UCF101 [33] have been biased and have corresponded to
activities that are hardly seen in daily lives. However, in
recent years, things have started to change with the arrival
of large-scale video datasets depicting a variety of complex
human activities in untrimmed videos. Datasets such as
ActivityNet [1], Sports1M [13], Charades [31], and MultiTHUMOS [8, 40] have revitalized activity recognition and
inspired new research and new ideas.
But before we move forward and define the benchmarks,
we believe it is worth pausing and thoroughly analyzing this
novel domain. What does the data show about the right categories for recognition in case of activities? Do existing
approaches scale with increasing complexity of activities
categories, video data, or temporal relationships between
activities? Are the hypothesized new avenues of studying
context, objects, or intentions worthwhile: Do these really
help in understanding videos?
This paper provides an in-depth analysis of the new generation of video datasets, human annotators, activity categories, recognition approaches, and above all possible new
cues for video understanding. Concretely, we examine:
What are the right questions to ask? Here we investigate some fundamental questions regarding the problem of
activity recognition. First, we ask what are the right categories for activities? Unlike objects where semantic categories are somewhat well-defined, activity categories defined by verbs are relatively few in number. Should we
model one activity category called “open” or should we
model “open suitcase”, “open windows” and “open curtain”
by different categories. We also ask a fundamental question: whether we should perform classification or localization. Do humans agree on temporal activity boundaries?
And if they do not, is it worth exploring localization at all?
What are existing approaches learning, and are those
the right things? In the next set of analyses, we explore
the current algorithms for activity classification and localization. We define attributes for quantifying video and category complexity and evaluate algorithms with respect to
these attributes. Do current approaches work better when
12137

