From Point Clouds to Mesh using Regression
L’ubor Ladický
ETH Zürich

Olivier Saurer
ETH Zürich

SoHyeon Jeong
ETH Zürich

lubor.ladicky@inf.ethz.ch

saurero@inf.ethz.ch

sohyeon.jeong@inf.ethz.ch

Fabio Maninchedda
ETH Zürich

Marc Pollefeys
ETH Zürich, Microsoft

fabiom@inf.ethz.ch

marc.pollefeys@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Surface reconstruction from a point cloud is a standard
subproblem in many algorithms for dense 3D reconstruction from RGB images or depth maps. Methods, performing
only local operations in the vicinity of individual points, are
very fast, but reconstructed models typically contain lots
of holes. On the other hand, regularized volumetric approaches, formulated as a global optimization, are typically
too slow for real-time interactive applications.
We propose to use a regression forest based method,
which predicts the projection of a grid point to the surface,
depending on the spatial configuration of point density in
the grid point neighborhood. We designed a suitable feature
vector and efficient oct-tree based GPU evaluation, capable
of predicting surface of high resolution 3D models in milliseconds. Our method learns and predicts surfaces from an
observed point cloud sparser than the evaluation grid, and
therefore effectively acts as a regularizer.

1. Introduction
There is an increasing demand in creating compelling
3D models from 2D image sets. Current reconstruction
pipelines can build 3D models from millions of images at
city scale [1]. Others have optimized the reconstruction
process for real-time applications and showed that the full
pipeline can run on commodity smart phones [27, 14, 19,
25]. While the reconstruction process has been highly optimized one of the challenges which remains is the efficient extraction of a triangular mesh from a point cloud.
While standard dense reconstruction approaches provide
noisy depth measurements the approach we are seeking for
needs to be robust towards noisy measurements, outliers
and needs to be able to cope with varying point cloud densities.
Surface reconstruction algorithms can mainly be divided

into two categories, which are volumetric approaches and
surface based methods. Various algorithms have been proposed for volumetric integration of depth measurements, we
refer here to the most closely related publications. Curless et al. [7] compute the signed distance for each point
and extract an isosurface at the zero crossing using marching cubes. The method expects the input depth maps of
similar scale and density, and lacks global regularization
and only averages depth measurements locally, leading to
holes at places where the point cloud is sparse. Real-time
variants of this approach have been used in [19, 17, 11]. To
extend the surface into neighboring areas with no measurement, local surface reconstruction methods such as variants
of moving least squares [5] have been proposed, however
they often struggle with small density of points, especially
with extrapolation into holes. To overcome this problem,
Fuhrmann et al. [10] propose a fusion algorithm that copes
with depth maps of varying resolutions, allowing to simultaneously represent low resolution regions as well as high
resolution details. They use an oct-tree representation to
store the signed distance field at various scales. Similarly
Ummenhofer et al. [30] proposed to globally optimize the
signed distance field on a hierarchical oct-tree. While those
algorithms provide very compelling results, they operate in
terms of hours and are therefor not suitable for real-time applications. Zach et al. [34] formulates the depth integration
task as a global optimization problem. They use a L1 data
fidelity term to be more robust towards noise and outliers.
While the method provides impressive results it is restricted
by its computation time and memory consumption. In [33]
Zach proposed a robust and memory efficient approach to
integrate range images. Using recent advances in optimization Savinov et al. [23] formulate the visibility constraints
as high order potentials over rays and solves it using nonconvex relaxation methods. This method is currently the
state-of-the-art on the Middlebury dataset [24], however, it
takes days to run on high resolution models.

13893

