Scene Graph Generation from Objects, Phrases and Region Captions
Yikang Li1 , Wanli Ouyang1,2 , Bolei Zhou3 , Kun Wang1 , Xiaogang Wang1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
University of Sydney, Australia 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA

Abstract

1. Introduction
Understanding visual scenes is one of the primal goals
of computer vision. Visual scene understanding includes
numerous vision tasks at several semantic levels, including detecting and recognizing objects, estimating the pairwise visual relations of the detected objects, and describing
image regions with free-form sentences. In recent years,
great progress has been made to build intelligent visual
recognition systems for the three vision tasks, object detection [33, 34, 30], scene graph generation [31, 40, 28, 45],
and image/region captioning [41, 10, 22].
The three vision tasks target on different semantic levels of scene understanding. Take the image in Fig.1 as
an example. Object detection focuses on detecting in1 https://github.com/yikang-li/MSDN

use

woman

watch

toothbrush

Region Caption

use

child

toothbrush

phrase

object

Scene graph

Object detection, scene graph generation and region
captioning, which are three scene understanding tasks at
different semantic levels, are tied together: scene graphs
are generated on top of objects detected in an image with
their pairwise relationship predicted, while region captioning gives a language description of the objects, their attributes, relations and other context information. In this
work, to leverage the mutual connections across semantic
levels, we propose a novel neural network model, termed as
Multi-level Scene Description Network (denoted as MSDN),
to solve the three vision tasks jointly in an end-to-end manner. Object, phrase, and caption regions are first aligned
with a dynamic graph based on their spatial and semantic connections. Then a feature refining structure is used
to pass messages across the three levels of semantic tasks
through the graph. We benchmark the learned model on
three tasks, and show the joint learning across three tasks
with our proposed method can bring mutual improvements
over previous models. Particularly, on the scene graph generation task, our proposed method outperforms the stateof-art method with more than 3% margin. Code has been
made publicly available1 .

Mom and her cute baby
are brushing teeth

Figure 1. Image with annotations of different semantic levels: objects, phrases and region captions. Scene graph is generated using
all objects and their relationships in the image.

dividual objects such as woman, toothbrush, and child.
Scene graph generation recognizes not only the objects
but also their relationships. Such relationships can be
represented by directed edges, which connect two objects
as a hsubject-predicate-objecti phrase, like hwoman-usetoothbrushi. Region captioning generates a free-form sentence involving uncertain number of the objects, their attributes, and their interactions, as shown in Fig.1. We can
see that though there are connections among the three tasks,
the weak alignment across different tasks makes it difficult
to learn a model jointly. Our work explores the possibility
in understanding the image from these three levels together
through a single neural network model.
The key to connect these three tasks is to leverage the
spatial and semantic correlations of their visual features.
For example in Fig. 1, the phrase hwoman-watch-childi provides the constraint that two persons are interacting with
each other. This constraint validates the existence of the
woman and child. In addition, the region caption ‘mom
and her cute babies are brushing their teeth’ provides
constraints on the existence of the objects (woman, child,
and toothbrush), their attributes (cute), and their relationships (the woman is watching the child and they are using toothbrush) within this area. Therefore, the features for
these three tasks are highly correlated and can be the complementary information of each other. Based on this observation, we propose to jointly refine the features of different
semantic levels by introducing a novel framework to align
the three tasks and a message passing structure to leverage
11261

