Speaking the Same Language:
Matching Machine to Human Captions by Adversarial Training
Rakshith Shetty1

Marcus Rohrbach2,3
Mario Fritz1

1

Lisa Anne Hendricks2

Bernt Schiele1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
2
3
UC Berkeley EECS, CA, United States
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
While strong progress has been made in image captioning recently, machine and human captions are still quite distinct. This is primarily due to the deficiencies in the generated word distribution, vocabulary size, and strong bias in
the generators towards frequent captions. Furthermore, humans – rightfully so – generate multiple, diverse captions,
due to the inherent ambiguity in the captioning task which
is not explicitly considered in today’s systems.
To address these challenges, we change the training objective of the caption generator from reproducing groundtruth captions to generating a set of captions that is indistinguishable from human written captions. Instead of
handcrafting such a learning target, we employ adversarial training in combination with an approximate Gumbel
sampler to implicitly match the generated distribution to the
human one. While our method achieves comparable performance to the state-of-the-art in terms of the correctness of
the captions, we generate a set of diverse captions that are
significantly less biased and better match the global uni-,
bi- and tri-gram distributions of the human captions.

1. Introduction
Image captioning systems have a variety of applications
ranging from media retrieval and tagging to assistance for
the visually impaired. In particular, models which combine
state-of-the-art image representations based on deep convolutional networks and deep recurrent language models have
led to ever increasing performance on evaluation metrics
such as CIDEr [39] and METEOR [8] as can be seen e.g.
on the COCO image Caption challenge leaderboard [6].
Despite these advances, it is often easy for humans to
differentiate between machine and human captions – particularly when observing multiple captions for a single image.

Ours: a person on skis jumping
over a ramp

Ours: a skier is making a turn
on a course

Ours: a cross country skier
makes his way through the snow

Ours: a skier is headed down a
steep slope

Baseline: a man riding skis down a snow covered slope

Figure 1: Four images from the test set related to skiing,
with captions from our model and a baseline. Baseline describes all four images with a generic caption, whereas our
model produces diverse and more image specific captions.

As we analyze in this paper, this is likely due to artifacts and
deficiencies in the statistics of the generated captions, which
is more apparent when observing multiple samples. Specifically, we observe that state-of-the-art systems frequently
“reveal themselves” by generating a different word distribution and using smaller vocabulary. Further scrutiny reveals
that generalization from the training set is still challenging
and generation is biased to frequent fragments and captions.
Also, today’s systems are evaluated to produce a single
caption. Yet, multiple potentially distinct captions are typically correct for a single image – a property that is reflected
in human ground-truth. This diversity is not equally reproduced by state-of-the-art caption generators [40, 23].
Therefore, our goal is to make image captions less distinguishable from human ones – similar in the spirit to a Turing

4135

