A Two Stream Siamese Convolutional Neural
Network For Person Re-Identification
Dahjung Chung
Khalid Tahboub
Edward J. Delp
Video and Image Processing Laboratory (VIPER)
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
chung123@purdue.edu

ktahboub@purdue.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
In recent years, the number of video surveillance systems
has increased dramatically. According to a study by Cisco,
Internet video surveillance traffic is projected to increase
tenfold between 2015 and 2020 [1]. The continuous monitoring of surveillance data is practically impossible, making
the automatic analysis of surveillance video the only plausible solution. Many video analytic methods have been proposed for person detection and tracking, action recognition,
crowd analysis and anomaly detection.
One of the fundamental tasks associated with video
surveillance systems is person re-identification (ReID). Person re-identification refers to tracking a person across a
network of non-overlapping cameras [2, 3]. Given sin-

ILIDS-VID

Camera A

PRID 2011

Camera B

Person re-identification is an important task in video
surveillance systems. It can be formally defined as establishing the correspondence between images of a person
taken from different cameras at different times. In this paper, we present a two stream convolutional neural network
where each stream is a Siamese network. This architecture can learn spatial and temporal information separately.
We also propose a weighted two stream training objective
function which combines the Siamese cost of the spatial and
temporal streams with the objective of predicting a person’s
identity. We evaluate our proposed method on the publicly
available PRID2011 and iLIDS-VID datasets and demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed method. On average, the
top rank matching accuracy is 4% higher than the accuracy
achieved by the cross-view quadratic discriminant analysis used in combination with the hierarchical Gaussian descriptor (GOG+XQDA), and 5% higher than the recurrent
neural network method.

ace@ecn.purdue.edu

Figure 1: Sample images of two subjects captured from two
different cameras in the PRID2011 [4] and the ILIDS-VID
[5] datasets
gle/multiple images or a video sequence outlining a person’s appearance in the field of view of a camera, person
re-identification is the task of recognizing the same person
across a network of cameras with non-overlapping fields of
view. It can be formally defined as establishing the correspondence between images of a person taken from different
cameras at different times [2].
The ReID task is a challenging problem. It remains an
active research area due to inter/intra illumination changes,
pose variations, occlusions, cluttered background, various
scales and viewpoints [3]. Figure 1 shows sample images
depicting the differences in camera viewpoints and illumination conditions.
Over the past years, the performance of ReID methods have improved by adopting new features, using metric learning techniques, and the use of semantic attributes
and appearance models [6–13]. Most of the traditional
approaches proposed for ReID uses low-level features in
the form of color and texture histograms and exploit metric learning to find a distance function in which distances
between images from the same class are minimized and

1983

