Neural EPI-volume Networks for Shape from Light Field
Stefan Heber1
Wei Yu1
Thomas Pock1,2
Graz University of Technology1
Austrian Institute of Technology2
{stefan.heber,wei.yu,pock}@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
This paper presents a novel deep regression network to
extract geometric information from Light Field (LF) data.
Our network builds upon u-shaped network architectures.
Those networks involve two symmetric parts, an encoding
and a decoding part. In the first part the network encodes relevant information from the given input into a set
of high-level feature maps. In the second part the generated feature maps are then decoded to the desired output.
To predict reliable and robust depth information the proposed network examines 3D subsets of the 4D LF called
Epipolar Plane Image (EPI) volumes. An important aspect of our network is the use of 3D convolutional layers,
that allow to propagate information from two spatial dimensions and one directional dimension of the LF. Compared to
previous work this allows for an additional spatial regularization, which reduces depth artifacts and simultaneously
maintains clear depth discontinuities. Experimental results
show that our approach allows to create high-quality reconstruction results, which outperform current state-of-the-art
Shape from Light Field (SfLF) techniques. The main advantage of the proposed approach is the ability to provide those
high-quality reconstructions at a low computation time.

1. Introduction
This paper investigates the task of reconstructing the geometry of a scene based on captured Light Field (LF) data.
The corresponding problem is referred to as Shape from
Light Field (SfLF). A LF represents a densely sampled set
of images captured from a regular grid of viewpoints located on a common 2D plane. It should be emphasized
that the key difference to the general multi-view stereo setting is the dense and regular sampling of the viewpoints.
Thus compared to a traditional 2D image a 4D LF provides two additional dimensions, that can be interpreted as
a parametrization of the 2D grid of viewpoints. This multiview stereo interpretation of the LF data directly shows that
a LF provides information about the geometry of the ob-

y

x

x

ξ

ξ

y

Figure 1. Illustration of the input and output of the proposed network. To the left the figure shows a RGB EPI volume, that is
fed to our network, and to the right the corresponding color-coded
disparity information is shown.

served scene. The encoded geometrical information in the
LF allows to tackle problems that are impossible to solve
based on a single 2D image of the scene. Those problems include the geometrical reconstruction of the observed
scene itself [32, 9, 13, 30, 11, 17], the generation of images
with different focus or aperture settings [16, 25], and the
digital viewpoint manipulation [25], to name but a few.
SfLF is currently a very active area of research. The LF
research field has grown from a niche topic to an established
part of today’s Computer Vision (CV) research. This development occurred not least because there is a growing commercial interest in LF technology. Nowadays LF or plenoptic cameras are used in industrial applications, like for instance automated optical inspection [28], and LF technology is used in consumer cameras to provide features like
digital refocusing capabilities [23]. Moreover, there is also
an increasing number of companies that are looking for
new ways to capture cinematic Virtual Reality (VR) content, where LF imaging might be a perfect solution that allows to take advantage of the freedom of motion offered by
devices like Oculus Rift [26] or HTC Vive [15].

2252

