What will Happen Next?
Forecasting Player Moves in Sports Videos
Panna Felsen
UC Berkeley, STATS

Pulkit Agrawal
UC Berkeley

Jitendra Malik
UC Berkeley

panna@berkeley.edu

pulkitag@berkeley.edu

malik@berkeley.edu

Abstract
A large number of very popular team sports involve the
act of one team trying to score a goal against the other.
During this game play, defending players constantly try to
predict the next move of the attackers to prevent them from
scoring, whereas attackers constantly try to predict the next
move of the defenders in order to defy them and score. Such
behavior is a prime example of the general human faculty to
make predictions about the future and is an important facet
of human intelligence. An algorithmic solution to learning
a model of the external world from sensory inputs in order
to make forecasts is an important unsolved problem. In this
work we develop a generic framework for forecasting future
events in team sports videos directly from visual inputs. We
introduce water polo and basketball datasets towards this
end and compare the predictions of the proposed methods
against expert and non-expert humans.

1. Introduction
In 2002, Billy Beane defied conventional wisdom by performing meticulous statistical evaluations of undervalued
players to assemble the Oakland Athletics baseball team on
a negligible budget. His team made history with a recordsetting 20-game win streak, and this tremendous feat is documented in the academy award nominated film Moneyball.
Their success made an unprecedented case for competitive
advantages gained by new analyses of individual players’
game play. Now imagine if, in addition to knowing the shot
success rate of Stephen Curry, the best basketball shooter, it
is also possible to forecast that he is more likely to attempt
a shot within zero, one, and two seconds of a pass when his
teammates are in a diamond, ring, and triangle formation,
respectively. Such forecasts are invaluable to the defending
team in planning strategy. Billy Beane’s analysis revolutionized strategic thinking in baseball, and similarly, we believe statistical methods for forecasting player moves have
the potential to impact how teams plan their play strategies.

Predicting player moves in sports videos is an instance of
a much grander research agenda to develop algorithms that
can forecast future events directly from visual inputs. The
ability to forecast is a key aspect of human intelligence, and
as Kenneth Craik famously wrote in 1943, “If the organism
carries a ‘small scale model of external reality and its own
possible actions within its head, it is able try out various
alternatives, conclude which is the best of them, react to future situations before they arise and in every way react in
much fuller, safer and more competent manner to emergencies which face it.” While there has been a lot of interest in
this problem [14, 28, 35, 12, 24, 36, 1, 16, 8, 26, 44, 38,
37, 2], we lack a good benchmark for comparing different
forecasting algorithms.
For multiple reasons, it appears to us that team sports
videos are a very good benchmark for evaluating forecasting algorithms. Firstly, many human activities are social
and team sports provide an opportunity to study forecasting
in an adversarial multi-agent environment. Secondly, team
sports are composed of a large and diverse set of discrete
events, such as passing, shooting, dribbling, etc. The sequence of events reflects the game play strategies of the two
teams, and thus forecasting requires game specific knowledge combined with other visual cues, such as player pose
and game state. This implies that for any system to make accurate predictions directly from visual imagery, it must distill game specific knowledge by crunching large amounts of
data. Representing such knowledge is a central problem in
forecasting, which is put to test in this setup. Expert players
and coaches gain such knowledge via experience gathered
over long periods of time. An additional benefit of predicting discrete events is crisp and straightforward evaluation
of the information of interest that avoids the problems associated with evaluating pixel-level predictions.
In this work, we present a generic framework for predicting future events in team sports directly from visual inputs, and we introduce water polo and basketball datasets
for evaluation. These datasets contain game stream accompanied by annotations of player tracks and seventeen different events. The task of interest is, given a history of obser13342

