Deep Facial Action Unit Recognition from Partially Labeled Data
Shan Wu1 , Shangfei Wang∗,1 , Bowen Pan1 , and Qiang Ji2
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, China
2
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180, USA
SA14WS@mail.ustc.edu.cn, sfwang@ustc.edu.cn, bowenpan@mail.ustc.edu.cn, qji@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract
Current work on facial action unit (AU) recognition requires AU-labeled facial images. Although large amounts
of facial images are readily available, AU annotation is expensive and time consuming. To address this, we propose a
deep facial action unit recognition approach learning from
partially AU-labeled data. The proposed approach makes
full use of both partly available ground-truth AU labels and
the readily available large scale facial images without annotation. Specifically, we propose to learn label distribution
from the ground-truth AU labels, and then train the AU classifiers from the large-scale facial images by maximizing the
log likelihood of the mapping functions of AUs with regard
to the learnt label distribution for all training data and minimizing the error between predicted AUs and ground-truth
AUs for labeled data simultaneously. A restricted Boltzmann machine is adopted to model AU label distribution, a deep
neural network is used to learn facial representation from
facial images, and the support vector machine is employed
as the classifier. Experiments on two benchmark databases
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Facial behavior is one of the most important emotion communication channels for human-human interaction.
Therefore, a great progress on automatical facial action unit
recognition has been achieved due to its wide application in
many user-centered fields in recent years.
Automatical AU recognition is very challenging due to
many factors, such as imaging conditions and individual
subject differences. Large-scale training data can facilitate
the learning process of AU classifiers. Although it is easy
to obtain a large-scale facial images due to the popularity of
digital cameras, portable devices and internet, providing AU
labels for the obtained large-scale facial images is very time
consuming and difficult, since AU labels should be anno∗ This is the corresponding author.

tated by experts. However, almost all current work formulates AU recognition as a supervised learning process, and
thus requires facial images and their corresponding AU labels. The requirement of corresponding AU labels prevents
leveraging large-scale available facial images for improving
AU recognition.
Fortunately, behavior research shows that there exist regular spatial and temporal patterns in AU labels due to facial anatomy and human’s behavior habits. For example,
as stated in Du et al.’s [2] work, 99 percent of the time,
persons show happiness by raising their cheeks and stretching their mouth in a smile. Persons can not pull lip corner
(AU12) and depress lip corner (AU15) at the same time due
to the constraint of facial anatomy. Such regular spatial and
temporal patterns embedded in AU labels can be described
probabilistically as label distribution, which is also existed in ground-truth AU labels of existing benchmark expression databases. Take the DISFA database as an example,
as shown in Figure 1, when AU6 appears, AU12 and AU25
occur with a probability higher than 0.7, but AU1 rarely occurs. Similarly, when AU12 or AU25 occur, AU6 appears
with a probability higher than 0.6. Therefore, the annotated
AU labels are samples of AU label distributions, which are
inherent in facial anatomy and human’s behavior habits. In
fact, the AUs appear on any facial images, whether manually annotated or not, are samples of the underlying AU label
distributions. Inspired by the above observations, we pro-

Figure 1. Dependencies between AU labels (each entry represents
the conditional probability of p(yj = 1|yi = 1))

pose a deep facial action unit recognition approach learning
from partially AU-labeled training data through incorporating such spatial regular patterns of AU labels presented in

3951

