Personalized Image Aesthetics
Jian Ren1 Xiaohui Shen2
1
Rutgers University

Zhe Lin2

Radomı́r Měch2 David J. Foran1
2
Adobe Research

jian.ren0905@rutgers.edu, foran@cinj.rutgers.edu

{xshen, zlin, rmech}@adobe.com

Abstract
Automatic image aesthetics rating has received a growing interest with the recent breakthrough in deep learning.
Although many studies exist for learning a generic or universal aesthetics model, investigation of aesthetics models
incorporating individual user’s preference is quite limited.
We address this personalized aesthetics problem by showing
that individual’s aesthetic preferences exhibit strong correlations with content and aesthetic attributes, and hence
the deviation of individual’s perception from generic image aesthetics is predictable. To accommodate our study,
we first collect two distinct datasets, a large image dataset
from Flickr and annotated by Amazon Mechanical Turk,
and a small dataset of real personal albums rated by owners. We then propose a new approach to personalized aesthetics learning that can be trained even with a small set of
annotated images from a user. The approach is based on
a residual-based model adaptation scheme which learns an
offset to compensate for the generic aesthetics score. Finally, we introduce an active learning algorithm to optimize personalized aesthetics prediction for real-world application scenarios. Experiments demonstrate that our approach can effectively learn personalized aesthetics preferences, and outperforms existing methods on quantitative
comparisons.

1. Introduction
Automatic assessment of image aesthetics is an important problem that has a variety of applications such as image
search, creative recommendation, photo ranking and personal album curation, etc. [16, 20]. It is a challenging task
that requires high-level understanding of photographic attributes and semantics in an image. Only recently, there
has been a significant progress due to the advancement in
deep learning that can learn such high-level information effectively from data [15, 16, 30]. Although many successful deep learning-based approaches have been proposed for
learning generic aesthetics classifiers, efforts on learning
user-specific aesthetic models are quite limited.

Figure 1: Examples illustrating personal aesthetic preferences. Each image is rated by 5 different users. As can
be seen, on the first example, ratings are consistent among
the users while on the other two, different users manifest
very different visual tastes. Individual users may have their
unique preference with respect to visual attributes or contents of an image when they judge its aesthetic quality.

Image aesthetics rating is well known to be a highly subjective task as individual users have very different visual
preferences. This has been observed in earlier rule-based
photo ranking systems such as [29, 33, 34]. For example,
Figure 1 shows example images and their aesthetic scores
(1 to 5) rated by five different users following careful instructions. As can be seen, ratings for each image could
vary significantly among the users. This is expected as different users may have very different opinions with respect
to photographic attributes (composition, lighting, color) or
semantic contents of the image (portrait, landscape, pets).
Therefore, learning individual user’s visual preference is a
crucial next step in image aesthetics research.
We refer to this problem as personalized image aesthetics and aim to address it by adapting a generic aesthetics
model for individual user’s preference. However, this is a
challenging task as we typically need to learn such preference from a very limited set of annotated examples from
each user. For example, in photo organization softwares, it
is desired to minimize user’s annotation effort. An effective
strategy in such applications is to leverage active learning
by automatically selecting representative images and suggest them to users for rating.
1638

