Learning Discriminative αβ-Divergences for Positive Definite Matrices
1

A. Cherian∗ 2 P. Stanitsas∗ 3 M. Harandi 2 V. Morellas 2 N. Papanikolopoulos
1
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision, 3 Data61/CSIRO, 1,3 The Australian National University
2
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis
{anoop.cherian, mehrtash.harandi}@anu.edu.au, {stani078, morellas, npapas}@umn.edu
Abstract
Symmetric positive definite (SPD) matrices are useful for
capturing second-order statistics of visual data. To compare two SPD matrices, several measures are available,
such as the affine-invariant Riemannian metric, Jeffreys divergence, Jensen-Bregman logdet divergence, etc.; however, their behaviors may be application dependent, raising the need of manual selection to achieve the best possible performance. Further and as a result of their overwhelming complexity for large-scale problems, computing
pairwise similarities by clever embedding of SPD matrices is often preferred to direct use of the aforementioned
measures. In this paper, we propose a discriminative metric learning framework, Information Divergence and Dictionary Learning (IDDL), that not only learns application
specific measures on SPD matrices automatically, but also
embeds them as vectors using a learned dictionary. To learn
the similarity measures (which could potentially be distinct
for every dictionary atom), we use the recently introduced
αβ-logdet divergence, which is known to unify the measures listed above. We propose a novel IDDL objective, that
learns the parameters of the divergence and the dictionary
atoms jointly in a discriminative setup and is solved efficiently using Riemannian optimization. We showcase extensive experiments on eight computer vision datasets, demonstrating state-of-the-art performances.

1. Introduction
Symmetric Positive Definite (SPD) matrices arise naturally in several computer vision applications, such as covariances when modeling data using Gaussians, as kernel
matrices for high-dimensional embedding, as points in diffusion MRI [37], and as structure tensors in image processing [5]. Furthermore, SPD matrices in the form of Region
CoVariance Descriptors (RCoVDs) [44], offer an easy way
to compute a representation that fuses multiple modalities
∗ Equal contribution.

X

Bi

Bj

X

X
Bk

Figure 1. A schematic illustration of our IDDL scheme. From an
infinite set of potential geometries, our goal is to learn multiple geometries (parameterized by (α, β)) and representative dictionary
atoms for each geometry (represented by B’s), such that a given
SPD data matrix X can be embedded into a similarity vector VX ,
each dimension of which captures the divergence of X to the Bs
using the respective measure. We use VX for classification.

(e.g., color, gradients, filter responses, etc.) in a cohesive,
and compact format. In various mainstream vision applications, including tracking, re-identification, object, texture,
and activity recognition, the trail of SPD matrices to advance the state-of-the-art solutions can be seen [6, 45, 18].
SPD matrices are even used as second-order pooling operators for enhancing the performance of popular deep learning
architectures [24, 22].
SPD matrices, due to their positive definiteness property,
form a cone in the Euclidean space. However, analyzing
these matrices through their Riemannian geometry (or the
associated Lie algebra) helps avoiding unlikely/unrealistic
solutions, thereby improving the outcomes. For example, in
diffusion MRI [37, 3], it has been shown that the Riemannian structure (which comes with an affine invariant met14270

