Scaling the Scattering Transform: Deep Hybrid Networks
Edouard Oyallon
Département Informatique
ENS/PSL Research University
Paris, France

Eugene Belilovsky
KU Leuven and INRIA
University of Paris-Saclay
eugene.belilovsky@inria.fr

edouard.oyallon@ens.fr

Abstract
We use the scattering network as a generic and fixed initialization of the first layers of a supervised hybrid deep
network. We show that early layers do not necessarily
need to be learned, providing the best results to-date with
pre-defined representations while being competitive with
Deep CNNs. Using a shallow cascade of 1 × 1 convolutions, which encodes scattering coefficients that correspond to spatial windows of very small sizes, permits to obtain AlexNet accuracy on the imagenet ILSVRC2012. We
demonstrate that this local encoding explicitly learns invariance w.r.t. rotations. Combining scattering networks
with a modern ResNet, we achieve a single-crop top 5 error of 11.4% on imagenet ILSVRC2012, comparable to the
Resnet-18 architecture, while utilizing only 10 layers. We
also find that hybrid architectures can yield excellent performance in the small sample regime, exceeding their endto-end counterparts, through their ability to incorporate geometrical priors. We demonstrate this on subsets of the
CIFAR-10 dataset and on the STL-10 dataset.

1. Introduction
Image classification is a high dimensional problem that
requires building lower dimensional representations that reduce the non-informative images variabilities. For example, some of the main source of variability are often due
to geometrical operations such as translations and rotations.
An efficient classification pipeline necessarily builds invariants to these variabilities. Deep architectures build representations that lead to state-of-the-art results on image classification tasks [13]. These architectures are designed as
very deep cascades of non-linear end-to-end learned modules [22]. When trained on large-scale datasets they have
been shown to produce representations that are transferable
to other datasets [43, 15], which indicate they have captured
generic properties of a supervised task that consequently do

Sergey Zagoruyko
Université Paris-Est
École des Ponts ParisTech
Paris, France
sergey.zagoruyko@enpc.fr

not need to be learned. Indeed several works indicate geometrical structures in the filters of the earlier layers [19, 39]
of Deep CNNs. However, understanding the precise operations performed by those early layers is a complicated
[38, 26] and possibly intractable task. In this work we investigate if it is possible to replace these early layers, by
simpler cascades of non-learned operators that reduce variability while retaining discriminative information.
Indeed, there can be several advantages to incorporating
pre-defined geometric priors, via a hybrid approach of combining pre-defined and learned representations. First, endto-end pipelines can be data hungry and ineffective when
the number of samples is low. Secondly, it could permit
to obtain more interpertable classification pipelines which
are amenable to analysis. Finally, it can reduce the spatial
dimensions and the required depth of the learned modules.
A potential candidate for an image representation is the
SIFT descriptor [23] that was widely used before 2012 as
a feature extractor in classification pipelines [30, 31]. This
representation was typically encoded via an unsupervised
Fisher Vector (FV) and fed to a linear SVM. However, several works indicate that this is not a generic enough representation to build further modules on top of [21, 2]. Indeed end-to-end learned features produce substantially better classification accuracy. A major improvement over SIFT
can be found in the scattering transform [24, 6, 33], which
is a type of deep convolutional network, which permits
to retain discriminative information normally discarded by
methods like SIFT while introducing geometric invariances
and stability. Scattering transforms have been shown to already produce representations that lead to the top results
on complex image datasets when compared to other unsupervised representations (even learned ones) [27]. This
makes them an excellent candidate for the initial layers of a
deep network. We thus investigate the use of scattering as
a generic representation to combine with deep neural networks.
Related to our work [28] proposed a hybrid representation for large scale image recognition combining a prede-

5618

