Deep Clustering via Joint Convolutional Autoencoder Embedding and Relative
Entropy Minimization
Kamran Ghasedi Dizaji† , Amirhossein Herandi‡ , Cheng Deng♯ , Weidong Cai♮ , Heng Huang†∗
†
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, USA
‡
Computer Science and Engineering, University of Texas at Arlington, USA
♯
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, China
♮
School of Information Technologies, University of Sydney, Australia
kamran.ghasedi@gmail.com, amirhossein.herandi@uta.edu, chdeng@mail.xidian.edu.cn
tom.cai@sydney.edu.au, heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new clustering model,
called DEeP Embedded RegularIzed ClusTering (DEPICT), which efficiently maps data into a discriminative
embedding subspace and precisely predicts cluster assignments. DEPICT generally consists of a multinomial logistic
regression function stacked on top of a multi-layer convolutional autoencoder. We define a clustering objective function using relative entropy (KL divergence) minimization,
regularized by a prior for the frequency of cluster assignments. An alternating strategy is then derived to optimize
the objective by updating parameters and estimating cluster assignments. Furthermore, we employ the reconstruction loss functions in our autoencoder, as a data-dependent
regularization term, to prevent the deep embedding function from overfitting. In order to benefit from end-to-end
optimization and eliminate the necessity for layer-wise pretraining, we introduce a joint learning framework to minimize the unified clustering and reconstruction loss functions
together and train all network layers simultaneously. Experimental results indicate the superiority and faster running time of DEPICT in real-world clustering tasks, where
no labeled data is available for hyper-parameter tuning.

1. Introduction
Clustering is one of the fundamental research topics in
machine learning and computer vision research, and it has
gained significant attention for discriminative representation of data points without any need for supervisory signals. The clustering problem has been extensively studied in
∗ Corresponding Author. This work was partially supported by U.S.
NIH R01 AG049371, NSF IIS 1302675, IIS 1344152, DBI 1356628, IIS
1619308, IIS 1633753.

(a) Raw Data

(b) NonJoint DEPICT (c) Joint DEPICT

Figure 1: Visualization to show the discriminative capability of embedding subspaces using MNIST-test data. (a)
The space of raw data. (b) The embedding subspace of
non-joint DEPICT using standard stacked denoising autoencoder (SdA). (c) The embedding subspace of joint DEPICT using our joint learning approach (MdA).
various applications; however, the performance of standard
clustering algorithms is adversely affected when dealing
with high-dimensional data, and their time complexity dramatically increases when working with large-scale datasets.
Tackling the curse of dimensionality, previous studies often initially project data into a low-dimensional manifold,
and then cluster the embedded data in this new subspace
[36, 42, 49]. Handling large-scale datasets, there are also
several studies which select only a subset of data points to
accelerate the clustering process [39, 21, 19].
However, dealing with real-world image data, existing
clustering algorithms suffer from different issues: 1) Using
inflexible hand-crafted features, which do not depend on the
input data distribution; 2) Using shallow and linear embedding functions, which are not able to capture the non-linear
nature of data; 3) Non-joint embedding and clustering processes, which do not result in an optimal embedding subspace for clustering; 4) Complicated clustering algorithms
that require tuning the hyper-parameters using labeled data,
which is not feasible in real-world clustering tasks.
To address the mentioned challenging issues, we propose

5736

