Beyond Face Rotation: Global and Local Perception GAN for Photorealistic and
Identity Preserving Frontal View Synthesis
Rui Huang1,2∗ Shu Zhang1,2,3∗ Tianyu Li1,2 Ran He1,2,3
1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
2
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, CASIA
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
huangrui@cmu.edu, tianyu.lizard@gmail.com, {shu.zhang, rhe}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Photorealistic frontal view synthesis from a single face
image has a wide range of applications in the field of face
recognition. Although data-driven deep learning methods
have been proposed to address this problem by seeking solutions from ample face data, this problem is still challenging because it is intrinsically ill-posed. This paper proposes
a Two-Pathway Generative Adversarial Network (TP-GAN)
for photorealistic frontal view synthesis by simultaneously
perceiving global structures and local details. Four landmark located patch networks are proposed to attend to local
textures in addition to the commonly used global encoderdecoder network. Except for the novel architecture, we
make this ill-posed problem well constrained by introducing
a combination of adversarial loss, symmetry loss and identity preserving loss. The combined loss function leverages
both frontal face distribution and pre-trained discriminative
deep face models to guide an identity preserving inference
of frontal views from profiles. Different from previous deep
learning methods that mainly rely on intermediate features
for recognition, our method directly leverages the synthesized identity preserving image for downstream tasks like
face recognition and attribution estimation. Experimental
results demonstrate that our method not only presents compelling perceptual results but also outperforms state-of-theart results on large pose face recognition.

1. Introduction
Benefiting from the rapid development of deep learning methods and the easy access to a large amount of annotated face images, unconstrained face recognition techniques [28, 29] have made significant advances in recent
years. Although surpassing human performance has been
∗ These two authors contributed equally

Figure 1. Frontal view synthesis by TP-GAN. The upper half
shows the 90◦ profile image (middle) and its corresponding synthesized and ground truth frontal face. We invite the readers to
guess which side is our synthesis results (please refer to Sec. 1 for
the answer). The lower half shows the synthesized frontal view
faces from profiles of 90◦ , 75◦ and 45◦ respectively.

achieved on several benchmark datasets [25], pose variations are still the bottleneck for many real-world application
scenarios. Existing methods that address pose variations
can be divided into two categories. One category tries to
adopt hand-crafted or learned pose-invariant features [4,25],
while the other resorts to synthesis techniques to recover a
frontal view image from a large pose face image and then
use the recovered face images for face recognition [41, 42].
For the first category, traditional methods often make use
of robust local descriptors such as Gabor [5], Haar [32] and
LBP [2] to account for local distortions and then adopt metric learning [4,33] techniques to achieve pose invariance. In
contrast, deep learning methods often handle position variances with pooling operation and employ triplet loss [25] or

2439

