Pixel-Level Matching for Video Object Segmentation using Convolutional Neural
Networks
Jae Shin Yoon† ‡

Francois Rameau‡
†

Junsik Kim‡

Seokju Lee‡
‡

UMN, Minneapolis, MN

Seunghak Shin‡

In So Kweon‡

KAIST, South Korea

yoon0074@umn.edu, {frameau, Jskim2, sjlee, shshin}@rcv.kaist.ac.kr, iskweon@kaist.ac.kr

Frame t

(Target)

Frame 1

Objectness

Pixel-level Similarity

Video object segmentation refers to the propagation of
the mask of an initial object(s) from the first to the last
frame of a video sequence. With it, users can determine the
pixel-level foreground masks of every image from single
key frame supervision. Separating the foreground from the
background in a video is a fundamental problem with high
applicability to many video based tasks including video
summarization, stabilization, retrieval, and scene understanding. For these reasons, video object segmentation has
been studied intensively, but it still demonstrates poor results in real world scenarios.
Most recent approaches [5, 23, 29, 1, 25, 28] separate
discriminative objects from a background by optimizing
an energy equation under various pixel graph relationships.

Query

1. Introduction & Related Works

Search

We propose a novel video object segmentation algorithm
based on pixel-level matching using Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN). Our network aims to distinguish the target area from the background on the basis of the pixel-level
similarity between two object units. The proposed network
represents a target object using features from different depth
layers in order to take advantage of both the spatial details
and the category-level semantic information. Furthermore,
we propose a feature compression technique that drastically
reduces the memory requirements while maintaining the capability of feature representation. Two-stage training (pretraining and fine-tuning) allows our network to handle any
target object regardless of its category (even if the object’s
type does not belong to the pre-training data) or of variations in its appearance through a video sequence. Experiments on large datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of
our model - against related methods - in terms of accuracy,
speed, and stability. Finally, we introduce the transferability of our network to different domains, such as the infrared
data domain.

(Reference)

Abstract

Result

Figure 1. Example of a result of the proposed pixel-level matching
network. Here, a completely segmented reference frame is fixed
to the query and a sample target frame is fed to the search input.
Each colored box is associated with the same color in Fig. 2.

For instance, fully connected graphs have been proposed in
[22] to construct a long range spatio-temporal graph structure robust to challenging situations such as occlusion. In
another study [9], the higher potential term in a supervoxel
cluster unit was used to enforce the steadiness of a graph
structure. More recently, non-local graph connections were
effectively approximated in the bilateral space [17], which
drastically improved the accuracy of segmentation. However, many recent methods are too computationally expensive to deal with long video sequences. They are also
greatly affected by cluttered backgrounds, resulting in a
drifting effect. Furthermore, many challenges remain partly
unsolved, such as large scale variations and dynamic appearance changes. The main reason behind these failure
cases is likely poor target appearance representations which
do not encompass any semantic level information.
Recently, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have
been extensively applied to various vision tasks given their
ability to encapsulate semantic information in the object
representation task itself. In spite of this advantage, however, only a few attempts [4, 20, 10] have been made to
solve video object segmentation problems using a CNN.

2167

