Revisiting Cross-channel Information Transfer
for Chromatic Aberration Correction

1

Tiancheng Sun2,1 Yifan Peng3,1 Wolfgang Heidrich1,3
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
2
IIIS, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada

Abstract
Image aberrations can cause severe degradation in image quality for consumer-level cameras, especially under
the current tendency to reduce the complexity of lens designs in order to shrink the overall size of modules. In simplified optical designs, chromatic aberration can be one of
the most significant causes for degraded image quality, and
it can be quite difficult to remove in post-processing, since
it results in strong blurs in at least some of the color channels. In this work, we revisit the pixel-wise similarity between different color channels of the image and accordingly
propose a novel algorithm for correcting chromatic aberration based on this cross-channel correlation. In contrast
to recent weak prior-based models, ours uses strong pixelwise fitting and transfer, which lead to significant quality
improvements for large chromatic aberrations. Experimental results on both synthetic and real world images captured
by different optical systems demonstrate that the chromatic
aberration can be significantly reduced using our approach.

1. Introduction
Modern optical systems usually consist of dozens of
heavy and complex lenses, which are used to compensate
for aberrations of all kinds [5]. However, the increase of
the computing power and the demand for more compact devices, has recently started a push to optical designs with reduced complexity, that instead use computational imaging
methods to recover high quality photographs [23, 7, 18, 19].
This is of significance particularly in mobile devices, where
form factor constraints mandate optical designs with a small
number of lens elements, and the small size of components
complicates manufacture and alignment.
Images captured by uncorrected lenses may suffer from
both monochromatic aberrations (e.g. spherical, astigmatism, coma, field curvature), as well as chromatic aberrations. Further, in the absence of optical image stabilizers
(OIS), the captured images may be subject to motion blur.

With optical means, chromatic aberration can only be corrected by involving multiple lens elements with different geometric shapes and different refractive indices. Thus, there
is a high demand on an effective deblurring approaches specially targeting the reconstruction of color images captured
by reduced complexity optics, which is also the objective of
our work. Specifically, we tackle this problem by exploiting the pixel correlation between color channels. In this
way, we reduce the problem to single channel deblurring,
and show that high-quality color images can be recovered
with cross-channel information.

1.1. Related work
In the following we will summarize two types of related
work: general deconvolution/deblurring research, and work
that specifically targets chromatic aberrations.
Image deblurring Early development of deconvolution
algorithms include direct frequency inverse, Wiener filter [29], which fail to tackle those frequencies that are zeroed out by the blur kernel, and thus may result in ringing
artifacts. Later development of iterative algorithms [15] extracts better results but may amplify noise level.
In recent years, researchers have attempted to add extra prior knowledge into deconvolution to restore highfrequency information. Chan et al. [2] used a total variation prior, where a global optimum can be obtained with
convex optimization. Alternative non-convex regularization terms have been investigated [12, 10], empirically giving improved results at reasonable local optimum. Cho et
al. [3] explored to match gradient distribution in order to
restore mid-frequency information. All these methods rely
on weak statistic priors for image restoration.
General image deconvolution model requires a known
convolution kernel, which could be impractical to calibrate,
for instance motion blur. Accordingly, blind deconvolution
algorithms have been extensively studied aiming to reconstruct the latent image and estimate the kernel simultaneously [24]. Similar to their non-blind counterparts, a wide

3248

