Situation Recognition with Graph Neural Networks
Ruiyu Li1 , Makarand Tapaswi2 , Renjie Liao2 , Jiaya Jia1,3 , Raquel Urtasun2,4,5 , Sanja Fidler2,5
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 University of Toronto, 3 Youtu Lab, Tencent
4
Uber Advanced Technologies Group, 5 Vector Institute

ryli@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, {makarand,rjliao,urtasun,fidler}@cs.toronto.edu, leojia9@gmail.com

Abstract
We address the problem of recognizing situations in images. Given an image, the task is to predict the most
salient verb (action), and fill its semantic roles such as
who is performing the action, what is the source and target of the action, etc. Different verbs have different roles
(e.g. attacking has weapon), and each role can take on
many possible values (nouns). We propose a model based
on Graph Neural Networks that allows us to efficiently
capture joint dependencies between roles using neural networks defined on a graph. Experiments with different graph
connectivities show that our approach that propagates information between roles significantly outperforms existing
work, as well as multiple baselines. We obtain roughly 35% improvement over previous work in predicting the full
situation. We also provide a thorough qualitative analysis
of our model and influence of different roles in the verbs.

VERB:
REPAIRING

ITEM

PROBLEM

AC
Wall
Car

⋯

Part
Pipe
Wheel

⋯

AGENT

PLACE

TOOL

Worker
Plumber
Soldier

Outdoors
Bathroom
Field

Screwdriver
Wrench
Knife

⋯

⋯

⋯

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Understanding an image involves more than just predicting the most salient action. We need to know who is performing
this action, what tools (s)he may be using, etc. Situation recognition is a structured prediction task that aims to predict the verb
and its frame that consists of multiple role-noun pairs. The figure
shows a glimpse of our model that uses a graph to model dependencies between the verb and its roles.

Object [14, 33, 36], action [35, 40], and scene classification [50, 51] have come a long way, with performance
in some of these tasks almost reaching human agreement.
However, in many real world applications such as robotics
we need a much more detailed understanding of the scene.
For example, knowing that an image depicts a repairing
action is not sufficient to understand what is really happening in the scene. We thus need additional information such
as the person repairing the house, and the tool that is used.
Several datasets have recently been collected for such
detailed understanding [22, 27, 47]. In [22], the Visual
Genome dataset was built containing detailed relationships
between objects. A subset of the scenes were further annotated with scene graphs [17] to capture both unary (e.g. attributes) and pairwise (e.g. relative spatial info) object relationships. Recently, Yatskar et al. [47] extended this idea
to actions by labeling action frames where a frame consists
of a fixed set of roles that define the action. Fig. 1 shows a
frame for action repairing. The challenge then consists

of assigning values (nouns) to these roles based on the image content. The number of different role types, their possible values, as well as the number of actions are very large,
making it a very challenging prediction task. As shown in
Fig. 2, the same verb can appear in very different image
contexts, and nouns that fill the roles are vastly different.
In [47], the authors proposed a Conditional Random
Field (CRF) to model dependencies between verb-rolenoun pairs. In particular, a neural network was trained in
an end-to-end fashion to both, predict the unary potentials
for verbs and nouns, and to perform inference in the CRF.
While their model captured the dependency between the
verb and role-noun pairs, dependencies between the roles
were not modeled explicitly.
In this paper, we aim to jointly reason about verbs and
their roles using a Graph Neural Network (GNN), a generalization of graphical models to neural networks. A GNN
defines observation and output at each node in the graph,
14173

