Cut, Paste and Learn: Surprisingly Easy Synthesis for Instance Detection
Debidatta Dwibedi
Ishan Misra
Martial Hebert
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
debidatta@cmu.edu, {imisra, hebert}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

Cut
Object Instances

A major impediment in rapidly deploying object detection models for instance detection is the lack of large annotated datasets. For example, finding a large labeled
dataset containing instances in a particular kitchen is unlikely. Each new environment with new instances requires
expensive data collection and annotation. In this paper, we
propose a simple approach to generate large annotated instance datasets with minimal effort. Our key insight is that
ensuring only patch-level realism provides enough training
signal for current object detector models. We automatically
‘cut’ object instances and ‘paste’ them on random backgrounds. A naive way to do this results in pixel artifacts
which result in poor performance for trained models. We
show how to make detectors ignore these artifacts during
training and generate data that gives competitive performance on real data. Our method outperforms existing synthesis approaches and when combined with real images improves relative performance by more than 21% on benchmark datasets. In a cross-domain setting, our synthetic
data combined with just 10% real data outperforms models trained on all real data.

1. Introduction
Imagine using an object detection system for an environment like your kitchen. Such a system needs to not only
recognize different kinds of objects but also distinguish between many different instances of the same object category,
e.g., your cup vs. my cup. With the tremendous progress
that has been made in visual recognition, as documented on
benchmark detection datasets, one may expect to easily take
a state-of-the-art system and deploy it for such a setting.
However, one of the biggest drawbacks of using a stateof-the-art detection system is the amount of annotations
needed to train it. For a new environment with new objects, we would likely need to curate thousands of diverse
images with varied backgrounds and viewpoints, and annotate them with boxes. Traditionally, vision researchers have
undertaken such a mammoth task [8, 26] for a few commonly occurring categories like man, cow, sheep etc., but

Background Scenes

Paste
Generated Scenes (Training Data)

Learn
Detections on Real Images

Figure 1: We present a simple way to rapidly generate training images for instance detection with minimal human effort. We automatically extract object instance masks and
render it on random background images to create realistic
training images with bounding box labels. Our results show
that such data is competitive with human curated datasets,
and contains complementary information.

this approach is unlikely to scale to all possible categories,
especially the instances in your kitchen. In a personalized
setting we need annotations for instances like your cup. We
believe that collecting such annotations is a major impediment for rapid deployment of detection systems in robotics
or other personalized applications.
Recently, a successful research direction to overcome
this annotation barrier, is to use synthetically rendered
scenes and objects [22, 34, 47] to train a detection system.
This approach requires a lot of effort to make the scenes and
objects realistic, ensuring high quality global and local consistency. Moreover, models trained on such synthetic data
11301

