Composite Focus Measure for High Quality Depth Maps
Parikshit Sakurikar and P. J. Narayanan
Center for Visual Information Technology - Kohli Center on Intelligent Systems,
International Institute of Information Technology - Hyderabad, India
{parikshit.sakurikar@research.,pjn@}iiit.ac.in

Abstract
Depth from focus is a highly accessible method to estimate the 3D structure of everyday scenes. Today’s DSLR
and mobile cameras facilitate the easy capture of multiple focused images of a scene. Focus measures (FMs) that
estimate the amount of focus at each pixel form the basis
of depth-from-focus methods. Several FMs have been proposed in the past and new ones will emerge in the future,
each with their own strengths. We estimate a weighted combination of standard FMs that outperforms others on a wide
range of scene types. The resulting composite focus measure consists of FMs that are in consensus with one another
but not in chorus. Our two-stage pipeline first estimates fine
depth at each pixel using the composite focus measure. A
cost-volume propagation step then assigns depths from confident pixels to others. We can generate high quality depth
maps using just the top five FMs from our composite focus
measure. This is a positive step towards depth estimation of
everyday scenes with no special equipment.

1. Introduction
Recovering the 3D structure of the scene from 2D images
has been an important pursuit of Computer Vision. The size,
relative position and shape of scene objects play an important role in understanding the world around us. The 2.5D
depth map is a natural description of scene structure, corresponding to an image from a specific viewpoint. Multicamera arrangements, structured lights, focus stacks, shading etc., can all recover depth maps under suitable conditions. Users’ experience and understanding of the environment around them can be improved significantly if the
3D structure is available. The emergence of Augmented
and Virtual Reality (AR/VR) as an effective user interaction
medium enhances the importance of easy and inexpensive
structure recovery of everyday environments around us.
Depth sensors using structured lights or time-of-flight
cameras are common today, with a primary use as game
appliances [13]. They can capture dynamic scenes but have

Figure 1. A coarse focal stack of an outdoor scene and its surfacemapped 3D depth is shown from two different viewpoints. The
depth-map is computed using our composite focus measure. The
smooth depth variation along the midrib of the leaf is clearly visible in the reconstructed depth rendering.

serious environmental, resolution and depth-range limitations. Multi-camera setups are more general, but are unwieldy and/or expensive. Focus and defocus can also provide estimates of scene depth. Today’s DSLR cameras and
most mobile cameras can capture focal stacks by manipulating the focus distance programmatically. Thus, depth from
focus is a promising way to recover 3D structure of static
scenes as it is accessible widely.
We present a scheme to recover high quality depth maps
of static scenes from a focal stack, improving on previous
depth-from-focus (DfF) methods. We show results on several everyday scenes with different depth ranges and scene
complexity. Figure 1 is an example of robust depth recovery
that we facilitate. The specific contributions of this paper
are given below.
1. Composite Focus Measure: A focus measure (FM) to
evaluate the degree of focus or sharpness at an image
pixel is central to DfF. Several focus measures have
been used for different scenarios. We combine them
into a composite focus measure (cFM) by analyzing
their consensus and correlation with one another over
150 typical focal stacks. The cFM is a weighted combination of individual adhoc FMs with weights com11614

