Mask R-CNN
Kaiming He

Georgia Gkioxari

Piotr Dollár

Ross Girshick

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

Abstract
We present a conceptually simple, flexible, and general
framework for object instance segmentation. Our approach
efficiently detects objects in an image while simultaneously
generating a high-quality segmentation mask for each instance. The method, called Mask R-CNN, extends Faster
R-CNN by adding a branch for predicting an object mask in
parallel with the existing branch for bounding box recognition. Mask R-CNN is simple to train and adds only a small
overhead to Faster R-CNN, running at 5 fps. Moreover,
Mask R-CNN is easy to generalize to other tasks, e.g., allowing us to estimate human poses in the same framework.
We show top results in all three tracks of the COCO suite of
challenges, including instance segmentation, bounding-box
object detection, and person keypoint detection. Without
tricks, Mask R-CNN outperforms all existing, single-model
entries on every task, including the COCO 2016 challenge
winners. We hope our simple and effective approach will
serve as a solid baseline and help ease future research in
instance-level recognition. Code will be made available.

1. Introduction
The vision community has rapidly improved object detection and semantic segmentation results over a short period of time. In large part, these advances have been driven
by powerful baseline systems, such as the Fast/Faster RCNN [9, 29] and Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) [24]
frameworks for object detection and semantic segmentation, respectively. These methods are conceptually intuitive
and offer flexibility and robustness, together with fast training and inference time. Our goal in this work is to develop a
comparably enabling framework for instance segmentation.
Instance segmentation is challenging because it requires
the correct detection of all objects in an image while also
precisely segmenting each instance. It therefore combines
elements from the classical computer vision tasks of object detection, where the goal is to classify individual objects and localize each using a bounding box, and semantic
segmentation, where the goal is to classify each pixel into

class
box

RoIAlign
conv

conv

Figure 1. The Mask R-CNN framework for instance segmentation.

a fixed set of categories without differentiating object instances.1 Given this, one might expect a complex method
is required to achieve good results. However, we show that
a surprisingly simple, flexible, and fast system can surpass
prior state-of-the-art instance segmentation results.
Our method, called Mask R-CNN, extends Faster R-CNN
[29] by adding a branch for predicting segmentation masks
on each Region of Interest (RoI), in parallel with the existing branch for classification and bounding box regression (Figure 1). The mask branch is a small FCN applied
to each RoI, predicting a segmentation mask in a pixel-topixel manner. Mask R-CNN is simple to implement and
train given the Faster R-CNN framework, which facilitates
a wide range of flexible architecture designs. Additionally,
the mask branch only adds a small computational overhead,
enabling a fast system and rapid experimentation.
In principle Mask R-CNN is an intuitive extension of
Faster R-CNN, yet constructing the mask branch properly
is critical for good results. Most importantly, Faster R-CNN
was not designed for pixel-to-pixel alignment between network inputs and outputs. This is most evident in how
RoIPool [14, 9], the de facto core operation for attending
to instances, performs coarse spatial quantization for feature extraction. To fix the misalignment, we propose a simple, quantization-free layer, called RoIAlign, that faithfully
preserves exact spatial locations. Despite being a seem1 Following common terminology, we use object detection to denote

detection via bounding boxes, not masks, and semantic segmentation to
denote per-pixel classification without differentiating instances. Yet we
note that instance segmentation is both semantic and a form of detection.

12961

