Spatiotemporal Modeling for Crowd Counting in Videos
Feng Xiong Xingjian Shi Dit-Yan Yeung
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{fxiongab,xshiab,dyyeung}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Region of Interest (ROI) crowd counting can be formulated as a regression problem of learning a mapping from
an image or a video frame to a crowd density map. Recently, convolutional neural network (CNN) models have
achieved promising results for crowd counting. However,
even when dealing with video data, CNN-based methods
still consider each video frame independently, ignoring the
strong temporal correlation between neighboring frames.
To exploit the otherwise very useful temporal information
in video sequences, we propose a variant of a recent deep
learning model called convolutional LSTM (ConvLSTM) for
crowd counting. Unlike the previous CNN-based methods,
our method fully captures both spatial and temporal dependencies. Furthermore, we extend the ConvLSTM model to
a bidirectional ConvLSTM model which can access longrange information in both directions. Extensive experiments
using four publicly available datasets demonstrate the reliability of our approach and the effectiveness of incorporating temporal information to boost the accuracy of crowd
counting. In addition, we also conduct some transfer learning experiments to show that once our model is trained on
one dataset, its learning experience can be transferred easily to a new dataset which consists of only very few video
frames for model adaptation.

1. Introduction
Crowd counting is the problem of estimating the number of people in a still image or a video. It has drawn a
lot of attention due to the need for solving this problem
in many real-world applications such as video surveillance,
traffic control, and emergency management. Proper use of
crowd counting techniques can help to prevent some serious accidents such as the massive stampede that happened
in Shanghai, China during the 2015 New Year’s Eve festivities, killing 35 people. Moreover, some crowd counting methods can also be applied to other object counting applications such as cell counting in microscopic im-

ages [15, 29], vehicle counting in public areas [18, 34], and
animal counting in the wild [3].
The methods for crowd counting in videos fall into two
broad categories: (a) Region of Interest (ROI) counting,
which estimates the total number of people in some region
at a certain time; and (b) Line of Interest (LOI) counting,
which counts the number of people crossing a detecting line
in a video during a certain period of time. Since LOI counting is more restrictive in its applications and is much less
studied than ROI counting, we focus on ROI counting in
this paper.
Many methods have been proposed in the past for crowd
counting. Some methods take the approach of tackling
the crowd counting problem in an unsupervised manner
through grouping based on self-similarities [1] or motion
similarities [21]. However, the accuracy of such fully unsupervised counting methods is limited. Thus more attention has been paid to the supervised learning approach. Supervised crowd counting methods generally fall into two
categories: detection-based methods and regression-based
methods. In detection-based methods, some given object
detectors [12, 37, 16, 9] are used to detect people individually. They usually operate in two stages by first producing a real-valued confidence map and then locating from
the map those peaks that correspond to individual people.
Once the locations of all individuals have been estimated,
the counting problem becomes trivial. However, object detection could be a challenging problem especially under severe occlusion in highly crowded scenes.
In recent years, regression-based methods have achieved
promising counting results in crowded scenes. Regressionbased methods avoid solving the difficult detection problem. Instead, they regard crowd counting as a regression problem by learning a regression function or mapping from some holistic or local visual features to a crowd
count or a crowd density map. Linear regression, Gaussian process regression, and neural networks are often used
as the regression models. Currently, most methods which
achieve state-of-the-art performance are regression-based
methods [4, 7, 2, 20, 6, 32, 36, 29].

5151

