Learning long-term dependencies for action recognition with a
biologically-inspired deep network
Yemin Shi1,2 , Yonghong Tian1,2∗, Yaowei Wang3 , Wei Zeng1,2 , Tiejun Huang1,2
1
National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, School of EE&CS,
Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, China
3
School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China

Abstract

will then leads to massive amount of parameters and high
risk of over-fitting.

Despite a lot of research efforts devoted in recent years,
how to efficiently learn long-term dependencies from sequences still remains a pretty challenging task. As one of
the key models for sequence learning, recurrent neural network (RNN) and its variants such as long short term memory (LSTM) and gated recurrent unit (GRU) are still not
powerful enough in practice. One possible reason is that
they have only feedforward connections, which is different from the biological neural system that is typically composed of both feedforward and feedback connections. To
address this problem, this paper proposes a biologicallyinspired deep network, called shuttleNet1 . Technologically,
the shuttleNet consists of several processors, each of which
is a GRU while associated with multiple groups of hidden states. Unlike traditional RNNs, all processors inside
shuttleNet are loop connected to mimic the brain’s feedforward and feedback connections, in which they are shared
across multiple pathways in the loop connection. Attention mechanism is then employed to select the best information flow pathway. Extensive experiments conducted on two
benchmark datasets (i.e UCF101 and HMDB51) show that
we can beat state-of-the-art methods by simply embedding
shuttleNet into a CNN-RNN framework.

In biological neural system, the visual areas of the brain
are interconnected in a complex pattern of feedforward, lateral, and feedback pathways [12, 25]. Feedback connections are ubiquitous throughout the cortex, and subcortical
regions in ascending hierarchical pathways also receive a
large amount of feedback from cortical areas [9, 29]. This
fact motivates us that DNNs may benefit a lot from imitating the biological neural system by introducing lateral or
feedback connections.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great success in recent years as they are able to learn complex features and patterns from data. A typical DNN has multiple
nonlinear layers which are connected with feedforward connections. In order to gain better performance, very deep
structure must be considered to construct a DNN, which
∗ Corresponding author: Yonghong Tian (email: yhtian@pku.edu.cn).
1 The code is available at https://github.com/shiyemin/
shuttleNet

Following the similar idea, recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) introduce lateral connections to the temporal domain to condition their present state on the entire history of
inputs. Because of the temporal lateral connection mechanism, RNNs are able to capture long-term dependencies
in sequential data over an extended period of time. Moreover, RNNs have been theoretically proved to be a Turingcomplete machine, indicating that they can be used to approximate any functions [32]. As one variant of RNNs,
long short term memory (LSTM) [17] is proposed to solve
the gradient vanishing and exploding problems. When unfolded in time, LSTMs are equivalent to very deep neural
networks that share model parameters and receive the input at each time step. The parameter-sharing mechanism
guarantees that there are not too many parameters and consequently the network is trainable. Many works [7, 30, 47]
have proved the effectiveness of LSTM on the action recognition task from video sequences.
In this paper, we propose a new kind of biologicallyinspired deep neural network, called shuttleNet, which is
composed of both feedforward and feedback connections.
Technologically, the shuttleNet consists of N processors
and N × D groups of hidden states. In our model, each
processor is a simple Gated Recurrent Unit [5], typically
containing a group of weight matrices and associated with
D groups of hidden states. All the N processors are orga-

716

