Attribute-Enhanced Face Recognition with Neural Tensor Fusion Networks
Guosheng Hu1
Sankha S. Mukherjee1

Yang Hua1,2
Yang Yuan1
Zhihong Zhang3
Timothy M. Hospedales4
Neil M. Robertson1,2

Zheng Lu1
Yongxin Yang5,6

1

2
3
AnyVision
Queen’s University Belfast
Xiamen University
4
5
The University of Edinburgh
Queen Mary University of London 6 Yang’s Accounting Consultancy Ltd

{guosheng.hu,yang.hua,yuany,steven,rick}@anyvision.co.uk, N.Robertson@qub.ac.uk
zhihong@xmu.edu.cn, t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk, yongxin@yang.ac

Abstract
Deep learning has achieved great success in face recognition, however deep-learned features still have limited invariance to strong intra-personal variations such as large
pose changes. It is observed that some facial attributes
(e.g. eyebrow thickness, gender) are robust to such variations. We present the first work to systematically explore
how the fusion of face recognition features (FRF) and facial attribute features (FAF) can enhance face recognition
performance in various challenging scenarios. Despite the
promise of FAF, we find that in practice existing fusion methods fail to leverage FAF to boost face recognition performance in some challenging scenarios. Thus, we develop
a powerful tensor-based framework which formulates feature fusion as a tensor optimisation problem. It is nontrivial to directly optimise this tensor due to the large number of parameters to optimise. To solve this problem, we
establish a theoretical equivalence between low-rank tensor optimisation and a two-stream gated neural network.
This equivalence allows tractable learning using standard
neural network optimisation tools, leading to accurate and
stable optimisation. Experimental results show the fused
feature works better than individual features, thus proving
for the first time that facial attributes aid face recognition.
We achieve state-of-the-art performance on three popular
databases: MultiPIE (cross pose, lighting and expression),
CASIA NIR-VIS2.0 (cross-modality environment) and LFW
(uncontrolled environment).

1. Introduction
Face recognition has advanced dramatically with the advent of bigger datasets, and improved methodologies for
generating features that are variant to identity but invariant to covariates such as pose, expression and illumination.
Deep learning methodologies [41, 40, 42, 32] have proven
particularly effective recently, thanks to end-to-end repre-

Figure 1: A sample attribute list is given (col.1) which pertains to the images of the same individual at different poses
(col.2). While the similarity scores for each dimension vary
in the face recognition feature (FRF) set (col.3), the face attribute feature (FAF) set (col.4) remains very similar. The
fused features (col.5) are more similar and a higher similarity score (0.89) is achieved.
sentation learning with a discriminative face recognition objective. Nevertheless, the resulting features still show imperfect invariance to the strong intra-personal variations in
real-world scenarios. We observe that facial attributes provide a robust invariant cue in such challenging scenarios.
For example gender and ethnicity are likely to be invariant
to pose and expression, while eyebrow thickness may be
invariant to lighting and resolution. Overall, face recognition features (FRF) are very discriminative but less robust;
while facial attribute features (FAF) are robust but less discriminative. Thus these two features are potentially complementary, if a suitable fusion method can be devised. To
the best of our knowledge, we are the first to systematically
explore the fusion of FAF and FRF in various face recognition scenarios. We empirically show that this fusion can
greatly enhance face recognition performance.
Though facial attributes are an important cue for face
recognition, in practice, we find the existing fusion methods including early (feature) or late (score) fusion cannot
reliably improve the performance [34]. In particular, while
13744

