SVDNet for Pedestrian Retrieval
Yifan Sun† , Liang Zheng‡ , Weijian Deng§ , Shengjin Wang†∗
†
Tsinghua University ‡ University of Technology Sydney
§
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
sunyf15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {liangzheng06, dengwj16}@gmail.com, wgsgj@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper proposes the SVDNet for retrieval problems,
with focus on the application of person re-identification (reID). We view each weight vector within a fully connected
(FC) layer in a convolutional neuron network (CNN) as a
projection basis. It is observed that the weight vectors are
usually highly correlated. This problem leads to correlations among entries of the FC descriptor, and compromises
the retrieval performance based on the Euclidean distance.
To address the problem, this paper proposes to optimize the
deep representation learning process with Singular Vector
Decomposition (SVD). Specifically, with the restraint and
relaxation iteration (RRI) training scheme, we are able to
iteratively integrate the orthogonality constraint in CNN
training, yielding the so-called SVDNet. We conduct experiments on the Market-1501, CUHK03, and DukeMTMCreID datasets, and show that RRI effectively reduces the
correlation among the projection vectors, produces more
discriminative FC descriptors, and significantly improves
the re-ID accuracy. On the Market-1501 dataset, for instance, rank-1 accuracy is improved from 55.3% to 80.5%
for CaffeNet, and from 73.8% to 82.3% for ResNet-50.

1. Introduction
This paper considers the problem of pedestrian retrieval,
also called person re-identification (re-ID). This task aims at
retrieving images containing the same person to the query.
Person re-ID is different from image classification in
that the training and testing sets contain entirely different classes. So a popular deep learning method for re-ID
consists of 1) training a classification deep model on the
training set, 2) extracting image descriptors using the fullyconnected (FC) layer for the query and gallery images, and
3) computing similarities based on Euclidean distance before returning the sorted list [33, 31, 26, 10].
Our work is motivated by the observation that after train∗ Corresponding Author

Figure 1: A cartoon illustration of the correlation among
weight vectors and its negative effect. The weight vectors
are contained in the last fully connected layer, e.g., FC8
layer of CaffeNet [12] or FC layer of ResNet-50 [11]. There
are three training IDs in red, pink and blue clothes from the
DukeMTMC-reID dataset [17]. The dotted green and black
vectors denote feature vectors of two testing samples before
the last FC layer. Under the baseline setting, the red and
the pink weight vectors are highly correlated and introduce
redundancy to the descriptors.

ing a convolutional neural network (CNN) for classification,
the weight vectors within a fully-connected layer (FC) are
usually highly correlated. This problem can be attributed
to two major reasons. The first reason is related to the
non-uniform distribution of training samples. This problem
is especially obvious when focusing on the last FC layer.
The output of each neuron in the last FC layer represents
the similarity between the input image and a corresponding
identity. After training, neurons corresponding to similar
persons (i.e., the persons who wear red and pink clothes)
learns highly correlated weight vectors, as shown in Fig. 1.
The second is that during the training of CNN, there exists
few, if any, constraints for learning orthogonalization. Thus
the learned weight vectors may be naturally correlated.
Correlation among weight vectors of the FC layer com-

3800

