Chained Multi-stream Networks Exploiting Pose, Motion, and Appearance for
Action Classification and Detection
Mohammadreza Zolfaghari , Gabriel L. Oliveira, Nima Sedaghat, and Thomas Brox
University of Freiburg
Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany
{zolfagha,oliveira,nima,brox}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
General human action recognition requires understanding of various visual cues. In this paper, we propose a network architecture that computes and integrates the most
important visual cues for action recognition: pose, motion, and the raw images. For the integration, we introduce a Markov chain model which adds cues successively.
The resulting approach is efficient and applicable to action
classification as well as to spatial and temporal action localization. The two contributions clearly improve the performance over respective baselines. The overall approach
achieves state-of-the-art action classification performance
on HMDB51, J-HMDB and NTU RGB+D datasets. Moreover, it yields state-of-the-art spatio-temporal action localization results on UCF101 and J-HMDB.

1. Introduction
Human action recognition is a complex task in computer
vision, due to the variety of possible actions is large and
there are multiple visual cues that play an important role. In
contrast to object recognition, action recognition involves
not only the detection of one or multiple persons, but also
the awareness of other objects, potentially involved in the
action, such as the pose of the person, and their motion.
Actions can span various time intervals, making good use
of videos and their temporal context is a prerequisite for
solving the task to its full extent [42, 41].
The success of convolutional networks in recognition has
also influenced action recognition. Due to the importance of
multiple visual cues, as shown by Jhuang et al. [13], multistream architectures have been most popular. This trend was
initiated by Simonyan and Zisserman [36], who proposed a
simple fusion of the action class scores obtained with two
separate convolutional networks, where one was trained on
raw images and the other on optical flow. The relative success of this strategy shows that deep networks for action

Figure 1. The chained multi-stream 3D-CNN sequentially refines
action class labels by analyzing motion and pose cues. Pose is
represented by human body parts detected by a deep network. The
spatio-temporal CNN can capture the temporal dynamics of pose.
Additional losses on YP ose and YOF are used for training. The
final output of the network YRGB is provided at the end of the
chain.

recognition cannot directly infer the relevant motion cues
from the raw images, although, in principle, the network
could learn to compute such cues.
In this paper, we propose a three-stream architecture1
that also includes pose, see Figure 1. Existing approaches
model the temporal dynamics of human postures with handcrafted features. We rather propose to compute the position of human body parts with a fast convolutional network. Moreover, we use a network architecture with spatiotemporal convolutions [41]. This combination can capture
temporal dynamics of body parts over time, which is valuable to improve action recognition performance, as we show
in dedicated experiments. The pose network also yields the
spatial localization of the persons, which allows us to apply
the approach to spatial action localization in a straightforward manner.
1 https://lmb.informatik.uni-freiburg.de/
projects/action_chain/

12904

