Tracking as Online Decision-Making:
Learning a Policy from Streaming Videos with Reinforcement Learning
James Supančič, III
University of California, Irvine

Deva Ramanan
Carnegie Mellon University

jsupanci@uci.edu

deva@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We formulate tracking as an online decision-making process, where a tracking agent must follow an object despite
ambiguous image frames and a limited computational budget. Crucially, the agent must decide where to look in the
upcoming frames, when to reinitialize because it believes
the target has been lost, and when to update its appearance
model for the tracked object. Such decisions are typically
made heuristically. Instead, we propose to learn an optimal
decision-making policy by formulating tracking as a partially observable decision-making process (POMDP). We
learn policies with deep reinforcement learning algorithms
that need supervision (a reward signal) only when the track
has gone awry. We demonstrate that sparse rewards allow us to quickly train on massive datasets, several orders
of magnitude more than past work. Interestingly, by treating the data source of Internet videos as unlimited streams,
we both learn and evaluate our trackers in a single, unified
computational stream.

Figure 1. Streaming interactive training: We propose an iterative
procedure for interactively training trackers from data. We download a new video from the Internet and run the current tracker
on it, evaluate the tracker’s performance with interactive rewards,
and then retrain the tracker policy (with reinforcement learning)
with the reward signals. Importantly, rather than requiring interactive labeling of bounding-boxes, we require only binary (incorrect
/ correct) feedback from human users. This scheme allows us to
train and evaluate our tracker on massive streaming datasets, 100X
larger than prior work (Table 1).

1. Introduction
Object tracking is one of the basic computational building blocks of video analysis, relevant for tasks such as general scene understanding and perception-for-robotics. A
particularly popular formalism is that of model-free tracking, where a tracker is provided with a bounding-box initialization of an unknown object. Much of the recent
state-of-the-art advances make heavy use of machine learning [23, 54, 40, 56, 20], often producing impressive results
by improving core components such as appearance descriptors or motion modeling.
Challenges: We see two significant challenges that limit
further progress. First, the limited quantity of annotated
video data impedes both training and evaluation. While
image datasets involve millions of images for training and
testing, tracking datasets have hundreds of videos. Lack
of data seems to arise from the difficulty of annotating

videos, as opposed to images. Second, as vision (re)integrates with robotics, video processing must be done in
an online, streaming fashion. This requires a tracker to
make on-the-fly decisions such as when to re-initialize itself [51, 16, 30, 47, 21] or update its appearance model (the
so-called template-update problem [54, 21]). Such decisions are known to be crucial in terms of final performance,
but are typically hand-designed rather than learned.
Contribution 1 (interactive video processing): We
show that reinforcement learning (RL) can be used to address both challenges in distinct ways. In terms of data,
rather than requiring videos to be labeled with detailed
bounding-boxes at each frame, we interactively train trackers with far more limited supervision (specifying binary rewards/penalties only when a tracker fails). This allows us
to train on massive video datasets that are 100× larger than

322

