Visual Relationship Detection with
Internal and External Linguistic Knowledge Distillation
Ruichi Yu, Ang Li, Vlad I. Morariu, Larry S. Davis
University of Maryland, College Park
{richyu,angli,morariu,lsd}@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Detecting visual relationships from images is a central problem in image understanding. Relationships are
commonly defined as tuples consisting of a subject (subj),
predicate (pred) and object (obj) [31, 8, 1]. Visual relationships represent the visually observable interactions
between subject and object hsubj, obji pairs, such as
hperson, ride, horsei [19].
Recently, Lu et al. [19] introduce the visual relationship
dataset (VRD) to study learning of a large number of visual

Object

shirt

rd
Wo

ed

din

g

+

Crop

Detection
Spa
tia
ext l featu
rac
tion re

Training
annotations
(VRD, Visual
Genome)
External
textual data
(Wikipedia)

Person
shirt

Parse

table / with / table
car / has / engine
person / has / hand
……
bowl / in / hand

…

Student Network’s
Output

GT

…

person

b
em

LK Distillation

Understanding the visual relationship between two objects involves identifying the subject, the object, and a predicate relating them. We leverage the strong correlations
between the predicate and the hsubj, obji pair (both semantically and spatially) to predict predicates conditioned
on the subjects and the objects. Modeling the three entities jointly more accurately reflects their relationships compared to modeling them independently, but it complicates
learning since the semantic space of visual relationships
is huge and training data is limited, especially for longtail relationships that have few instances. To overcome
this, we use knowledge of linguistic statistics to regularize visual model learning. We obtain linguistic knowledge
by mining from both training annotations (internal knowledge) and publicly available text, e.g., Wikipedia (external knowledge), computing the conditional probability distribution of a predicate given a hsubj, obji pair. As we
train the visual model, we distill this knowledge into the
deep model to achieve better generalization. Our experimental results on the Visual Relationship Detection (VRD)
and Visual Genome datasets suggest that with this linguistic knowledge distillation, our model outperforms the stateof-the-art methods significantly, especially when predicting
unseen relationships (e.g., recall improved from 8.45% to
19.17% on VRD zero-shot testing set).

Linguistic Knowledge
Distillation in Deep Model

FC

+

0
0
1
0

0

Teacher
Network’s
Teacher'Network'Output'
Output
P (pred|subj, obj)

Linguistic Knowledge Collection

Figure 1. Linguistic Knowledge Distillation Framework. We extract linguistic knowledge from training annotations and a public
text corpus (green box), then construct a teacher network to distill
the knowledge into an end-to-end deep neural network (student)
that predicts visual relationships from visual and semantic representations (red box). GT is the ground truth label and “+” is the
concatenation operator.

relationships from images. Lu et al. predict the predicates
independently from the subjects and objects, and use the
product of their scores to predict relationships present in a
given image using a linear model. The results in [19] suggest that predicates cannot be predicted reliably with a linear model that uses only visual cues, even when the ground
truth categories and bounding boxes of the subject and object are given ([19] reports Recall@100 of only 7.11% for
their visual prediction). Although the visual input analyzed
by the CNN in [19] includes the subject and object, predicates are predicted without any knowledge about the object
categories present in the image or their relative locations.
In contrast, we propose a probabilistic model to predict the
predicate name jointly with the subject and object names
and their relative spatial arrangement:
P (R|I) = P (pred|Iunion , subj, obj)P (subj)P (obj). (1)
While our method models visual relationships more accurately than [19], our model’s parameter space is also en11974

