Increasing CNN Robustness to Occlusions by Reducing Filter Support
Elad Osherov
Technion, Israel

Michael Lindenbaum
Technion, Israel

eladosherov@campus.technion.ac.il

mic@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) provide the current state of the art in visual object classification, but they
are far less accurate when classifying partially occluded
objects. A straightforward way to improve classification
under occlusion conditions is to train the classifier using
partially occluded object examples. However, training the
network on many combinations of object instances and occlusions may be computationally expensive. This work proposes an alternative approach to increasing the robustness
of CNNs to occlusion.
We start by studying the effect of partial occlusions on
the trained CNN and show, empirically, that training on
partially occluded examples reduces the spatial support of
the filters. Building upon this finding, we argue that smaller
filter support is beneficial for occlusion robustness. We propose a training process that uses a special regularization
term that acts to shrink the spatial support of the filters. We
consider three possible regularization terms that are based
on second central moments, group sparsity, and mutually
reweighted L1 , respectively. When trained on normal (unoccluded) examples, the resulting classifier is highly robust
to occlusions. For large training sets and limited training time, the proposed classifier is even more accurate than
standard classifiers trained on occluded object examples.

1. Introduction
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks [14] have recently
exhibited remarkable performance in the task of image classification [12]. The availability of large amounts of annotated data [3], parallel computational resources such as
GPUs, and regularization techniques [20, 9, 26] have contributed greatly to CNN performance. Deeper, more sophisticated, network topologies have continuously provided
state-of-the-art results [19, 21, 10].
Nevertheless, CNNs, as well as other visual classification algorithms, are far less accurate when classifying partially occluded objects; see Figure (1). The decrease in performance is especially severe when the classifier is trained

Figure 1: (Left) Classification error rates for AlexNet and
VGG16 under occlusions of various sizes. Note that even
the slightest partial occlusion may significantly reduce classification accuracy. (Right) Examples of partially occluded
examples used for validation.

as usual, on images of mostly unoccluded objects. This
problem could be regarded as a special case of domain adaptation, where the training data and the test data are drawn
from different distributions.
Thus, one possible approach to improving classification
accuracy under partial occlusion is to train the classifier on
partially occluded objects as well [17]. In the first part of
this work we experimented with this approach and indeed
found that the classification accuracy improved. We also
examined the resulting network and observed that (a) its filters (in all layers) tend to be of smaller spatial support, and
(b) every filter uses more features from the previous layer.
Intuition tells us that smaller spatial support makes the filter more robust to occlusion because the probability that a
random occluder will intersect with the filter support and
adversely affect its response is smaller. But does it really
explain the classifier’s greater robustness to occlusions?
To validate the hypothesis that smaller spatial support is
indeed important for occlusion robustness, we propose, in
the next part of this work, to reduce the spatial support in
a different way, by specialized regularization. We propose
three possible regularization terms that act to shrink the spatial support of the filters. These regularization terms are
based on second central moments, group sparsity, and mutually re-weighted L1 , respectively. When trained on normal (unoccluded) examples, the resulting classifier is usually (for large training sets) more occlusion robust than stan1550

