First-Person Activity Forecasting with Online Inverse Reinforcement Learning
Nicholas Rhinehart and Kris M. Kitani
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{nrhineha,kkitani}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of incrementally modeling
and forecasting long-term goals of a first-person camera
wearer: what the user will do, where they will go, and
what goal they seek. In contrast to prior work in trajectory forecasting, our algorithm, DARKO, goes further to
reason about semantic states (will I pick up an object?),
and future goal states that are far in terms of both space
and time. DARKO learns and forecasts from first-person visual observations of the user’s daily behaviors via an Online Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) approach. Classical IRL discovers only the rewards in a batch setting,
whereas DARKO discovers the states, transitions, rewards,
and goals of a user from streaming data. Among other results, we show DARKO forecasts goals better than competing methods in both noisy and ideal settings, and our approach is theoretically and empirically no-regret.

1. Introduction
Our long-term aim is to develop an AI system that can
learn about a person’s intent and goals by continuously
observing their behavior. In this work, we progress towards this aim by proposing an online Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) technique to learn a decision-theoretic
human activity model from video captured by a wearable
camera. The use of a wearable camera is critical to our task,
as human activities must be observed up close and across
large environments. Imagine a person’s daily activities—
perhaps they are at home today, moving about, completing
tasks. Perhaps they are a scientist that conducts a long series of experiments across various stations in a laboratory, or
they work in an office building where they walk about their
floor, get coffee, etc. As people tend to be very mobile, a
wearable camera is ideal for observing a person’s behavior.
Since our task is to continuously learn human behavior models (i.e., a policy) from observed behavior captured
with a wearable camera, our task is best described as an
online IRL problem. The problem is an inverse Reinforc-

Figure 1: Forecasting future behavior from first-person
video. Overhead map shows likely future goal states. si
is user state at time i. Histogram insets display predictions
of user’s long-term semantic goal (inner right) and acquired
objects (inner left).

ment Learning problem because the underlying reward or
cost function of the person is unknown. We must infer
it along with the policy from the demonstrated behaviors.
Our task is also an online learning problem, because our
algorithm must continuously learn as a part of a life-long
process. From this perspective, we must develop an online
learning approach that learns effectively over time.

3696

