3D Surface Detail Enhancement from A Single Normal Map
Wuyuan Xie 1,⋆ , Miaohui Wang 2,⋆ , Xianbiao Qi1 , Lei Zhang1
1
Dept. of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
2
College of Information Engineering, Shenzhen University, Guangdong, China
wuyuan.xie@gmail.com, mhwang@szu.edu.cn, qixianbiao@gmail.com, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
In 3D reconstruction, the obtained surface details are
mainly limited to the visual sensor due to sampling and
quantization in the digitalization process. How to get a
fine-grained 3D surface with low-cost is still a challenging obstacle in terms of experience, equipment and easyto-obtain. This work introduces a novel framework for enhancing surfaces reconstructed from normal map, where the
assumptions on hardware (e.g., photometric stereo setup)
and reflection model (e.g., Lambertion reflection) are not
necessarily needed. We propose to use a new measure, angle profile, to infer the hidden micro-structure from existing surfaces. In addition, the inferred results are further
improved in the domain of discrete geometry processing
(DGP) which is able to achieve a stable surface structure
under a selectable enhancement setting. Extensive simulation results show that the proposed method obtains significantly improvements over uniform sharpening method
in terms of both subjective visual assessment and objective
quality metric.

1. Introduction
In 3D reconstruction, the surface details are mainly limited to visual sensors of digital equipment. Specifically,
micro-structure of surface is degraded by sampling and
quantization in the digitalization process. Consequently,
although many dense-based 3D reconstruction techniques
(i.e., photometric stereo [5, 16] and structured light [11]) are
used to perform the reconstruction on a pixel-by-pixel basis,
the reconstructed surface quality is still affected by the input
data, not to mention other sparse-based 3D reconstruction
algorithms (i.e., depth camera [8], stereo/multi-view stereo
vision [12, 14]). However, as the trend of 3D reconstruction
in industry is more inclined to use low-cost technology, how
to improve the surface quality from existing depth data is a
challenging but meaningful research topic.
⋆ Authors contributed equally to this work.
This work is supported by China NSFC grant (no. 61672446).

Unlike shape information, the texture pattern of 3D object cannot be directly represented by the depth values, but
can be reflected by the distribution of the pixel gray-scale
values observed on the object appearance. How to obtain
these gray-scale values from the depth map needs to employ the reflection model which defines the relationship between the observed pixel value and the normal vector under a given lighting condition [24]. Reflection model is
the backbone of the most-recent works on the surface enhancement, and these works can be divided into two categories according to their applications: 1) shade rendering
[10, 17, 23] in computer graphics, and 2) photometric stereo
(PS) [21, 22] based surface texture enhancement. In shade
rendering, a complex reflection model is usually employed,
where the captured pixel is rendered by adjusting the lighting direction. Note that these methods do not really change
the surface geometry structure, but make varying lighting
conditions such that the observed object appearance seems
to have richer details.
PS-based enhancement methods utilize one camera to
capture a set of images under different lighting conditions,
and the high-resolution normal map can be reconstructed
from the raw data according to the Lambertian reflection
[24]. However, PS-based methods change the surface geometry structure in a live capture way. Tan et al. [22]
proposed to improve the surface micro-structure by photometric stereo, where the lighting direction within one pixel
is estimated by the Gaussian mixture model (GMM). Li et
al. [15] proposed to refine the surface by multi-view stereo
where triangular meshing of surface is a necessary condition. Authors in [18, 13, 1, 9] used the normal map to
repair the scanned sparse depth map as well as to recover
the surface details. Significantly, all these methods rely on
the related hardware which will cause two limitations: 1)
it cannot enhance 3D surface from existing depth data; 2)
it is strongly dependent on a reflection model. As a result,
they are not satisfied for general 3D surface enhancement,
which is expected to perform on existing depth or normal
map without taking assumption on any reflection models.
In this paper, we present an efficient surface enhance-

2325

