Learning to Fuse 2D and 3D Image Cues for Monocular Body Pose Estimation
Bugra Tekin

Pablo Márquez-Neila
Mathieu Salzmann
CVLab, EPFL, Switzerland

Pascal Fua

{firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Most recent approaches to monocular 3D human pose
estimation rely on Deep Learning. They typically involve
regressing from an image to either 3D joint coordinates directly or 2D joint locations from which 3D coordinates are
inferred. Both approaches have their strengths and weaknesses and we therefore propose a novel architecture designed to deliver the best of both worlds by performing both
simultaneously and fusing the information along the way.
At the heart of our framework is a trainable fusion scheme
that learns how to fuse the information optimally instead of
being hand-designed. This yields significant improvements
upon the state-of-the-art on standard 3D human pose estimation benchmarks.

FCN

Con$idence Map stream

FUSION

Image stream

Figure 1: Overview of our approach. One stream of our
network accounts for the 2D joint locations and the corresponding uncertainties. The second one leverages all 3D
image cues by directly acting on the image. The outputs
of these two streams are then fused to obtain the final 3D
human pose estimate.

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D human pose estimation is a longstanding problem of Computer Vision. Over the years, two
main classes of approaches have been proposed: Discriminative ones that directly regress 3D pose from image data [1, 8, 34, 46, 56, 68] and generative ones that
search the pose space for a plausible body configuration
that aligns with the image data [21, 60, 69]. With the advent of ever larger datasets [30], models have evolved towards deep architectures, but the story remains largely unchanged. The state-of-the-art approaches can be roughly
grouped into those that directly regress 3D pose from images [30, 38, 64, 65] and those that first predict a 2D pose
in the form of joint location confidence maps and fit a 3D
model to this 2D prediction [9, 77].
Since detecting the 2D image location of joints is easier than directly inferring the 3D pose, it can be done more
reliably. However, inferring a 3D pose from these 2D locations is fraught with ambiguities and the above-mentioned
methods usually rely on a database of 3D models to resolve
them, at the cost of a potentially expensive run-time fitting
procedure. By contrast, the methods that regress directly to
3D avoid this extra step but also do not benefit of the wellposedness of the 2D joint detection location problem.

In this paper, we propose the novel architecture depicted
by Fig. 1 designed to deliver the best of both worlds. The
first stream, which we will refer to as the Confidence Map
Stream, first computes a heatmap of 2D joint locations and
then infer the 3D poses from it. The second stream, which
we will dub the Image Stream, is designed to produce features that complement those computed by the first stream
and can be used in conjunction with them to compute the
3D pose, that is, guide the regression process given the 2D
locations.
However, for this approach to be beneficial, effective fusion of the two streams is crucial. In theory, it could happen at any stage of the two streams, ranging from early to
late fusion, with no principled way to choose one against
the other. We therefore also developed a trainable fusion
scheme that learns how to fuse the two streams.
Ultimately, our approach allows the network to still exploit image cues while inferring 3D poses from 2D joint
locations. As we demonstrate in our experiments, the features computed by both streams are decorrelated and therefore truly encode complementary information. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We introduce a discriminative fusion framework to
13941

