Semantically Informed Multiview Surface Refinement
Maroš Bláha1 Mathias Rothermel1 Martin R. Oswald2 Torsten Sattler2
Audrey Richard1 Jan D. Wegner1 Marc Pollefeys2,3 Konrad Schindler1
1
Institute of Geodesy and Photogrammetry, ETH Zurich
2
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich 3 Microsoft

Abstract
We present a method to jointly refine the geometry and
semantic segmentation of 3D surface meshes. Our method
alternates between updating the shape and the semantic labels. In the geometry refinement step, the mesh is deformed
with variational energy minimization, such that it simultaneously maximizes photo-consistency and the compatibility
of the semantic segmentations across a set of calibrated images. Label-specific shape priors account for interactions
between the geometry and the semantic labels in 3D. In the
semantic segmentation step, the labels on the mesh are updated with MRF inference, such that they are compatible
with the semantic segmentations in the input images. Also,
this step includes prior assumptions about the surface shape
of different semantic classes. The priors induce a tight coupling, where semantic information influences the shape update and vice versa. Specifically, we introduce priors that
favor (i) adaptive smoothing, depending on the class label;
(ii) straightness of class boundaries; and (iii) semantic labels that are consistent with the surface orientation. The
novel mesh-based reconstruction is evaluated in a series of
experiments with real and synthetic data. We compare both
to state-of-the-art, voxel-based semantic 3D reconstruction,
and to purely geometric mesh refinement, and demonstrate
that the proposed scheme yields improved 3D geometry as
well as an improved semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction
Extracting 3D scene models from multiple images is one
of the core problems in geometric computer vision. Assuming known camera poses, the problem conceptually boils
down to estimating the unknown parameters of an (explicit
or implicit) surface representation, such that photometric
discrepancies between different views of the scene surfaces
are minimized, e.g. [37]. A number of recent works have
coupled the 3D reconstruction to a semantic segmentation
of the scene, and have shown that, unsurprisingly, superior
results can be obtained by jointly optimizing over both ge-

Figure 1. The impact of the proposed method: scene image (left),
input model (middle), and the result after performing geometric
and semantic surface refinement (right). Notice the higher scene
fidelity – e.g., emerging structures on roofs – and simultaneously
an adequate, class-specific regularization in our mesh.

ometry and semantics [12, 14, 28]. A major advantage of
such a semantic 3D reconstruction approach is its ability to
apply class-specific priors. Any dense 3D reconstruction
algorithm includes a-priori assumptions to regularize the
scene geometry – in the simplest case some form of preference for smooth surfaces. Recovering a semantic segmentation together with the scene geometry makes it possible
to use regularizers that are a lot more expressive, and take
into account the specific geometric properties of different
semantic classes. For example, one might want to selectively enforce higher smoothness on roads, where only little
texture is available, or straight boundaries where building
walls meet the ground.
In recent work, integrated models have been developed
for semantic 3D reconstruction, but these employ a voxelbased representation of the scene which limits their resolution. Increasing the level of detail requires finer volume
discretization, which in turn increases memory consumption and computational cost, even with adaptive data structures [3, 17]. Moreover, the subsequent conversion of volumetric occupancy models to explicit surface meshes typically leads to aliasing artifacts on surfaces not aligned with
the 3D coordinate system. In this work we present a scalable framework for the refinement of semantically annotated 3D surface meshes, which starts from a coarse 3D reconstruction and mitigates the mentioned limitations.

3819

