DSOD: Learning Deeply Supervised Object Detectors from Scratch
Zhiqiang Shen∗1 , Zhuang Liu∗2 , Jianguo Li3 , Yu-Gang Jiang1 , Yurong Chen3 , Xiangyang Xue1
1
Fudan University, 2 Tsinghua University, 3 Intel Labs China
{zhiqiangshen13, ygj, xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn, liuzhuangthu@gmail.com
{jianguo.li, yurong.chen}@intel.com

Abstract
We present Deeply Supervised Object Detector (DSOD),
a framework that can learn object detectors from scratch.
State-of-the-art object objectors rely heavily on the offthe-shelf networks pre-trained on large-scale classification
datasets like ImageNet, which incurs learning bias due to
the difference on both the loss functions and the category
distributions between classification and detection tasks.
Model fine-tuning for the detection task could alleviate this
bias to some extent but not fundamentally. Besides, transferring pre-trained models from classification to detection
between discrepant domains is even more difficult (e.g. RGB
to depth images). A better solution to tackle these two critical problems is to train object detectors from scratch, which
motivates our proposed DSOD. Previous efforts in this direction mostly failed due to much more complicated loss
functions and limited training data in object detection. In
DSOD, we contribute a set of design principles for training
object detectors from scratch. One of the key findings is that
deep supervision, enabled by dense layer-wise connections,
plays a critical role in learning a good detector. Combining
with several other principles, we develop DSOD following
the single-shot detection (SSD) framework. Experiments on
PASCAL VOC 2007, 2012 and MS COCO datasets demonstrate that DSOD can achieve better results than the stateof-the-art solutions with much more compact models. For
instance, DSOD outperforms SSD on all three benchmarks
with real-time detection speed, while requires only 1/2 parameters to SSD and 1/10 parameters to Faster RCNN.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have produced
impressive performance improvements in many computer
vision tasks, such as image classification [17, 28, 32, 9, 10],
object detection [5, 4, 27, 19, 21, 25], image segmenta∗ indicates equal contribution. This work was done when Zhiqiang Shen
and Zhuang Liu were interns at Intel Labs China. Jianguo Li is the corresponding author.

tion [23, 8, 2, 36], etc. In the past several years, many
innovative CNN network structures have been proposed.
Szegedy et al. [32] propose an “Inception” module which
concatenates features maps produced by various sized filters. He et al. [9] propose residual learning blocks with skip
connections, which enable training very deep networks with
more than 100 layers. Huang et al. [10] propose DenseNets
with dense layer-wise connections. Thanks to these excellent network structures, the accuracy of many vision tasks
has been greatly improved. Among them, object detection
is one of the fastest moving areas due to its wide applications in surveillance, autonomous driving, etc.
In order to achieve good performance, most of the advanced object detection systems fine-tune networks pretrained on ImageNet [3]. This fine-tuning process is also
viewed as transfer learning [24]. Fine-tuning from pretrained models has at least two advantages. First, there are
many state-of-the-art deep models publicly available. It is
very convenient to reuse them for object detection. Second, fine-tuning can quickly generate the final model and requires much less instance-level annotated training data than
the classification task.
However, there are also critical limitations when adopting the pre-trained networks in object detection: (1) Limited
structure design space. The pre-trained network models are
mostly from ImageNet-based classification task, which are
usually very heavy — containing a huge number of parameters. Existing object detectors directly adopt the pre-trained
networks, and as a result there is little flexibility to control/adjust the network structures (even for small changes
of network structure). The requirement of computing resources is also bounded by the heavy network structures.
(2) Learning bias. As both the loss functions and the category distributions between classification and detection tasks
are different, we argue that this will lead to different searching/optimization spaces. Therefore, learning may be biased
towards a local minimum which is not the best for detection
task. (3) Domain mismatch. As is known, fine-tuning can
mitigate the gap due to different target category distribution. However, it is still a severe problem when the source

1919

