Unrolled Memory Inner-Products: An Abstract GPU Operator for Efficient
Vision-Related Computations
Yu-Sheng Lin
National Taiwan Univ.

Wei-Chao Chen
Skywatch Inc.

Shao-Yi Chien
National Taiwan Univ.

johnjohnlys@media.ee.ntu.edu.tw

weichao.chen@skywatch24.com

sychien@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
achieved great success in fields such as computer vision,
natural language processing, and artificial intelligence.
Many of these applications utilize parallel processing in
GPUs to achieve higher performance. However, it remains
a daunting task to optimize for GPUs, and most researchers
have to rely on vendor-provided libraries for such purposes.
In this paper, we discuss an operator that can be used
to succinctly express computational kernels in CNNs and
various scientific and vision applications. This operator, called Unrolled-Memory-Inner-Product (UMI), is a
computationally-efficient operator with smaller code token
requirement. Since a naı̈ve UMI implementation would increase memory requirement through input data unrolling,
we propose a method to achieve optimal memory fetch performance in modern GPUs. We demonstrate this operator
by converting several popular applications into the UMI
representation, and achieve 1.3x-26.4x speedup against
frameworks such as OpenCV and Caffe.

1. Introduction
The recent resurgence of convolution neural networks
(CNNs) in vision applications are enabled in large part by
the rapid advances of graphics processing units (GPUs), and
researchers have been utilizing deeper networks with more
training data than ever before [14, 27]. However, owing
to the complexities in computational scheduling, it remains
difficult to program these GPUs at full efficiency despite
progress in programming tools. Because of this, processor vendors have created higher-level primitives for deep
learning, such as NVIDIA’s cuDNN [4], that can achieve
extremely high computational efficiencies on GPUs. However, details of the implementation are inaccessible to the
research and open-source community, making it difficult to
adapt these techniques to newer algorithms. GPUs also can
be sub-optimal in terms of power efficiency because, for

example, the math precision requirements for DNNs tend
to be less than what is needed for scientific computations.
In order to pursue a higher computation-to-power ratio, several application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs)
have been created, and some can even operate with entropycompressed data directly [8]. These ASICs tend to be
equipped with fairly large and expensive on-chip memory,
and it can be difficult to adapt these ASICs to newer algorithms, such as batch normalization [12] and deconvolution layer [22]. We can gain additional flexibilities with
field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), but they tend to
be slower and less area-efficient. Programming on these
FPGAs can also be difficult and hardware-specific, making
it difficult to transfer between different platforms.
Recently, researchers have proposed domain-specific
languages or abstract models of computation, such that programmers can focus on algorithm designs, and leave the
specific optimizations to the tools. To achieve maximal performance, someone uses complex algorithms to search for
the best parameters and scheduling [25], which can be very
time-consuming and again, platform and algorithm dependent.
In this paper, we propose a new primitive which focuses
on kernels frequently appear in computer vision and scientific computations. This primitive, the unrolled memory
inner-product (UMI) operator, is implemented with C++11
and CUDA, and can be easily integrate into existing algorithms to achieve higher performance than hand-tuned
open-source code. Specifically, our contributions are
• An UMI operator that can be used as computational
kernels for various vision-related applications,
• an abstraction model that results in smaller code tokens
compared to naı̈ve CPU implementations, and
• a methodology to implement UMI to achieve conflictfree and optimal memory access pattern in modern parallel processors.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We start by
describing memory unrolling, or lowering, techniques for
14577

