Focal Track: Depth and Accommodation with Oscillating Lens Deformation
Qi Guo, Emma Alexander, and Todd Zickler
Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Science
qguo@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
The focal track sensor is a monocular and computationally efficient depth sensor that is based on defocus controlled by a liquid membrane lens. It synchronizes small
lens oscillations with a photosensor to produce real-time
depth maps by means of differential defocus, and it couples these oscillations with bigger lens deformations that
adapt the defocus working range to track objects over large
axial distances. To create the focal track sensor, we derive a texture-invariant family of equations that relate image derivatives to scene depth when a lens changes its focal
length differentially. Based on these equations, we design
a feed-forward sequence of computations that: robustly incorporates image derivatives at multiple scales; produces
confidence maps along with depth; and can be trained endto-end to mitigate against noise, aberrations, and other
non-idealities. Our prototype with 1-inch optics produces
depth and confidence maps at 100 frames per second over
an axial range of more than 75cm.

1. Introduction
Depth from defocus is an attractive ranging modality for
micro-robots, wearables, and other small, low-power platforms because it fits into a small monocular package, does
not require an active light source, and can be implemented
in ways that produce depth maps with low computational
power. This has previously been demonstrated with defocus
that is controlled by manipulating a camera’s aperture diaphragm [13], the distance between a sensor and lens [17],
or a camera’s position [1].
Here we describe a defocus range sensor that is instead
based on lens deformation, which has the practical advantage of providing a large working range with little mechanical power. The working range of any depth from defocus
system behaves like a depth of field in photography: once
an object is too far in front or behind the in-focus plane, the
depth-dependent contrast effects become too small to detect
and analyze. The advantage of using lens deformation is
that the sensor can easily mimic the accommodation reflex

Figure 1: Focal tracking. A deformable lens creates
exposure-synchronized oscillations of the in-focus distance
Zf , producing sequential pairs of video frames (top) with
slightly different defocus. Depth and confidence maps (bottom) are computed from each pair, at rates up to 100fps. The
depth also feeds back to the lens controller so that the system can “accommodate” by adjusting its in-focus distance
(green line) to match a moving object.

found in vertebrate vision, adaptively shifting its in-focus
distance to match a moving object, and thereby extending
its defocus working range. See Figure 1.
We call this focal tracking, and we design our focal track
sensor in two steps. First, we use an idealized optical model
to derive a new texture-invariant family of equations that directly relate the spatial and temporal image derivatives at a
pixel, ∇2 I, It , to the scene depth Z at the back-projection
of that pixel. These equations are derived by analyzing differential defocus in the spirit of Alexander et al. [1], but
with a different optical model that consists of a thin lens
with Gaussian blur and time-varying focal length f (t). The
simplest equation in the derived family is
Z=

966

α∇2 I
,
β∇2 I + It

(1)

