Robust Hand Pose Estimation during the Interaction with an Unknown Object
Chiho Choi

Sang Ho Yoon
Chin-Ning Chen
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA

Karthik Ramani

{chihochoi, yoon87, chen2300, ramani}@purdue.edu

Abstract
This paper proposes a robust solution for accurate 3D
hand pose estimation in the presence of an external object interacting with hands. Our main insight is that the
shape of an object causes a configuration of the hand in the
form of a hand grasp. Along this line, we simultaneously
train deep neural networks using paired depth images. The
object-oriented network learns functional grasps from an
object perspective, whereas the hand-oriented network explores the details of hand configurations from a hand perspective. The two networks share intermediate observations produced from different perspectives to create a more
informed representation. Our system then collaboratively
classifies the grasp types and orientation of the hand and
further constrains a pose space using these estimates. Finally, we collectively refine the unknown pose parameters to
reconstruct the final hand pose. To this end, we conduct extensive evaluations to validate the efficacy of the proposed
collaborative learning approach by comparing it with selfgenerated baselines and the state-of-the-art method.

1. Introduction
Real-time depth data acquisition from commercial sensors has helped to simplify the tasks for hand pose estimation over the last decade. Although extensive research
has been conducted on finding a robust and efficient solution for kinematic pose estimation of an isolated hand
[14, 5, 6, 12, 29, 26, 17, 21, 2, 24, 22], the problem of the
hand’s interactions with a physical object is barely considered in the literature. The current approaches allow the user
to manipulate a known object and a simple primitive shape
such as a cylinder or cuboid. Therefore, these solutions do
not work consistently with general human-computer interaction interfaces and augmented reality applications during
natural interactions.
Hand pose estimation during the interaction with an unknown object is a challenging problem due to (i) the loss
of hand information caused by partial or full object occlu-

sions, (ii) the complicated shape of the unknown object and
articulated nature of the hand, (iii) global 3D rotations, and
(iv) the noise in acquired data, which confounds continuous estimation. In this paper, we present a new framework
to effectively resolve these issues by collaboratively learning deep convolutional features from a hand and object perspective. Our fundamental observation from earlier work
[20, 15] is that the interacting object can be a source of constraint on hand poses. In this view, we employ pose dependency on the shape of the object to learn discriminative
features of the hand-object interaction.
The traditional approaches for pose estimation start with
segmenting hand and object regions using RGB data followed by running an SVM classifier [18] or pixel-wise part
classification [23] using hand-crafted features. A convolutional neural network (ConvNet) has recently been adopted
to replace the hand-crafted features in [19], but this approach only aims for grasp classification. In contrast to
these methods, we introduce a simultaneous training of
deep neural networks for hand pose estimation. As a first
step, we localize both the hand and object position using a
ConvNet architecture. Specifically, we show that predicting
the positions in the form of the heatmaps is an efficient way
of overcoming the use of simple heuristics such as colorbased segmentation or known object initialization.
We leverage the paradigm of analysis by synthesis and
create a population of everyday human grasps. Similar
to [19], the scope of hand-object interactions includes daily
activities captured from an egocentric viewpoint. We adopt
a 33-class taxonomy [3] to focus more on the shape of the
hand grasp rather than the grasping motion [11]. The handobject interactions are effectively mesh modeled with the
corresponding hand pose parameters and grasp class labels.
Although these synthetic depth images are easily simulated
and accurately annotated, they do not explore artifacts (e.g.,
noise and distortion) of real data captured from 3D sensors
[22]. Thus, we design a fully unsupervised learning architecture to generate reconstructed data based on the idea
of signal reconstruction in autoencoders. The output images are used to extract grasp features encoded in pairs 13123

