DualGAN: Unsupervised Dual Learning for Image-to-Image Translation
Zili Yi1,2 , Hao Zhang2 , Ping Tan2 , and Minglun Gong1
1

Memorial University of Newfoundland, Canada
2
Simon Fraser University, Canada

Abstract
Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
for cross-domain image-to-image translation have made
much progress recently [7, 8, 21, 12, 4, 18]. Depending
on the task complexity, thousands to millions of labeled image pairs are needed to train a conditional GAN. However,
human labeling is expensive, even impractical, and large
quantities of data may not always be available. Inspired
by dual learning from natural language translation [23],
we develop a novel dual-GAN mechanism, which enables
image translators to be trained from two sets of unlabeled
images from two domains. In our architecture, the primal
GAN learns to translate images from domain U to those in
domain V , while the dual GAN learns to invert the task.
The closed loop made by the primal and dual tasks allows
images from either domain to be translated and then reconstructed. Hence a loss function that accounts for the reconstruction error of images can be used to train the translators. Experiments on multiple image translation tasks with
unlabeled data show considerable performance gain of DualGAN over a single GAN. For some tasks, DualGAN can
even achieve comparable or slightly better results than conditional GAN trained on fully labeled data.

1. Introduction
Many image processing and computer vision tasks, e.g.,
image segmentation, stylization, and abstraction, can be
posed as image-to-image translation problems [4], which
convert one visual representation of an object or scene into
another. Conventionally, these tasks have been tackled separately due to their intrinsic disparities [7, 8, 21, 12, 4, 18].
It is not until the past two years that general-purpose and
end-to-end deep learning frameworks, most notably those
utilizing fully convolutional networks (FCNs) [11] and conditional generative adversarial nets (cGANs) [4], have been
developed to enable a unified treatment of these tasks.

Up to date, these general-purpose methods have all been
supervised and trained with a large number of labeled and
matching image pairs. In practice however, acquiring such
training data can be time-consuming (e.g., with pixelwise
or patchwise labeling) and even unrealistic. For example, while there are plenty of photos or sketches available,
photo-sketch image pairs depicting the same people under
the same pose are scarce. In other image translation settings, e.g., converting daylight scenes to night scenes, even
though labeled and matching image pairs can be obtained
with stationary cameras, moving objects in the scene often
cause varying degrees of content discrepancies.
In this paper, we aim to develop an unsupervised learning framework for general-purpose image-to-image translation, which only relies on unlabeled image data, such as two
sets of photos and sketches for the photo-to-sketch conversion task. The obvious technical challenge is how to train
a translator without any data characterizing correct translations. Our approach is inspired by dual learning from natural language processing [23]. Dual learning trains two “opposite” language translators (e.g., English-to-French and
French-to-English) simultaneously by minimizing the reconstruction loss resulting from a nested application of the
two translators. The two translators represent a primal-dual
pair and the nested application forms a closed loop, allowing the application of reinforcement learning. Specifically,
the reconstruction loss measured over monolingual data (either English or French) would generate informative feedback to train a bilingual translation model.
Our work develops a dual learning framework for imageto-image translation for the first time and differs from the
original NLP dual learning method of Xia et al. [23] in two
main aspects. First, the NLP method relied on pre-trained
(English and French) language models to indicate how confident the the translator outputs are natural sentences in their
respective target languages. With general-purpose processing in mind and the realization that such pre-trained models
are difficult to obtain for many image translation tasks, our
work develops GAN discriminators [3] that are trained ad12849

