Range Loss for Deep Face Recognition with Long-Tailed Training Data
Xiao Zhang1,2
1

Zhiyuan Fang1,3

Yandong Wen4

Zhifeng Li5

Yu Qiao∗1,6

Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Vitrual Reality Technology,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Science, China

2

3

Tianjin University
5

Southern University of Science and Technology

Tencent AI Lab, China

zhangx9411@gmail.com

6

Carnegie Mellon University

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China

fangzy@mail.sustc.edu.cn

michaelzfli@tencent.com

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks have achieved significant improvements on face recognition task due to their
ability to learn highly discriminative features from tremendous amounts of face images. Many large scale face
datasets exhibit long-tail distribution where a small number
of entities (persons) have large number of face images while
a large number of persons only have very few face samples
(long tail). Most of the existing works alleviate this problem
by simply cutting the tailed data and only keep identities
with enough number of examples. Unlike these work, this
paper investigated how long-tailed data impact the training of face CNNs and develop a novel loss function, called
range loss, to effectively utilize the tailed data in training
process. More specifically, range loss is designed to reduce overall intrapersonal variations while enlarge interpersonal differences simultaneously. Extensive experiments
on two face recognition benchmarks, Labeled Faces in the
Wild (LFW) [11] and YouTube Faces (YTF) [33], demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed range loss in overcoming the long tail effect, and show the good generalization ability of the proposed methods.

1. Introduction
Recent years witnessed the remarkable progresses of applying deep learning models in various computer vision
tasks such as classification [14, 26, 29, 10, 9] , scene understanding [37, 36], and action recognition [13]. As for
face recognition, deep CNNs like DeepID2+ [28], FaceNet
[24], DeepFace [30], Deep FR [21], exhibit excellent performance, which even surpass human recognition ability at
certain dataset such as LFW [11].
To train an effective deep face model, abundant training
∗ The corresponding author: yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn

4

yandongw@andrew.cmu.edu

yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn

data [4] and well-designed training strategies are indispensable. Unlike large scale datasets like ImageNet [22] where
each category contains almost the same number of images,
most large scale face datasets exhibit long-tailed distribution, that is, only limited number of classes (persons) appear frequently, while most of the other classes have spares
examples. This fact is shown in Figure 1, which illustrates
the distribution of MS-Celeb-1M. Only a small number of
persons have large number face images, while many persons have very few examples. Empirical studies and analysis show that classes with more samples will pose greater
impact on the feature learning procedure [38, 22] and inversely cripple the models ability on tailed part. As a result, the model trained under an extremely imbalanced distributed dataset is lean to overfit the rich classes with large
samples, and spare samples from poor classes tends to exhibit large intra-class dispension after training. Clearly, this
fact will harm recognition performance of the final model.
Most previous works handled this problem by removing
the samples from poor classes to achieve the class balance
of training dataset. According to [20], the performance can
improve slightly if one just preserves 40% of positive samples to make the training samples more uniform. However,
such disposal strategys flaw is obvious: to simply abandon
the data partially, information contained in these data may
also be omitted. Poor classes can include complementary
knowledge to rich classes which can boost the performance
of the final models.
This paper addresses the long tail problem in the context
of deep face recognition from two aspects. Note here “long
tail” is used to describe the imbalanced distribution of training set, of which most identities have rare samples while a
few identities have most samples. This is different from the
classical definition of heavy-tailed distributions in probability theory[1]. Firstly, we deeply investigate how long tailed
data impacts current deep CNN models for face recognition. Secondly, we propose a new loss function, namely
15409

