Rotation equivariant vector field networks
Diego Marcos ∗1 , Michele Volpi1 , Nikos Komodakis2 , and Devis Tuia1
1

University of Zurich, 2 Ecole des Ponts, Paris Tech

Abstract
In many computer vision tasks, we expect a particular
behavior of the output with respect to rotations of the input
image. If this relationship is explicitly encoded, instead of
treated as any other variation, the complexity of the problem is decreased, leading to a reduction in the size of the
required model.
In this paper, we propose the Rotation Equivariant Vector
Field Networks (RotEqNet), a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architecture encoding rotation equivariance,
invariance and covariance. Each convolutional filter is applied at multiple orientations and returns a vector field representing magnitude and angle of the highest scoring orientation at every spatial location. We develop a modified
convolution operator relying on this representation to obtain deep architectures. We test RotEqNet on several problems requiring different responses with respect to the inputs’ rotation: image classification, biomedical image segmentation, orientation estimation and patch matching. In
all cases, we show that RotEqNet offers extremely compact
models in terms of number of parameters and provides results in line to those of networks orders of magnitude larger.

1. Introduction
In many real life problems, such as overhead (aerial or
satellite) or biomedical image analysis, there are no dominant up-down or left-right relationships. For example, when
detecting cars in aerial images, the object’s absolute orientation is not a discriminant feature. If the absolute orientation
of the image is changed, e.g. by following a different flightpath, we would expect the car detector to score the exact
same values over the same cars, just in their new position on
the rotated image, independently from their new orientation
along the image axes. In this case, we say that the problem
is rotation equivariant: rotating the input is expected to result in the same rotation in the output. On the other hand,
if we were confronted with a classification setting in which
we are only interested in the presence or absence of cars in
∗ Corresponding author: diego.marcos@geo.uzh.ch

Equivariant
g45
f

f
g45

Covariant
g45

Invariant
g45
f
"3" =

f
"3"

f

f

45° +45 90°

Figure 1. Desirable behaviors with respect to rotation of the inputs:
(left) equivariance in segmentation; (center) invariance in classification; (right) covariance in absolute orientation estimation. g45 is
an operator that rotates the input image by 45◦ .

the whole scene, the classification score should remain the
same, no matter the absolute orientation of the input scene.
In this case the problem is rotation invariant. The more general case would be rotation covariance, in which the output
changes as a function of the rotation of the input, with some
predefined behavior. Taking again the cars example, a rotation covariant problem would be to retrieve the absolute
orientation of cars with respect to longitude and latitude: in
this case, a rotation of the image should produce a change
of the predicted angle.
Throughout this article we will make use of the terms
equivariance, invariance and covariance of a function f (·)
with respect to a transformation g(·) in the following sense:
- equivariance: f (g(·)) = g(f (·)),
- invariance: f (g(·)) = f (·),
- covariance: f (g(·)) = g ′ (f (·)),
where g ′ (·) is a second transformation, which is itself a
function of g(·). With the above definitions, equivariance
and invariance are special cases of covariance. We illustrate
these properties in Fig. 1.
In this paper, we propose a CNN architecture that naturally encodes these three properties: RotEqNet. In the following, we will recall how CNNs achieve translation invariance, before discussing our own proposition.

1.1. Dealing with translations in CNNs
The success of CNNs is partly due to the translation
equivariant nature of the convolution operation. The convolution of an image x ∈ RM ×N ×d with a filter w ∈
15048

