Parameter-free Lens Distortion Calibration of Central Cameras
Filippo Bergamasco, Luca Cosmo, Andrea Gasparetto, Andrea Albarelli and Andrea Torsello
Dipartimento di Scienze Ambientali, Informatica e Statistica
Università Ca’ Foscari - Venice, Italy
{filippo.bergamasco,luca.cosmo,andrea.gasparetto,andrea.albarelli,andrea.torsello}@unive.it

Abstract
At the core of many Computer Vision applications stands
the need to define a mathematical model describing the
imaging process. To this end, the pinhole model with radial distortion is probably the most commonly used, as
it balances low complexity with a precision that is sufficient for most applications. On the other hand, unconstrained non-parametric models, despite being originally
proposed to handle specialty cameras, have been shown
to outperform the pinhole model, even with the simpler setups. Still, notwithstanding the higher accuracy, the inability of describing the imaging model by simple linear projective operators severely limits the use of standard algorithms with unconstrained models. In this paper we propose
a parameter-free camera model where each imaging ray is
constrained to a common optical center, forcing the camera to be central. Such model can be easily calibrated with
a practical procedure which provides a convenient undistortion map that can be used to obtain a virtual pinhole
camera. The proposed method can also be used to calibrate
a stereo rig with a displacement map that simultaneously
provides stereo rectification and corrects lens distortion.

1. Introduction
The pinhole camera model is by far the most widely used
image formation model. The reasons behind its huge success among researchers and practitioners is due to several
factors. First, its simplicity. In fact, the model is fully determined by its optical center and principal point. Given
this basic information, the whole imaging process can be
modeled as a direct projection of the scene onto the image
plane. Second, the availability of mathematical tools. Its
plain formulation allows to easily apply a wide spectrum
of powerful and well understood mathematical tools, ranging from epipolar geometry to projective invariance of conics [6] and straight lines [10]. Finally, its wide range of
applicability. Specifically, provided that the field of view
of the camera fully intersects the image plane, a proper lens
distortion model can be applied to approximate an ideal pinhole. Generally speaking, the role of the distortion model

is to describe how the incoming light rays diverge from the
expected central direction once they enter the lens assembly
of a real camera. In practice, since for any given lens configuration, the geometry that relates the optics to the image
sensor is fixed, the distortion model is often defined just as
a displacement function to be applied over the image plane.
Moreover, due to physical considerations, many distortion
models are radial; that is, they are defined as a displacement
function that only depends on the distance from the principal point. This is the case with the seminal model proposed
by Tsai [29], where the distortion function is modeled as a
polynomial radial translation with two non-zero coefficients
respectively for the second and fourth degree terms. Such
model, albeit simpler than previous proposals [7, 8], obtained a large success, mainly because it was able to offer
a good approximation of the imaging process and an easy
calibration procedure was available since its introduction.
For this reason, it has been embraced and extended several times in the last three decades. Zhang, when introducing his well-known calibration procedure [31], adopts
the same model with slight modifications. More recently,
Claus and Fitgibbon [9] proposed a rational function as a
replacement for the original polynomial term. This latter
approach is currently one of the most successful, probably
because of its inclusion in the OpenCV library. Other recent approaches include variations on the number and type
of parameters [18, 30, 11], the enforcement of projective
invariants for parameter estimation [10, 5, 2], simultaneous
calibration of multiple cameras [13, 12], and extensions designed to work with highly distorted cameras [24, 26]. Indeed, it is when addressing the need to calibrate fisheye and
catadioptric cameras that the need to diverge from the pinhole model is felt the most, as any pinhole-based model,
regardless of its level of sophistication, is geometrically
unable to properly describe cameras exhibiting a view angle wider than 180 degrees. To overcome such limitation,
several alternative parametric models have been proposed.
Some of them try to modify the captured image in order
to follow the original pinhole behaviour [16]. Others go
trough a totally different path by introducing novel image

3847

