Online Video Deblurring via Dynamic Temporal Blending Network
Tae Hyun Kim1 , Kyoung Mu Lee2 , Bernhard Schölkopf1 and Michael Hirsch1
1

Department of Empirical Inference, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
2
Department of ECE, ASRI, Seoul National University

{tkim,bernhard.schoelkopf,michael.hirsch}@tuebingen.mpg.de, kyoungmu@snu.ac.kr

Figure 1: Our online deblurring results (bottom) on a number of challenging real-world video frames (top) suffering from
strong object motion. Our proposed approach is able to process the input video (VGA) in real-time, i.e. ∼24 fps on a standard
graphics card (NVIDIA GTX 1080).

Abstract
State-of-the-art video deblurring methods are capable
of removing non-uniform blur caused by unwanted camera shake and/or object motion in dynamic scenes. However, most existing methods are based on batch processing and thus need access to all recorded frames, rendering
them computationally demanding and time-consuming and
thus limiting their practical use. In contrast, we propose
an online (sequential) video deblurring method based on
a spatio-temporal recurrent network that allows for realtime performance. In particular, we introduce a novel architecture which extends the receptive field while keeping
the overall size of the network small to enable fast execution. In doing so, our network is able to remove even large
blur caused by strong camera shake and/or fast moving objects. Furthermore, we propose a novel network layer that
enforces temporal consistency between consecutive frames
by dynamic temporal blending which compares and adap-

tively (at test time) shares features obtained at different time
steps. We show the superiority of the proposed method in an
extensive experimental evaluation.

1. Introduction
Moving objects in dynamic scenes as well as camera
shake can cause undesirable motion blur in video recordings, often implying a severe degradation of video quality. This is especially true for low-light situations where
the exposure time of each frame is increased, and for videos
recorded with action (hand-held) cameras that have enjoyed
widespread popularity in recent years. Therefore, not only
to improve video quality [6, 18] but also to facilitate other
vision tasks such as tracking [16], SLAM [21], and dense
3D reconstruction [22], video deblurring techniques and
their applications have seen an ever increasing interest recently. However, removing motion blur and restoring sharp
14038

