Learning Spatio-Temporal Representation with Pseudo-3D Residual Networks ∗
Zhaofan Qiu † , Ting Yao ‡ , and Tao Mei ‡
†
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
‡
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
zhaofanqiu@gmail.com, {tiyao, tmei}@microsoft.com

Abstract

Video hit@1
66.4%

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have been regarded as a powerful class of models for image recognition problems. Nevertheless, it is not trivial when utilizing
a CNN for learning spatio-temporal video representation.
A few studies have shown that performing 3D convolutions
is a rewarding approach to capture both spatial and temporal dimensions in videos. However, the development of a
very deep 3D CNN from scratch results in expensive computational cost and memory demand. A valid question is
why not recycle off-the-shelf 2D networks for a 3D CNN. In
this paper, we devise multiple variants of bottleneck building blocks in a residual learning framework by simulating
3 × 3 × 3 convolutions with 1 × 3 × 3 convolutional filters
on spatial domain (equivalent to 2D CNN) plus 3 × 1 × 1
convolutions to construct temporal connections on adjacent
feature maps in time. Furthermore, we propose a new architecture, named Pseudo-3D Residual Net (P3D ResNet),
that exploits all the variants of blocks but composes each
in different placement of ResNet, following the philosophy
that enhancing structural diversity with going deep could
improve the power of neural networks. Our P3D ResNet
achieves clear improvements on Sports-1M video classification dataset against 3D CNN and frame-based 2D CNN by
5.3% and 1.8%, respectively. We further examine the generalization performance of video representation produced by
our pre-trained P3D ResNet on five different benchmarks and three different tasks, demonstrating superior performances over several state-of-the-art techniques.

1. Introduction
Today’s digital contents are inherently multimedia: text, audio, image, video and so on. Images and videos, in
particular, become a new way of communication between
Internet users with the proliferation of sensor-rich mobile
∗ This work was performed when Zhaofan Qiu was visiting Microsoft Research as a research intern.

64.6%

61.1%

P3D ResNet

ResNet

Method

Depth

C3D
ResNet
P3D ResNet

11
152
199

Model
size
321MB
235MB
261MB

C3D

Figure 1. Comparisons of different models on Sports-1M dataset
in terms of accuracy, model size and the number of layers.

devices. This has encouraged the development of advanced
techniques for a broad range of multimedia understanding
applications. A fundamental progress that underlies the success of these technological advances is representation learning. Recently, the rise of Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN) convincingly demonstrates high capability of learning visual representation especially in image domain. For
instance, an ensemble of residual nets [7] achieves 3.57%
top-5 error on the ImageNet test set, which is even lower
than 5.1% of the reported human-level performance. Nevertheless, video is a temporal sequence of frames with large
variations and complexities, resulting in difficulty in learning a powerful and generic spatio-temporal representation.
One natural way to encode spatio-temporal information
in videos is to extend the convolution kernels in CNN from
2D to 3D and train a brand new 3D CNN. As such, the networks have access not only the visual appearance present
in each video frame, but also the temporal evolution across
consecutive frames. While encouraging performances are
reported in recent studies [8, 31, 33], the training of 3D CNN is very computationally expensive and the model size also
has a quadratic growth compared to 2D CNN. Take a widely adopted 11-layer 3D CNN, i.e., C3D [31] networks, as an
example, the model size reaches 321MB which is even larger than that (235MB) of a 152-layer 2D ResNet (ResNet152) [7], making it extremely difficult to train a very deep
3D CNN. More importantly, directly fine-tuning ResNet152 with frames in Sports-1M dataset [10] may achieve better accuracy than C3D trained on videos from scratch as
shown in Figure 1. Another alternative solution of producing spatio-temporal video representation is to utilize pool-

5533

