Probabilistic Structure from Motion with Objects (PSfMO)
Paul Gay, Vaibhav Bansal, Cosimo Rubino, Alessio Del Bue
Visual Geometry and Modelling (VGM) Lab
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT)
Via Morego 30, 16163 Genova, Italy
{paul.gay, vaihbav.bansal, cosimo.rubino, alessio.delbue}@iit.it

Abstract
This paper proposes a probabilistic approach to recover
affine camera calibration and objects position/occupancy
from multi-view images using solely the information from
image detections. We show that remarkable object localisation and volumetric occupancy can be recovered by including both geometrical constraints and prior information
given by objects CAD models from the ShapeNet dataset.
This can be done by recasting the problem in the context of a
probabilistic framework based on PPCA that enforces both
geometrical constraints and the associated semantic given
by the object category extracted by the object detector. We
present results on synthetic data and extensive real evaluation on the ScanNet datasets on more than 1200 image
sequences to show the validity of our approach in realistic
scenarios. In particular, we show that 3D statistical priors
are key to obtain reliable reconstruction especially when the
input detections are noisy, a likely case in real scenes.

1. Introduction
Recovering 3D information from multiple-view images
has been a long standing research topic in Computer Vision.
Most of the efforts have been put in the robust computation
of the 3D position of points extracted from 2D images correspondences [26]. This trend has led to impressive results
showing accurate 3D points clouds obtained from realistic
objects, even at the very large scale [1, 57, 22, 51]. Such
description of the 3D world is however conveying a minimal semantic information: the point cloud provides just
the localisation of the 3D points without the information
associated, for instance, to the context of the scene it has
been reconstructed from. Differently, on a higher semantic
level, objects can provide an incredible amount of information to increase robustness when solving for geometry in
multiple images and to improve performance of classification/recognition tasks [29, 19].
Applications such as 3D-aware scene understanding [52,

Figure 1. The figure shows the proposed framework. A semantic
engine extracts and matches bounding boxes from objects in multiple frames using a CNN detector [47]. Given the object classes,
we use the ShapeNet dataset [9] to create a realistic prior on the
detected objects. Then, the Probabilistic Structure from Motion
with Objects (PSfMO) method provides the metric localisation,
occupancy and pose of object as a set of quadrics in the 3D space.

37, 54, 36], visual question and answering [59] and robot
object manipulation [8, 49] strongly require to localise objects in 3D and thus motivate a joint geometric and semantic understanding. The usefulness of this problem is
also stressed by the attempts of previous works injecting higher semantic in classical 3D reconstruction problems [4, 45, 55, 20, 14, 17]. This object-based geometric reasoning is now possible because of the accuracy and
generalisation of modern objects detectors that can provide
localization of several object classes in realistic scenarios
[27, 15, 47, 46]. Still, one relevant and open problem is
that most detectors provide this information onto the image
plane only, without giving an indication of the object position and occupancy in 3D.
To this end, this paper proposes an efficient and robust
13075

