Non-Rigid Object Tracking via Deformable Patches using Shape-Preserved KCF
and Level Sets
Xin Sun§†
Ngai-Man Cheung§∗
Hongxun Yao†
Yiluan Guo§
§
Singapore University of Technology and Design , Singapore
Harbin Institute of Technology† , China
sunxintyc@163.com

ngaiman cheung@sutd.edu.sg

H.yao@hit.edu.cn

guoyl1990@outlook.com

Abstract
Part-based trackers are effective in exploiting local details of the target object for robust tracking. In contrast to
most existing part-based methods that divide all kinds of
target objects into a number of fixed rectangular patches,
in this paper, we propose a novel framework in which a set
of deformable patches dynamically collaborate on tracking
of non-rigid objects. In particular, we proposed a shapepreserved kernelized correlation filter (SP-KCF) which can
accommodate target shape information for robust tracking. The SP-KCF is introduced into the level set framework
for dynamic tracking of individual patches. In this manner, our proposed deformable patches are target-dependent,
have the capability to assume complex topology, and are deformable to adapt to target variations. As these deformable
patches properly capture individual target subregions, we
exploit their photometric discrimination and shape variation to reveal the trackability of individual target subregions, which enables the proposed tracker to dynamically
take advantage of those subregions with good trackability
for target likelihood estimation. Finally the shape information of these deformable patches enables accurate object
contours to be computed as the tracking output. Experimental results on the latest public sets of challenging sequences
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking refers to the task of generating the trajectories of the moving objects in a sequence of images. It is
a fundamental research topic in computer vision and is important in many applications such as surveillance, humancomputer interfaces, vision-based control, etc. Despite significant progress over the past decade [9, 24, 32], it remains
to be very challenging for tracking in complex scenes due to
variations of lighting condition, pose, scale, and view-point
∗ Corresponding Author: Ngai-Man Cheung

(a) Regular patches [1] (b) Deformable patches

(c) Tracking output

(d)Regular patches [20] (e) Deformable patches

(f) Tracking output

(g) Non-rigid subregion (h) Complex topology (i) Variation adaption

Figure 1. Comparison of regular part-based trackers (a,d) with the
proposed deformable patch tracker (b,c,e,f). (g-i) show some examples of the deformable patches: (g,h) are from the object in (e),
which show the capability in capturing non-rigid target subregions
with complex topology; (i) is from the object in (b), illustrating its
adaptiveness to target variations.

over time. In particular, appearance modeling of the target
is critical, and it directly affects the robustness of the tracker. A good target model should capture the most distinctive properties between the target object and background,
meanwhile with the ability to adapt to target variations. In
contrast to describing the entire object with a single global
model, dividing the target into patches is effective in capturing local discriminative properties, preserving spatial relationships, and dealing with partial occlusions.
However, most existing part-based methods [28, 15, 31,
1, 20, 18] use a number of fixed rectangular patches to divide the target. They do not adapt to different kinds of ob-

5495

