Learning Multi-Attention Convolutional Neural Network for Fine-Grained
Image Recognition
Heliang Zheng1∗, Jianlong Fu2 , Tao Mei2 , Jiebo Luo3
1

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
3

1

Microsoft Research, Beijing, China

University of Rochester, Rochester, NY

zhenghl@mail.ustc.edu.cn, 2 {jianf, tmei}@microsoft.com, 3 jluo@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recognizing fine-grained categories (e.g., bird species
[1, 35], flower types [21, 24], car models [14, 17], etc.)
∗ This work was performed when Heliang Zheng was visiting Microsoft
Research as a research intern.

Bohemian Waxwing

Part Attention

Multi-Attention Network

Recognizing fine-grained categories (e.g., bird species)
highly relies on discriminative part localization and partbased fine-grained feature learning. Existing approaches
predominantly solve these challenges independently, while
neglecting the fact that part localization (e.g., head of a
bird) and fine-grained feature learning (e.g., head shape)
are mutually correlated. In this paper, we propose a novel part learning approach by a multi-attention convolutional neural network (MA-CNN), where part generation and
feature learning can reinforce each other. MA-CNN consists of convolution, channel grouping and part classification sub-networks. The channel grouping network takes
as input feature channels from convolutional layers, and
generates multiple parts by clustering, weighting and pooling from spatially-correlated channels. The part classification network further classifies an image by each individual part, through which more discriminative fine-grained
features can be learned. Two losses are proposed to guide
the multi-task learning of channel grouping and part classification, which encourages MA-CNN to generate more
discriminative parts from feature channels and learn better fine-grained features from parts in a mutual reinforced
way. MA-CNN does not need bounding box/part annotation
and can be trained end-to-end. We incorporate the learned
parts from MA-CNN with part-CNN for recognition, and
show the best performances on three challenging published
fine-grained datasets, e.g., CUB-Birds, FGVC-Aircraft and
Stanford-Cars.

Images

Cedar Waxwing

Figure 1: The ideal discriminative parts with four different colors for the two bird species of “waxwing.” We
can observe the subtle visual differences from multiple attended parts, which can distinguish the birds, e.g., the red
head/wing/tail, and white belly for the top bird, compared
with the bottom ones. [Best viewed in color]
by computer vision techniques has attracted extensive attention. This task is very challenging, as fine-grained image recognition should be capable of localizing and representing the marginal visual differences within subordinate
categories (e.g., the two species of Waxwing in Figure 1).
A large corpus of works [9, 33, 34] solve this problem by
relying on human-annotated bounding box/part annotations
(e.g., head, body for birds) for part-based feature representations. However, the heavy human involvement makes part
definition and annotation expensive and subjective, which
are not optimal for all fine-grained recognition tasks [3, 36].
Significant progresses have been made by learning
weakly-supervised part models by convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [2, 4, 15] with category labels, which have
no dependencies on bounding box/part annotations and thus

5209

