Reconstruction-Based Disentanglement for Pose-invariant Face Recognition
Xi Peng†∗, Xiang Yu‡ , Kihyuk Sohn‡ , Dimitris N. Metaxas† and Manmohan Chandraker§‡
†
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
§
University of California, San Diego
‡
NEC Laboratories America
{xipeng.cs, dnm}@rutgers.edu, {xiangyu,ksohn,manu}@nec-labs.com

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) trained on large-scale
datasets have recently achieved impressive improvements
in face recognition. But a persistent challenge remains to
develop methods capable of handling large pose variations
that are relatively under-represented in training data. This
paper presents a method for learning a feature representation that is invariant to pose, without requiring extensive
pose coverage in training data. We first propose to generate non-frontal views from a single frontal face, in order
to increase the diversity of training data while preserving
accurate facial details that are critical for identity discrimination. Our next contribution is to seek a rich embedding
that encodes identity features, as well as non-identity ones
such as pose and landmark locations. Finally, we propose a
new feature reconstruction metric learning to explicitly disentangle identity and pose, by demanding alignment between
the feature reconstructions through various combinations
of identity and pose features, which is obtained from two
images of the same subject. Experiments on both controlled
and in-the-wild face datasets, such as MultiPIE, 300WLP
and the profile view database CFP, show that our method
consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art, especially on
images with large head pose variations. 1

1. Introduction
The human visual system is commendable at recognition
across variations in pose, for which two theoretical constructs are preferred. The first postulates invariance based
on familiarity where separate view-specific visual representations or templates are learned [6, 26]. The second suggests that structural descriptions are learned from images
that specify relations among viewpoint-invariant primitives
[10]. Analogously, pose-invariance for face recognition in
∗ This work was part of the Xi’s internship at NEC Laboratories America.
1 Detail results and resource are referred to: https://sites.
google.com/site/xipengcshomepage/iccv2017.

Figure 1. (a) Generic data-driven features for face recognition might
confound images of the same identity under large poses with other
identities, as shown two subjects (in different colors) from MultiPIE
are mapped into the learned feature space of VGGFace [22]. (b)
We propose a feature reconstruction metric learning to disentangle
identity and pose information in the latent feature space. (c) The
disentangled feature space encourages identity features of the same
subject to be clustered together despite of the pose variation.

computer vision also falls into two such categories.
The use of powerful deep neural networks (DNNs) [15]
has led to dramatic improvements in recognition accuracy.
However, for objects such as faces where minute discrimination is required among a large number of identities, a straightforward implementation is still ineffective when faced with
factors of variation such as pose changes [24]. Consider the
feature space of the VGGFace [22] evaluated on MultiPIE
[7] shown in Figure 1, where examples from the same identity class that differ in pose are mapped to distant regions of
the feature space. An avenue to address this is by increasing
the pose variation in training data. For instance, 4.4 million
face images are used to train DeepFace [39] and 200 million
labelled faces for FaceNet [32]. Another approach is to learn
11623

