Blind Image Deblurring with Outlier Handling
Jiangxin Dong1 Jinshan Pan2 Zhixun Su1,4 Ming-Hsuan Yang3
1
Dalian University of Technology 2 Nanjing University of Science and Technology
4
Guilin University of Electronic Technology

3

UC Merced

dongjxjx@gmail.com sdluran@gmail.com zxsu@dlut.edu.cn mhyang@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
Deblurring images with outliers has attracted considerable attention recently. However, existing algorithms usually involve complex operations which increase the difficulty
of blur kernel estimation. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective blind image deblurring algorithm to handle
blurred images with outliers. The proposed method is motivated by the observation that outliers in the blurred images
significantly affect the goodness-of-fit in function approximation. Therefore, we propose an algorithm to model the
data fidelity term so that the outliers have little effect on kernel estimation. The proposed algorithm does not require
any heuristic outlier detection step, which is critical to the
state-of-the-art blind deblurring methods for images with
outliers. We analyze the relationship between the proposed
algorithm and other blind deblurring methods with outlier
handling and show how to estimate intermediate latent images for blur kernel estimation principally. We show that
the proposed method can be applied to generic image deblurring as well as non-uniform deblurring. Experimental
results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm performs
favorably against the state-of-the-art blind image deblurring methods on both synthetic and real-world images.

1. Introduction
Single image deblurring has received considerable attention in recent years as more photos are taken using handheld devices, especially with mobile smartphones. Although most existing smartphones are equipped with antishake features, inevitable camera shake results in blurred
images when taking photos in low-light conditions. Numerous deblurring algorithms [1, 3, 5, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16,
21, 23, 24, 25, 33] have been developed to address motion
blur. The success of these methods can be mainly attributed to the use of statistical priors from natural images (e.g.,
heavy-tailed distribution of image gradients [5, 25], normalized sparsity prior [13], L0 -regularized priors [20, 32, 33],
internal patch recurrence [19], and dark channel prior [23])
and salient edge selection for kernel estimation [3, 31]. Al-

though most existing methods are able to address blurred
images with a small amount of noise, these approaches are
not effective in handling blurred images with significant outliers, such as saturated pixels and non-Gaussian noise.
Handling blurred images with significant outliers is challenging, and existing methods [4, 29] mainly address the
effects of outliers for non-blind deblurring. To address
blurred images with outliers in blind image deblurring, one
type of methods depends heavily on domain-specific properties, e.g., light streaks [8, 18]. These methods are less effective when the light streaks cannot be extracted and do not
perform well for other types of outliers, e.g., non-Gaussian
noise. Recently, Pan et al. [22] propose an outlier handling
method to improve the blur kernel estimation. This method
first selects salient edges and then detects the regions of outliers to refine the edge information for blur kernel estimation. Although this method performs well on several kinds
of outliers, e.g., saturated pixels and non-Gaussian noise, it
needs complex operations and does not deblur images well
when the edges are not correctly selected or the regions of
outliers cannot be detected.
It is well known that the outliers significantly affect the
goodness-of-fit in function approximation. Thus, when outliers exist, the intermediate latent images estimated by the
methods with conventional data fidelity terms [15] contain
significant artifacts and blur residues (Figure 2), which accordingly affects the blur kernel estimation process. This
is the main reason why most existing blind deblurring approaches are less effective in handling blurred images with
outliers. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective
method that is able to minimize the effects of outliers on
the blur kernel estimation. In contrast to existing outlier handling algorithms [8, 18, 22], the proposed method
does not require complex operations, e.g., light streak detection [8, 18] and outlier detection [22], which are vital for
existing outlier handling methods to estimate blur kernels.
The contributions of this work are summarized as follows. First, we propose a robust method to measure the
goodness-of-fit so that the effects of outliers can be minimized in the blur kernel estimation process. Second, we
12478

