Scale-adaptive Convolutions for Scene Parsing ∗
Rui Zhang1,3 , Sheng Tang1,3 , Yongdong Zhang1,3 , Jintao Li1,3 , Shuicheng Yan2
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, 100190.
2
Artificial Intelligence Institute, 360 company, Beijing, China, 100025.
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, 100039.
zhangrui@ict.ac.cn; ts@ict.ac.cn; jtli@ict.ac.cn; zhyd@ict.ac.cn; yanshuicheng@360.cn.

Abstract
Many existing scene parsing methods adopt Convolutional Neural Networks with fixed-size receptive fields,
which frequently result in inconsistent predictions of large
objects and invisibility of small objects. To tackle this issue,
we propose a scale-adaptive convolution to acquire flexiblesize receptive fields during scene parsing. Through adding
a new scale regression layer, we can dynamically infer the
position-adaptive scale coefficients which are adopted to resize the convolutional patches. Consequently, the receptive
fields can be adjusted automatically according to the various sizes of the objects in scene images. Thus, the problems of invisible small objects and inconsistent large-object
predictions can be alleviated. Furthermore, our proposed
scale-adaptive convolutions are not only differentiable to
learn the convolutional parameters and scale coefficients in
an end-to-end way, but also of high parallelizability for the
convenience of GPU implementation. Additionally, since
the new scale regression layers are learned implicitly, any
extra training supervision of object sizes is unnecessary.
Extensive experiments on Cityscapes and ADE20K datasets
well demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed scaleadaptive convolutions.

1. Introduction
As a significant and challenging task in computer vision,
accurate scene parsing is a crucial step towards better scene
understanding. The goal of semantic scene parsing is to
associate one of the semantic categories to each pixel in a
scene image. Recently, approaches based on Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) achieve great success in scene
parsing. Based on the idea of transfer learning, they employ CNNs [15, 25, 11] pre-trained on large classification
datasets [7] to convolutional-deconvolutional frameworks
for pixel-level labeling, such as Fully Convolutional Net∗ Corresponding author: Sheng Tang.

(a) Image

(b) Fixed-size Receptive Fields
of Standard Convolutions

(c) Flexible-size Receptive Fields
of Scale-adaptive Convolutions

(d) Groundtruth

(e) Mislabeling in Predictions
of Standard Convolutions

(f) Improvement in Predictions
of Scale-adaptive Convolutions

Figure 1. Illustration of the comparison between standard convolutions and scale-adaptive convolutions. The standard convolutions have fixed-size receptive fields (b), which lead to inconsistent predictions of large objects and invisibility of small objects
(e). In comparison, the proposed scale-adaptive convolutions learn
flexible-size receptive fields (c), which can adaptively expand to
cover large objects or shrink to focus on small objects, so as to
obtain preferable parsing predictions (f).

works (FCNs) based frameworks [21, 3] and Deconvolutional Networks (DeconvNets) based frameworks [23, 1].
However, there is a huge difference between classification and scene parsing, which damages the performance of
parsing predictions during transferring models. The CNNs
with standard convolutions can only handle a single scale
due to the fixed-size receptive fields, as shown in Figure
1(b). This has little influence on classification task, since
samples of classification datasets are not only often objectcentric but also resized to a uniform size (e.g. 224×224)
before being fed into CNNs. Differently, as shown in Figure 1(e), scene images usually contain stuff (e.g. sky, wall)
and objects (e.g. people, cars) with various sizes, leading to
two critical drawbacks [23]: (1) objects which are enough
larger than the receptive fields often have inconsistent parsing predictions, since the receptive fields may cover only
small part of the large objects; (2) small objects are often
ignored and mislabeled to the background because the re12031

