Two-Phase Learning for Weakly Supervised Object Localization
Dahun Kim
KAIST

Donghyeon Cho
KAIST

Donggeun Yoo∗
KAIST

In So Kweon
KAIST

mcahny@kaist.ac.kr

cdh12242@gmail.com

dgyoo@rcv.kaist.ac.kr

iskweon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Weakly supervised semantic segmentation and localization have a problem of focusing only on the most important
parts of an image since they use only image-level annotations. In this paper, we solve this problem fundamentally
via two-phase learning. Our networks are trained in two
steps. In the first step, a conventional fully convolutional
network (FCN) is trained to find the most discriminative
parts of an image. In the second step, the activations on the
most salient parts are suppressed by inference conditional
feedback, and then the second learning is performed to find
the area of the next most important parts. By combining
the activations of both phases, the entire portion of the target object can be captured. Our proposed training scheme
is novel and can be utilized in well-designed techniques
for weakly supervised semantic segmentation, salient region
detection, and object location prediction. Detailed experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our two-phase learning in each task.

1. Introduction
The most fundamental task for image understanding is
to localize objects in a scene where each object has different locations and scales. It provides clues to challenging vision problems such as object detection and semantic
segmentation. In recent years, deep learning based methods [13, 12, 27, 19, 21, 7, 20, 39] have achieved remarkably improved performance for those tasks by virtue of
a large amount of annotated data and GPU parallel processing. However, it is expensive and laborious to obtain huge amounts of annotations such as bounding boxes
and pixel-level labels. Therefore, weakly supervised learning [22, 42, 5, 16, 25, 18, 17, 23, 24, 28, 38] using only
image-level annotations has begun to attract attention and
shown interesting results.
However, there is still a large gap between the object localization power of weakly supervised methods and that of
∗ This work was done when he was in KAIST. He is currently working
in Lunit Inc.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1: The effects of two-phase learning. (a) An input
image, and estimated locations as the most (red) and the
next (orange) important parts. (b) The heat map from the
first network [42]. (c) The segmentation prediction of our
baseline [18]. (d) Ground truth segmentation mask. (e) The
heat map from the proposed method. (f) The segmentation
prediction using the proposed method.

fully supervised methods. One major reason is that the localizability of weakly supervised FCNs is inherently limited to finding the most discriminative parts, rather than
estimating the complete extent of objects. This is because image-level annotations simply lack information on
the spatial extent of objects. Most existing weakly supervised methods for object localization [22, 42, 41, 10],
detection [5, 16, 9, 29, 4, 37], and semantic segmentation [25, 18, 17, 23, 24, 28, 38, 35, 36, 40] suffer from this
chronic problem.
In this work, we overcome this problem fundamentally
via two-phase learning. Our networks are trained in two
phases. During the first phase, a conventional FCN is
trained for image-level classification. At this time, pixels
belonging to the most important parts in an image are revealed in a heat map, as shown in Fig. 1-(b). During the
second phase, another FCN is trained but the activations
on highlighted regions in the first stage are suppressed via
inference conditional feedback. The underlying insight is
that when the network is encouraged to discriminate im13534

