Fine-grained Recognition in the Wild:
A Multi-Task Domain Adaptation Approach
Timnit Gebru Judy Hoffman Li Fei-Fei
CS Department Stanford University
{tgebru, jhoffman, feifeili}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
While fine-grained object recognition is an important
problem in computer vision, current models are unlikely
to accurately classify objects in the wild. These fully supervised models need additional annotated images to classify objects in every new scenario, a task that is infeasible. However, sources such as e-commerce websites and
field guides provide annotated images for many classes. In
this work, we study fine-grained domain adaptation as a
step towards overcoming the dataset shift between easily
acquired annotated images and the real world. Adaptation
has not been studied in the fine-grained setting where annotations such as attributes could be used to increase performance. Our work uses an attribute based multi-task adaptation loss to increase accuracy from a baseline of 4.1% to
19.1% in the semi-supervised adaptation case. Prior domain adaptation works have been benchmarked on small
datasets such as [46] with a total of 795 images for some
domains, or simplistic datasets such as [41] consisting of
digits. We perform experiments on a subset of a new challenging fine-grained dataset consisting of 1, 095, 021 images of 2, 657 car categories drawn from e-commerce websites and Google Street View.

1. Introduction
The ultimate goal of image recognition is to recognize
all objects in the world, as they appear in their natural environments. An even more difficult task, fine-grained recognition, aims to distinguish between objects in the same category (e.g. different bird species or car brands). Current
state-of-the-art fine-grained classification methods [2, 5, 8,
33] focus on fully supervised learning regimes: a setting
where human annotated images are available for all object
categories of interest. To enable these methods, datasets
have been proposed to train models recognizing all categories and scenes [15, 35, 54], or focus on the fine-grained
recognition task [51, 30, 52, 42, 34].

Training
Images

Real World
Scenarios

Figure 1. We aim to recognize fine-grained objects in the real
world without requiring large amounts of expensive expert annotated images. Instead, we propose training fine-grained models
using cheaper annotated data such as field guides or e-commerce
web sources (see top row). We adapt the learned models to our
task using only a sparse set of annotations in the real world.

Models trained on these datasets are capable of outperforming humans when evaluated on benchmark tasks such
as [15, 44]. However, this evaluation paradigm ignores a
key challenge towards the development of real world object classification models. Namely, fixed datasets such as
ImageNet or Birds offer a sparse and biased sample of the
world [48]. Thus, to achieve comparable performance in
real-world settings, fully supervised models trained with
these datasets need additional annotated data from each new
scenario. However, collecting images capturing all possible
appearances of an object in a constantly changing real world
environment is infeasible. The large number of possible images makes it prohibitively expensive to obtain labeled examples for every object category in the real world. Moreover, this annotation burden is amplified when we consider
recognition for fine-grained categories. In this setting, only
experts are able to provide our algorithms with labeled data.
Fortunately, freely available sources of paired images
and category labels exist for many objects we may want
to recognize. For example, images and annotations from a
field guide can be used to train a model recognizing various
bird species in the wild (Fig. 1 (top row)). Similarly, annotated car images on e-commerce websites can be used to
train a model distinguishing between different types of cars
11349

