Approximate Grassmannian Intersections: Subspace-Valued Subspace Learning
Fernando De la Torre
Carnegie Mellon University
Robotics Institute

cmurdock@cs.cmu.edu

ftorre@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Subspace learning is one of the most foundational tasks
in computer vision with applications ranging from dimensionality reduction to data denoising. As geometric objects, subspaces have also been successfully used for efficiently representing certain types of invariant data. However, methods for subspace learning from subspace-valued
data have been notably absent due to incompatibilities with
standard problem formulations. To fill this void, we introduce Approximate Grassmannian Intersections (AGI), a
novel geometric interpretation of subspace learning posed
as finding the approximate intersection of constraint sets
on a Grassmann manifold. Our approach can naturally be
applied to input subspaces of varying dimension while reducing to standard subspace learning in the case of vectorvalued data. Despite the nonconvexity of our problem, its
globally-optimal solution can be found using a singular
value decomposition. Furthermore, we also propose an efficient, general optimization approach that can incorporate
additional constraints to encourage properties such as robustness. Alongside standard subspace applications, AGI
also enables the novel task of transfer learning via subspace
completion. We evaluate our approach on a variety of applications, demonstrating improved invariance and generalization over vector-valued alternatives.

1. Introduction
Understanding the structure of data is one of the most
fundamental problems in machine learning. Surprisingly,
despite their apparent simplicity, models that learn linear
subspaces have achieved remarkable success in areas such
as dimensionality reduction [11], data denoising [15], collaborative filtering [18], and many others.
Within computer vision, this could partially be attributed
to the observation that real data tend to concentrate near
lower-dimensional (locally) linear structures. This can arise
naturally for a variety of reasons. For example, harmonic
analysis of Lambertian reflectance functions has demon-

Testing Training

Calvin Murdock
Carnegie Mellon University
Machine Learning Department

(a) Example Images from Biased Datasets
Training
Testing

Training
Testing

35
30
25
20
15
10
5

(b) PCA Latent Space

(c) AGI Latent Space

Figure 1: A comparison between PCA and AGI applied to the
task of dimensionality reduction. For each method, a subspace
was learned from training images with lighting conditions that differed substantially from those in the testing images. Examples are
shown (a) alongside two-dimensional Isomap [35] embeddings of
the associated latent spaces (b,c). Unlike PCA, AGI provides some
invariance to shared variations due to lighting by representing the
data as subspaces, resulting in discriminative representations that
contain more information relating to identity.

strated that third-order approximations can account for over
99% of the energy, allowing aligned images of convex,
Lambertian objects under any illumination to be succinctly
summarized by 9-dimensional subspaces [4]. This has led
to the practical success of linear component analysis methods for automatic facial analysis [16].
Of course, data linearity is often satisfied only in restricted, highly-controlled scenarios. With faces, even slight
image misalignment or appearance variability can introduce
nonlinearities that adversely affect subspace-based methods [23]. However, subspaces can provide efficient and
robust representations of sets of data points that span subspaces invariant to certain linear transformations. This is especially useful in scenarios in which sufficient training data
is unavailable; subspace representations can generalize a

4308

