Learning View-Invariant Features for Person Identification in Temporally
Synchronized Videos Taken by Wearable Cameras
Kang Zheng1 , Xiaochuan Fan2 , Yuewei Lin3 , Hao Guo1 , Hongkai Yu1 , Dazhou Guo1 , Song Wang1
1
University of South Carolina, 2 HERE North America, LLC, 3 Brookhaven National Laboratory
{zheng37,hguo,yu55,guo22}@email.sc.edu, {efan3000,ywlin.cq}@gmail.com, songwang@cec.sc.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of Cross-View Person
Identification (CVPI), which aims at identifying the same
person from temporally synchronized videos taken by different wearable cameras. Our basic idea is to utilize the
human motion consistency for CVPI, where human motion
can be computed by optical flow. However, optical flow
is view-variant – the same person’s optical flow in different videos can be very different due to view angle change.
In this paper, we attempt to utilize 3D human-skeleton sequences to learn a model that can extract view-invariant
motion features from optical flows in different views. For
this purpose, we use 3D Mocap database to build a synthetic optical flow dataset and train a Triplet Network (TN)
consisting of three sub-networks: two for optical flow sequences from different views and one for the underlying 3D
Mocap skeleton sequence. Finally, sub-networks for optical
flows are used to extract view-invariant features for CVPI.
Experimental results show that, using only the motion information, the proposed method can achieve comparable performance with the state-of-the-art methods. Further combination of the proposed method with an appearance-based
method achieves new state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Associating persons from two different views, or person
identification, is an important computer vision task. It can
be used for surveillance in crowded areas such as airports,
train stations and theaters. This task is very challenging because a person’s appearance can change significantly due
to variations of view angle, illumination, occlusion, background clutter and body pose. Most surveillance systems
are based on multi-camera network which are fixed at specific locations and can only cover limited areas. Wearable
cameras such as Google Glass can offer more flexibility and
better capture scenes as the camera wearer can move freely.
To better understand the ongoing events, we may use mul-

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Examples of (a) matching and (b) non-matching pairs
of synchronized videos. Matching pair of videos capture the
same person with synchronized and consistent movement, while
non-matching pair of videos capture two different persons whose
movements are inconsistent.

tiple wearable cameras to capture multiple videos from different view angles. For example, in a protest scene, police
officers on site wear Google Glasses for surveillance and
their captured videos from different view angles can provide complementary information for detecting/recognizing
abnormal activities of people. In order to perform multiview activity detection/recognition, we need to first identify
the same person of common interest from multiple videos,
i.e., to perform Cross-View Person Identification (CVPI).
As in [34], in this paper we assume the videos taken
by multiple wearable cameras are temporally synchronized,
i.e., these videos are aligned in a way that the corresponding
frames in all these videos are taken at the same time. This
can be achieved by synchronizing clocks in these cameras.
This paper is focused on CVPI from a pair of temporally
synchronized videos taken by wearable cameras, because
it is easy to be extended to more than two synchronized
videos. We assume persons in each video are already detected and tracked. From now on, we use the term “video”
to represent an image sequence of localized regions containing a tracked person. If two temporally synchronized
videos capture the same person, these two videos are called
a matching or positive pair. Otherwise, they are called a
non-matching or negative pair. Figure 1 shows an example
of matching pair and non-matching pair of videos.
In [34], Zheng et al. propose to estimate the underly-

2858

