Complex Event Detection by Identifying Reliable Shots from Untrimmed Videos
Hehe Fan1 , Xiaojun Chang2 , De Cheng3 , Yi Yang1∗, Dong Xu4 and Alexander G. Hauptmann2
1
Centre for Artificial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia
2
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
3
Institute of artificial intelligence and robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
4
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
Hehe.Fan@student.uts.edu.au, cxj273@gmail.com, chengde19881214@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
Yi.Yang@uts.edu.au, dong.xu@sydney.edu.au, alex+@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
The goal of complex event detection is to automatically
detect whether an event of interest happens in temporally
untrimmed long videos which usually consist of multiple
video shots. Observing some video shots in positive (resp.
negative) videos are irrelevant (resp. relevant) to the given
event class, we formulate this task as a multi-instance learning (MIL) problem by taking each video as a bag and the
video shots in each video as instances. To this end, we
propose a new MIL method, which simultaneously learns
a linear SVM classifier and infers a binary indicator for
each instance in order to select reliable training instances
from each positive or negative bag. In our new objective function, we balance the weighted training errors and
a l1 -l2 mixed-norm regularization term which adaptively
selects reliable shots as training instances from different
videos to have them as diverse as possible. We also develop an alternating optimization approach that can efficiently solve our proposed objective function. Extensive experiments on the challenging real-world Multimedia Event
Detection (MED) datasets MEDTest-14, MEDTest-13 and
CCV clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
MIL approach for complex event detection.

1. Introduction
Complex event detection has attracted increasing attention in recent years. It aims to automatically detect an event
of interest in temporally untrimmed long videos. Unlike
human action recognition [27, 23, 22, 26] where actions are
∗ Corresponding author. This work is in part supported by Data to Decisions Cooperative Research Centre (www.d2dcrc.com.au), in part supported by the Google Faculty Research Award and in part supported by the
award 60NANB17D156 from U.S. Department of Commerce, National Institute of Standards and Technology.

well-defined and videos are constrained, complex event detection is more challenging where the target event is complex and may only occur within a short period of time.
The existing works [25, 4] proposed to use different
strategies to exploit temporal information for complex event
detection. By decomposing the complex event like “grooming a dog” as a set of actions like “prepare water”, “walk
to dog”, “groom dog”, “leave dog” and “clean up”, Tang et
al. [25] adopted a Hidden Markov Model based approach to
model the complex event. Cheng et al. [4] used a sequence
memorizer approach [28] to exploit temporal information
by treating each video shot as an individual visual word.
However, the performance is still not quite satisfactory because it is a non-trivial task to effectively exploit temporal information in long videos like those from MEDTest13 and MEDTest-14. Meanwhile, researchers also explored
information from Wikipedia to provide more detailed explanation and definition for each complex event. Chang et
al. [3] proposed to first prioritize the shots according to the
salience scores from some pre-trained concept detectors,
and then used a SVM based method to exploit ordering information of semantic concepts. Yan et al. [32] proposed
a dictionary learning approach for complex event detection,
in which the dictionary consists of a set of selected meaningful concepts for all events. However, these approaches
heavily depend on human knowledge in order to design the
elementary concepts for each complex event. It remains unclear what and how many concept detectors should be pretrained for arbitrary events.
Recently, Li et al. [17] proposed a dynamic pooling
method based on sliding windows. However, this sliding window based approach is computationally expensive.
Moreover, the work in [13] partitioned each untrimmed long
video as a set of video shots and used the multi-instance
learning method ∝-SVM [35] for complex event detection.
The major limitation of this work is the assumption that almost all video shots in positive bags are positive and all

736

