Toward perceptually-consistent stereo: A scanline study
Jialiang Wang
Harvard University

Daniel Glasner
AiCure ∗

Todd Zickler
Harvard University

jialiangwang@g.harvard.edu

dglasner@gmail.com

zickler@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Two types of information exist in a stereo pair: correlation (matching) and decorrelation (half-occlusion). Vision
science has shown that both types of information are used
in the visual cortex, and that people can perceive depth even
when correlation cues are absent or very weak, a capability that remains absent from most computational stereo systems. As a step toward stereo algorithms that are more consistent with these perceptual phenomena, we re-examine the
topic of scanline stereo as energy minimization. We represent a disparity profile as a piecewise smooth function
with explicit breakpoints between its smooth pieces, and we
show this allows correlation and decorrelation to be integrated into an objective that requires only two types of local
information: the correlation and its spatial gradient. Experimentally, we show the global optimum of this objective
matches human perception on a broad collection of wellknown perceptual stimuli, and that it also provides reasonable piecewise-smooth interpretations of depth in natural
images, even without exploiting monocular boundary cues.

1. Introduction
There are two sources of shape information in a stereo
pair. One is the correlation (matching) signal from smooth
surface regions that are visible to both cameras, which provides direct information about depth and possibly higherorder shape. The other is the decorrelation (anti-matching)
signal at regions that are visible to only one camera, which
provides information about the locations and amplitudes of
depth discontinuities by the half-occlusions they induce.
These two sources of information are complimentary, and
vision scientists have invented a variety of perceptual stimuli [23, 2, 5, 1, 34, 25, 6, 30, 31], some of which are included
in Figure 1, that convincingly demonstrate how biological
vision can exploit one or both of them.
In the computer vision community, there has been sub∗ Most work was done when Daniel Glasner was at Harvard University

stantial recent progress in exploiting correlation information, both in terms of designing or learning effective local matching functions (e.g., census [36, 16] and MCCNN [39]), and in terms of developing message passing
methods and other techniques for aggregating matching information across piecewise-smooth scenes. However, there
has been less progress in using the decorrelation information. There were early attempts to build it into scanline
algorithms [12, 5, 7, 41], but more recently, the trend has
been to treat it secondarily. A typical approach is to recover an initial depth map using correlation and then “clean
it up” with left-right consistency checks [35] and other postprocessing schemes [9] that aim to identify and fix the regions of half-occlusion. This strategy can be very effective
when tuned on particular stereo datasets [27, 28, 22], but as
shown in Figure 1, it is inconsistent with the human ability
to accurately perceive depth discontinuities when correlation and color/texture cues are absent or very weak.
As a step towards stereo systems that are more consistent with human perception, and hopefully more likely to
generalize beyond specific datasets, this paper re-examines
scanline stereo by energy minimization, and it introduces an
objective that more effectively combines the two sources of
stereo information. The key idea is to represent the disparity
map (and thus the depth map) as a piecewise smooth function over the visual field, with “smoothness” specified by
any basis of a low-dimensional function space. In a single
scanline, the stereo problem is formalized as identifying the
best piecewise smooth cut through disparity space, as specified by a finite number of boundary locations and the shape
coefficients for the smooth pieces between them. By explicitly representing the depth discontinuities at these boundary
points, our approach provides a natural way to merge halfocclusion cues with correlation cues.
Although simple scanline formulations like ours do not
provide state-of-the-art results on standard benchmarks,
they have the important property of allowing exact global
optimization by dynamic programming. This allows us
to study the properties of a stereo objective without the
complications of approximate inference and local minima.
Following this approach, we find that an objective using

1548

