PanNet: A deep network architecture for pan-sharpening
Junfeng Yang† , Xueyang Fu† , Yuwen Hu, Yue Huang, Xinghao Ding∗ , John Paisley‡
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, Xiamen University, China
‡
Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, USA

Abstract
We propose a deep network architecture for the pansharpening problem called PanNet.
We incorporate
domain-specific knowledge to design our PanNet architecture by focusing on the two aims of the pan-sharpening
problem: spectral and spatial preservation. For spectral
preservation, we add up-sampled multispectral images to
the network output, which directly propagates the spectral
information to the reconstructed image. To preserve spatial
structure, we train our network parameters in the high-pass
filtering domain rather than the image domain. We show
that the trained network generalizes well to images from
different satellites without needing retraining. Experiments
show significant improvement over state-of-the-art methods
visually and in terms of standard quality metrics.

1. Introduction
Multispectral images are widely used, for example in
agriculture, mining and environmental monitoring applications. Due to physical constraints, satellites will often only
measure a high resolution panchromatic (PAN) image (i.e.,
grayscale) and several low resolution multispectral (LRMS)
images. The goal of pan-sharpening is to fuse this spectral
and spatial information to produce a high resolution multispectral (HRMS) image of the same size as PAN.
With recent advances made by deep neural networks for
image processing applications, researchers have begun exploring this avenue for pan-sharpening. For example, one
deep pan-sharpening model assumes that the relationship
between HR/LR multispectral image patches is the same
† co-first authors contributed equally, ∗ correspondence: dxh@xmu.edu.cn.

This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China grants 61571382, 81671766, 61571005, 81671674,
U1605252, 61671309 and 81301278, Guangdong Natural Science Foundation grant 2015A030313007, Fundamental Research Funds for the Central
Universities grants 20720160075 and 20720150169, the CCF-Tencent research fund, and the Science and Technology funds from the Fujian Provincial Administration of Surveying, Mapping and Geoinformation. Xueyang
Fu conducted portions of this work at Columbia University under China
Scholarship Council grant No. [2016]3100.

Figure 1. Examples from 425 satellite images used in experiments.

as that between the corresponding HR/LR panochromatic
image patches, and uses this assumption to learn a mapping through a neural network [16]. The state-of-the-art
pan-sharpening model, based on the convolutional neural
network and called PNN [21], adopts an architecture previously proposed for image super-resolution [11].
These two methods regard the pan-sharpening problem
as a simple image regression problem. That is, though
they are able to obtain good results, they do not exploit the
particular goals of the pan-sharpening problem—spectral
and spatial preservation—but rather treat pan-sharpening
as a black-box deep learning problem. However, for pansharpening it is clear that preserving spatial and spectral
information are the primary goals of fusion, and so deep
learning methods should explicitly focus on these aspects.
This motivates our proposed deep network called “PanNet,”
which has the following features:
1. We incorporate problem-specific knowledge about
pan-sharpening into the deep learning framework. Specifically, we propagate spectral information through the network using up-sampled multispectral images, a procedure
we’ll refer to as “spectra-mapping.” To focus on the spatial structure in the PAN image, we train the network in the
high-pass domain rather than the image domain.
2. Our approach is an end-to-end system which automatically learns the mapping purely from the data. Convolutions allow us to capture intra-correlation across different
bands of the MS images and the PAN image, unlike previous (non-deep) methods. Experiments show that PanNet
achieves state-of-the-art performance compared with sev-

5449

