ScaleNet: Guiding Object Proposal Generation in Supermarkets and Beyond
Siyuan Qiao1 Wei Shen1,2 Weichao Qiu1 Chenxi Liu1 Alan Yuille1
Johns Hopkins University1 Shanghai University2
{siyuan.qiao, wqiu7, cxliu, alan.yuille}@jhu.edu

wei.shen@t.shu.edu.cn

Abstract
Motivated by product detection in supermarkets, this paper studies the problem of object proposal generation in
supermarket images and other natural images. We argue
that estimation of object scales in images is helpful for
generating object proposals, especially for supermarket images where object scales are usually within a small range.
Therefore, we propose to estimate object scales of images
before generating object proposals. The proposed method
for predicting object scales is called ScaleNet. To validate
the effectiveness of ScaleNet, we build three supermarket
datasets, two of which are real-world datasets used for testing and the other one is a synthetic dataset used for training.
In short, we extend the previous state-of-the-art object proposal methods by adding a scale prediction phase. The resulted method outperforms the previous state-of-the-art on
the supermarket datasets by a large margin. We also show
that the approach works for object proposal on other natural images and it outperforms the previous state-of-the-art
object proposal methods on the MS COCO dataset. The supermarket datasets, the virtual supermarkets, and the tools
for creating more synthetic datasets will be made public.

1. Introduction
There is an exciting trend in developing intelligent shopping systems to reduce human intervention and bring convenience to human’s life, e.g., Amazon Go1 system, which
makes checkout-free shopping experience possible in physical supermarkets. Another way to enhance the shopping experience in supermarkets is setting customer free from finding and fetching products they want to buy, which drives the
demand to develop shopping navigation robots. This kind
of robots can also help visually impaired people shop in supermarkets. The vision system of such a robot should have
the abilities to address two problems sequentially. The first
is generating object proposals for products in images captured by the equipped camera (Fig. 1), and the second is
1 https://www.amazon.com/b?node=16008589011

Figure 1: Example Object Annotations in the Supermarket
Datasets (Left) and the MS COCO Datasets [26] (Right). Yellow:
object scale is between 20% and 30% of the image scale; red: between 10% and 20%; green: less than 10%. The ratio is calculated
as the maximum of the width and the height of the object divided
by the maximum of the width and the height of the image. No
other object scales appear in the examples.

identifying each product proposal. In this paper, we focus
on the first problem.
There are many object proposal methods for general natural images [33, 34, 42, 46]. However, scenes of supermarkets are usually very crowded, e.g., one image taken
in supermarkets could have over 60 products. More challengingly, products of the same brands and categories are
usually placed together, i.e., the appearance similarities between adjacent products are often high, making the boundaries between them hard to detect. Consequently, the current object proposal detection methods, including superpixel grouping based [1, 20, 42], edge or gradient computation based [7, 46] and saliency and attention detection
based [2, 4, 5, 24, 28], are less effective and require a large
number of proposals to achieve reasonable recall rates.
However, we observe that the products in supermarkets
typically occur at a limited range of scales in the image.
To demonstrate this, we plot the distribution of the number
of object scales in real-world supermarkets (Fig. 2). This
suggests a strategy where we estimate object scales and use
them to guide proposals rather than exhaustive searching on
all scales. The same strategy of reducing search space of
scales is also applicable to other natural images in the MS
COCO [26], and it becomes very effective especially for
those that have sparse object scales (Fig. 2), for which an
effective scale prediction can reduce the search space and

1791

