Intrinsic3D: High-Quality 3D Reconstruction by Joint Appearance and
Geometry Optimization with Spatially-Varying Lighting
Robert Maier1,2 Kihwan Kim1 Daniel Cremers2 Jan Kautz1 Matthias Nießner2,3
1
2
3
NVIDIA
Technical University of Munich
Stanford University
Fusion

Abstract

Ours

We introduce a novel method to obtain high-quality 3D
reconstructions from consumer RGB-D sensors. Our core
idea is to simultaneously optimize for geometry encoded in
a signed distance field (SDF), textures from automaticallyselected keyframes, and their camera poses along with material and scene lighting. To this end, we propose a joint
surface reconstruction approach that is based on Shapefrom-Shading (SfS) techniques and utilizes the estimation of
spatially-varying spherical harmonics (SVSH) from subvolumes of the reconstructed scene. Through extensive examples and evaluations, we demonstrate that our method dramatically increases the level of detail in the reconstructed
scene geometry and contributes highly to consistent surface
texture recovery.

1. Introduction
With the wide availability of commodity RGB-D sensors such as the Microsoft Kinect, Intel RealSense, or
Google Tango, reconstruction of 3D scenes has gained significant attention. Along with new hardware, researchers
have developed impressive approaches that are able to reconstruct 3D surfaces from the noisy depth measurements
of these low-cost devices. A very popular strategy to handle strong noise characteristics is volumetric fusion of independent depth frames [7], which has become the core
of many state-of-the-art RGB-D reconstruction frameworks
[17, 18, 21, 5, 8].
Volumetric fusion is a fast and efficient solution for
regularizing out sensor noise; however, due to its ℓ2 regularization property, it tends to oversmooth the reconstruction, leaving little fine-scale surface detail in the result. The same problem also translates to reconstruction of
surface textures. Most RGB-D reconstruction frameworks
simply map RGB values of associated depth pixels onto the
geometry by averaging all colors that have been observed
for a given voxel. This typically leads to blurry textures,
as wrong surface geometry and misaligned poses introduce
re-projection errors where one voxel is associated with dif-

Figure 1. Our 3D reconstruction method jointly optimizes geometry and intrinsic material properties encoded in a Signed Distance
Field (SDF), as well as the image formation model to produce
high-quality models of fine-detail geometry (top) and compelling
visual appearance (bottom).

ferent color values that are then incorrectly averaged.
Very recent approaches address these two problems independently. For instance, Zhou and Koltun [29] optimize for
consistent surface textures by iteratively solving for rigid
pose alignment and color averages. To compensate for
wrong surface geometry where re-projection consistency is
infeasible, they non-rigidly warp RGB frames on top of the
reconstructed mesh, thus obtaining a high-quality surface
texture. On the other end of the spectrum, shading-based
refinement techniques enhance depth frames [24] or surface
geometry [30] by adding shading constraints from higher
resolution color frames; i.e., they leverage RGB signal to
refine the geometry. These reconstruction pipelines are sequential; for instance, Zollhöfer et al. [30] first compute
the alignment between RGB-D frames, then fuse both RGB

3114

