Face Sketch Matching via Coupled Deep Transform Learning
Shruti Nagpal1 , Maneet Singh1 , Richa Singh1,2 , Mayank Vatsa1,2 , Afzel Noore2 , and Angshul Majumdar1
1
IIIT-Delhi, India, 2 West Virginia University
{shrutin, maneets, rsingh, mayank, angshul}@iiitd.ac.in, afzel.noore@mail.wvu.edu
Abstract
Face sketch to digital image matching is an important
challenge of face recognition that involves matching across
different domains. Current research efforts have primarily
focused on extracting domain invariant representations or
learning a mapping from one domain to the other. In this
research, we propose a novel transform learning based approach termed as DeepTransformer, which learns a transformation and mapping function between the features of
two domains. The proposed formulation is independent of
the input information and can be applied with any existing
learned or hand-crafted feature. Since the mapping function is directional in nature, we propose two variants of
DeepTransformer: (i) semi-coupled and (ii) symmetricallycoupled deep transform learning. This research also uses
a novel IIIT-D Composite Sketch with Age (CSA) variations database which contains sketch images of 150 subjects
along with age-separated digital photos. The performance
of the proposed models is evaluated on a novel application
of sketch-to-sketch matching, along with sketch-to-digital
photo matching. Experimental results demonstrate the robustness of the proposed models in comparison to existing
state-of-the-art sketch matching algorithms and a commercial face recognition system.

1. Introduction
Face recognition systems have been evolving over the
past few decades, particularly with the availability of large
scale databases and access to sophisticated hardware. Large
scale face recognition challenges such as MegaFace [13]
and Janus [16] further provide opportunities for bridging
the gap between unconstrained and constrained face recognition. However, the availability of new devices and applications continuously open new challenges. One such challenging application is matching sketches with digital face
photos. In criminal investigations, eyewitnesses provide a
first hand account of the event, along with a description of
the appearance of the suspect based on their memory. A
sketch artist interviews the eyewitness of a particular case

(a) Viewed sketches

(b) Forensic sketches

Figure 1: Illustrating the variations in the information content of digital images and different types of sketches.
and a sketch image of the suspect is created. Such a sketch
drawn by an artist is termed as a hand-drawn sketch. To
eliminate the inter-artist variations and automate the process
of sketch generation, law enforcement agencies have started
using software generated composite sketches. In such cases,
the eyewitness is interviewed by an officer and a sketch is
created using the drag-and-drop features available in sketch
generation tools such as FACES [2], evoFIT [1] and IdentiKit [3]. As shown in Figure 1(a), the information content in the two domains/modalities (sketch and digital image) vary significantly. The digital image is an informationrich representation whereas, the sketch image contains only
the edge information and lacks texture details. Figure 1(b)
shows real world examples of forensic hand-drawn sketch
and corresponding photo pairs. Along with domain differences, variations caused by eyewitness description makes
this problem further challenging.
Traditionally, a sketch image is matched with digital
mugshot images for identifying the suspect. The literature
is spread across hand-drawn and composite sketch to digital photo matching [30], with algorithms being evaluated
[17, 23] on viewed sketches [18, 45, 49]. Viewed sketches
are drawn while looking at the digital photos. Such sketches
do not reflect real scenario and fail to capture the challenging nature of the problem. Choi et al. [8] have established
the limitations of viewed sketches and emphasized the need
for new databases and algorithms imitating real scenarios.
15419

