Unpaired Image-to-Image Translation
using Cycle-Consistent Adversarial Networks
Jun-Yan Zhu∗
Taesung Park∗
Phillip Isola
Alexei A. Efros
Berkeley AI Research (BAIR) laboratory, UC Berkeley
Monet

Photos

Monet

photo

photo

Monet

Photograph

Zebras

Monet

Horses

Summer

Winter

zebra

horse

summer

winter

horse

zebra

winter

summer

Van Gogh

Cezanne

Ukiyo-e

Figure 1: Given any two unordered image collections X and Y , our algorithm learns to automatically “translate” an image from one into the other and vice
versa. Example application (bottom): using a collection of paintings of a famous artist, learn to render a user’s photograph into their style.

Abstract

1. Introduction

What did Claude Monet see as he placed his easel by the
Image-to-image translation is a class of vision and graphics problems where the goal is to learn the mapping between bank of the Seine near Argenteuil on a lovely spring day in
an input image and an output image using a training set of 1873 (Figure 1, top-left)? A color photograph, had it been
aligned image pairs. However, for many tasks, paired train- invented, may have documented a crisp blue sky and a glassy
ing data will not be available. We present an approach for river reflecting it. Monet conveyed his impression of this same
learning to translate an image from a source domain X to a scene through wispy brush strokes and a bright palette. What
target domain Y in the absence of paired examples. Our goal if Monet had happened upon the little harbor in Cassis on a
is to learn a mapping G : X → Y such that the distribution cool summer evening (Figure 1, bottom-left)? A brief stroll
of images from G(X) is indistinguishable from the distribu- through a gallery of Monet paintings makes it easy to imagine
tion Y using an adversarial loss. Because this mapping is how he would have rendered the scene: perhaps in pastel
highly under-constrained, we couple it with an inverse map- shades, with abrupt dabs of paint, and a somewhat flattened
ping F : Y → X and introduce a cycle consistency loss to dynamic range.
push F (G(X)) ≈ X (and vice versa). Qualitative results are
We can imagine all this despite never having seen a side by
presented on several tasks where paired training data does side example of a Monet painting next to a photo of the scene
not exist, including collection style transfer, object transfigu- he painted. Instead we have knowledge of the set of Monet
ration, season transfer, photo enhancement, etc. Quantitative paintings and of the set of landscape photographs. We can
comparisons against several prior methods demonstrate the reason about the stylistic differences between these two sets,
superiority of our approach.
and thereby imagine what a scene might look like if we were
to “translate” it from one set into the other.
* indicates equal contribution

12223

