Object-level Proposals
Jianxiang Ma1
1

Anlong Ming1 Zilong Huang2 Xinggang Wang2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Huazhong University of Science and Technology

{jianxiangma,minganlong,yuzhou}@bupt.edu.cn

Yu Zhou 1,∗

{hzl,xgwang}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Edge and surface are two fundamental visual elements
of an object. The majority of existing object proposal approaches utilize edge or edge-like cues to rank candidates,
while we consider that the surface cue containing the 3D
characteristic of objects should be captured effectively for
proposals, which has been rarely discussed before. In this
paper, an object-level proposal model is presented, which
constructs an occlusion-based objectness taking the surface
cue into account. Specifically, the better detection of occlusion edges is focused on to enrich the surface cue into proposals, namely, the occlusion-dominated fusion and
normalization criterion are designed to obtain the approximately overall contour information, to enhance the occlusion edge map at utmost and thus boost proposals. Experimental results on the PASCAL VOC 2007 and MS COCO
2014 dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach,
which achieves around 6% improvement on the average recall than Edge Boxes at 1000 proposals and also leads to a
modest gain on the performance of object detection.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. The formation of occlusion and contour. (a) a natural
image, (b) the surface of the object cow and its projection, (c)
the contour of the cow formed by occlusion edges in red, (b) the
detailed occlusion edges.

an unsupervised manner is a challenging task.

1. Introduction
Object proposal aims to generate a certain amount of
candidate bounding boxes to determine the potential objects
and their locations in an image, which is widely applied to
many visual tasks for pre-processing, e.g., object detection
[12], [29], segmentation [8], [28], object discovery [15],
and 3D match [3]. Due to the great practicability, it has
been a signiﬁcant research recently.
As Perception of the Visual World writes, “The elementary impressions of a visual world are those of surface and
edge.” Indeed, edge and surface are fundamental to perceive
everything in vision, including objects. Most of existing approaches utilize the edge or edge-like cues to generate proposals, but the surface cue has been rarely discussed. The
main reason is that achieving the high-level surface cue in
∗ Corresponding Author.

From the perspective of optics [25], the smooth surface
of an object presented on the 2D image forms the complete
and continuous contour, which is produced by the occlusion
events in the 3D space [23]. Fig.1 illustrates the formation
of occlusion and contour. In (b), the optical rays (orange
lines) project the object cow in the 3D space onto the background, and then its surface is delineated by contour in the
2D image. It is observed that the contour just occurs at the
boundary where the surface of the cow occludes the background. Formally, the contour is composed of a set of occlusion edges. In this paper, an occlusion edge is an edge signalling depth discontinuity between regions, and the edge
is called the basic edge for clarity. As shown in Fig.1 (c)
and (d), the red occlusion edge is essentially a blue basic
edge between two junctions, circled in yellow. Moreover,
discontinuous occlusion edges form the complete contour,
corresponding to the object surface. Consequently, occlu-

4921

