HydraPlus-Net: Attentive Deep Features for Pedestrian Analysis
Xihui Liu1,2∗ , Haiyu Zhao2∗, Maoqing Tian2 , Lu Sheng1
Jing Shao2†, Shuai Yi2 , Junjie Yan2 , Xiaogang Wang1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 SenseTime Group Limited
shaojing@sensetime.com

Abstract
Pedestrian analysis plays a vital role in intelligent video
surveillance and is a key component for security-centric
computer vision systems. Despite that the convolutional
neural networks are remarkable in learning discriminative features from images, the learning of comprehensive
features of pedestrians for fine-grained tasks remains an
open problem. In this study, we propose a new attentionbased deep neural network, named as HydraPlus-Net (HPnet), that multi-directionally feeds the multi-level attention maps to different feature layers. The attentive deep
features learned from the proposed HP-net bring unique
advantages: (1) the model is capable of capturing multiple attentions from low-level to semantic-level, and (2)
it explores the multi-scale selectiveness of attentive features to enrich the final feature representations for a pedestrian image. We demonstrate the effectiveness and generality of the proposed HP-net for pedestrian analysis on two
tasks, i.e. pedestrian attribute recognition and person reidentification. Intensive experimental results have been provided to prove that the HP-net outperforms the state-of-theart methods on various datasets.1

1. Introduction
Pedestrian analysis is a long-lasting research topic because of the continuing demands for intelligent video
surveillance and psychological social behavior researches.
Particularly, with the explosion of researches about the
deep convolutional neural networks in recent computer vision community, a variety of applications categorized as
the pedestrian analysis, e.g. pedestrian attribute recognition,
person re-identification and etc., have received remarkable
improvements and presented potentialities for practical us∗ X. Liu and H. Zhao share equal contribution.
† J. Shao is the corresponding author.
1 https://github.com/xh-liu/HydraPlus-Net

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Pedestrian analysis needs a comprehensive feature representation from multi-levels and scales. (a) Semantic-level: attending features around local regions facilitates distinguishing persons that own similar appearances at a glance, such as “long hair”
vs. “short hair” and “long-sleeves” vs. “short-sleeves”. (b) Lowlevel: some patterns like “clothing stride” can be well captured
by low-level features rather than those in high-level. (c-d) Scales:
multi-scale attentive features benefit describing person’s characteristics, where the small-scale attention map in (c) corresponds to
the “phone” and a large-scale one in (d) for a global understanding.

age in modern surveillance system. However, the learning
of feature representation for pedestrian images, as the backbone for all those applications, still confronts critical challenges and needs profound studies.
At first, most traditional deep architectures have not extracted the detailed and localized features complementary
to the high-level global features, which are especially effective for fine-grained tasks in pedestrian analysis. For example, it is difficult to distinguish two instances if no semantic features are extracted around hair and shoulders, as
shown in Fig. 1(a). Also in Fig. 1(c), the effective features
should be located within a small-scale head-shoulder region
if we want to detect the attribute “calling”. However, existing arts merely extract global features [13, 24, 30] and are
hardly effective to location-aware semantic pattern extraction. Furthermore, it is well-known that multi-level features
1350

