Benchmarking and Error Diagnosis in Multi-Instance Pose Estimation
Matteo Ruggero Ronchi

Pietro Perona

www.vision.caltech.edu/˜mronchi

perona@caltech.edu

California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA
1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Estimating the pose of a person from a single monocular frame is a challenging task due to many confounding factors such as perspective projection, the variability of lighting and clothing, self-occlusion, occlusion by
objects, and the simultaneous presence of multiple interacting people. Nevertheless, the performance of human
pose estimation algorithms has recently improved dramatically, thanks to the development of suitable deep architectures [9, 11, 12, 17, 28, 29, 32, 33, 42, 44] and the availability of well-annotated image datasets, such as MPII Human
Pose Dataset and COCO [4, 27]. There is broad consensus that performance is saturated on simpler single-person
datasets [23, 24], and researchers’ focus is shifting towards
less constrained and more challenging datasets [4, 14, 27],
where images may contain multiple instances of people, and
a variable number of body parts (or keypoints) are visible.
However, evaluation is challenging: more complex datasets
make it harder to benchmark algorithms due to the many
sources of error that may affect performance, and existing

@OKS .9:

.327 (AP)

Localization Errors (Sec. 3.1):

Precision

We propose a new method to analyze the impact of errors in algorithms for multi-instance pose estimation and a
principled benchmark that can be used to compare them.
We define and characterize three classes of errors - localization, scoring, and background - study how they are influenced by instance attributes and their impact on an algorithm’s performance. Our technique is applied to compare the two leading methods for human pose estimation on
the COCO Dataset, measure the sensitivity of pose estimation with respect to instance size, type and number of visible
keypoints, clutter due to multiple instances, and the relative
score of instances. The performance of algorithms, and the
types of error they make, are highly dependent on all these
variables, but mostly on the number of keypoints and the
clutter. The analysis and software tools we propose offer a
novel and insightful approach for understanding the behavior of pose estimation algorithms and an effective method
for measuring their strengths and weaknesses.

Original Detections:

Miss:

.415

Swap:

.448

Inversion:

.545

Jitter:

.859

Scoring Errors (Sec. 3.2):
Opt. Score:

.879

Background Errors (Sec. 3.3):
0
0

Recall

False Pos.:

.881

False Neg.:

1.00

1

Figure 1. Coarse to Fine Error Analysis. We study the errors
occurring in multi-instance pose estimation, and how they are affected by physical characteristics of the portrayed people. We
build upon currently adopted evaluation metrics and provide the
tools for a fine-grained description of performance, which allows
to quantify the impact of different types of error at a single glance.
The fine-grained Precision-Recall curves are obtained by fixing an
OKS threshold and evaluating the performance of an algorithm after progressively correcting its mistakes.

metrics, such as Average Precision (AP) or mean Percentage of Correct Parts (mPCP), hide the underlying causes of
error and are not sufficient for truly understanding the behaviour of algorithms.
Our goal is to propose a principled method for analyzing
pose algorithms’ performance. We make four contributions:
1. Taxonomization of the types of error that are typical of
the multi-instance pose estimation framework;
2. Sensitivity analysis of these errors with respect to measures of image complexity;
3. Side-by-side comparison of two leading human pose estimation algorithms highlighting key differences in behaviour
that are hidden in the average performance numbers;
4. Assessment of which types of datasets and benchmarks
may be most productive in guiding future research.
Our analysis extends beyond humans, to any object category where the location of parts is estimated along with
detections, and to situations where cluttered scenes may
contain multiple object instances. This is common in
fine-grained categorization [8], or animal behavior analysis [10, 16], where part alignment is often crucial.

369

