Blob Reconstruction Using Unilateral Second Order Gaussian Kernels with
Application to High-ISO Long-Exposure Image Denoising
Gang Wang1 , Carlos Lopez-Molina1,2 , Bernard De Baets1
KERMIT, Department of Mathematical Modelling, Statistics and Bioinformatics,
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
2
Dpto. Automatica y Computacion, Universidad Publica de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain
1

{gang.wang, bernard.debaets}@ugent.be, carlos.lopez@unavarra.es

Abstract
Blob detection and image denoising are fundamental,
and sometimes related, tasks in computer vision. In this paper, we propose a blob reconstruction method using scaleinvariant normalized unilateral second order Gaussian kernels. Unlike other blob detection methods, our method suppresses non-blob structures while also identifying blob parameters, i.e., position, prominence and scale, thereby facilitating blob reconstruction. We present an algorithm for
high-ISO long-exposure noise removal that results from the
combination of our blob reconstruction method and stateof-the-art denoising methods, i.e., the non-local means algorithm (NLM) and the color version of block-matching
and 3-D filtering (CBM3D). Experiments on standard images corrupted by real high-ISO long-exposure noise and
real-world noisy images demonstrate that our schemes incorporating the blob reduction procedure outperform both
the original NLM and CBM3D.

1. Introduction
In the computer vision community, the term blob is used
to refer to a small structure that is either brighter or darker
than the surrounding background in images [6, 9, 22]. It
is an important low-level image feature and plays a prominent role in many computer vision tasks, such as bioimagery analysis [14, 23], medical image diagnosis [25], object tracking [19, 26] and autonomous driving [8]. Numerous methods, like Laplacian of Gaussian (LoG) [15],
Difference-of-Gaussians (DoG) [15], Determinant of Hessian (DoH) [11], generalized Laplacian of Gaussian (gLoG)
[7] and Hessian-based Difference of Gaussians (HDoG)
[24], have been proposed over the past several decades.
Conventional methods produce significant responses for
lines, terminations, corners and edges, hindering the discrimination of the blobs. Moreover, very few researchers

have focused on blob reconstruction and reduction. However, on some occasions, blob reduction might be the key to
solve some computer vision tasks like the removal of blob
noise caused by high-International Organization for Standardization (ISO) sensitivity and long exposure in digital
single-lens reflex (DSLR) camera images.
Since it is a fundamental step for improving the final
performance in many applications, image denoising has
received great attention [20]. A multitude of noise reduction algorithms, such as NLM [1], CBM3D [4], deep
Gaussian conditional random field [21], multi-layer perceptron [2], external patch prior guided internal clustering [3] and Wishart fidelity nonlocal total variation [16],
have achieved considerable performance in removing white
Gaussian noise, salt-and-pepper noise, Poisson noise or
speckle noise. Unfortunately, to the best of our knowledge, very few approaches were targeted to the noise caused
by high-ISO sensitivity and long-exposure sensors [17, 18],
though it is common in DSLR camera images.
In digital photography, high ISO sensitivity and long exposure time are necessary for taking photos of objects under
low light conditions. However, the combination of high ISO
and long exposure, which maintains a high sensitivity and
raises the temperature of the sensor, simultaneously leads to
random noise and fixed pattern noise. The random noise is
conventionally termed as grain [17, 18]. The fixed pattern
noise is generally less spatially correlated than the random
noise. Therefore, in this paper, we term the noise caused
by high ISO and long exposure as blob noise, which includes the long-exposure noise and most of the fine grain
noise. Unfortunately, this kind of blob noise can hardly be
removed by conventional methods. The first reason is that
blob noise has a certain shape and occupies a certain area,
and therefore the self-similarity of image is seriously damaged. The conventional denoising algorithms can hardly
recognize whether it is a noise blob or a true visual element
of the image. A second reason is that, from the perspective
14817

