Efficient Global Illumination for Morphable Models
Andreas Schneider, Sandro Schönborn, Bernhard Egger, Lavrenti Frobeen, Thomas Vetter
University of Basel, Switzerland
{andreas.schneider,sandro.schoenborn,bernhard.egger,l.frobeen,thomas.vetter}@unibas.ch

Abstract
We propose an efficient self-shadowing illumination
model for Morphable Models. Simulating self-shadowing
with ray casting is computationally expensive which makes
them impractical in Analysis-by-Synthesis methods for object reconstruction from single images. Therefore, we propose to learn self-shadowing for Morphable Model parameters directly with a linear model. Radiance transfer
functions are a powerful way to represent self-shadowing
used within the precomputed radiance transfer framework
(PRT). We build on PRT to render deforming objects with
self-shadowing at interactive frame rates. It can be illuminated efficiently by environment maps represented with
spherical harmonics. The result is an efficient global illumination method for Morphable Models, exploiting an approximated radiance transfer. We apply the method to fitting
Morphable Model parameters to a single image of a face
and demonstrate that considering self-shadowing improves
shape reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Morphable Models [6] describe the variation of shape
and texture of objects such as faces. They allow to draw
new samples, create animations of morphing between two
instances, and to reconstruct shape, texture, and illumination from a single image by adapting model parameters
to it. Currently Morphable Models are oblivious to selfshadowing. Self-shadowing has a large effect on images.
The extent depends on how much the shape shadows itself and under which illumination it is lit. In faces, expressions and aging are deformations resulting in substantial self-shadowing. Self-shadowing comes with a significant computational cost which makes morphing and model
adaptation impractical. Being able to interact with the Morphable Model or making inverse rendering practical requires a fast self-shadowing model. In this work, we propose a method for fast and realistic self-shadowing for the
Morphable Model.
Simulating self-shadowing requires tedious sampling of

the hemisphere for every point on the surface by casting
rays [17]. We represent self-shadowing with radiance transfer functions. For a given shape PRT [20] allows to precompute them. The shape can then be lit under arbitrary
low-frequency environment maps [20], and BRDFs [8] at
interactive frame rates. This method is suitable for rigid
objects. PRT is expensive and unfeasible for rendering deforming objects like those arising from Morphable Models.
For every surface change we would have to compute the radiance transfer with ray-casting.
In the Morphable Model, shape is modelled linearly.
Similar shapes are close to each other in the shape space.
It can be expected that self-shadowing of neighbouring
shapes is similar too. As a consequence, we compute selfshadowing only for a few hundred shapes instead of expensive ray casting for every possible shape. In this work we
model the radiance transfer field of the Morphable Model.
The idea is to approximate radiance transfer directly from
shape parameters. We learn the mapping between Morphable Model shape parameters with linear regression. We
assume the object to be of diffuse reflectance to be lit by
a low-frequency environment map represented with spherical harmonics. Extension to other BRDFs and interreflections is possible. In the methods section we describe the linear approximation of the radiance transfer field of the Morphable Model. In the experiments section we show that a
linear approximation is sufficient and compare the proposed
fast Morphable Model self-shadowing model (MoMo-PRT)
to the exact and expensive PRT method. We show that reconstructing face shape from a single image is improved
with the proposed method. Figure 1 gives an overview over
the proposed approach.

1.1. Related Work
Morphable Models were first introduced by Blanz and
Vetter [6]. They model face shape and texture independently of each other. Face shape and texture are modelled as a linear combination of Principal Component Analyis (PCA) basis vectors computed from exemplar 3D face
scans. The Analysis-by-Synthesis method of Schönborn et
al. [18] uses a MCMC Metropolis Hastings method to re-

3865

