Monocular 3D Human Pose Estimation by Predicting Depth on Joints
Bruce Xiaohan Nie1∗ , Ping Wei2,1∗ , and Song-Chun Zhu1
1
Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning, and Autonomy, UCLA, USA
2
Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
xiaohan.nie@gmail.com, pingwei@xjtu.edu.cn, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
This paper aims at estimating full-body 3D human poses from monocular images of which the biggest challenge
is the inherent ambiguity introduced by lifting the 2D pose
into 3D space. We propose a novel framework focusing on
reducing this ambiguity by predicting the depth of human
joints based on 2D human joint locations and body part
images. Our approach is built on a two-level hierarchy of
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) Networks which can be
trained end-to-end. The first level consists of two components: 1) a skeleton-LSTM which learns the depth information from global human skeleton features; 2) a patch-LSTM
which utilizes the local image evidence around joint locations. The both networks have tree structure defined on the
kinematic relation of human skeleton, thus the information
at different joints is broadcast through the whole skeleton in
a top-down fashion. The two networks are first pre-trained
separately on different data sources and then aggregated in
the second layer for final depth prediction. The empirical evaluation on Human3.6M and HHOI dataset demonstrates
the advantage of combining global 2D skeleton and local
image patches for depth prediction, and our superior quantitative and qualitative performance relative to state-of-theart methods.

1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation and Objective
This paper aims at reconstructing full-body 3D human
poses from a single RGB image. Specifically we want to localize the human joints in 3D space, as shown in Fig. 1. Estimating 3D human pose is a classic task in computer vision
and serves as a key component in many human related practical applications such as intelligent surveillance, humanrobot interaction, human activity analysis, human attention
recognition,etc. There are some existing works which estimate 3D poses in constrained environment from depth im∗ Bruce Xiaohan Nie and Ping Wei are co-first authors.

Second
level

First level

LSTM

Skeleton
LSTM

Patch
LSTM

Zhead
Zelbow
Zhand
.
.
.

Figure 1. Our two-level hierarchy of LSTM for 3D pose estimation. The skeleton-LSTM and patch-LSTM captures information
from global 2D skeleton and local image patches respectively at
the first level. The global and local features are integrated in the
second level to predict the depth on joints. The 3D pose is recovered by attaching depth values onto the 2D pose. We render the
3D pose for better visualization.

ages [40, 26] or RGB images captured simultaneously at
multiple viewpoints [2, 10]. Different from them, we focus
on recognizing 3D pose directly from a single RGB image
which is easier to be captured from general environment.
Estimating 3D human poses from a single RGB image
is a challenging problem due to two main reasons: 1) the
target person in the image always exhibits large appearance and geometric variation because of different clothes,
postures, illuminations, camera viewpoints and so on. The
highly articulated human pose also brings about heavy selfocclusions. 2) even the ground-truth 2D pose is given, recovering the 3D pose is inherently ambiguous since that
there are infinite 3D poses which can be projected onto the
same 2D pose when the depth information is unknown.
One inspiration of our work is the huge progress of 2D
human pose estimation made by recent works based on deep
architectures [33, 32, 17, 37, 3]. In those works, the appearance and geometric variation are implicitly modeled in feedforward computations in networks with hierarchical deep
structure. The self-occlusion is also addressed well by filters from different layers capturing features at different s13447

