Single Shot Text Detector with Regional Attention
Pan He1 , Weilin Huang2, 3 , Tong He3 , Qile Zhu1 , Yu Qiao3 , and Xiaolin Li1
1

National Science Foundation Center for Big Learning, University of Florida
2
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Virtual Reality Technology,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
We present a novel single-shot text detector that directly
outputs word-level bounding boxes in a natural image. We
propose an attention mechanism which roughly identifies
text regions via an automatically learned attentional map.
This substantially suppresses background interference in
the convolutional features, which is the key to producing
accurate inference of words, particularly at extremely small
sizes. This results in a single model that essentially works
in a coarse-to-fine manner. It departs from recent FCNbased text detectors which cascade multiple FCN models
to achieve an accurate prediction. Furthermore, we develop a hierarchical inception module which efficiently aggregates multi-scale inception features. This enhances local
details, and also encodes strong context information, allowing the detector to work reliably on multi-scale and multiorientation text with single-scale images. Our text detector
achieves an F-measure of 77% on the ICDAR 2015 benchmark, advancing the state-of-the-art results in [18, 28].
Demo is available at: http://sstd.whuang.org/.

1. Introduction
Reading text in the wild has attracted increasing attention in computer vision community, as shown in recent
work [28, 4, 36, 38, 2, 6]. It has numerous potential applications in image retrieval, industrial automation, robot navigation and scene understanding. Recent work focuses on text
detection in natural images, which remains a challenging
problem [28, 4, 36, 38, 2]. The main difficulty lies in a vast
diversity in text scale, orientation, illumination, and font,
which often come with a highly complicated background.
Previous works in text detection have been dominated by
bottom-up approaches [3, 9, 10, 33, 8], which often contain

Figure 1: Illustrations of text attention mechanism in the
proposed one-shot text detector. Our model automatically
learns a rough text regional attention which is used to highlight text information in the convolutional features. This
makes it possible to achieve accurate word-level predictions
in one shot. Text can be precisely separated and accurately
predicted at the word level in challenging cases.

multiple sequential steps, including character or text component detection, followed by character classification or filtering, text line construction and word splitting. Character
detection and filtering steps play a key role in such bottomup approaches. Previous methods typically identify character or text component candidates using connected component based approaches (e.g., stroke width [3, 9] or extremal
region [22, 10, 33]), or sliding window methods [12, 30, 6].
However, both groups of methods commonly suffer from
two main limitations which significantly reduce their efficiencies and performance. First, text detection is built on
identification of individual characters or components, making it difficult to explore regional context information. This

3047

