Deltille Grids for Geometric Camera Calibration
Hyowon Ha†, *
†

Michal Perdoch‡, *

Hatem Alismail‡

In So Kweon†

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology

‡

Yaser Sheikh‡

Oculus Research

Abstract
The recent proliferation of high resolution cameras
presents an opportunity to achieve unprecedented levels of
precision in visual 3D reconstruction. Yet the camera calibration pipeline, developed decades ago using checkerboards, has remained the de facto standard. In this paper,
we ask the question: are checkerboards the optimal pattern for high precision calibration? We empirically demonstrate that deltille grids (regular triangular tiling) produce
the highest precision calibration of the possible tilings of
Euclidean plane. We posit that they should be the new standard for high-precision calibration and present a complete
ecosystem for calibration using deltille grids including: (1)
a highly precise corner detection algorithm based on polynomial surface fitting; (2) an indexing scheme based on polarities extracted from the fitted surfaces; and (3) a 2D coding system for deltille grids, which we refer to as DelTags,
in lieu of conventional matrix barcodes. We demonstrate
state-of-the-art performance and apply the full calibration
ecosystem through the use of 3D calibration objects for multiview camera calibration.

1. Introduction
Camera calibration is a foundational operation in 3D vision systems. Small errors incurred during the calibration of
perspective cameras are magnified by back-projection and
these errors often cascade through all successive modules
of the system. Precision is, therefore, of paramount importance. Checkerboard patterns have become the default
choice for high precision camera calibration, as they provide a uniform calibration pattern with distinct corners for
precise fiducial localization [5, 6]. An entire ecosystem has
been built around checkerboard patterns that includes efficient and precise corner detection algorithms [6, 18, 24],
robust indexing schemes when only a partial checkerboard
is visible [14, 30], and matrix barcodes for absolute localization of corners on the checkerboard [13, 27]. Yet, the
advent of higher resolution cameras and the proliferation of
multi-camera rigs calls for revisiting the merit of checkerboard patterns as the basis of the calibration pipeline.
* Equal contribution

(a) Checkerboard

(b) Deltille Grid

(c) Icosahedron

Figure 1: Regular tiling with uniform but alternating colorings. (a) Checkerboard pattern, (b) a Deltille pattern with
the same edge length as (a), (c) a 3D calibration object textured with a deltille grid.
In this paper, we advocate for the use of triangles rather
than quadrilaterals as primitives for calibration patterns, and
report significant advantages to their use. We present a complete calibration ecosystem based on deltille patterns [8] including an algorithm for high precision deltille corner detection, an indexing algorithm for partially viewed deltille
grids, and a triangular barcode system, which we refer to
as DelTags, for absolute localization of calibration objects.
This ecosystem is applied to precise multi-view camera calibration using a 3D calibration object.
A deltille is a regular triangular tiling (so-called “delta
tiles”) with a Schläfli symbol of {3, 6} [9]. It is one of only
three regular tilings of the Euclidean plane and, besides the
familiar checkerboard tiling, it is the only tiling that can be
colored with alternating colors (specifically, with a uniform
coloring of 121212) [16]. We refer to a deltille pattern with
such a coloring as a deltille grid (see Fig. 1(b)).
There are three principal advantages to deltille grids
compared to checkerboards: (1) Deltille grids achieve a
higher density of elements, for a given edge distance, compared to square or skew-rectangular tiling, as can be seen
in Fig. 1. This property allows for a greater number of
fiducials to be detected, improving localization precision
(as shown in our experiments). Furthermore, as it is an
isotropic tiling, deltille grids help reduce localization bias
when the pattern is observed under perspective transformation. (2) Each fiducial is characterized by the intersection
of three alternating edges, which offer a greater number of
constraints compared to the intersection of two edges for
checkerboards (see Fig. 2). This property results in a more
precise localization even in the fronto-parallel view, under
15344

