Is Second-order Information Helpful for Large-scale Visual Recognition?
Peihua Li1 , Jiangtao Xie1 , Qilong Wang1 , Wangmeng Zuo2
1
Dalian University of Technology, 2 Harbin Institute of Technology
peihuali@dlut.edu.cn,{jiangtaoxie,qlwang}@mail.dlut.edu.cn,wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
By stacking layers of convolution and nonlinearity, convolutional networks (ConvNets) effectively learn from lowlevel to high-level features and discriminative representations. Since the end goal of large-scale recognition is to
delineate complex boundaries of thousands of classes, adequate exploration of feature distributions is important for
realizing full potentials of ConvNets. However, state-of-theart works concentrate only on deeper or wider architecture
design, while rarely exploring feature statistics higher than
first-order. We take a step towards addressing this problem. Our method consists in covariance pooling, instead
of the most commonly used first-order pooling, of highlevel convolutional features. The main challenges involved
are robust covariance estimation given a small sample of
large-dimensional features and usage of the manifold structure of covariance matrices. To address these challenges,
we present a Matrix Power Normalized Covariance (MPNCOV) method. We develop forward and backward propagation formulas regarding the nonlinear matrix functions
such that MPN-COV can be trained end-to-end. In addition, we analyze both qualitatively and quantitatively its advantage over the well-known Log-Euclidean metric. On the
ImageNet 2012 validation set, by combining MPN-COV we
achieve over 4%, 3% and 2.5% gains for AlexNet, VGG-M
and VGG-16, respectively; integration of MPN-COV into
50-layer ResNet outperforms ResNet-101 and is comparable to ResNet-152. The source code will be available on the
project page: http://www.peihuali.org/MPN-COV.

1. Introduction
Since outperforming significantly the classical, shallow classification framework, deep convolutional networks
(ConvNets) [14] have triggered fast growing interests and
achieved great advance in large-scale visual recognition [27,
29, 9]. The ConvNet architecture [17] renders learning of
features, representations and classification in an end-to-end
The work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No. 61471082). Peihua Li is the corresponding author.

manner, superior to the classical Bag of Words (BoW) [16]
architecture where these components are separately optimized, independent of each other. The large-scale, labeled ImageNet dataset [24] and high computing capability
of GPUs contribute to successful training of increasingly
wider and deeper ConvNets.
The ConvNet model, which starts from the raw color images as inputs, learns progressively the low-level, middlelevel and high-level features from bottom, intermediate to
top convolutional (conv.) layers [33], obtaining discriminative representations connected to fully-connected (FC) layers. The gradient backprogation algorithm enables the classifier to learn decision boundaries delineating thousands of
classes in the space of large-dimensional features generally
with complex distributions. Hence, for realizing full potentials of ConvNets, it is important to adequately consider
feature distributions. However, most ConvNets concentrate
only on designing wider or deeper architectures, rarely exploring statistical information higher than first-order. In
the traditional classification paradigm where sufficient labeled data are not available, high-order methods combined
with ConvNet models pretrained on ImageNet dataset have
achieved impressive recognition accuracies [6, 31]. In the
small-scale classification scenarios, researchers have studied end-to-end methods, including DeepO2 P [11] and BCNN [22], for exploiting second-order statistics in deep
ConvNets [11, 22]. As such, one interesting problem arising naturally is whether statistics higher than first-order is
helpful for large-scale visual recognition.
In this paper, we take a step towards addressing this
problem. Motivated by [11, 22], we perform covariance
pooling of the last convolutional features rather than the
commonly used first-order pooling, producing covariance
matrices as global image representations. The main challenges involved are robust covariance estimation provided
only with a small sample of large-dimensional features and
usage of the manifold structure of the covariance matrices. Existing methods can not well address the two problems, producing unsatisfactory improvement in the largescale setting. DeepO2 P adopts Log-Euclidean (Log-E) metric [1] for exploiting geometry of covariance spaces, which

2070

