Joint Adaptive Sparsity and Low-Rankness on the Fly:
An Online Tensor Reconstruction Scheme for Video Denoising
Bihan Wen
Yanjun Li
Luke Pfister
Yoram Bresler ∗
Electrical and Computer Engineering and Coordinated Science Laboratory
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA.
{bwen3, yli145, lpfiste2, ybresler}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Recent works on adaptive sparse and low-rank signal
modeling have demonstrated their usefulness, especially in
image/video processing applications. While a patch-based
sparse model imposes local structure, low-rankness of the
grouped patches exploits non-local correlation. Applying
either approach alone usually limits performance in various low-level vision tasks. In this work, we propose a
novel video denoising method, based on an online tensor
reconstruction scheme with a joint adaptive sparse and lowrank model, dubbed SALT. An efficient and unsupervised
online unitary sparsifying transform learning method is introduced to impose adaptive sparsity on the fly. We develop
an efficient 3D spatio-temporal data reconstruction framework based on the proposed online learning method, which
exhibits low latency and can potentially handle streaming
videos. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work
that combines adaptive sparsity and low-rankness for video
denoising, and the first work of solving the proposed problem in an online fashion. We demonstrate video denoising
results over commonly used videos from public datasets.
Numerical experiments show that the proposed video denoising method outperforms competing methods.

1. Introduction
Denoising is one of the most important problems in
video processing. Despite today’s vast improvement in
camera sensors, videos captured at high speed and in low
light conditions are still corrupted by severe noise due to
high sensitivity (i.e. ISO). The problem of noise in videos
is gaining prominence with the ubiquitous use of relatively low-quality cameras in smart phones and other devices. Therefore, recovering high-quality videos from noisy
footage is of great interest as a low-level vision problem,
and also improves robustness in high-level vision tasks [13].
Video denoising presents challenges that are distinct
∗ This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation
(NSF) under grants CCF-13-20953 and IIS 14-47879.

Figure 1. A simple illustration of the SALT model for video

from other multi-frame image data, such as volumetric data
(e.g. 3D medical image) or hyperspectral data. Hyperspectral images, in particular, typically exhibit strong correlation in a small spatial window along the spectral dimension [15, 20]. In video, however, objects can move throughout or exit the scene, and such long-term correlations may
not exist [14]. Furthermore, many video denoising applications are of a streaming nature and a low-latency denoising
method is required. In this environment a denoising algorithm can depend only on a small number of frames [31].
Most video denoising methods take advantage of local
or non-local structures present in video data. Natural images and videos have local structures that are sparse or compressible in some transform domain or over certain dictionaries [11,12,21], e.g., discrete cosine transform (DCT) and
wavelets. One can exploit this fact and reduce noise by coefficient shrinkage, e.g., sparse approximation or Wiener filtering, of the compressible representation [21, 26]. Beyond
these local structures captured by sparsity, videos also contain non-local structures, such as spatial similarity and temporal redundancy. State-of-the-art video and image denoising algorithms group similar structures across the spatial
and temporal dimensions (usually within a spatio-temporal
neighborhood) and apply a denoising operation jointly to a
group. A successful approach of this nature comprises the
1241

