Neural Person Search Machines
Hao Liu 1
Bo Zhao 5

Jiashi Feng2 Zequn Jie3 Karlekar Jayashree4
Meibin Qi1 Jianguo Jiang1 Shuicheng Yan6,2

1

Hefei University of Technology 2 National University of Singapore
4
Panasonic R&D Center Singapore 5 Southwest Jiaotong University

3

Tencent AI Lab
360 AI Institute

6

{hfut.haoliu, zequn.nus}@gmail.com, elefjia@nus.edu.sg, karlekar.jayashree@sg.panasonic.com
zhaobo@my.swjtu.edu.cn, {qimeibin, jgjiang}@hfut.edu.cn, yanshuicheng@360.cn

Abstract
We investigate the problem of person search in the wild in
this work. Instead of comparing the query against all candidate regions generated in a query-blind manner, we propose to recursively shrink the search area from the whole
image till achieving precise localization of the target person, by fully exploiting information from the query and contextual cues in every recursive search step. We develop the
Neural Person Search Machines (NPSM) to implement such
recursive localization for person search. Benefiting from
its neural search mechanism, NPSM is able to selectively
shrink its focus from a loose region to a tighter one containing the target automatically. In this process, NPSM employs an internal primitive memory component to memorize
the query representation which modulates the attention and
augments its robustness to other distracting regions. Evaluations on two benchmark datasets, CUHK-SYSU Person
Search dataset and PRW dataset, have demonstrated that
our method can outperform current state-of-the-arts in both
mAP and top-1 evaluation protocols.

1. Introduction
Person search [33, 41] aims to localize a specific person matching the provided query in gallery images or video
frames. It is a new and challenging task that requires to address person detection and re-identification simultaneously.
It has many important applications in video surveillance and
security, such as cross-camera visual tracking [22] and person verification [37]. But it is difficult in real-world scenarios due to various distracting factors including large appearance variance across multiple cameras, low resolution,
cluttered background, unfavorable camera setting, etc.
To date, only a few methods have been proposed to address this task. In the pioneer work [33], Xiao et al. adopted
the end-to-end person search model based on the proposed
Online Instance Matching (OIM) loss function to jointly

(a) Search process of previous methods

(b) Search process of the NPSM

Figure 1. Demonstration of person search process for one gallery
image in previous methods and our proposed method. (a) The
search process of previous methods. The query person is one-byone compared with the detection results for one gallery image;
then the search result ranked at the first place is obtained. The
red boxes indicate the wrong matched results while the green box
represents the truly matched person. (b) The search process of the
NPSM. When a target person is searched within a whole scene, the
search scope on which attention is focused is recursively shrinking with guidance from memory of the query person’s appearance,
which is marked in red boxes.

train person detection and re-identification networks. The
recent work [41] also follows a similar pipeline. Generally,
all of the previous person search methods are based on such
a simple two-stage search strategy: first to detect all candidate persons within an image and then to perform exhaustive comparison between all possible pairs of the query and
the candidates to output a search result ranked at the first
place within the searched images. This pipeline has some
drawbacks. Firstly, if the target person has distracting factors around, e.g., another person with similar appearance,
the search accuracy would be affected by the distracting

493

