Temporal Non-Volume Preserving Approach to Facial Age-Progression and
Age-Invariant Face Recognition
Chi Nhan Duong 1,2 , Kha Gia Quach 1,2 , Khoa Luu 2 , T. Hoang Ngan Le 2 and Marios Savvides 2
1
Computer Science and Software Engineering, Concordia University, Montréal, Québec, Canada
2
CyLab Biometrics Center and the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
{chinhand, kquach, kluu, thihoanl}@andrew.cmu.edu, msavvid@ri.cmu.edu

Input I

Abstract

Additional provided familial photos If

Modeling the long-term facial aging process is extremely
challenging due to the presence of large and non-linear
variations during the face development stages. In order to
efficiently address the problem, this work first decomposes
the aging process into multiple short-term stages. Then, a
novel generative probabilistic model, named Temporal NonVolume Preserving (TNVP) transformation, is presented to
model the facial aging process at each stage. Unlike Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), which requires an empirical balance threshold, and Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBM), an intractable model, our proposed TNVP
approach guarantees a tractable density function, exact inference and evaluation for embedding the feature transformations between faces in consecutive stages. Our model
shows its advantages not only in capturing the non-linear
age related variance in each stage but also producing a
smooth synthesis in age progression across faces. Our approach can model any face in the wild provided with only
four basic landmark points. Moreover, the structure can be
transformed into a deep convolutional network while keeping the advantages of probabilistic models with tractable
log-likelihood density estimation. Our method is evaluated in both terms of synthesizing age-progressed faces
and cross-age face verification and consistently shows the
state-of-the-art results in various face aging databases, i.e.
FG-NET, MORPH, AginG Faces in the Wild (AGFW), and
Cross-Age Celebrity Dataset (CACD). A large-scale face
verification on Megaface challenge 1 is also performed to
further show the advantages of our proposed approach.

Forensic artist rendition with I and If

Ours TNVP
results
without If
Figure 1: An illustration of age progression from forensic
artist and our TNVP model. Given an input I of a subject at 34 years old [17], a forensic artist rendered his ageprogressed faces at 40s, 50s, 60s and 70s by reference to
his familial photos If . Without using If , our TNVP can
aesthetically produce his age-progressed faces.

1. Introduction

shown its potential in many applications varied from wanted
fugitives, cross-age face verification, security system to
other cosmetic studies against aging. Aesthetically synthesizing faces of a subject at different development stages is a
very challenging task. Human aging is complicated and differs from one individual to the next. Both intrinsic factors
such as heredity, gender, and ethnicity, and extrinsic factors,
i.e. environment and living styles, jointly contribute to this
process and create large aging variations between individuals. As illustrated in Figure 1, given a face of a subject at
the age of 34 [17], a set of closely related family faces has
to be provided to a forensic artist as references to generate
multiple outputs of his faces at 40s, 50s, 60s, and 70s.

Face age progression is known as the problem of aesthetically predicting individual faces at different ages. Origin from finding the missing children, age progression has

In recent years, automatic age progression has become
a prominent topic and attracted considerable interest from
the computer vision community. The conventional meth13735

