FCN-rLSTM: Deep Spatio-Temporal Neural Networks for
Vehicle Counting in City Cameras
Shanghang Zhang†‡∗, Guanhang Wu†∗ , João P. Costeira‡ , José M. F. Moura†
†
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
‡
ISR - IST, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal
{shanghaz, guanhanw}@andrew.cmu.edu, jpc@isr.ist.utl.pt, moura@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we develop deep spatio-temporal neural
networks to sequentially count vehicles from low quality
videos captured by city cameras (citycams). Citycam videos
have low resolution, low frame rate, high occlusion and
large perspective, making most existing methods lose their
efficacy. To overcome limitations of existing methods and
incorporate the temporal information of traffic video, we
design a novel FCN-rLSTM network to jointly estimate vehicle density and vehicle count by connecting fully convolutional neural networks (FCN) with long short term memory networks (LSTM) in a residual learning fashion. Such
design leverages the strengths of FCN for pixel-level prediction and the strengths of LSTM for learning complex
temporal dynamics. The residual learning connection reformulates the vehicle count regression as learning residual functions with reference to the sum of densities in each
frame, which significantly accelerates the training of networks. To preserve feature map resolution, we propose a
Hyper-Atrous combination to integrate atrous convolution
in FCN and combine feature maps of different convolution
layers. FCN-rLSTM enables refined feature representation
and a novel end-to-end trainable mapping from pixels to vehicle count. We extensively evaluated the proposed method
on different counting tasks with three datasets, with experimental results demonstrating their effectiveness and robustness. In particular, FCN-rLSTM reduces the mean absolute
error (MAE) from 5.31 to 4.21 on TRANCOS; and reduces
the MAE from 2.74 to 1.53 on WebCamT. Training process
is accelerated by 5 times on average.

1. Introduction
Many cities are being instrumented with hundreds of
surveillance cameras mounted on streets and intersections
[22, 39, 38]. They capture traffic 24 hours a day, 7 days
∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1. FCN-rLSTM network to count vehicles in traffic videos
captured by city cameras. The videos have low frame rate, low
resolution, high occlusion, and large perspective. FCN and LSTM
are combined in a residual learning framework, leveraging the
strengths of FCN for dense visual prediction and strength of LSTM
for modeling temporal correlation. Video frames are input into
FCN, and the output density maps are fed into a stack of LSTMs
to learn residual functions with reference to the sum of densities
in each frame. The global vehicle count is finally generated by
summing the learned residual and the densities.

a week, generating large scale video data. Citycam videos
can be regarded as highly versatile, being an untapped potential to develop many vision-based techniques for applications like traffic flow analysis and crowd counting. This
paper aims to extract vehicle counts from streaming realtime video captured by citycams. Vehicle count is the number of vehicles in a given region of the road [23]. As shown
in Figure 1, we select a region of fixed length in a video and
count the number of vehicles in that region.
Vehicle counting is of great importance for many realworld applications, such as urban traffic management. Important as it is, Counting vehicles from city cameras is an
extremely difficult problem faced with severe challenges (il13667

