Transferring Objects: Joint Inference of Container and Human Pose
Hanqing Wang1

Wei Liang1∗

Lap-Fai Yu2

{whqueryk@gmail.com, liangwei@bit.edu.cn, craigyu@cs.umb.edu}
1

Beijing Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology, School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2

Graphics and Virtual Environments Laboratory, Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts, Boston, USA

Abstract
Transferring objects from one place to another place is
a common task performed by human in daily life. During
this process, it is usually intuitive for humans to choose an
object as a proper container and to use an efficient pose
to carry objects; yet, it is non-trivial for current computer
vision and machine learning algorithms. In this paper, we
propose an approach to jointly infer container and human
pose for transferring objects by minimizing the costs associated both object and pose candidates. Our approach predicts which object to choose as a container while reasoning about how humans interact with physical surroundings
to accomplish the task of transferring objects given visual
input. In the learning phase, the presented method learns
how humans make rational choices of containers and poses
for transferring different objects, as well as the physical
quantities required by the transfer task (e.g., compatibility
between container and containee, energy cost of carrying
pose) via a structured learning approach. In the inference
phase, given a scanned 3D scene with different object candidates and a dictionary of human poses, our approach infers the best object as a container together with human pose
for transferring a given object.

1. Introduction
Given a set of containees (red in Figure 1(a)), which object to serve as a container, and what pose is proper to transfer those containees to another place? When transferring
an object from one place to another, a person will consider
the physical quantities during the transfer task, e.g., compatibility between container and containees, energy cost of
carrying pose, etc. In this paper, we propose an approach to
learn how humans make rational choices and reason about a
proper container (green) and a pose (orange) for transferring
objects from one place to another, as shown in Figure 1(b).
The overview of our approach is illustrated in Figure 2.

Figure 1. Which container and what pose is proper to transfer the
given objects to another place? (a) Given a scanned scene as the
input, we first detect all the objects: the objects bounded by the
red rectangle are the targeted containees and the ones bounded by
the blue rectangles are the candidate containers. (b) Our approach
infers the best object as a container (green) as well as choosing the
best pose (orange) from a pose dictionary.

Our approach takes a 3D scanned scene as the input, and
uses a learned structured SVM to analyze the compatibility
between containees, container and pose. By assuming the
human judgments are near-optimal, we formulate the presented study as a ranking problem, and infer the best container and pose to carry out the transfer task.
Solving this inference problem will allow computers to
predict and reason about how humans perform transfer tasks
in everyday environments, and hence achieve better understanding and visual perception of the affordance of our
physical surroundings.
This paper makes the following three major contributions:
• We propose a new task by joint inference of optimal
container and human pose for transferring objects from
one place to another.
• We present a ranking-based framework capable of reasoning about and selecting the best container and human pose to perform a transfer task.
• We propose a 3D scanned objects dataset, on which
we perform experiments to validate the effectiveness
of our framework, demonstrating that the performance
of our approach is close to human judgment.

∗ Corresponding author (liangwei@bit.edu.cn).

12933

