SceneNet RGB-D: Can 5M Synthetic Images
Beat Generic ImageNet Pre-training on Indoor Segmentation?
John McCormac, Ankur Handa, Stefan Leutenegger, Andrew J. Davison
Dyson Robotics Laboratory at Imperial College, Department of Computing,
Imperial College London
❢brendan.mccormac13,s.leutenegger,a.davison❣@imperial.ac.uk, handa.ankur@gmail.com

Abstract
We introduce SceneNet RGB-D, a dataset providing
pixel-perfect ground truth for scene understanding problems such as semantic segmentation, instance segmentation, and object detection. It also provides perfect camera
poses and depth data, allowing investigation into geometric computer vision problems such as optical flow, camera pose estimation, and 3D scene labelling tasks. Random sampling permits virtually unlimited scene configurations, and here we provide 5M rendered RGB-D images from 16K randomly generated 3D trajectories in synthetic layouts, with random but physically simulated object configurations. We compare the semantic segmentation performance of network weights produced from pretraining on RGB images from our dataset against generic
VGG-16 ImageNet weights. After fine-tuning on the SUN
RGB-D and NYUv2 real-world datasets we find in both
cases that the synthetically pre-trained network outperforms the VGG-16 weights. When synthetic pre-training
includes a depth channel (something ImageNet cannot natively provide) the performance is greater still. This suggests that large-scale high-quality synthetic RGB datasets
with task-specific labels can be more useful for pretraining than real-world generic pre-training such as ImageNet. We host the dataset at http://robotvault.
bitbucket.io/scenenet-rgbd.html.

1. Introduction
A primary goal of computer vision research is to give
computers the capability to reason about real-world images in a human-like manner. Recent years have witnessed
large improvements in indoor scene understanding, largely
driven by the seminal work of Krizhevsky et al. [20] and
the increasing popularity of Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs). That work highlighted the importance of large
scale labelled datasets for supervised learning algorithms.

Figure 1. Example RGB rendered scenes from our dataset.

In this work we aim to obtain and experiment with large
quantities of labelled data without the cost of manual capturing and labelling. In particular, we are motivated by tasks
which require more than a simple text label for an image.
For tasks such as semantic labelling and instance segmentation, obtaining accurate per-pixel ground truth annotations
by hand is a pain-staking task, and the majority of RGB-D
datasets have until recently been limited in scale [29, 31].
A number of recent works have started to tackle this
problem. Hua et al. provide sceneNN [16], a dataset of
100 labelled meshes of real world scenes, obtained with a
reconstruction system with objects labelled directly in 3D
for semantic segmentation ground truth. Armeni et al. [1]
produced 2D-3D-S dataset with 70K RGB-D images of 6
large-scale indoor (educational and office) areas with 270
smaller rooms, and the accompanying ground-truth annotations. Their work used 360✍ rotational scans at fixed locations rather than a free 3D trajectory. Very recently, ScanNet by Dai et al. [7] provided a large and impressive realworld RGB-D dataset consisting of 1.5K free reconstruction trajectories taken from 707 indoor spaces, with 2.5M
frames, along with dense 3D semantic annotations obtained
manually via mechanical turk.
Obtaining other forms of ground-truth data from realworld scenes, such as noise-free depth readings, precise
camera poses, or 3D models is even harder and often can
only be estimated or potentially provided with costly additional equipment (e.g. LIDAR for depth, VICON for cam-

2678

