Semantic Video CNNs through Representation Warping
Raghudeep Gadde1,3 , Varun Jampani1,4 and Peter V. Gehler1,2,3
1
2
MPI for Intelligent Systems,
University of Würzburg
3
4
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience,
NVIDIA
{raghudeep.gadde,varun.jampani,peter.gehler}@tuebingen.mpg.de
Abstract
In this work, we propose a technique to convert CNN
models for semantic segmentation of static images into
CNNs for video data. We describe a warping method that
can be used to augment existing architectures with very little extra computational cost. This module is called NetWarp and we demonstrate its use for a range of network
architectures. The main design principle is to use optical flow of adjacent frames for warping internal network
representations across time. A key insight of this work is
that fast optical flow methods can be combined with many
different CNN architectures for improved performance and
end-to-end training. Experiments validate that the proposed
approach incurs only little extra computational cost, while
improving performance, when video streams are available.
We achieve new state-of-the-art results on the CamVid and
Cityscapes benchmark datasets and show consistent improvements over different baseline networks. Our code and
models are available at http://segmentation.is.
tue.mpg.de

1. Introduction
It is fair to say that the empirical performance of semantic image segmentation techniques has seen dramatic improvement in the recent years with the onset of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) methods. The driver of this
development have been large image segmentation datasets
and the natural next challenge is to develop fast and accurate
video segmentation methods.
The number of proposed CNN models for semantic image segmentation by far outnumbers those for video data. A
naive way to use a single image CNN for video is to apply it
frame-by-frame, effectively ignoring the temporal information altogether. However, frame-by-frame application often
yields to jittering across frames, especially at object boundaries. Alternative approaches include the use of conditional
random field (CRF) models on video data to fuse the predicted label information across frames or the development
of tailored CNN architectures for videos. A separate CRF
applied to the CNN predictions has the limitation, that it
has no access to internal representations of the CNNs. Thus

the CRF operates on a representations (the labels) that has
already been condensed. Furthermore, existing CRFs for
video data are often too slow for practical purposes.
We aim to develop a video segmentation technique that
makes use of temporal coherence in video frames and reuse strong single image segmentation CNNs. For this, we
propose a conceptually simple approach to convert existing
image CNNs into video CNNs that uses only very little extra computational resources. We achieve this by ‘NetWarp’,
a neural network module that warps the intermediate CNN
representations of the previous frame to the corresponding
representations of the current frame. Specifically, the NetWarp module uses the optical flow between two adjacent
frames and then learns to transform the intermediate CNN
representations through an extra set of operations. Multiple NetWarp modules can be used at different layers of the
CNN hierarchies to warp deep intermediate representations
across time, as depicted in Fig. 1.
Our implementation of NetWarp takes only about 2.5
milliseconds to process an intermediate CNN representation of 128 × 128 with 1024 feature channels. It is fully
differentiable and can be learned using standard back propagation techniques during training of the entire CNN network. In addition, the resulting video CNN model with
NetWarp modules processes the frames in an online fashion, i.e., the system has access only to the present and previous frames when predicting the segmentation of the present
frame.
We augmented several existing state-of-the-art image
segmentation CNNs using NetWarp. On the current standard video segmentation benchmarks of CamVid [2] and
Cityscapes [7], we consistently observe performance improvements in comparison to base network that is applied
in a frame-by-frame mode. Our video CNNs also outperformed other recently proposed (CRF-)architectures and
video propagation techniques setting up a new state-of-theart on both CamVid and Cityscapes datasets.
In Section 2, we discuss the related works on video segmentation. In Section 3, we describe the NetWarp module
and how it is used to convert image CNNs into video CNNs.
In Section 4, experiments on CamVid and Cityscapes are
presented. We conclude with a discussion in Section 5.
14453

