Learning Policies for Adaptive Tracking with Deep Feature Cascades
Chen Huang
Simon Lucey
Deva Ramanan
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
chenh2@andrew.cmu.edu

{slucey,deva}@cs.cmu.edu

Pixel layer +
correlation
filters

Abstract
Visual object tracking is a fundamental and time-critical
vision task. Recent years have seen many shallow tracking methods based on real-time pixel-based correlation filters, as well as deep methods that have top performance but
need a high-end GPU. In this paper, we learn to improve the
speed of deep trackers without losing accuracy. Our fundamental insight is to take an adaptive approach, where easy
frames are processed with cheap features (such as pixel values), while challenging frames are processed with invariant but expensive deep features. We formulate the adaptive
tracking problem as a decision-making process, and learn
an agent to decide whether to locate objects with high confidence on an early layer, or continue processing subsequent
layers of a network. This significantly reduces the feedforward cost for easy frames with distinct or slow-moving
objects. We train the agent offline in a reinforcement learning fashion, and further demonstrate that learning all deep
layers (so as to provide good features for adaptive tracking) can lead to near real-time average tracking speed of
23 fps on a single CPU while achieving state-of-the-art performance. Perhaps most tellingly, our approach provides a
100X speedup for almost 50% of the time, indicating the
power of an adaptive approach.

1. Introduction
Visual Object Tracking (VOT) is a fundamental problem
in vision. We consider the single object tracking task, where
an object is identified in the first video frame and should
be tracked in subsequent frames, despite large appearance
changes due to object scaling, occlusion, and so on. VOT is
the basic building block of many time-critical systems such
as video surveillance and autonomous driving. Thus it is
important for a visual tracker to meet the strict constraints
of time and computational budget, especially on mobile or
embedded computing architectures where real-time analysis perception is often required.
Although much progress has been made in the tracking literature, there still exist tremendous challenges in

Deep convolutional layers

Template frame

Current frame

Easy frame

Agent Output at this layer
or forward to the next layer
Hard frame

Figure 1. Learning policies for adaptive tracking with deep feature
cascades. The agent decides whether we can accurately locate objects on an early layer of the cascade. This avoids the need to always wait for the last layer to make decisions, saving a substantial
amount of feed-forwarding time.

designing a tracker that has both high accuracy and high
speed. Real-time tracking methods like TLD [21] and correlation filters [19] usually rely on low-level features that
are not descriptive enough to disambiguate target and background. Several recent works [15, 27, 11, 31, 10] overcome
this limitation by learning correlation filters on hierarchical
deep features, but the real-time capacity largely fades away.
Other deep trackers [41, 30, 40] take full advantage of the
end-to-end learning, and fine-tune the deep network online
to achieve top performance. However, even on a high-end
GPU, the speed of such trackers is usually around 1 fps
which is too slow for practical use.
Two recent deep trackers [3, 18] significantly boost their
speed by deploying fixed convolutional networks without
any online learning. During tracking, the pre-trained network is simply traversed in a feed-forward pass for similarity evaluation or location regression, allowing to track objects at real-time speeds on GPU. Nevertheless, on a modern CPU, smartphone or tablet with much less computing
power, such deep trackers can only process a couple of
frames per second, far below the normal video frame-rate
30 fps. Obviously, the major computational burden comes
from the forward pass through the entire network, and can
1105

