Multi-View Dynamic Shape Refinement Using Local Temporal Integration
Vincent Leroy
Jean-Sebastien Franco
Edmond Boyer
INRIA Grenoble Rhône-Alpes, LJK - Grenoble Universities, France
{vincent.leroy,jean-sebastien.franco,edmond.boyer}@inria.fr

Abstract
We consider 4D shape reconstructions in multi-view environments and investigate how to exploit temporal redundancy for precision refinement. In addition to being beneficial to many dynamic multi-view scenarios this also enables
larger scenes where such increased precision can compensate for the reduced spatial resolution per image frame.
With precision and scalability in mind, we propose a symmetric (non-causal) local time-window geometric integration scheme over temporal sequences, where shape reconstructions are refined framewise by warping local and reliable geometric regions of neighboring frames to them. This
is in contrast to recent comparable approaches targeting a
different context with more compact scenes and real-time
applications. These usually use a single dense volumetric
update space or geometric template, which they causally
track and update globally frame by frame, with limitations
in scalability for larger scenes and in topology and precision with a template based strategy. Our templateless and
local approach is a first step towards temporal shape superresolution. We show that it improves reconstruction accuracy by considering multiple frames. To this purpose, and
in addition to real data examples, we introduce a multicamera synthetic dataset that provides ground-truth data
for mid-scale dynamic scenes.

1. Introduction
We address multi-view 4D modeling of dynamic scenes
observed with a set of color cameras. We are particularly
interested in challenging scenes, of mid-scale size (dozen
square meters or more), with possibly fast motions and multiple people. These are a prominent feature of numerous
moving surface capture scenarios, for instance sport moves
with running, combat, or dancing over a large area. Addressing this use case enhances the creative possibilities for
many applications typically associated to 3D content creation and such as sports analysis, cultural heritage preservation or virtual reality applications.
Increasing the acquisition space of multi-camera set-ups

Figure 1. A challenging dynamic scene with fast motions and a
mid-scale acquisition space, hence low image resolution on shapes
in addition to motion blur. Temporal integration helps recovering
highly detailed models.

raises challenges since it generally requires larger camera
field of views and more distant cameras, leading to lower
pixel coverage of the scene for fixed sensor resolutions. For
dynamic scenes, we expect anyway scene details to be accessible by considering observations not only over space,
with different cameras, but also over time with moving objects. This requires going beyond static per-frame reconstruction methods [40, 18, 12] and turn to temporal redundancy for detail refinement.
A number of global 4D strategies have been devised for
such task, with the general strategy of globally optimizing
a spatio-temporal scene representation, e.g. implicit variational [14], volumetric with convex relaxation [26] or graph
cut based [23]. These robust schemes optimize over all in-

3094

