Personalized Cinemagraphs using Semantic Understanding and
Collaborative Learning⇤
Tae-Hyun Oh1,2† Kyungdon Joo2† Neel Joshi3 Baoyuan Wang3 In So Kweon2 Sing Bing Kang3
1
MIT CSAIL, Boston, MA 2 KAIST, South Korea 3 Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA
Abstract
Cinemagraphs are a compelling way to convey dynamic
aspects of a scene. In these media, dynamic and still elements are juxtaposed to create an artistic and narrative
experience. Creating a high-quality, aesthetically pleasing cinemagraph requires isolating objects in a semantically meaningful way and then selecting good start times
and looping periods for those objects to minimize visual
artifacts (such a tearing). To achieve this, we present a
new technique that uses object recognition and semantic
segmentation as part of an optimization method to automatically create cinemagraphs from videos that are both
visually appealing and semantically meaningful. Given a
scene with multiple objects, there are many cinemagraphs
one could create. Our method evaluates these multiple candidates and presents the best one, as determined by a model
trained to predict human preferences in a collaborative way.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach with multiple results and a user study.

1. Introduction
With modern cameras, it is quite easy to take short, high
resolution videos or image bursts to capture the important
and interesting moments. These small, dynamic snippets of
time convey more richness than a still photo, without being as heavyweight as a longer video clip. The popularity
of this type of media has spawned numerous approaches to
capture and create them. The most straightforward methods make it as easy to capture this imagery as it is to take a
photo (e.g., Apple Live Photo). To make these bursts more
compelling and watchable, several techniques exist to stabilize (a survey can be found in [33]), or loop the video to
create video textures [29] or “cinemagraphs” [1], a media
where dynamic and still elements are juxtaposed, as a way
to focus the viewer’s attention or create an artistic effect.
The existing work in the space of cinemagraph and live
⇤ Acknowledgment We would like to thank all the participants in our
user study. We are also grateful to Jian Sun and Jinwoo Shin for the helpful
discussions. This work was mostly done while the first author was an intern
at Microsoft Research, Redmond. It was completed at KAIST with the
support of the Technology Innovation Program (No. 10048320), which is
funded by the Korean government (MOTIE).
† The first and second authors contributed equally to this work.

image capture and creation has focused on ways to ease user
burden, but these methods still require significant user control [2, 17]. There are also methods that automate the creation of the loops such that they are the most visually seamless [23], but they need user input to create aesthetic effects
such as cinemagraphs.
We propose a novel, scalable approach for automatically creating semantically meaningful and pleasing cinemagraphs. Our approach has two components: (1) a new
computational model that creates meaningful and consistent cinemagraphs using high-level semantics and (2) a new
model for predicting person-dependent interestingness and
visual appeal of a cinemagraph given its semantics. These
two problems must be considered together in order to deliver a practical end-to-end system.
For the first component, our system makes use of semantic information by using object detection and semantic segmentation to improve the visual quality of cinemagraphs.
Specifically, we reduce artifacts such as whole objects being separated into multiple looping regions, which can lead
to tearing artifacts.
In the second component, our approach uses semantic
information to generate a range of candidate cinemagraphs,
each of which involves animation of a different object, e.g.,
tree or person, and uses a machine learning approach to pick
which would be most pleasing to a user, which allows us to
present the most aesthetically pleasing and interesting cinemagraphs automatically. This is done by learning a how
to rate a cinemagraph based on interestingness and visual
appeal. Our rating function is trained using data from an
extensive user study where subjects rate different cinemagraphs. As the user ratings are highly subjective, due to
individual personal preference, we propose a collaborative
filtering approach that allows us to generalize preferences
of sub-populations to novel users. The overall pipeline of
our system is shown in Fig. 1.
In summary, our technical contributions include: (1) a
novel algorithm for creating semantically meaningful cinemagraphs, (2) a computational model that learns to rate
(i.e., predict human preference for) cinemagraphs, and (3) a
collaborative filtering approach that allows us to generalize
and predict ratings for multiple novel user populations.
15160

