Hard-Aware Deeply Cascaded Embedding
Yuhui Yuan1,3
Kuiyuan Yang2
Chao Zhang1,4∗
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception(MOE),Peking University
2
3
DeepMotion
Microsoft Research
4
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
1

yhyuan@pku.edu.cn, kuiyuanyang@deepmotion.ai, chzhang@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Riding on the waves of deep neural networks, deep metric learning has achieved promising results in various tasks
by using triplet network or Siamese network. Though the
basic goal of making images from the same category closer
than the ones from different categories is intuitive, it is hard
to optimize the objective directly due to the quadratic or
cubic sample size. Hard example mining is widely used to
solve the problem, which spends the expensive computation
on a subset of samples that are considered hard. However,
hard is defined relative to a specific model. Then complex
models will treat most samples as easy ones and vice versa
for simple models, both of which are not good for training.
It is difficult to define a model with the just right complexity and choose hard examples adequately as different samples are of diverse hard levels. This motivates us to propose
the novel framework named Hard-Aware Deeply Cascaded
Embedding(HDC) to ensemble a set of models with different complexities in cascaded manner to mine hard examples
at multiple levels. A sample is judged by a series of models with increasing complexities and only updates models
that consider the sample as a hard case. The HDC is evaluated on CARS196, CUB-200-2011, Stanford Online Products, VehicleID and DeepFashion datasets, and outperforms
state-of-the-art methods by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Deep metric embedding has attracted increasing attention for various tasks , such as visual product search [6,
18, 23, 27, 35], face recognition [21, 32, 41, 4], local image descriptor learning [9, 2, 12, 24], person/vehicle reidentification [22, 7, 43, 17], zero-shot image classification [19, 45, 5], fine-grained image classification [8, 40, 44]
and object tracking [14, 33]. Although deep metric embedding is modified into different forms for various tasks,
it shares the same objective to learn an embedding space
∗ Corresponding author : Chao Zhang.

semi-hard positive images

query image

easy positive images

hard positive images
1

Figure 1. Illustration of samples with different hard levels: A
query image is shown at the center, while other images from the
same category (Nissan 240X Coupe 1998 from CARS196 [11])
are used to form positive pairs with the query image.

that pulls similar images closer and pushes dissimilar images far away. Typically, the target embedding space is
learned with a convolutional neural network equipped with
contrastive/triplet loss.
Different from the traditional classification based models, the models of deep metric embedding consider two images (a pair) or three images (a triplet) as a training sample.
Thus N images can generate O(N 2 ) or O(N 3 ) samples. It
becomes impossible to consider all samples even for a moderate number of images. Fortunately, not all samples are
equally informative to train a model, which inspires many
recent works to mine hard examples for training [8, 24, 39].
However, the hard level of a sample is defined relative to
a model. Then samples can be divided into different hard
levels as illustrated in Figure 1. For a complex model, most
samples will be treated as easy ones, and the model converges fast but is prone to overfitting. While for a simple
model, most samples will be treated as hard ones and cannot

814

