Faster Than Real-time Facial Alignment: A 3D Spatial Transformer Network
Approach in Unconstrained Poses
Chandrasekhar Bhagavatula, Chenchen Zhu, Khoa Luu, and Marios Savvides
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA
cbhagava@andrew.cmu.edu, zcckernel@cmu.edu, kluu@andrew.cmu.edu, msavvid@ri.cmu.edu

Abstract
Facial alignment involves finding a set of landmark
points on an image with a known semantic meaning. However, this semantic meaning of landmark points is often lost
in 2D approaches where landmarks are either moved to visible boundaries or ignored as the pose of the face changes.
In order to extract consistent alignment points across large
poses, the 3D structure of the face must be considered in the
alignment step. However, extracting a 3D structure from
a single 2D image usually requires alignment in the first
place. We present our novel approach to simultaneously extract the 3D shape of the face and the semantically consistent 2D alignment through a 3D Spatial Transformer Network (3DSTN) to model both the camera projection matrix
and the warping parameters of a 3D model. By utilizing a
generic 3D model and a Thin Plate Spline (TPS) warping
function, we are able to generate subject specific 3D shapes
without the need for a large 3D shape basis. In addition, our
proposed network can be trained in an end-to-end framework on entirely synthetic data from the 300W-LP dataset.
Unlike other 3D methods, our approach only requires one
pass through the network resulting in a faster than realtime alignment. Evaluations of our model on the Annotated
Facial Landmarks in the Wild (AFLW) and AFLW2000-3D
datasets show our method achieves state-of-the-art performance over other 3D approaches to alignment.

1. Introduction
Robust face recognition and analysis are contingent upon
accurate localization of facial features. When modeling
faces, the landmark points of interest consist of points that
lie along the shape boundaries of facial features, e.g. eyes,
lips, mouth, etc. When dealing with face images collected
in the wild conditions, facial occlusion of landmarks becomes a common problem for off-angle faces. Predicting
the occlusion state of each landmarking points is one of the

Figure 1. A subject from the CMU Multi-PIE dataset [18, 19] landmarked and frontalized by our method at various poses. Landmarks found by our model are overlaid in green if they are determined to be a visible landmark and blue if self-occluded. The
non-visible regions of the face are determined by the estimated
camera center and the estimated 3D shape. Best viewed in color.

challenges due to variations of objects in faces, e.g. beards
and mustaches, sunglasses and other noisy objects. Additionally, face images of interest nowadays usually contain
off-angle poses, illumination variations, low resolutions,
and partial occlusions.
Many complex factors could affect the appearance of
a face image in real-world scenarios and providing tolerance to these factors is the main challenge for researchers.
Among these factors, pose is often the most important factor
to be dealt with. It is known that as facial pose deviates from
a frontal view, most face recognition systems have difficulty
in performing robustly. In order to handle a wide range of
pose changes, it becomes necessary to utilize 3D structural
information of faces. However, many of the existing 3D
face modeling schemes [1, 4, 42] have many drawbacks,
such as computation time and complexity. Though these
can be mitigated by using depth sensors [23] or by tracking results from frame to frame in video [39], this can cause
difficulty when they have to be applied in real-world large
13980

