Revisiting IM2GPS in the Deep Learning Era
Nam Vo
Georgia Tech

Nathan Jacobs
University of Kentucky

James Hays
Georgia Tech

namvo@gatech.edu

jacobs@cs.uky.edu

hays@gatech.edu

Abstract
Image geolocalization, inferring the geographic location
of an image, is a challenging computer vision problem with
many potential applications. The recent state-of-the-art approach to this problem is a deep image classification approach in which the world is spatially divided into cells and
a deep network is trained to predict the correct cell for a
given image. We propose to combine this approach with
the original Im2GPS approach in which a query image is
matched against a database of geotagged images and the
location is inferred from the retrieved set. We estimate the
geographic location of a query image by applying kernel
density estimation to the locations of its nearest neighbors
in the reference database. Interestingly, we find that the best
features for our retrieval task are derived from networks
trained with classification loss even though we do not use
a classification approach at test time. Training with classification loss outperforms several deep feature learning
methods (e.g. Siamese networks with contrastive of triplet
loss) more typical for retrieval applications. Our simple approach achieves state-of-the-art geolocalization accuracy
while also requiring significantly less training data.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the recognition community has broadened its focus beyond object categorization to the understanding of a litany of object, scene, material, or 3D attributes. One of the most important attributes of an image is geolocation – if we know the location of a photo,
we trivially know hundreds of additional attributes (any attribute for which a map exists, e.g. population density, average temperature, crime rate, elevation, distance to a McDonald’s, etc.). Knowing the location of an image is also
a common photo forensics task. For example, the mobile
app TraffickCam collects hotel room images to locate incidents of abuse. Unlike many computer vision tasks, computational systems typically exceed the performance of humans at image geolocalization because it is hard for humans
to have an accurate visual model of the entire world.

Figure 1. This work addresses the image geolocalization problem:
given a large set of GPS-tagged images, learn to infer the GPS
coordinate of a query image with unknown location.

Estimating the geolocation of an arbitrary photo is still a
challenging task (Figure 1). In particular, we examine the
task of predicting the location of a single photo given only
the image content with no metadata. We consider this task
at a global scale and attempt to estimate the GPS coordinates for any query image. For this task, localization can
be considered successful if the estimated location is within
a specified error threshold. Depending on the application,
this threshold could be street level (1km), city level (25km),
region level (200km), country level (750km), or continent
level (2500km). We adopt these five levels of granularity
from prior work and examine the performance of geolocalization strategies at these error thresholds.
One natural approach to the image geolocalization task
would be to to treat it like an instance retrieval task and
match local features from the query image (and perhaps
their geometric layout) to a reference database of images
with known locations [16]. Such approaches work well if
(1) there are images in the reference database with a field
of view that significantly overlaps with that of the query

2621

