The “something something” video database
for learning and evaluating visual common sense
Raghav Goyal

Samira Ebrahimi Kahou

Vincent Michalski

raghav.goyal@twentybn.com

samira.ebrahimi.kahou@gmail.com

michalskivince@gmail.com

Joanna Materzyńska

Susanne Westphal

joanna.materzynska@twentybn.com

susanne.westphal@twentybn.com

Heuna Kim

Valentin Haenel

Ingo Fruend

heuna.kim@twentybn.com

valentin.haenel@twentybn.com

ingo.fruend@twentybn.com

Peter Yianilos

Moritz Mueller-Freitag

Florian Hoppe

peter@yianilos.com

moritz.mueller-freitag@twentybn.com

florian.hoppe@twentybn.com

Christian Thurau

Ingo Bax

Roland Memisevic

christian.thurau@twentybn.com

ingo.bax@twentybn.com

roland.memisevic@twentybn.com

Abstract
Neural networks trained on datasets such as ImageNet
have led to major advances in visual object classification.
One obstacle that prevents networks from reasoning more
deeply about complex scenes and situations, and from integrating visual knowledge with natural language, like humans do, is their lack of common sense knowledge about the
physical world. Videos, unlike still images, contain a wealth
of detailed information about the physical world. However,
most labelled video datasets represent high-level concepts
rather than detailed physical aspects about actions and
scenes. In this work, we describe our ongoing collection
of the “something-something” database of video prediction
tasks whose solutions require a common sense understanding of the depicted situation. The database currently contains more than 100,000 videos across 174 classes, which
are defined as caption-templates. We also describe the challenges in crowd-sourcing this data at scale.

Figure 1: An example video from our database, captioned
“Picking [something] up”. Crowd-workers are asked to
record videos and to complete caption-templates, by providing appropriate input-text for placeholders. In this example,
the text provided for placeholder “something” is “a shoe”.
We plan to increase the complexity and sophistication of
caption-templates over time, to the degree that models succeed at making predictions.

1. Introduction
Datasets and challenges like ImageNet [3] have been major contributors to the recent dramatic improvements in neural network based object recognition [14, 30, 8], as well as
to improvements on a variety of other vision tasks thanks to
transfer learning (eg., [4, 27, 19]).
Despite their representational power, neural networks
trained on still images ignore of a wide range of scene

aspects, many of which are could be inferable from
video. These include 3-D geometry (which can reveal itself through multiple views [7]), material properties (such
as deformability, elasticity, stiffness, etc.), articulation, affordances [34] or intuitive physics (for example, occlusion/object permanence, gravity).
Motion patterns extracted from a video are not only ca-

5842

