Towards 3D Human Pose Estimation in the Wild: a Weakly-supervised Approach
Xingyi Zhou1,2 , Qixing Huang2 , Xiao Sun3 , Xiangyang Xue1 , Yichen Wei3
1
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
The University of Texas at Austin
3
Microsoft Research
{zhouxy13,xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn, huangqx@cs.utexas.edu, {xias, yichenw}@microsoft.com

Abstract
In this paper, we study the task of 3D human pose estimation in the wild. This task is challenging due to lack
of training data, as existing datasets are either in the wild
images with 2D pose or in the lab images with 3D pose.
We propose a weakly-supervised transfer learning
method that uses mixed 2D and 3D labels in a unified deep
neutral network that presents two-stage cascaded structure.
Our network augments a state-of-the-art 2D pose estimation sub-network with a 3D depth regression sub-network.
Unlike previous two stage approaches that train the two
sub-networks sequentially and separately, our training is
end-to-end and fully exploits the correlation between the
2D pose and depth estimation sub-tasks. The deep features
are better learnt through shared representations. In doing
so, the 3D pose labels in controlled lab environments are
transferred to in the wild images. In addition, we introduce
a 3D geometric constraint to regularize the 3D pose prediction, which is effective in the absence of ground truth depth
labels. Our method achieves competitive results on both 2D
and 3D benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation problem has been heavily studied in computer vision. It has numerous important applications in human-computer interaction, virtual reality, and
action recognition. Existing research works falls into two
categories: 2D pose estimation and 3D pose estimation.
Thanks to the availability of large-scale 2D annotated human poses and the emergence of deep neural networks, the
2D human pose estimation problem has gained tremendous
success recently [17, 29, 11, 4, 7]. State-of-the-art techniques are able to achieve accurate predictions across a wide
range of settings (e.g., on images in the wild [2]).
In contrast, advance in 3D human pose estimation re-

Indoor images
with 3D annotation

In-the-wild images
with 2D annotation

CNN
In-the-wild image

3D pose

Figure 1. A schematic illustration of our method: transferring 3D
annotation from indoor images to in-the-wild images. Top (Training): Both indoor images with 3D annotation (Right) and in-thewild images with 2D annotation (Left) are used to train the deep
neural network. Bottom (Testing): The learned network can predict the 3D pose of the human in in-the-wild images.

mains limited. This is partially due to the ambiguity of recovering 3D information from single images, and partially
due to the lack of large scale 3D pose annotation dataset.
Specifically, there is not yet a comprehensive 3D human
pose dataset for images in the wild. The commonly used
3D datasets [12, 24] were captured by mocap systems in
controlled lab environments. Deep neural networks [13, 33]
trained on these datasets do not generalize well to other environments, such as in the wild.
1398

