Adversarial Image Perturbation for Privacy Protection
A Game Theory Perspective
Seong Joon Oh

Mario Fritz

Bernt Schiele

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
{joon,mfritz,schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
Users like sharing personal photos with others through
social media. At the same time, they might want to make
automatic identification in such photos difficult or even impossible. Classic obfuscation methods such as blurring are
not only unpleasant but also not as effective as one would
expect [28, 37, 18]. Recent studies on adversarial image
perturbations (AIP) suggest that it is possible to confuse recognition systems effectively without unpleasant artifacts.
However, in the presence of counter measures against AIPs
[7], it is unclear how effective AIP would be in particular when the choice of counter measure is unknown. Game
theory provides tools for studying the interaction between
agents with uncertainties in the strategies. We introduce a
general game theoretical framework for the user-recogniser
dynamics, and present a case study that involves current
state of the art AIP and person recognition techniques. We
derive the optimal strategy for the user that assures an upper bound on the recognition rate independent of the recogniser’s counter measure. Code is available at https:
//goo.gl/hgvbNK.

1. Introduction
People nowadays share massive amounts of personal photos
through social media. Personal photos contain rich private
information, e.g. about family members, travel destinations,
and political activities. Together with recent developments
in computer vision techniques [4, 11, 8, 27, 34], this results in increasing concerns that malicious entities employing computer vision technologies could extract private information from visual data.
Classical obfuscation techniques, such as face blurring
and pixellisation, is not only unpleasant but also ineffective
against convnet-based recognisers [28, 37, 18].
There have been recent studies on adversarial image perturbations (AIP): carefully crafted additive perturbations on
the image that confuses a convnet while being nearly invis-

Figure 1: A game between a social media user and a recogniser over a photo. The user perturbs the image using
orange strategy, trying to confuse the recogniser. The recogniser chooses blue strategy as a counter measure. They
do not know which strategy is picked by the other.

ible to human eyes [36, 6, 21, 20]. AIPs are indeed promising as obfuscation techniques.
However, it remains a question whether AIPs are still
effective when counter measures are taken. For example,
[7] proposed simple image processing tactics to counter the
AIP effects (e.g. blurring by small amount). If furthermore
the particular choice of counter measure is unknown, the
best strategy is not obvious for the user.
Game theory provides useful tools for analysis when
there exist uncertainties in the strategies for each player.
We present a game theoretical framework to describe a system in which the user and recogniser strive for antagonistic
goals: dis-/enabling recognition. This framework makes it
possible to derive guarantees on the user’s level of privacy,
independent of the recogniser’s counter measure, from an
explicitly formulated set of assumptions. We include a case
study of a person identification game, deriving the user’s
privacy guarantee with respect to the current state of the art
AIP and person recognition methods.
This paper showcases the utility of game theory in understanding the user-recogniser dynamics. The framework
can be extended beyond the particular settings considered.
We believe this framework will further aid user-recogniser
analyses in more diverse tasks and setups.
11482

