Temporal Context Network for Activity Localization in Videos
Xiyang Dai1

Bharat Singh1
Guyue Zhang2
1
University of Maryland
College Park, MD

guyuezhang13, chenyq@fudan.edu.cn

xdai, bharat, lsd@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
We present a Temporal Context Network (TCN) for precise temporal localization of human activities. Similar
to the Faster-RCNN architecture, proposals are placed at
equal intervals in a video which span multiple temporal
scales. We propose a novel representation for ranking these
proposals. Since pooling features only inside a segment is
not sufficient to predict activity boundaries, we construct
a representation which explicitly captures context around
a proposal for ranking it. For each temporal segment inside a proposal, features are uniformly sampled at a pair
of scales and are input to a temporal convolutional neural
network for classification. After ranking proposals, nonmaximum suppression is applied and classification is performed to obtain final detections. TCN outperforms stateof-the-art methods on the ActivityNet dataset and the THUMOS14 dataset.

1. Introduction
Recognizing actions and activities in videos is a long
studied problem in computer vision [2, 10, 3]. An action
is defined as a short duration movement such as jumping,
throwing, kicking. In contrast, activities are more complex.
An activity has a beginning, which is triggered by an action or an event, which involves multiple actions, and an
end, which involves another action or an event. For example, an activity like “assembling a furniture” could start
with unpacking boxes, continue by putting different parts
together and end when the furniture is ready. Since videos
can be arbitrarily long, they may contain multiple activities
and therefore, temporal localization is needed. Detecting
human activities in videos has several applications in content based video retrieval for web search engines, reducing
the effort required to browse through lengthy videos, monitoring suspicious activity in video surveillance etc. While
localizing objects in images is an extensively studied problem, localizing activities has received less attention. This is
primarily because performing localization in videos is com-

Larry S. Davis1
Yan Qiu Chen2
2
Fudan University
Shanghai, China

putationally expensive [6] and well annotated large datasets
[5] were unavailable until recently.
Current object detection pipelines have three major components - proposal generation, object classification and
bounding box refinement [25]. In [6, 29] this pipeline was
adopted for deep learning based action detection as well.
LSTM is used to embed a long video into a single feature
vector which is then used to score different segment proposals in the video [6]. While a LSTM is effective for capturing local context in a video [31], learning to predict the start
and end positions for all activity segments using the hidden
state of a LSTM is challenging. In fact, in our experiments
we show that even a pre-defined set of proposals at multiple scales obtains better recall than the temporal segments
predicted by a LSTM on the ActivityNet dataset.
In [29], a ranker was learned on multiple segments of a
video based on overlap with ground truth segments. However, a feature representation which does not integrate information from a larger temporal scale than a proposal lacks
sufficient information to predict whether a proposal is a
good candidate or not. For example, in Figure 1, the red
and green solid segments are two proposals which are both
completely included within an activity. While the red segment is a good candidate, the green is not. So, although a
single scale representation for a segment captures sufficient
information for recognition, it is inadequate for detection.
To capture information for predicting activity boundaries,
we propose to explicitly sample features both at the scale of
the proposal and also at a higher scale while ranking proposals. We experimentally demonstrate that this has significant impact on performance when ranking temporal activity
proposals.
By placing proposals at equal intervals in a video which
span multiple temporal scales, we construct a set of proposals which are then ranked using features sampled from a
pair of scales. A temporal convolution network is applied
over these features to learn background and foreground
probabilities. The top ranked proposals are then input to a
classification network which assigns individual class probabilities to each segment proposal.

5793

