Interleaved Group Convolutions
Ting Zhang1 Guo-Jun Qi2 Bin Xiao1 Jingdong Wang1
1
Microsoft Research 2 University of Central Florida
{tinzhan, Bin.Xiao, jingdw}@microsoft.com

Abstract
In this paper, we present a simple and modularized neural network architecture, named interleaved group convolutional neural networks (IGCNets). The main point lies
in a novel building block, a pair of two successive interleaved group convolutions: primary group convolution and
secondary group convolution. The two group convolutions
are complementary: (i) the convolution on each partition in
primary group convolution is a spatial convolution, while
on each partition in secondary group convolution, the convolution is a point-wise convolution; (ii) the channels in the
same secondary partition come from different primary partitions. We discuss one representative advantage: Wider
than a regular convolution with the number of parameters
and the computation complexity preserved. We also show
that regular convolutions, group convolution with summation fusion , and the Xception block are special cases of interleaved group convolutions. Empirical results over standard benchmarks, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, SVHN and ImageNet demonstrate that our networks are more efficient in
using parameters and computation complexity with similar
or higher accuracy.

1. Introduction
Architecture design in deep convolutional neural networks has been attracting increasing interests. The basic design purpose is efficient in terms of computation
and parameter with high accuracy. Various design dimensions have been considered, ranging from small kernels [15, 35, 33, 4, 14], identity mappings [10] or general
multi-branch structures [38, 42, 22, 34, 35, 33] for easing
the training of very deep networks, and multi-branch structures for increasing the width [34, 4, 14].
Our interest is to reduce the redundancy of convolutional kernels. The redundancy comes from two extents:
the spatial extent and the channel extent. In the spatial extent, small kernels are developed, such as 3 × 3, 3 × 1,
1 × 3 [35, 29, 17, 26, 18]. In the channel extent, group convolutions [42, 40] and channel-wise convolutions or separa-

guojun.qi@ucf.edu

ble filters [28, 4, 14], have been studied. Our work belongs
to the kernel design in the channel extent.
In this paper, we present a novel network architecture,
which is a stack of interleaved group convolution (IGC)
blocks. Each block contains two group convolutions: primary group convolution and secondary group convolution,
which are conducted on primary and secondary partitions,
respectively. The primary partitions are obtained by simply
splitting input channels, e.g., L partitions with each containing M channels, and there are M secondary partitions,
each containing L channels that lie in different primary partitions. The primary group convolution performs the spatial convolution over each primary partition separately, and
the secondary group convolution performs a 1 × 1 convolution (point-wise convolution) over each secondary partition, blending the channels across partitions outputted by
primary group convolution. Figure 1 illustrates the interleaved group convolution block.
It is known that a group convolution is equivalent to a
regular convolution with sparse kernels: there is no connections across the channels in different partitions. Accordingly, an IGC block is equivalent to a regular convolution
with the kernel composed from the product of two sparse
kernels, resulting in a dense kernel. We show that under
the same number of parameters/computation complexity, an
IGC block (except the extreme case that the number of primary partitions, L, is 1) is wider than a regular convolution
with the spatial kernel size same to that of primary group
convolution. Empirically, we also observe that a network
built by stacking IGC blocks under the same computation
complexity and the same number of parameters performs
better than the network with regular convolutions.
We study the relations with existing related modules. (i)
The regular convolution and group convolution with summation fusion [40, 42, 38], are both interleaved group convolutions, where the kernels are in special forms and are
fixed in secondary group convolution. (ii) An IGC block
in the extreme case where there is only one partition in the
secondary group convolution, is very close to Xception [4].
Our main contributions are summarized as follows.
• We present a novel building block, interleaved group

4373

