From Square Pieces to Brick Walls:
The Next Challenge in Solving Jigsaw Puzzles
Shir Gur, Ohad Ben-Shahar
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
{gursh, ben-shahar}@cs.bgu.ac.il

Abstract
Research into computational jigsaw puzzle solving, an
emerging theoretical problem with numerous applications,
has focused in recent years on puzzles that constitute square
pieces only. In this paper we wish to extend the scientific scope of appearance-based puzzle solving and consider
”brick wall” jigsaw puzzles – rectangular pieces who may
have different sizes, and could be placed next to each other
at arbitrary offset along their abutting edge – a more explicit configuration with properties of real world puzzles.
We present the new challenges that arise in brick wall puzzles and address them in two stages. First we concentrate
on the reconstruction of the puzzle (with or without missing
pieces) assuming an oracle for offset assignments. We show
that despite the increased complexity of the problem, under
these conditions performance can be made comparable to
the state-of-the-art in solving the simpler square piece puzzles, and thereby argue that solving brick wall puzzles may
be reduced to finding the correct offset between two neighboring pieces. We then move on to focus on implementing
the oracle computationally using a mixture of dissimilarity
metrics and correlation matching. We show results on various brick wall puzzles and discuss how our work may start
a new research path for the puzzle solving community.

1. Introduction
Although jigsaw puzzles were first introduced in 1760 as
a children’s game to teach geography [28], nowadays they
abstract a range of computational problems in which a set of
unordered fragments should be organized into visual or geometrical wholes. Indeed, applications are found in fields
as diverse as archeology [4, 13, 7], biology [17], reconstructing of shredded documents or photographs [1, 16], and
learning visual representations [9, 18]. Theoretical work,
however, has focused on square pieces only and toward
that end various square piece puzzle reconstruction methods

Figure 1. The structure of a “brick wall” jigsaw puzzle and its solution. A brick wall puzzle is based on organizing an unordered set
of rectangular pieces into a coherent image. The spatial placement
is in lines, where each brick (i.e. piece) can have arbitrary offset
relative to its neighbors perpendicular to the offset direction. The
piece numbers in this sketch replaces the pictorial content for illustration only. The shaded pieces represent the possibility of missing
pieces in the puzzle (both in the input and output).

have been proposed over the years where common to many
approaches is a basic operation of seeking the unassigned
piece that should link to an existing piece by finding its best
neighbors according to some affinity function that examines
appearance differences at interfacing boundaries [23, 6, 21],
or matching contours [16, 10, 24, 31, 30, 14]. Such an operation can repeat itself until a proper solution is achieved and
all parts are put in place, but this somewhat naive greedy approach is likely to fail because often “best neighbors” are
false-positives, a result of the occasionally unpredictable
continuation between true neighbors and the properties of
the metrics used to predict it. To alleviate this problem various stronger (often less local) conditions have been proposed, from the best buddies condition by Pomeranz et al.
[23], through loop constraints by Son et al. [26], to treebased reassembly constraints by Gallagher et al. [11] and
quadratic programming by Andaló et al. [3] (to name but
a few). These heuristics serve to avoid checking all possible permutations of piece placements in order to examine
which one scores the best according to some global measure. Indeed, the problem was proved NP-complete [8] and
the race has been focusing on improving result accuracy.
The latter now appears to saturate at over 95% reconstruction accuracy in some cases while problem sizes (i.e. num-

4029

