Parallel Tracking and Verifying: A Framework for Real-Time and High
Accuracy Visual Tracking
Heng Fan

Haibin Ling∗

Meitu HiScene Lab, HiScene Information Technologies, Shanghai, China
Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA USA
{hengfan,hbling}@temple.edu

Abstract
Being intensively studied, visual tracking has seen great
recent advances in either speed (e.g., with correlation filters) or accuracy (e.g., with deep features). Real-time and
high accuracy tracking algorithms, however, remain scarce.
In this paper we study the problem from a new perspective
and present a novel parallel tracking and verifying (PTAV)
framework, by taking advantage of the ubiquity of multithread techniques and borrowing from the success of parallel tracking and mapping in visual SLAM. Our PTAV framework typically consists of two components, a tracker T and
a verifier V, working in parallel on two separate threads.
The tracker T aims to provide a super real-time tracking
inference and is expected to perform well most of the time;
by contrast, the verifier V checks the tracking results and
corrects T when needed. The key innovation is that, V does
not work on every frame but only upon the requests from
T ; on the other end, T may adjust the tracking according
to the feedback from V. With such collaboration, PTAV enjoys both the high efficiency provided by T and the strong
discriminative power by V. In our extensive experiments on
popular benchmarks including OTB2013, OTB2015, TC128
and UAV20L, PTAV achieves the best tracking accuracy among all real-time trackers, and in fact performs even better than many deep learning based solutions. Moreover, as
a general framework, PTAV is very flexible and has great
rooms for improvement and generalization.

1. Introduction
1.1. Background
Visual object tracking plays a crucial role in computer
vision and has a variety of applications such as robotics, visual surveillance, human-computer interaction and so forth
[36, 41]. Despite great successes in recent decades, robust
∗ Corresponding author.

real-time

Figure 1. Speed and accuracy plot of state-of-the-art visual trackers on OTB2013 [39]. For better illustration, only those trackers
with accuracy higher than 0.75 are reported. The proposed PTAV
algorithm achieves the best accuracy among all real-time trackers.

visual tracking still remains challenging due to many factors
including object deformation, occlusion, rotation, illumination change, pose variation, etc. An emerging trend toward
improving tracking accuracy is to use deep learning-based
techniques (e.g., [9, 28, 33, 38]) for their strong discriminative power, as shown in [33]. Such algorithms, unfortunately, often suffer from high computational burden and hardly
run in real-time (see Fig. 1).
Along a somewhat orthogonal direction, researchers
have been proposing efficient visual trackers (e.g., [5, 7, 16,
43]), represented by the series of trackers based on correlation filters. While easily running at real-time, these trackers
are usually less robust than deep learning-based approaches.
Despite the above mentioned progresses in either speed
or accuracy, real-time high quality tracking algorithms remain scarce. A natural way is to seek a trade-off between
speed and accuracy, e.g., [3, 29]. In this paper we work toward this goal, but from a novel perspective as following.

1.2. Motivation
Our key idea is to decompose the original tracking task
into two parallel but collaborative ones, one for fast tracking
and the other for accurate verification. Our work is inspired
by the following observations or related works:
Motivation 1. When tracking a target from visual input,

5486

