Side Information in Robust Principal Component Analysis: Algorithms and
Applications
Niannan Xue
Imperial College London, UK
n.xue15@imperial.ac.uk

Yannis Panagakis
Imperial College London, UK
Middlesex University, UK

Stefanos Zafeiriou
Imperial College London, UK
s.zafeiriou@imperial.ac.uk∗

i.panagakis@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Robust Principal Component Analysis (RPCA) aims at
recovering a low-rank subspace from grossly corrupted
high-dimensional (often visual) data and is a cornerstone in
many machine learning and computer vision applications.
Even though RPCA has been shown to be very successful in solving many rank minimisation problems, there are
still cases where degenerate or suboptimal solutions are obtained. This is likely to be remedied by taking into account
of domain-dependent prior knowledge. In this paper, we
propose two models for the RPCA problem with the aid of
side information on the low-rank structure of the data. The
versatility of the proposed methods is demonstrated by applying them to four applications, namely background subtraction, facial image denoising, face and facial expression
recognition. Experimental results on synthetic and five real
world datasets indicate the robustness and effectiveness of
the proposed methods on these application domains, largely
outperforming six previous approaches.

1. Introduction
Principal Component Pursuit (PCP) as proposed in [7, 8]
and its variants e.g. [2, 3, 5, 25, 33, 36] are the current
methods of choice for recovering a low-rank subspace from
a set of grossly corrupted and possibly incomplete highdimensional data. PCP employs the nuclear norm and the
l1 norm (convex surrogates of the rank and sparsity constraints, respectively) in order to approximate the original
l0 norm regularised rank minimisation problem. In particular, under certain conditions (such as the restricted isometry
property [6]), the relaxation gap is zero and rank minimisation is equivalent to nuclear norm minimisation. However,
these conditions rarely hold for real-world visual data and
PCP thus occasionally yields degenerate or suboptimal so∗ The work of Stefanos Zafeiriou was partially funded by EPSRC
project EP/N007743/1 (FACER2VM).

lutions. To alleviate this, it is advantageous for PCP to take
into account of domain-dependent prior knowledge [13],
i.e. side information [32].
The use of side information has been studied in the context of matrix completion [9, 34] and compressed sensing
[17]. Recently, side information has been applied to the
PCP framework in the noiseless case [10, 21]. In particular, an error-free orthogonal column space was used to drive
a PCP-based deformable image alignment algorithm [21].
More generally, Chiang et al. [10] used both a column and
a row space as side information and the algorithm had to recover the weights of their interaction. The main limitation
of such methods is that they require a set of clean, noisefree data samples in order to determine the column and/or
row spaces of the low-rank component. Clearly, these data
are are difficult to find in practice.
In this paper, we investigate the idea of using a noisy
approximation of the low-rank component to guide PCP.
Knowledge regarding the low-rank component, albeit noisy,
is available in many applications. In background subtraction, we may find some frames of the video that do not contain changes and therefore may be used to accurately estimate the background. Another example concerns the problem of disentangling identity and expression components in
expressive faces, where the low-rank component is roughly
similar to the neutral face. Note that side information which
has the same form as the source is already subject to widespread usage. Watermark detection methods require a reference image to identify ownership [11]. Automated photo
tagging explores visually similar social images [31]. Locality preserving projection can be enhanced by exploiting
similar pairs of patterns [1]. Spatial and temporal correlation can improve signal recovery algorithms in compressive
imaging [26]. In content-based image retrieval, historical
feedback log data can help retrieve semantically relevant
images [35]. Low-resolution images can help adapt a highresolution compressive sensing system [29]. Near-accurate
fingerprint or DNA can be used as side information to hack
a biometric authentication system [14].
14317

