Encouraging LSTMs to Anticipate Actions Very Early
Mohammad Sadegh Aliakbarian1,3 , Fatemeh Sadat Saleh1,3 , Mathieu Salzmann2 , Basura Fernando1 ,
Lars Petersson1,3 , Lars Andersson3
1
Australian National University, 2 CVLab, EPFL, Switzerland, 3 Smart Vision Systems, CSIRO
firstname.lastname@data61.csiro.au, mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch, basura.fernando@anu.edu.au

Abstract
In contrast to the widely studied problem of recognizing an action given a complete sequence, action anticipation aims to identify the action from only partially available
videos. As such, it is therefore key to the success of computer vision applications requiring to react as early as possible, such as autonomous navigation. In this paper, we propose a new action anticipation method that achieves high
prediction accuracy even in the presence of a very small
percentage of a video sequence. To this end, we develop a
multi-stage LSTM architecture that leverages context-aware
and action-aware features, and introduce a novel loss function that encourages the model to predict the correct class
as early as possible. Our experiments on standard benchmark datasets evidence the benefits of our approach; We
outperform the state-of-the-art action anticipation methods
for early prediction by a relative increase in accuracy of
22.0% on JHMDB-21, 14.0% on UT-Interaction and 49.9%
on UCF-101.

1. Introduction
Understanding actions from videos is key to the success
of many real-world applications, such as autonomous navigation and sports analysis. While great progress has been
made to recognize actions from complete sequences [16, 38,
7, 9, 30, 41, 31, 10, 2] in the past decade, action anticipation [25, 26, 24, 45, 32, 33, 21], which aims to predict the
observed action as early as possible, has become a popular research problem only recently. Anticipation is crucial
in scenarios where one needs to react before the action is
finalized, such as to avoid hitting pedestrians with an autonomous car, or to forecast dangerous situations in surveillance scenarios.
The key difference between recognition and anticipation
lies in the fact that the methods tackling the latter should
predict the correct class as early as possible, given only a
few frames from the beginning of the video sequence. To
address this, several approaches have introduced new train-

Figure 1. Overview of our approach. Given a small portion
of sequential data, our approach is able to predict the action category with very high performance. For instance, in UCF-101, our
approach anticipates actions with more than 80% accuracy given
only the first 1% of the video. To achieve this, we design a a
model that leverages action- and context-aware features together
with a new loss function that encourages the model to make correct predictions as early as possible.

ing losses encouraging the score [32] or the rank [21] of the
correct action to increase with time, or penalizing increasingly strongly the classification mistakes [11]. In practice,
however, the effectiveness of these losses remains limited
for very early prediction, such as from 1% of the sequence.
In this paper, we introduce a novel loss that encourages
making correct predictions very early. Specifically, our loss
models the intuition that some actions, such as running and
high jump, are highly ambiguous after seeing only the first
few frames, and false positives should therefore not be penalized too strongly in the early stages. By contrast, we
would like to predict a high probability for the correct class
as early as possible, and thus penalize false negatives from
the beginning of the sequence. Our experiments demonstrate that, for a given model, our new loss yields significantly higher accuracy than existing ones on the task of
early prediction.
In particular, in this paper, we also contribute a novel
multi-stage Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) architecture for action anticipation. This model effectively extracts
and jointly exploits context- and action-aware features (see

280

