Deep Occlusion Reasoning
for Multi-Camera Multi-Target Detection
Pierre Baqué1
François Fleuret1,2
Pascal Fua1
1
CVLab, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
2
IDIAP, Martigny, Switzerland
{firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch

Abstract
People detection in single 2D images has improved
greatly in recent years. However, comparatively little
of this progress has percolated into multi-camera multipeople tracking algorithms, whose performance still degrades severely when scenes become very crowded. In this
work, we introduce a new architecture that combines Convolutional Neural Nets and Conditional Random Fields to
explicitly model those ambiguities. One of its key ingredients are high-order CRF terms that model potential occlusions and give our approach its robustness even when many
people are present. Our model is trained end-to-end and we
show that it outperforms several state-of-the-art algorithms
on challenging scenes.

1. Introduction
Multi-Camera Multi-Target Tracking (MCMT) algorithms have long been effective at tracking people in complex environments. Before the emergence of Deep Learning, some of the most effective methods relied on simple
background subtraction, geometric and sparsity constraints,
and occlusion reasoning [12, 6, 1]. Given the limited discriminative power of background subtraction, they work
surprisingly well as long as there are not too many people in
the scene. However, their performance degrades as people
density increases, making the background subtraction used
as input less and less informative.
Since then, Deep Learning based people detection algorithms in single images [23, 19, 28] have become among the
most effective [28]. However, their power has only rarely
been leveraged for MCMT purposes. Some recent algorithms, such as the one of [27], attempt to do so by first
detecting people in single images, projecting the detections
into a common reference-frame, and finally putting them
into correspondence to achieve 3D localization and eliminate false positives. As shown in Fig. 1, this is prone to errors for two reasons. First, projection in the reference frame

is inaccurate, especially when the 2D detector has not been
specifically trained for that purpose. Second, the projection
is usually preceded by Non Maximum Suppression (NMS)
on the output of the 2D detector, which does not take into
account the multi-camera geometry to resolve ambiguities.
Ideally, the power of Deep Learning should be combined
with occlusion reasoning much earlier in the detection process than is normally done. To this end, we designed a joint
CNN/CRF model whose posterior distribution can be approximated by Mean-Field inference using standard differentiable operations. Our model is trainable end-to-end and
can be used in both supervised and unsupervised scenarios.
More specifically, we reason on a discretized ground
plane in which detections are represented by boolean variables. The CRF is defined as a sum of innovative highorder terms whose values are computed by measuring the
discrepancy between the predictions of a generative model
that accounts for occlusions and those of a CNN that can infer that certain image patches look like specific body parts.
To these terms, we add unary and pairwise ones to increase
robustness and model physical repulsion constraints.
To summarize, our contribution is a joint CNN/CRF
pipeline that performs detection for MCMT purposes in
such a way that NMS is not required. Because it explicitly models occlusions, our algorithm operates robustly even
in crowded scenes. Furthermore, it outputs probabilities of
presence on the ground plane, as opposed to binary detections, which can then be linked into full trajectories using a
simple flow-based approach [6].

2. Related Work
In this section, we first discuss briefly recent Deep
Learning approaches to people detection in single images.
We then move on to multi-image algorithms and techniques
for combining CNNs and CRFs.

2.1. Deep Monocular Detection
As in many other domains, CNN-based algorithms [23,
19, 22] have become very good for people detection in sin-

271

