Learning Background-Aware Correlation Filters for Visual Tracking
Hamed Kiani Galoogahi1 , Ashton Fagg2 and Simon Lucey1
1
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
2
SAIVT Lab, Queensland University of Technology
hamedk@andrew.cmu.edu ashton@fagg.id.au slucey@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Correlation Filters (CFs) have recently demonstrated excellent performance in terms of rapidly tracking objects
under challenging photometric and geometric variations.
The strength of the approach comes from its ability to efficiently learn - on the fly - how the object is changing
over time. A fundamental drawback to CFs, however, is
that the background of the target is not modeled over time
which can result in suboptimal performance. Recent tracking algorithms have suggested to resolve this drawback by
either learning CFs from more discriminative deep features (e.g. DeepSRDCF [9] and CCOT [11]) or learning
complex deep trackers (e.g. MDNet [28] and FCNT [33]).
While such methods have been shown to work well, they
suffer from high complexity: extracting deep features or
applying deep tracking frameworks is very computationally expensive. This limits the real-time performance of
such methods, even on high-end GPUs. This work proposes a Background-Aware CF based on hand-crafted features (HOG [6]) that can efficiently model how both the
foreground and background of the object varies over time.
Our approach, like conventional CFs, is extremely computationally efficient- and extensive experiments over multiple tracking benchmarks demonstrate the superior accuracy
and real-time performance of our method compared to the
state-of-the-art trackers.

1. Introduction
Correlation Filters (CFs) have been a widely used framework for visual object tracking [23, 37, 10, 13], due to
their superior computation and fair robustness to photometric and geometric variations. CF trackers can learn and detect quickly in the frequency domain [20], the most notable
example being the MOSSE tracker with the tracking speed
of ⇠700 frames per second [3]. Furthermore, these trackers learn “on-the-fly”. The approach quickly models how
an object varies visually over time by updating the tracker
when the next frames become available. Such per frame

,
,,

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Traditional CFs discard the background patches, and
instead learn from shifted patches of the cropped target. This may
result to suboptimal results. (b) The BACF, however, exploits
all background patches as negative examples for learning a filter
which is more discriminative to background clutter.

adaptation offers robust tracking under challenging circumstances such as motion blur, scaling and lighting variation.
Learning CF trackers in the frequency domain, however,
comes at the high cost of learning from circular shifted examples of the foreground target. These shifted patches are
implicitly generated through the circulant property of correlation in the frequency domain and are used as negative
examples for training the filter [20]. All shifted patches are
plagued by circular boundary effects and are not truly representative of negative patches in real-world scenes [17].
These boundary effects have been shown to have a drastic impact on tracking performance, due to a number of
factors. First, learning from limited shifted patches may
lead to training an over-fitted filter which is not wellgeneralized to rapid visual deformation e.g. caused by fast
motion [10]. Second, the lack of real negative training examples can drastically degrade the robustness of such trackers against cluttered background, and as a result, increase
the risk of tracking drift specifically when the target and
background display similar visual cues. Third, discarding
background information from the learning process may reduce the tracker’s ability to distinguish the target from occlusion patches. This limits the potential of such trackers to
re-detect after an occlusion or out-of-plane movement [10].
Recently, two methods were proposed to address the dis11135

