Multi-view Non-rigid Refinement and Normal Selection for High Quality 3D
Reconstruction
Sk. Mohammadul Haque, Venu Madhav Govindu
Indian Institute of Science
Bengaluru, India
{smhaque, venu}@ee.iisc.ernet.in

Normalised Frequency −>

Abstract

0.04

In recent years, there have been a variety of proposals
for high quality 3D reconstruction by fusion of depth and
normal maps that contain good low and high frequency information respectively. Typically, these methods create an
initial mesh representation of the complete object or scene
being scanned. Subsequently, normal estimates are assigned to each mesh vertex and a mesh-normal fusion step
is carried out. In this paper, we present a complete pipeline
for such depth-normal fusion. The key innovations in our
pipeline are twofold. Firstly, we introduce a global multiview non-rigid refinement step that corrects for the nonrigid misalignment present in the depth and normal maps.
We demonstrate that such a correction is crucial for preserving fine-scale 3D features in the final reconstruction.
Secondly, despite adequate care, the averaging of multiple
normals invariably results in blurring of 3D detail. To mitigate this problem, we propose an approach that selects one
out of many available normals. Our global cost for normal
selection incorporates a variety of desirable properties and
can be efficiently solved using graph cuts. We demonstrate
the efficacy of our approach in generating high quality 3D
reconstructions of both synthetic and real 3D models and
compare with existing methods in the literature.

1. Introduction and Relevant Work
The recent availability of consumer-grade depth camera
technology has lead to very significant advances in dense
3D scene reconstruction techniques. Of the numerous approaches, the methods of RGBD Mapping [10], Kinect Fusion [11] and DynamicFusion [15] are representative. Despite such advances, there is a fundamental limit to the 3D
reconstruction quality achievable due to the inherent low
quality of individual depth maps obtained from devices such
as the Kinect.
One class of approaches enhance 3D reconstruction

0.03
0.02
0.01

(a) W/O non-rigid
refinement

0
0

2

4

6

mm−−−>

8

(b) Misalignment
Histograms

10

(c) Our non-rigid
refinement

Figure 1: Non-rigid misalignments: a) shows the presence
of significant non-rigid misalignments in 3 rigidly registered input scans, b) shows the histograms of non-rigid misalignments present in the 3 scans, c) shows that these misalignments are corrected by our method. Please view this
figure in colour.

quality by using additional information obtained through
radiometric methods. Of these methods, some implicitly
use shading information [6, 8, 12, 17] whereas others explicitly solve for surface normals using photometric stereo.
While depth maps are noisy in nature, their low frequency
component is of good quality. Conversely photometric normals are good at preserving high frequency or fine scale 3D
surface details. Therefore, many methods fuse 3D depth
representations with their corresponding photometric normals [2,5,9,14,16,18]. While the approach presented in this
paper falls into this category and assumes inputs of depth
and normal estimates, our formulation is in principle not
limited to photometric stereo for obtaining normals.
Of the methods mentioned above, our approach is closest
to those of [2, 9]. In [2], the authors obtain 2D normal maps
from multiple viewpoints and combine them in a weighted
fashion before passing on to a depth-normal fusion step.
In [9], instead of averaging the normals the authors select
one of them. Both [2] and [9] carry out their mesh-normal
fusion using approaches similar to [14] to provide a high
quality refined scan. Additionally, in [9] the photometric
normals are obtained using the IR camera of the depth cam-

2382

