AMAT: Medial Axis Transform for Natural Images
Stavros Tsogkas, Sven Dickinson
University of Toronto
27 King’s College Circle Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A1 Canada
{tsogkas,sven}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
We introduce Appearance-MAT (AMAT), a generalization of the medial axis transform for natural images, that
is framed as a weighted geometric set cover problem. We
make the following contributions: i) we extend previous medial point detection methods for color images, by associating each medial point with a local scale; ii) inspired by
the invertibility property of the binary MAT, we also associate each medial point with a local encoding that allows
us to invert the AMAT, reconstructing the input image; iii)
we describe a clustering scheme that takes advantage of the
additional scale and appearance information to group individual points into medial branches, providing a shape decomposition of the underlying image regions. In our experiments, we show state-of-the-art performance in medial
point detection on Berkeley Medial AXes (BMAX500), a
new dataset of medial axes based on the BSDS500 database,
and good generalization on the SK506 and WH-SYMMAX
datasets. We also measure the quality of reconstructed images from BMAX500, obtained by inverting their computed
AMAT. Our approach delivers significantly better reconstruction quality w.r.t. to three baselines, using just 10% of
the image pixels. Our code and annotations are available
at https://github.com/tsogkas/amat .

1. Introduction
Symmetry is a ubiquitous property in the natural world,
with a well-established role in human vision. Humans instinctively recognize and use symmetry to analyze complex
scenes, as it facilitates the encoding of shapes and their discrimination and recall from memory [7, 34, 52]. In the
context of computer vision, local symmetry is of particular interest, because of its robustness to viewpoint changes
and its connection to salient structures, such as object parts.
This intuition is fundamental to many milestones in object
representation theory, including generalized cylinders [10],
superquadrics [8], geons [9], and shock graphs [42].
Fundamental notions of local symmetry were introduced

(a) Input image

(b) Binary MAT

(c) Appearance-MAT

(d) Reconstructed image

Figure 1: Top: Input image (1a) and segmentation (1b)
from BSDS500, with color-coded ground-truth segments.
Medial axes (green) and a subset of medial disks (red) are
overlaid. Each (binary) segment can be reconstructed from
its medial points and radii. Bottom: Similarly, the AMAT
(1c) carries enough information to reconstruct the input image (1d) with just ∼ 5% of the pixels.

decades ago by Blum in the context of binary shapes with
the medial axis transform (MAT) [11, 12]. The MAT is a
powerful shape abstraction, and provides a compact representation that preserves topological properties of the input
shape. These properties are invariant to translation, rotation,
scaling, articulation, and their locality offers robustness to
occlusion. The MAT has been very effective in reducing the
computational complexity of algorithms for various tasks,
including shape matching [42] and recognition [35], mesh
editing [26, 55], and shape manipulation [15]. For these reasons many researchers have tried to achieve a good balance
between MAT sparsity and reconstruction quality [46, 25].
Extending the notion of the MAT to natural images can
correspondingly benefit applications that rely on a sparse

2708

