Learning from Video and Text via Large-Scale Discriminative Clustering
Antoine Miech1,2

Jean-Baptiste Alayrac1,2 Piotr Bojanowski2
1
2
École Normale Supérieure
Inria

Ivan Laptev 1,2
3
CIIRC

Josef Sivic1,2,3

Abstract
Discriminative clustering has been successfully applied to a number of weakly supervised learning tasks.
Such applications include person and action recognition,
text-to-video alignment, object co-segmentation and colocalization in videos and images. One drawback of discriminative clustering, however, is its limited scalability.
We address this issue and propose an online optimization
algorithm based on the Block-Coordinate Frank-Wolfe algorithm. We apply the proposed method to the problem
of weakly supervised learning of actions and actors from
movies together with corresponding movie scripts. The
scaling up of the learning problem to 66 feature-length
movies enables us to significantly improve weakly supervised action recognition.

1. Introduction
Action recognition has been significantly improved in recent years. Most existing methods [23, 35, 39, 40] rely on
supervised learning and, therefore, require large-scale, diverse and representative action datasets for training. Collecting such datasets, however, is a difficult task given the
high costs of manual search and annotation of the video.
Notably, the largest action datasets today are still orders
of magnitude smaller (UCF101 [37], ActivityNet [7]) compared to large image datasets, they often contain label noise
and target specific domains such as sports (Sports1M [20]).
Weakly supervised learning aims to bypass the need
of manually-annotated datasets using readily-available, but
possibly noisy and incomplete supervision. Examples of
such methods include learning of person names from image captions or video scripts [3, 10, 36, 38]. Learning actions from movies and movie scripts has been approached
in [4, 5, 9, 23]. Most of the work on weakly supervised person and action learning, however, has been limited to one or
a few movies. Therefore the power of leveraging large-scale
1 Département d’informatique de l’ENS, École normale supérieure,

CNRS, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France.
3 Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at the
Czech Technical University in Prague.

Figure 1: We automatically recognize actors and their actions in a
of dataset of 66 movies with scripts as weak supervision.

weakly annotated video data has not been fully explored.
In this work we aim to scale weakly supervised learning of actions. In particular, we follow the work of [4] and
learn actor names together with their actions from movies
and movie scripts. While actors are learned separately for
each movie, differently from [4], our method simultaneously learns actions from all movies and movie scripts available for training. Such an approach, however, requires solving a large-scale optimization problem. We address this
issue and propose to scale weakly supervised learning by
adapting the Block-Coordinate Frank-Wolfe approach [21].
Our optimization procedure enables action learning from
tens of movies and thousands of action samples, readily
available from our subset of movies or other recent datasets
with movie descriptions [31]. This, in turn, results in large
improvements in action recognition.
Besides the optimization, our work introduces a new
model for background class in the form of a constraint. It
enables better and automatic modeling of the background
class (i.e. unknown actors and actions). We evaluate our
method on 66 movies and demonstrate significant improvements for both actor and action recognition. Example results are illustrated in Figure 1.

5257

