DualNet: Learn Complementary Features for Image Recognition
Saihui Hou, Xu Liu and Zilei Wang
Department of Automation, University of Science and Technology of China
{saihui, liuxu91}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zlwang@ustc.edu.cn

Subnetwork 1

Abstract
In this work we propose a novel framework named DualNet aiming at learning more accurate representation for image recognition. Here two parallel neural networks are coordinated to learn complementary features and thus a wider
network is constructed. Specifically, we logically divide
an end-to-end deep convolutional neural network into two
functional parts, i.e., feature extractor and image classifier.
The extractors of two subnetworks are placed side by side,
which exactly form the feature extractor of DualNet. Then
the two-stream features are aggregated to the final classifier for overall classification, while two auxiliary classifiers
are appended behind the feature extractor of each subnetwork to make the separately learned features discriminative
alone. The complementary constraint is imposed by weighting the three classifiers, which is indeed the key of DualNet.
The corresponding training strategy is also proposed, consisting of iterative training and joint finetuning, to make the
two subnetworks cooperate well with each other. Finally,
DualNet based on the well-known CaffeNet, VGGNet, NIN
and ResNet are thoroughly investigated and experimentally evaluated on multiple datasets including CIFAR-100, Stanford Dogs and UEC FOOD-100. The results demonstrate that DualNet can really help learn more accurate image representation, and thus result in higher accuracy for
recognition. In particular, the performance on CIFAR-100
is state-of-the-art compared to the recent works.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the bloom of deep convolutional neural network (DCNN), which has remarkably boosted the performance of various visual assignments [14, 29, 5]. The success of DCNN is largely attributed to its deep architecture and end-to-end learning approach, which can learn hierarchical representation of the
input. And the fundamental research on DCNN is to develop advanced networks and corresponding training algorithms, with the aims of extracting more discriminative features for recognition.

Auxiliary
Classifier 1

Subnetwork 2

Fused
Classifier

Fused
Features
Auxiliary
Classifier 2

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed DualNet. The input images
are fed into two subnetworks, which are coordinated to learn complementary features. The two-stream features are then fused to
form a unified representation, and passed into the Fused Classifier
for overall classification. The auxiliary classifiers are appended to
keep the separately learned features discriminative.

There have been considerable interests in enhancing DCNN with greater capacity, in which the networks are generally designed to be deeper or wider. For example, He et
al. [13] propose a 152-layer ResNet, which is 8× deeper than VGGNet [31] and achieves state-of-the-art performance in several ILSVRC2015 tasks. On the other hand,
going wider has also been proven applicable [30, 37, 36].
For instance, the recent WRN [36] decreases depth and increases width of ResNet and achieves comparable performance. In fact, according to neurobiology, human visual
system only activates several neurons of cortex for a certain input pattern, but the details of visual stimulus can be
perfectly perceived in the V1 zone, especially for the area
of central fovea [9]. Such powerful capability implies that
there exist plenty of neurons in visual cortex to represent the details of input stimulus, although each of them just
has a simple response pattern. Inspired by such a mechanism, we particularly propose to construct a wider network
to learn richer features for image recognition, i.e., assigning more sibling nodes in each layer. However, developing
innovative networks is nontrivial, which needs expertise in
neuroscience and labor-intensive parameter tuning.
In this work, we present a framework named DualNet
to effectively learn more accurate representation for image
recognition, as illustrated in Figure 1. The core idea of DualNet is to coordinate two parallel DCNNs to learn features
complementary to each other, and thus richer features can
be extracted from the raw images. Specifically, we consider

502

