Self-organized Text Detection with Minimal Post-processing via Border Learning
Yue Wu and Prem Natarajan
Information Sciences Institute
4676 Admiralty Way, #1001, Marina Del Rey, CA, USA
{yue wu,pnatarajan}@isi.edu

Abstract
In this paper we propose a new solution to the text detection problem via border learning. Specifically, we make
four major contributions: 1) We analyze the insufficiencies
of the classic non-text and text settings for text detection.
2) We introduce the border class to the text detection problem for the first time, and validate that the decoding process is largely simplified with the help of text border. 3) We
collect and release a new text detection PPT dataset containing 10,692 images with non-text, border, and text annotations. 4) We develop a lightweight (only 0.28M parameters), fully convolutional network (FCN) to effectively
learn borders in text images. The results of our extensive
experiments show that the proposed solution achieves comparable performance, and often outperforms state-of-theart approaches on standard benchmarks–even though our
solution only requires minimal post-processing to parse a
bounding box from a detected text map, while others often
require heavy post-processing.

1. Introduction
As one of the most well-known and oldest problems in
computer vision [20, 27, 7, 43], text detection has attracted
increased attention in recent years [21, 13, 16, 33, 36, 22,
11, 39, 3, 35, 28, 1, 41, 12, 24, 9, 40, 38, 4, 42, 5, 8, 31,
25, 29, 19, 34, 15], bringing benefits to many real-world applications, including but not limited to image search, document analysis, automatic driving, and human-computer interactions. A good review of the text detection problem can
be found in [37].
Although the text detection problem seems to be selfexplanatory, namely detecting texts in a given image, it can
be interpreted in many different ways according to the used
detection unit, e.g., component detection [2, 33, 17, 22, 39],
character detection [19, 40, 5, 38, 24, 28, 29], word detection [10] , line detection [41], and region/block detection
[42, 34]. From the perspective of detection speed, the component detection is the most handy because components can

be efficiently extracted from low-level features like edges,
and some heuristic rules are also effective to distinguish text
from non-text. From the perspective of rigorous problem
definition, character detection is highly preferred because a
character is naturally a unit in any language, and there are
always a small number of characters. From the perspective
of human readable results, the most preferred is either the
word- or line-level detection. From the perspective of reducing false alarms, the region/block-level detection is preferred because it contains a larger image context region to
differentiate text from non-text. However, text detection is
not an isolated task, but is closely related to text recognition.
From the perspective of a down-streaming recognition system, the most preferred is the line- or word-level detection
depending on whether a recognition system is trained by
text lines or isolated words. Consequently, there are three
common strategies: 1) bottom-up [1, 24, 5, 38, 29, 19]: first
detect text at the component- or character-level, and convert
initial detection results to a desired word- or line-level; 2)
top-down [42]: first detect text on the block level, and break
a block to a word- or line-level if necessary; and 3) hybrid [34]: take advantage of both bottom-up and top-down
strategies. Actually, these are the mainstream frameworks
used in text detection until now, although people may use
different component/character detectors, rules to connect
character bounding boxes to a word/line, rules to divide a
region into words/lines, etc.
Early efforts under the mainstream frameworks focus on
various heuristics that are helpful for detecting characters or
character components. The two most well-known ones are:
1) maximally stable extremal regions (MSER) [2, 18, 22]
and 2) stroke-width transform (SWT) [6, 17, 23]. MSER
assumes that text components have similar homogeneous
background and foreground and thus are stable with respect
to a range of thresholds. SWT assumes that text components
have comparable stroke width, and thus finding components
with comparable stroke width finds text. Both MSER and
SWT are very useful heuristics, but they have to be combined with additional post-processing to produce reasonable
text candidates.
15000

