Action Tubelet Detector for Spatio-Temporal Action Localization
Vicky Kalogeiton1,2

Philippe Weinzaepfel3

Vittorio Ferrari2

Cordelia Schmid1

Abstract
si,ng down?

Current state-of-the-art approaches for spatio-temporal
action localization rely on detections at the frame level that
are then linked or tracked across time. In this paper, we
leverage the temporal continuity of videos instead of operating at the frame level. We propose the ACtion Tubelet
detector (ACT-detector) that takes as input a sequence of
frames and outputs tubelets, i.e., sequences of bounding
boxes with associated scores. The same way state-of-theart object detectors rely on anchor boxes, our ACT-detector
is based on anchor cuboids. We build upon the SSD framework [19]. Convolutional features are extracted for each
frame, while scores and regressions are based on the temporal stacking of these features, thus exploiting information
from a sequence. Our experimental results show that leveraging sequences of frames significantly improves detection
performance over using individual frames. The gain of our
tubelet detector can be explained by both more accurate
scores and more precise localization. Our ACT-detector
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods for frame-mAP
and video-mAP on the J-HMDB [12] and UCF-101 [31]
datasets, in particular at high overlap thresholds.

1. Introduction
Action localization is one of the key elements to video
understanding. It has been an active research topic for the
past years due to various applications, e.g. video surveillance [10, 21] or video captioning [33, 37]. Action localization focuses both on classifying the actions present in a
video and on localizing them in space and time. Action localization task faces significant challenges, e.g. intra-class
variability, cluttered background, low quality video data,
occlusion, changes in viewpoint. Recently, Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) have proven well adapted for action localization, as they provide robust representations of
video frames. Indeed, most state-of-the-art action localization approaches [9, 23, 27, 30, 36] are based on CNN
object detectors [19, 25] that detect human actions at the
1 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000
Grenoble, France.
2 University of Edinburgh
3 Naver Labs Europe

standing up?
Figure 1. Understanding an action from a single frame can be ambiguous, e.g. sitting down or standing up; the action becomes clear
when looking at a sequence of frames.

frame level. Then, they either link frame-level detections or
track them over time to create spatio-temporal tubes. Although these action localization methods have achieved remarkable results [23, 27], they do not exploit the temporal
continuity of videos as they treat the video frames as a set
of independent images on which a detector is applied independently. Processing frames individually is not optimal, as
distinguishing actions from a single frame can be ambiguous, e.g. person sitting down or standing up (Figure 1).
In this paper, we propose to surpass this limitation and
treat a video as a sequence of frames. Modern object detectors for images, such as Faster R-CNN [25] and Single
Shot MultiBox Detector (SSD) [19], proceed by classifying and regressing a set of anchor boxes to the ground-truth
bounding box of the object. In this paper, we introduce a
spatio-temporal tubelet extension of this design. Our Action Tubelet detector (ACT-detector) takes as input a short
sequence of a fixed number of frames and outputs tubelets,
i.e., sequences of bounding boxes over time (Figure 2). Our
method considers densely sampled anchors of cuboid shape
with various sizes and aspect ratios. At test time, we generate for each anchor cuboid a score for a given action and
regressed coordinates transforming it into a tubelet. Importantly, the score and regression are based on convolutional
feature maps from all frames in the sequence. While the
anchor cuboids have fixed spatial extent across time, the
tubelets change size, location and aspect ratio over time, following the actors. Here we build upon the SSD framework,
but the proposed tubelet extension is applicable to other detectors based on anchor boxes, such as Faster R-CNN.
14405

