Deep Dual Learning for Semantic Image Segmentation
Ping Luo2∗
1

Guangrun Wang1,2∗

Sun Yat-Sen University

2

Liang Lin1,3

Xiaogang Wang2
3

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

SenseTime Group (Limited)

pluo@ie.cuhk.edu.hk wanggrun@mail2.sysu.edu.cn linliang@ieee.org xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Deep neural networks have advanced many computer
vision tasks, because of their compelling capacities to learn
from large amount of labeled data. However, their performances are not fully exploited in semantic image segmentation as the scale of training set is limited, where perpixel labelmaps are expensive to obtain. To reduce labeling
efforts, a natural solution is to collect additional images
from Internet that are associated with image-level tags.
Unlike existing works that treated labelmaps and tags as
independent supervisions, we present a novel learning setting, namely dual image segmentation (DIS), which consists
of two complementary learning problems that are jointly
solved. One predicts labelmaps and tags from images,
and the other reconstructs the images using the predicted
labelmaps. DIS has three appealing properties. 1) Given an image with tags only, its labelmap can be inferred
by leveraging the images and tags as constraints. The
estimated labelmaps that capture accurate object classes
and boundaries are used as ground truths in training to
boost performance. 2) DIS is able to clean tags that have
noises. 3) DIS significantly reduces the number of perpixel annotations in training, while still achieves state-ofthe-art performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness of DIS, which outperforms an existing bestperforming baseline by 12.6% on Pascal VOC 2012 test set,
without any post-processing such as CRF/MRF smoothing.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional networks (CNNs) have improved
performances of many computer vision tasks, because they
have compelling modeling complexity to learn from large
number of supervised data. However, their capabilities are
not fully explored in the task of semantic image segmentation, which is to assign a semantic label such as ‘person’,
‘table’, and ‘cat’ to each pixel in an image. This is due to
the training set of semantic image segmentation is limited,
∗ The first two authors share first-authorship.

I

L

T

(a) multitask + missing
labels
: CNN segmentation

I

L

T

(b) multitask + pseudo
labels

I

L

T̂

T

I

(c) dual image segmentation

: CNN reconstruction

: forward propagation

Figure 1: Comparisons of recent semi-supervised learning settings. I, L, and T denote an image, a per-pixel labelmap, and a
vector of image-level tags respectively, where the labelmap L can
be missing in training. (a) treats L as missing label in multitask
learning, where its gradient is not computed in back-propagation
(BP). (b) regards L as latent variable that can be inferred by tags
and used as ground truth in BP. We propose (c), which infers the
missing label L not only by recovering clean tags T̂ , but also
by reconstructing the image to capture accurate object shape and
boundary.

where the per-pixel labelmaps are difficult and expensive to
obtain.
To reduce efforts of data annotations, a usual way is to
automatically collect images from Internet, which are associated with image-level tags. As a result, the entire dataset
contains two parts, including a small number of fully annotated images with per-pixel labelmaps and a large number of
weakly annotated images with image-level tags. Learning
from this dataset follows a semi-supervised scenario. To
disclose the differences among existing works, we introduce
necessary notations that will be used throughout this paper.
Let I be an image and L, T represent its labelmap and
tags. Two superscripts w and f are utilized to distinguish
the weakly and fully annotated images respectively. For
example, I w represents a weakly labeled image that only
has tags T w , but its labelmap Lw is missing. I f indicates
an image that is fully annotated with both labelmap Lf and
tags T f .
Let θ be a set of parameters of a CNN. The objective
function of semi-supervised segmentation is often formulated as maximizing a log-likelihood with respect to θ.
We have θ∗ = arg maxθ log p(Lf , Lw , T f , T w |I f , I w ; θ),
where the probability measures the similarity between the
ground truths and the predicted labelmaps and tags pro12718

