3DCNN-DQN-RNN: A Deep Reinforcement Learning Framework for Semantic
Parsing of Large-scale 3D Point Clouds
Fangyu Liu∗ 1 , Shuaipeng Li∗ 1 , Liqiang Zhang† 1 , Chenghu Zhou† 2 ,
Rongtian Ye 1 , Yuebin Wang 1 , Jiwen Lu 3
1
2

Faculty of Geographical Science, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China

Institute of Geographic Sciences and Natural Resources Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3

Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

Abstract
Semantic parsing of large-scale 3D point clouds is an important research topic in computer vision and remote sensing fields. Most existing approaches utilize hand-crafted
features for each modality independently and combine them
in a heuristic manner. They often fail to consider the consistency and complementary information among features adequately, which makes them difficult to capture high-level semantic structures. The features learned by most of the current deep learning methods can obtain high-quality image
classification results. However, these methods are hard to
be applied to recognize 3D point clouds due to unorganized
distribution and various point density of data. In this paper,
we propose a 3DCNN-DQN-RNN method which fuses the
3D convolutional neural network (CNN), Deep Q-Network
(DQN) and Residual recurrent neural network (RNN) for an
efficient semantic parsing of large-scale 3D point clouds.
In our method, an eye window under control of the 3D CNN
and DQN can localize and segment the points of the object’s
class efficiently. The 3D CNN and Residual RNN further
extract robust and discriminative features of the points in
the eye window, and thus greatly enhance the parsing accuracy of large-scale point clouds. Our method provides an
automatic process that maps the raw data to the classification results. It also integrates object localization, segmentation and classification into one framework. Experimental
results demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms
the state-of-the-art point cloud classification methods.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning techniques have had a great
success in image, speech and text recognition. However,
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors are Liqiang Zhang and Chenghu Zhou, Email:{zhanglq@bnu.edu.cn; zhouch@lreis.ac.cn}.

Eye
Window
action

3DCNN

Multi-layer
3DCNN Features

[X, Y, Z, R, G, B]
Reward
Residual RNN
DQN
Network 1

Parsing Result
Network 2

Figure 1: The framework of the proposed approach.
(X, Y, Z) and (R, G, B) represent 3D coordinate and RGB
colors of each point Pi in the original point cloud.

few studies have focused on 3D large-scale point cloud classification. Different from images whose spatial relationships among pixels can be caught by sliding windows, the
points in a point cloud are unorganized and the point density
is uneven. It is a challenge to accurately parse an unorganized and unoriented 3D point cloud corrupted with noise,
outliers, and under-sampling.
In this paper, we propose a deep reinforcement learning
method, i.e. 3DCNN-DQN-RNN, to automatically parse
large-scale 3D point clouds. Through supervised learning,
the 3D convolutional neural network (CNN) has the ability to learn features about shape, spatial relationship, color
and context of the points in the point cloud from multiple
scales, and then encode them into a discriminative feature
representation called 3D CNN feature. To recognize a certain object from the point cloud, an eye window traverses
the whole data for localizing the points belonging to a certain class. The size and position of the eye window are controlled by the Deep Q-Network (DQN). During the traversal, the DQN gets the probability (computed through the
reward vector output by the 3D CNN) that the eye window
contains the class object. It next determines which region
is worth looking at, and then makes the eye window change

5678

