Point Set Registration with Global-local Correspondence and Transformation
Estimation
Su Zhang1,2,3 , Yang Yang1,2,3,∗ , Kun Yang1,2,∗ , Yi Luo1,2 , Sim Heng Ong4
School of Information Science and Technology, Yunnan Normal University
2
The Engineering Research Center of GIS Technology in Western China, Ministry of Education, China
3
Laboratory of Pattern Recognition and Artificial Intelligence, Yunnan Normal University
4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore
∗
Yang Yang and Kun Yang are joint corresponding authors.
∗
Email: {yyang ynu,kmdcynu}@163.com
1

Abstract
We present a new point set registration method with
global-local correspondence and transformation estimation
(GL-CATE). The geometric structures of point sets are exploited by combining the global feature, the point-to-point
Euclidean distance, with the local feature, the shape distance (SD) which is based on the histograms generated by
an elliptical Gaussian soft count strategy. By using a bidirectional deterministic annealing scheme to directly control the searching ranges of the two features, the mixturefeature Gaussian mixture model (MGMM) is constructed to
recover the correspondences of point sets. A new vector
based structure constraint term is formulated to regularize
the transformation. The accuracy of transformation updating is improved by constraining spatial structure at both
global and local scales. An annealing scheme is applied
to progressively decrease the strength of the regularization
and to achieve the maximum overlap. Both of the aforementioned processes are incorporated in the EM algorithm,
a unified optimization framework. We test the performances
of our GL-CATE in contour registration, sequence images,
real images, medical images, fingerprint images and remote sensing images, and compare with eight state-of-theart methods where our GL-CATE shows favorable performances in most scenarios.

1. Introduction
Non-rigid point set registration is an essential problem
which constantly draws interest in various fields such as remote sensing, medical image registration, template matching for hand-written characters and fingerprint identification. TPSRPM [5], RPM-LNS[34], CPD [22, 21], GMMREG [8], L2E-RPM [17, 15], GLMDTPS [32], MoAGREG

[30] and PR-GLS [18] are some of the outstanding works.
In this section, we briefly review these methods, and then
summarize from three aspects including: (i) energy optimization framework, (ii) fuzziness of correspondence and
(iii) spatial constraint, followed by the outline of our GLCATE.
The key idea of TPSRPM [5] is to assume that each
source point corresponds to a weighted sum of the target points. The weights are taken from a corresponding
matrix whose entries are proportional to a Gaussian function of the pairwise Euclidean distances between the source
and target point sets. The transformation is updated using
thin-plate splines (TPS) [3, 29]. Zheng et al. [34] proposed a robust point matching by preserving local neighborhood structures (RPM-LNS) for non-rigid shape registration based on the graph theory. RPM-LNS employs the
shape context (SC) descriptor [2, 11] to initialize the graph
matching, the optimal match between two graphs is the one
that maximizes the number of matched edges. CPD [22, 21]
takes the source and target point sets as the centroid of components and data, respectively, and the registration is interpreted to a maximum likelihood estimation problem. The
elegant expectation maximization (EM) algorithm framework [6, 23] is employed for parametric estimation. The
transformation is modeled using Gaussian radial basis function (GRBF) and the motion coherence theory [33] is used
to regularize the displacement field between the point sets.
GMMREG [8] extends the idea of registration from fitting
Gaussian mixtures to data to aligning two Gaussian mixture models (GMM). And the L2 distance is used to measure the discrepancy of two Gaussian mixtures instead of
the log-likelihood function. RPM-L2E [17, 15] introduces
the L2 minimizing estimate (L2 E) [1, 28] which is a robust estimator in statistics to estimate the transformation.
The source point set and the estimated corresponding point
12669

