Escape from Cells: Deep Kd-Networks for the Recognition of
3D Point Cloud Models
Roman Klokov
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology

Victor Lempitsky
Skolkovo Insitute of Science and Technology

roman.klokov@skoltech.ru

lempitsky@skoltech.ru

Abstract
We present a new deep learning architecture (called Kdnetwork) that is designed for 3D model recognition tasks
and works with unstructured point clouds. The new architecture performs multiplicative transformations and shares
parameters of these transformations according to the subdivisions of the point clouds imposed onto them by kdtrees. Unlike the currently dominant convolutional architectures that usually require rasterization on uniform twodimensional or three-dimensional grids, Kd-networks do
not rely on such grids in any way and therefore avoid poor
scaling behavior. In a series of experiments with popular
shape recognition benchmarks, Kd-networks demonstrate
competitive performance in a number of shape recognition
tasks such as shape classification, shape retrieval and shape
part segmentation.

1. Introduction
As the 3D world around us is getting scanned and digitized and as the archives of human-designed models are
growing in size, recognition and analysis of 3D geometric
models are gaining importance. Meanwhile, deep convolutional networks (ConvNets) [15] have excelled at solving
analogous recognition tasks for 2D image datasets. It is
therefore natural that a lot of research currently aims at the
adaptation of deep ConvNets to 3D models [36, 18, 4, 35,
34, 21, 31, 2, 3].
Such adaptation is non-trivial. Indeed, the most straightforward way to make ConvNets applicable to 3D data, is to
rasterize 3D models onto uniform voxel grids. Such approach however leads to excessively large memory footprints and slow processing times. Consequently, works that
follow this path [36, 18, 4, 35, 34, 16] use small spatial resolutions (e.g. 64 × 64 × 64), which clearly lag behind grid
resolutions typical for processing 2D data, and is likely to
be insufficient for the recognition tasks that require attention to fine details in the models.

To solve this problem, we take inspiration from the long
history of research in computer graphics and computational
geometry communities [25, 10], where a large number of
indexing structures that are far more scalable than uniform grids have been proposed, including kd-trees [1], octrees [19], binary spatial partition trees [28], R-trees [11],
constructive solid geometry [22], etc. Our work was motivated by the question, whether at least some of these indexing structures are amenable for forming the base for deep
architectures, in the same way as uniform grids form the
base for the computations, data alignment and parameter
sharing inside convolutional networks.
In this work, we pick one of the most common 3D indexing structures (a kd-tree [1]) and design a deep architecture (a Kd-network) that in many respects mimics ConvNets
but uses kd-tree structure to form the computational graph,
to share learnable parameters, and to compute a sequence
of hierarchical representations in a feed-forward bottomup fashion. In a series of experiments, we show that Kdnetworks come close (or even exceed) ConvNets in terms
of accuracy for recognition operations such as classification, retrieval and part segmentation. At the same time, Kdnetworks come with smaller memory footprints and more
efficient computations at train and at test time thanks to the
improved ability of kd-trees to index and structure 3D data
as compared to uniform voxel grids.
Below, we first review the related work on convolutional
networks for 3D models in Section 2. We then discuss the
Kd-network architecture in Section 3. An extensive evaluation on toy data (a variation of MNIST) and standard benchmarks (ModelNet10, ModelNet40, SHREC’16, ShapeNet
part datasets) is presented in Section 4. We summarize the
work in Section 5.

2. Related Work
Several groups investigated application of ConvNets
to the rasterizations of 3D models on uniform 3D grids
[36, 18]. The improvements include combinations of generative and very deep discriminative architectures [4, 35]. De-

863

