Adaptive Feeding: Achieving Fast and Accurate Detections by Adaptively
Combining Object Detectors
Hong-Yu Zhou Bin-Bin Gao Jianxin Wu
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, China
{zhouhy,gaobb}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wujx2001@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Object detection aims at high speed and accuracy simultaneously. However, fast models are usually less accurate,
while accurate models cannot satisfy our need for speed.
A fast model can be 10 times faster but 50% less accurate
than an accurate model. In this paper, we propose Adaptive
Feeding (AF) to combine a fast (but less accurate) detector
and an accurate (but slow) detector, by adaptively determining whether an image is easy or hard and choosing an
appropriate detector for it. In practice, we build a cascade
of detectors, including the AF classifier which make the easy
vs. hard decision and the two detectors. The AF classifier
can be tuned to obtain different tradeoff between speed and
accuracy, which has negligible training time and requires
no additional training data. Experimental results on the
PASCAL VOC, MS COCO and Caltech Pedestrian datasets
confirm that AF has the ability to achieve comparable speed
as the fast detector and comparable accuracy as the accurate one at the same time. As an example, by combining the
fast SSD300 with the accurate SSD500 detector, AF leads
to 50% speedup over SSD500 with the same precision on
the VOC2007 test set.

1. Introduction
Speed and accuracy are two main directions that current object detection systems are pursuing. Fast and accurate
detection systems would make autonomous cars safer, enable computers to understand scene information dynamically, and help robots act more intelligently.
The community have strived to improve both speed and
accuracy of detectors. Most recent state-of-the-art detection systems are based on deep convolutional neural networks. The basic pipeline of these modern detectors can be
summarized as: generate bounding box proposals, extract
features for each proposal, and apply a high-quality classifier. To obtain higher accuracy, better pretrained models, im-

Table 1: Speed (fps) and accuracy (mAP) of various modern detection systems. “07+12” means these models are trained on the
combined train and validation sets of VOC07 and VOC12. The
models are evaluated on the VOC07 test set. We measure the speed
with batch size 1.

Method

train set

FPS

mAP

Fast-Yolo [22]
Yolo [22]
SSD300 [18]1
SSD500 [18]1
R-FCN [4]

07+12
07+12
07+12
07+12
07+12

154
45
46
19
8

52.7
63.4
72.1
74.9
79.0

1

https://arxiv.org/pdf/1512.02325v2.pdf.

proved region proposal methods, context information, and
novel training strategies can be utilized. But, these methods
often suffer from high computational costs, e.g., tens of thousands of region proposals are required to obtain high accuracy. On the other hand, there are a few works focusing
on building faster detectors by hacking regular stages designed for traditional systems. YOLO replaces the general
region proposal procedures by generating bounding boxes
from regular grids [22]. Single Shot MultiBox Detectors
(SSD) make several improvements on existing approaches,
and the core of it is to calculate category scores and box
offsets at a fixed set of bounding boxes using small and separated convolution kernels [18]. Although these approaches
speed up the detection process, their accuracy rates are still lower than those slow but accurate detectors. In fact, as
shown in Table 1, accuracy drops as speed increases.
We humans are able to adaptively tune between detection speed and recognition accuracy. When you step into
the kitchen, it might seem easy to find the cabinet in few
milliseconds, but it surely will cost you longer to locate the
toaster. However, most modern detection models “look at”
different input images in the same way. Specifically, the
time cost is nearly the same across different images. For
example, regardless of the number of persons in the fore-

3505

