ProbFlow: Joint Optical Flow and Uncertainty Estimation
Anne S. Wannenwetsch1
1
TU Darmstadt

Margret Keuper2
Stefan Roth1
2
University of Mannheim

Abstract
Optical flow estimation remains challenging due to untextured areas, motion boundaries, occlusions, and more.
Thus, the estimated flow is not equally reliable across the
image. To that end, post-hoc confidence measures have
been introduced to assess the per-pixel reliability of the
flow. We overcome the artificial separation of optical flow
and confidence estimation by introducing a method that
jointly predicts optical flow and its underlying uncertainty.
Starting from common energy-based formulations, we rely
on the corresponding posterior distribution of the flow given
the images. We derive a variational inference scheme based
on mean field, which incorporates best practices from energy minimization. An uncertainty measure is obtained
along the flow at every pixel as the (marginal) entropy of
the variational distribution. We demonstrate the flexibility
of our probabilistic approach by applying it to two different
energies and on two benchmarks. We not only obtain flow
results that are competitive with the underlying energy minimization approach, but also a reliable uncertainty measure
that significantly outperforms existing post-hoc approaches.

1. Introduction
Optical flow estimation has been extensively studied for
more than three decades [5, 9, 14, 21, 36]. However, motion
boundaries, large displacements, and occlusions still lead
to erroneous flow fields, especially in challenging imaging
conditions. In contrast, flow predictions are almost errorless in textured regions of uniform motion, which causes the
reliability of optical flow predictions to vary greatly across
the image. Uncertainty measures1 aim to predict the reliability of the flow estimates and rate each estimate according
to its predicted accuracy [24, 27, 30]. One application of
such measures is to improve optical flow estimation using
different ways of post-processing [4, 36]. Moreover, uncertainty measures represent an important tool when optical
flow is used as a cue for other computer vision tasks, such
1 Uncertainty measures are closely related to confidence measures as
their values are inversely related to confidence estimates.

(a) First frame of image pair

(b) Ground truth optical flow

(c) Uncertainty map from our method

(d) Flow estimate from our method

Figure 1. Our uncertainty measure accurately detects regions with
reliable flow predictions (dark blue) as well as parts of the image
with erroneous estimates (dark red). Best viewed on screen.

as image segmentation or tracking, which consequently depend on the correctness of the flow. In such cases, error
propagation can be avoided if only flow estimates of high
confidence are taken into consideration, e.g. [33, 47].
Several post-hoc confidence measures have been introduced to directly estimate the uncertainty of flow predictions, e.g. [3, 20, 24, 30]. However, optical flow estimation is known to be rather challenging as a one-shot process
[14, 15, 43]. We thus believe it is natural to ask why confidence estimation should be restricted to non-iterative (posthoc) approaches. Moreover, flow algorithms for a concrete
problem are carefully selected for the task at hand and provide us with an underlying model. We, thus, argue that it is
very desirable to apply a model-inherent uncertainty measure tailored to the chosen method. We even go one step
further and aim to jointly predict optical flow and a corresponding uncertainty in order to preserve and extract important information contained in the flow estimation process.
Our work focuses on energy-based methods [3, 15, 43]
as they represent a flexible framework in widespread use.
Starting from a general energy formulation, we derive a
probability distribution of the flow field conditioned on the
input images. In this setting, optical flow can be determined
by minimizing the expected loss under the modeled posterior and the corresponding uncertainty measure is naturally
obtained as the marginal entropy of the posterior at every
pixel. Due to the intractability of exact posterior inference
in general, we rely on variational approximate inference and

1173

