Adversarial Inverse Graphics Networks: Learning 2D-to-3D Lifting and
Image-to-Image Translation from Unpaired Supervision
Hsiao-Yu Fish Tung ∗

Adam W. Harley ∗
William Seto ∗
Carnegie Mellon University

Katerina Fragkiadaki

{htung,aharley,wseto,katef}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

Memories
Discriminator

Researchers have developed excellent feed-forward
models that learn to map images to desired outputs, such as
to the images’ latent factors, or to other images, using supervised learning. Learning such mappings from unlabelled
data, or improving upon supervised models by exploiting
unlabelled data, remains elusive. We argue that there are
two important parts to learning without annotations: (i)
matching the predictions to the input observations, and (ii)
matching the predictions to known priors. We propose Adversarial Inverse Graphics networks (AIGNs): weakly supervised neural network models that combine feedback from
rendering their predictions, with distribution matching between their predictions and a collection of ground-truth
factors. We apply AIGNs to 3D human pose estimation
and 3D structure and egomotion estimation, and outperform models supervised by only paired annotations. We
further apply AIGNs to facial image transformation using
super-resolution and inpainting renderers, while deliberately adding biases in the ground-truth datasets. Our model
seamlessly incorporates such biases, rendering input faces
towards young, old, feminine, masculine or Tom Cruiselike equivalents (depending on the chosen bias), or adding
lip and nose augmentations while inpainting concealed lips
and noses.

(a)

Generator

Renderer

reconstruction
(b)
z

3D poses

y

projection
x

Camera motions
(c)

Depths
3D transformation
& projection

(d)

Old
faces

Tom Cruise
faces

Young
faces

Female
faces

down-sampling

1. Introduction
Humans imagine far more than they see. In Figure 1 (b),
we imagine the hidden arms and legs of the sitting woman.
In Figure 1 (c), we imagine forward motion of the camera,
as opposed to the road drifting backwards underneath the
camera. We arrive at these interpretations – i.e., predictions
of latent factors – by referring to priors on how the world
works.
This work proposes Adversarial Inverse Graphics Networks (AIGNs), a model that learns to map images to la∗ equal contribution

Figure 1. Adversarial Inverse Graphics Networks combine
feedback from differentiable rendering of the predictions, with priors, imposed through distribution matching between predictions
and “memories”. The general architecture is shown (a) with Dallenbach’s classic cow illusion [4], and subsequently with our experimental tasks: (b) 3D human pose estimation, (c) extraction of
3D depth and camera motion from a pair of frames, and (d) creative and controllable image generation. Each task uses a unique
domain-specific renderer, depicted in orange dashed arrows.

tent factors using feedback from the rendering of its predictions, as well as distribution matching between the predic-

4354

