Detecting Faces Using Inside Cascaded Contextual CNN
Kaipeng Zhang1∗ , Zhanpeng Zhang2 , Hao Wang1 , Zhifeng Li1 , Yu Qiao3 , Wei Liu1
1
3

Tencent AI Lab

2

SenseTime Group Limited

Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Virtual Reality Technology,

Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China
kp zhang@foxmail.com, zhzhanp@gmail.com
{hawelwang, michaelzfli}@tencent.com, yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn, wliu@ee.columbia.edu

Abstract
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) achieve
substantial improvements in face detection in the wild.
Classical CNN-based face detection methods simply stack
successive layers of filters where an input sample should
pass through all layers before reaching a face/non-face decision. Inspired by the fact that for face detection, filters in
deeper layers can discriminate between difficult face/nonface samples while those in shallower layers can efficiently
reject simple non-face samples, we propose Inside Cascaded Structure that introduces face/non-face classifiers at different layers within the same CNN. In the training phase,
we propose data routing mechanism which enables different layers to be trained by different types of samples, and
thus deeper layers can focus on handling more difficult samples compared with traditional architecture. In addition, we
introduce a two-stream contextual CNN architecture that
leverages body part information adaptively to enhance face
detection. Extensive experiments on the challenging FDDB and WIDER FACE benchmarks demonstrate that our
method achieves competitive accuracy to the state-of-theart techniques while keeps real time performance.

1. Introduction
Face detection is essential to many face applications (e.g.
face recognition, facial expression analysis). However, the
large visual variations of face, such as occlusion, large pose
variation, and extreme illumination impose great challenges
for face detection in unconstrained environments. Recently,
deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) achieve remarkable progresses in a variety of computer vision tasks,
such as image classification [8], object detection [5], and
face recognition [19]. Inspired by this, several studies
[13, 14, 25, 27, 29, 23, 26] utilize deep CNNs for face de*Corresponding author

(a)

(b)

(c)
Figure 1. (a) An example of face detection result using our proposed method. It leverages Inside Cascaded Structure (ICS) to
encourage the CNN to handle difficult samples at deep layers, and
utilizes the two-stream contextual CNN to exploit the body part
information adaptively. (b) Illustration of the proposed ICS and
Data Routing (DR) training. (c) Illustration of two-stream contextual CNN and Body Part Sensitive Learning (BPSL). Solid arrows
denote the samples processed in the forward pass, while the dashed
arrows are for backward propagation. Best viewed in color.

tection and achieve the leading detection performance.
The key part of recent CNN-based face detection methods is to train a powerful CNN as a face/non-face classifier.
Previous works formulate the feature extractor and classifier
in an end-to-end learning framework to obtain high accura-

3171

