Video Reflection Removal Through Spatio-Temporal Optimization
Ajay Nandoriya∗1 , Mohamed Elgharib∗1 , Changil Kim2 , Mohamed Hefeeda3 , and Wojciech Matusik2
1

Qatar Computing Research Institute, HBKU

Abstract
Reflections can obstruct content during video capture
and hence their removal is desirable. Current removal techniques are designed for still images, extracting only one reflection (foreground) and one background layer from the input. When extended to videos, unpleasant artifacts such as
temporal flickering and incomplete separation are generated. We present a technique for video reflection removal
by jointly solving for motion and separation. The novelty of
our work is in our optimization formulation as well as the
motion initialization strategy. We present a novel spatiotemporal optimization that takes n frames as input and directly estimates 2n frames as output, n for each layer. We
aim to fully utilize spatio-temporal information in our objective terms. Our motion initialization is based on iterative
frame-to-frame alignment instead of the direct alignment
used by current approaches. We compare against advanced
video extensions of the state of the art, and we significantly
reduce temporal flickering and improve separation. In addition, we reduce image blur and recover moving objects
more accurately. We validate our approach through subjective and objective evaluations on real and controlled data.

1. Introduction
The popularity of digital videography is driven by the
continuous rise of mobile imaging, whether being an expensive stand-alone camera or a commodity camera embedded
in a phone. Such devices are usually coupled with computational photography software to enhance the quality of
photographs beyond the physical and hardware limitations
[1]. One situation where such enhancement is desirable is
in reflection handling. Reflections can obstruct the original
scene (see Fig. 1), and hence their removal can be desirable.
Optics-driven separation techniques use polarized filters.
This, however, requires careful manual tweaking, generates
∗ Indicates equal contributions. Contact us through: ahmedelm@tcd.ie

2

MIT CSAIL

3

Simon Fraser University

incomplete removal and dims the overall illumination. A
number of computational separation approaches are proposed. However, all are developed to extract one reflection and one background image for the entire input. Some
techniques take a single still image as input [14, 13, 20],
some take image pairs [18, 29] and others take a sequence
of images [27, 28, 19, 22, 10]. Techniques using sequence
of images exploit the observation that separation can be
generated through temporal filtering. This requires stabilizing the examined layer beforehand. This category of
techniques commonly solves jointly for motion and layers
[27, 22, 19, 28, 6].
No current technique is designed to extract videos from
the input. Current approaches for doing so is to warp the
single-image results through time [28]. This, however, lacks
any moving object and often looks artificial. An alternative approach is applying separation techniques frame by
frame followed by temporal filtering. This, however, produces strong temporal flickering and incomplete removal.
It also blurs moving objects.
We present a technique for video reflection removal. The
novelty of our work lies in both our optimization function as
well as the motion initialization strategy. Our optimization
takes n frames as input and directly estimates 2n frames
as output, n for each layer. We aim to fully utilize spatiotemporal information in our optimization terms (see Tab. 1).
Motions are initialized through iterative frame-to-frame instead of direct alignment used in state of the art. Here, we
use a combination of feature tracks and edge-flow. This improves separation quality. Our approach is iterative, continuously refining separation and motion. Comparing against
advanced video extensions of the state of the art [28, 29],
our technique significantly reduces temporal flickering and
improves the quality of reflection removal (see Fig. 1). It
also reduces blurring of moving objects.

2. State of the Art
A mixed image I is modeled as a linear combination of
the original background B and the foreground reflection F
: I = αB + βF , where (α, β) are mixing parameters. A
12411

