AMTnet: Action-Micro-Tube Regression by
End-to-end Trainable Deep Architecture
Suman Saha
Gurkirt Singh
Fabio Cuzzolin
Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, United Kingdom
{suman.saha-2014, gurkirt.singh-2015, fabio.cuzzolin}@brookes.ac.uk

Abstract
Dominant approaches to action detection can only provide sub-optimal solutions to the problem, as they rely on
seeking frame-level detections, to later compose them into
‘action tubes’ in a post-processing step. With this paper
we radically depart from current practice, and take a first
step towards the design and implementation of a deep network architecture able to classify and regress whole video
subsets, so providing a truly optimal solution of the action
detection problem. In this work, in particular, we propose
a novel deep net framework able to regress and classify
3D region proposals spanning two successive video frames,
whose core is an evolution of classical region proposal networks (RPNs). As such, our 3D-RPN net is able to effectively encode the temporal aspect of actions by purely exploiting appearance, as opposed to methods which heavily
rely on expensive flow maps. The proposed model is end-toend trainable and can be jointly optimised for action localisation and classification in a single step. At test time the
network predicts ‘micro-tubes’ encompassing two successive frames, which are linked up into complete action tubes
via a new algorithm which exploits the temporal encoding
learned by the network and cuts computation time by 50%.
Promising results on the J-HMDB-21 and UCF-101 action
detection datasets show that our model does outperform the
state-of-the-art when relying purely on appearance.

1. Introduction
In recent years most action detection frameworks [6,
33, 20, 22] employ deep convolutional neural network
(CNN) architectures, mainly based on region proposal algorithms [29, 37, 21] and two-stream RGB and optical flow
CNNs [24, 6]. These methods first construct training hypotheses by generating region proposals (or ‘regions of interest’, ROI1 ), using either Selective Search [29], EdgeBoxes [37] or a region proposal network (RPN) [21]. ROIs
are then sampled as positive and negative training examples
as per the ground-truth. Subsequently, CNN features are ex1 A ROI is a rectangular bounding box parameterized as 4 coordinates
in a 2D plane [x1 y1 x2 y2].

tracted from each region proposal. Finally, ROI pooled features are fed to a softmax and a regression layer for action
classification and bounding box regression, respectively.
This dominant paradigm for action detection [6, 33, 20,
22], however, only provides a sub-optimal solution to the
problem. Indeed, rather than solving for
.
T ∗ = arg max score(T ),
(1)
T ⊂V

where T is a subset of the input video of duration D associated with an instance of a known action class, they
.
seek partial solutions for each video frame R∗ (t) =
arg maxR⊂I(t) score(R), to later compose in a postprocessing step partial frame-level solutions into a solution T̂ = [R∗ (1), ..., R∗ (D)] of the original problem (1), typically called action tubes [6]. By definition,
score(T̂ ) ≤score(T ∗ ) and such methods are bound to provide suboptimal solutions. The post-processing step is essential as those CNNs do not learn the temporal associations
between region proposals belonging to successive video
frames. This way of training is mostly suitable for object
detection, but inadequate for action detection where both
spatial and temporal localisation are crucial. To compensate
for this and learn the temporal dynamics of human actions,
optical flow features are heavily exploited [6, 33, 20, 22].
With this paper we intend to initiate a research programme leading, in the medium term, to a new deep network architecture able to classify and regress whole video
subsets. In such a network, the concepts of (video) region
proposal and action tube will coincide.
In this work, in particular, we take a first step towards a truly
optimal solution of the action detection problem by considering video region proposals formed by a pair of bounding boxes spanning two successive video frames at an arbitrary temporal interval ∆ (see Figure 2). We call these
pairs of bounding boxes 3D region proposals. The advantages of this approach are that a) appearance features can be
exploited to learn temporal dependencies (unlike what happens in current approaches), thus boosting detection performance; b) the linking of frame-level detections over time
is no longer a post processing step and can be (partially)
learned by the network. Obviously, at this stage we still
need to construct action tubes from 3D region proposals.

4414

