Look, Listen and Learn

†

DeepMind

Relja Arandjelović†

Andrew Zisserman†,∗

relja@google.com

zisserman@google.com

∗

VGG, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford

Abstract
We consider the question: what can be learnt by looking at and listening to a large number of unlabelled videos?
There is a valuable, but so far untapped, source of information contained in the video itself – the correspondence
between the visual and the audio streams, and we introduce a novel “Audio-Visual Correspondence” learning task
that makes use of this. Training visual and audio networks
from scratch, without any additional supervision other than
the raw unconstrained videos themselves, is shown to successfully solve this task, and, more interestingly, result in
good visual and audio representations. These features set
the new state-of-the-art on two sound classification benchmarks, and perform on par with the state-of-the-art selfsupervised approaches on ImageNet classification. We also
demonstrate that the network is able to localize objects in
both modalities, as well as perform fine-grained recognition
tasks.

1. Introduction
Visual and audio events tend to occur together; not always but often: the movement of fingers and sound of the
instrument when a piano, guitar or drum is played; lips
moving and speech when talking; cars moving and engine
noise when observing a street. The visual and audio events
are concurrent in these cases because there is a common
cause. In this paper we investigate whether we can use this
simple observation to learn about the world both visually
and aurally by simply watching and listening to videos.
We ask the question: what can be learnt by training visual and audio networks simultaneously to predict whether
visual information (a video frame) corresponds or not to audio information (a sound snippet)? This is a looser requirement than that the visual and audio events occur in sync. It
only requires that there is something in the image that correlates with something in the audio clip – a car present in
the video frame, for instance, correlating with engine noise;
or an exterior shot with the sound of wind.
Our motivation for this work is three fold: first, as in

many recent self-supervision tasks [1, 7, 9, 21, 22, 25, 35,
36], it is interesting to learn from a virtually infinite source
of free supervision (video with visual and audio modes in
this case) rather than requiring strong supervision; second,
this is a possible source of supervision that an infant could
use as their visual and audio capabilities develop; third, we
want to know what can be learnt, and how well the networks
are trained, for example in the performance of the visual and
audio networks for other tasks.
Of course, we are not the first to make the observation that visual and audio events co-occur, and to use
their concurrence or correlation as supervision for training a network. In a series of recent and inspiring papers [3, 12, 23, 24], the group at MIT has investigated precisely this. However, their goal is always to train a single
network for one of the modes, for example, train a visual
network to generate sounds in [23, 24]; or train an audio
network to correlate with visual outputs in [3, 12], where
the visual networks are pre-trained and fixed and act as a
teacher. In earlier, pre deep-learning, approaches the observation was used to beautiful effect in [15] showing “pixels
that sound” (e.g. for a guitar) learnt using CCA. In contrast,
we train both visual and audio networks and, somewhat surprisingly, show that this is beneficial – in that our performance improves substantially over that of [3] when trained
on the same data.
In summary: our goal is to design a system that is able to
learn both visual and audio semantic information in a completely unsupervised manner by simply looking at and listening to a large number of unlabelled videos. To achieve
this we introduce a novel Audio-Visual Correspondence
(AVC) learning task that is used to train the two (visual and
audio) networks from scratch. This task is described in section 2, together with the network architecture and training
procedure. In section 3 we describe what semantic information has been learnt, and assess the performance of the audio
and visual networks. We find, which we had not anticipated,
that this task leads to quite fine grained visual and audio
discrimination, e.g. into different instruments. In terms of
quantitative performance, the audio network exceed those
recently trained for audio recognition using visual super-

609

