Quasiconvex Plane Sweep for Triangulation with Outliers
Qianggong Zhang

Tat-Jun Chin
David Suter
The University of Adelaide
Adelaide, South Australia, 5005, Australia

qianggong.zhang@adelaide.edu.au, tat-jun.chin@adelaide.edu.au, david.suter@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Triangulation is a fundamental task in 3D computer vision. Unsurprisingly, it is a well-investigated problem with
many mature algorithms. However, algorithms for robust
triangulation, which are necessary to produce correct results in the presence of egregiously incorrect measurements
(i.e., outliers), have received much less attention. The default approach to deal with outliers in triangulation is by
random sampling. The randomized heuristic is not only
suboptimal, it could, in fact, be computationally inefficient
on large-scale datasets. In this paper, we propose a novel
locally optimal algorithm for robust triangulation. A key
feature of our method is to efficiently derive the local update step by plane sweeping a set of quasiconvex functions.
Underpinning our method is a new theory behind quasiconvex plane sweep, which has not been examined previously in
computational geometry. Relative to the random sampling
heuristic, our algorithm not only guarantees deterministic convergence to a local minimum, it typically achieves
higher quality solutions in similar runtimes1 .

1. Introduction
Triangulation is the task of estimating the 3D coordinates
of a scene point from multiple 2D image observations of the
point, given that the pose of the cameras are known [14].
The task is of fundamental importance to 3D vision, since
it enables the recovery of the 3D structure of a scene.
Most 3D reconstruction pipelines estimate 3D structure
and camera poses simultaneously (via bundle adjustment,
factorization, or equivalent steps). However, triangulation
can play an important role in densifying or refining the 3D
structure, by estimating the 3D coordinates of additional
image measurements (e.g., extracted from original highresolution images) based on the optimized camera poses.
Since 2D feature detection and association methods are
not perfect, they inevitably create wrong feature correspon1 See supplementary material for demo program.

dences and tracks. In an SfM pipeline, outliers are removed
during the robust relative pose estimation step. However,
outliers will exist in the additional feature correspondences
extracted post-SfM, since they were not subjected to the
SfM pipeline (e.g. for efficiency reasons).
For non-robust triangulation, the ℓ∞ paradigm [13] has
been influential. Given a set of N 2D image measurements
3
{ui }N
i=1 of the same scene point x ∈ R , and the associN
ated camera matrices {Pi }i=1 with each Pi ∈ R3×4 , we
estimate x by minimizing the maximum reprojection error
min3

maximum ui −
i∈{1,...,N }

P1:2
i x̃
,
P3i x̃ p

s.t.

P3i x̃ > 0

∀i ∈ {1, . . . , N },

x∈R

(1)

where P1:2 is the first-two rows of P, P3 is the third row
of P, and x̃ is x in homogeneous coordinates. The positivity constraints P3i x̃ > 0 ensure that x lies in front of all
the cameras. In the above, k · kp indicates a valid p-norm;
usually p is taken to be 1, 2 or ∞.
Algorithms to solve (1) take advantage of quasiconvexity
to efficiently find the global minimizer x∗ [15, 16, 25, 23,
3]. Recently, Donné et al. [9] showed that their polyhedron
collapse algorithm (for p = ∞) is the fastest.
A major weakness of the ℓ∞ paradigm, however, is that
the estimate is easily biased by outlying measurements. To
fix this issue, the usage of an inherently robust cost function is necessary. A popular robust criterion is least median
squares (LMS) [24]; for triangulation, this entails solving
P1:2
i x̃
,
P3i x̃ p

min3

x∈R

median

i∈{1,...,N }

ui −

s.t.

P3i x̃ > 0

∀i ∈ {1, . . . , N },

(2)

i.e., minimize the median error. LMS provably has a breakdown point of 0.5, which means that it can tolerate up to
50% of outliers [24, Chap. 3]. The drawback of LMS, however, is that the median of the reprojection errors is not quasiconvex, and problem (2) becomes intractable in general.
The non-differentiability of the median also complicates the
usage of standard gradient-based optimization [21].

920

