“Maximizing Rigidity” Revisited: a Convex Programming Approach for Generic
3D Shape Reconstruction from Multiple Perspective Views
Pan Ji
University of Adelaide

Hongdong Li
ANU

Abstract
Rigid structure-from-motion (RSfM) and non-rigid
structure-from-motion (NRSfM) have long been treated in
the literature as separate (different) problems. Inspired by a
previous work which solved directly for 3D scene structure
by factoring the relative camera poses out, we revisit the
principle of “maximizing rigidity” in structure-from-motion
literature, and develop a unified theory which is applicable to both rigid and non-rigid structure reconstruction in
a rigidity-agnostic way. We formulate these problems as
a convex semi-definite program, imposing constraints that
seek to apply the principle of minimizing non-rigidity. Our
results demonstrate the efficacy of the approach, with stateof-the-art accuracy on various 3D reconstruction problems.

1. Introduction
Structure-from-motion (SfM) is the problem of recovering the 3D structure of a scene from multiple images taken
by a camera at different viewpoints. When the scene structure is rigid the problem is generally well defined and has
been much studied [25, 12, 24, 8], with rigidity at the heart
of almost all vision-based 3D reconstruction theories and
methods. When the scene structure is non-rigid (deforming
surface, articulated motion, and etc.), the problem is underconstrained, and constraints such as low dimensionality [4]
or local rigidity [23] have been exploited to limit the set of
solutions.
Currently, non-rigid structure from motion (NRSfM)
lags far behind its rigid counterpart, and is often treated entirely separately from rigid SfM. Part of the reason for this
separate treatment lies in the usual formulation of the SfM
problem, which approaches the task in two stages: first the
relative camera motions w.r.t. the scene are estimated; then
the 3D structure is computed afterwards. In each stage, different methods and implementations have to be developed
for rigid and non-rigid scenarios separately because of the
different structure priors that are exploited. This has a further disadvantage in that it can be difficult to determine a

Yuchao Dai
ANU & NPU, China

Ian Reid
University of Adelaide

priori whether the scene is rigid or nonrigid (and if the latter, in what way).
Therefore, it is highly desirable to have a generic SfM
framework that can deal with both rigid and non-rigid motion, which leads to the main theme of this paper. In fact,
as early as in the year 1983, Ullman [26] proposed a “maximizing rigidity” principle that relies on a non-convex rigidity measure to reconstruct 3D structure from both rigid
and non-rigid (rubbery) motion. This idea has resurfaced
in various work under the ARAP (“as rigid as possible”)
moniker [15, 21]. However, it has not been further developed under the modern view of 3D reconstruction, mainly
due to the difficulty in its optimization. In this paper we revisit Ullman’s “maximizing rigidity” principle and propose
a novel convex rigidity measure that can be incorporated
into a modern SfM framework for both rigid and non-rigid
shape reconstruction.
Our proposed formulation yields reconstructions that are
more accurate than current state-of-the-art for non-rigid
shape reconstruction, and which enforces rigidity when this
is present in the scene. This is because our framework
aims at maximizing the rigidity while still satisfying the image measurements. We thus achieve a unified theory and
paradigm for 3D vision reconstruction tasks for both rigid
and non-rigid surfaces. Our method does not need to specify which case (out of the above scenarios) is the target to
be reconstructed. The method will automatically output the
optimal solution that best explains the observations.

2. Related Work
Traditionally, under a perspective camera, the pipeline
of RSfM consists of two steps, i.e., a camera motion estimation step and a following structure computation step [12,
10, 9, 8]; or the camera motion and 3D structure can also be
estimated simultaneously through measurement matrix factorization [24, 22]. In RSfM literature, most related to our
work was by Li [11], who proposed an unusual approach
to handle SfM which bypasses the motion-estimation step.
This method does not require any explicit motion estimation
and was called the “structure-without-motion” method.
In contrast to RSfM, NRSfM remains an open active re1929

