PathTrack: Fast Trajectory Annotation with Path Supervision
Santiago Manen1
1

Michael Gygli1

Dengxin Dai1
2

Computer Vision Laboratory
ETH Zurich

Luc Van Gool1,2

ESAT - PSI / IBBT
K.U. Leuven

{smanenfr, gygli, daid, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Progress in Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) has been
historically limited by the size of the available datasets. We
present an efficient framework to annotate trajectories and
use it to produce a MOT dataset of unprecedented size. In
our novel path supervision the annotator loosely follows the
object with the cursor while watching the video, providing
a path annotation for each object in the sequence. Our approach is able to turn such weak annotations into dense box
trajectories. Our experiments on existing datasets prove
that our framework produces more accurate annotations
than the state of the art, in a fraction of the time. We further validate our approach by crowdsourcing the PathTrack
dataset, with more than 15,000 person trajectories in 720
sequences1 . Tracking approaches can benefit training on
such large-scale datasets, as did object recognition. We
prove this by re-training an off-the-shelf person matching
network, originally trained on the MOT15 dataset, almost
halving the misclassification rate. Additionally, training
on our data consistently improves tracking results, both on
our dataset and on MOT15. On the latter, we improve the
top-performing tracker (NOMT) dropping the number of ID
Switches by 18% and fragments by 5%.

1. Introduction
Progress in vision has been fueled by the emergence of
datasets of ever-increasing scale. An example is the surge
of Deep Learning thanks to ImageNet [26, 44]. The scaling
up of datasets for Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) however has been limited due to the difficulty and cost to annotate complex video scenes with many objects. As a consequence, MOT datasets consist of only a couple dozens of
sequences [18, 29, 35] or are restricted to the surveillance
scenario [53]. This has hindered the development of fully
learned MOT systems that can generalize to any scenario.
In this paper, we tackle these issues by introducing a fast
1 We provide our dataset at http://www.vision.ee.ethz.ch/
smanenfr/pathtrack.
˜

Figure 1: This sequence is heavily crowded with similarly-looking
people. Annotating such sequences is typically time-consuming
and tedious. In our path supervision, the user effortlessly follows
the object while watching the video, collecting path annotations.
Our approach produces dense box trajectory annotations from such
path annotations.

and intuitive way to annotate trajectories in videos and use
it to create a large-scale MOT dataset.
Objects can be annotated at different levels of detail. The
cheapest way is to provide video-level object labels [39] or
action labels [4]. On the other end of the spectrum, sophisticated methods [38, 30, 3, 46, 2] produce pixel-accurate
segmentations of objects. Per-frame bounding box annotations lie in between these extremes. We call this the trajectory annotation task. The common approach to it is to
annotate a sparse set of boxes and interpolate between them
linearly [55] or with shortest-paths [47]. This is expensive,
e.g. it cost tens of thousands of dollars to annotate the VIRAT dataset [49].
The typical annotation pipeline involves the user idly
watching the video in-between manual annotations. This
is arguably a waste of time. In this paper, we present path
supervision as a more productive alternative. In it, the annotator follows the object with the cursor while playing the
video, collecting a path annotation, c.f . Fig. 1. Hence,
watching time is efficiently turned into annotation time. Our
experiments show that these paths are fast to annotate, almost in real time.

290

