Towards Context-aware Interaction Recognition for Visual Relationship
Detection
Bohan Zhuang∗ Lingqiao Liu∗ Chunhua Shen† Ian Reid
The University of Adelaide, Australia; and Australian Centre for Robotic Vision

Abstract
Recognizing how objects interact with each other is a
crucial task in visual recognition. If we define the context
of the interaction to be the objects involved, then most current methods can be categorized as either: (i) training a
single classifier on the combination of the interaction and
its context; or (ii) aiming to recognize the interaction independently of its explicit context. Both methods suffer limitations: the former scales poorly with the number of combinations and fails to generalize to unseen combinations,
while the latter often leads to poor interaction recognition
performance due to the difficulty of designing a contextindependent interaction classifier.
To mitigate those drawbacks, this paper proposes an
alternative, context-aware interaction recognition framework. The key to our method is to explicitly construct an
interaction classifier which combines the context, and the
interaction. The context is encoded via word2vec into a semantic space, and is used to derive a classification result for
the interaction. The proposed method still builds one classifier for one interaction (as per type (ii) above), but the classifier built is adaptive to context via weights which are context dependent. The benefit of using the semantic space is
that it naturally leads to zero-shot generalizations in which
semantically similar contexts (subject-object pairs) can be
recognized as suitable contexts for an interaction, even if
they were not observed in the training set. Our method also
scales with the number of interaction-context pairs since
our model parameters do not increase with the number of
interactions. Thus our method avoids the limitation of both
approaches. We demonstrate experimentally that the proposed framework leads to improved performance for all investigated interaction representations and datasets.

∗ First two authors contributed equally to this work.
† C. Shen is the corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Object interaction recognition is a fundamental problem
in computer vision and it can serve as a critical component
for solving many visual recognition problems such as action recognition [2, 22, 26, 35, 39], visual phrase recognition [11, 14, 28], sentence to image retrieval [12, 20] and visual question answering [19, 36, 37]. Unlike object recognition in which the object appearance and its class label have
a clear association, the interaction patterns, e.g., “eating”,
“playing”, “stand on”, usually have a vague connection to
visual appearance. This phenomenon is largely caused by
the same interaction being involved with different objects as
its context, i.e. the subject and object of an interaction type.
For example, “cow eating grass” and “people eating bread”
can be visually dissimilar although both of them have the
same interaction type “eating”. Thus the subject and object
associated with the interaction – also known as the context
of the interaction – could play an important role in interaction recognition.
In existing literature, there are two ways to model the
interaction and its context. The first one treats the combination of interaction and its context as a single class. For
example, in this approach, two classifiers will be built to
classify “cow eating grass” and “people eating bread.” To
recognize the interaction “eating”, images that are classified as either “cow eating grass” or “people eating bread”
will be considered as having interaction “eating”. This
treatment has been widely used in defining action (interaction) classes in many action (interaction) recognition benchmarks [2, 22, 26, 35, 39]. This approach, however, suffers
from poor scalability and generalization ability. The number of possible combinations of the interaction and its context can be huge, and thus it is very inefficient to collect
training images for each combination. Also, this method
fails to generalize to an unseen combination even if both its
interaction type and context are seen in the training set.
To handle these drawbacks, another way is to model the
interaction and the context separately [4, 10, 18, 30]. In this
case, the interaction is classified independently of its context, which can lead to poor recognition performance due

589

