Deep Spatial-Semantic Attention for Fine-Grained Sketch-Based Image Retrieval
Jifei Song∗ Qian Yu∗ Yi-Zhe Song Tao Xiang Timothy M. Hospedales
Queen Mary University of London
University of Edinburgh
{j.song, q.yu, yizhe.song, t.xiang}@qmul.ac.uk, t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Human sketches are unique in being able to capture
both the spatial topology of a visual object, as well as
its subtle appearance details. Fine-grained sketch-based
image retrieval (FG-SBIR) importantly leverages on such
fine-grained characteristics of sketches to conduct instancelevel retrieval of photos. Nevertheless, human sketches are
often highly abstract and iconic, resulting in severe misalignments with candidate photos which in turn make subtle visual detail matching difficult. Existing FG-SBIR approaches focus only on coarse holistic matching via deep
cross-domain representation learning, yet ignore explicitly
accounting for fine-grained details and their spatial context. In this paper, a novel deep FG-SBIR model is proposed which differs significantly from the existing models in
that: (1) It is spatially aware, achieved by introducing an
attention module that is sensitive to the spatial position of
visual details; (2) It combines coarse and fine semantic information via a shortcut connection fusion block; and (3) It
models feature correlation and is robust to misalignments
between the extracted features across the two domains by
introducing a novel higher-order learnable energy function (HOLEF) based loss. Extensive experiments show that
the proposed deep spatial-semantic attention model significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
With the proliferation of touch-screen devices, a number of sketch-based computer vision problems have attracted increasing attention, including sketch recognition
[47, 36, 3, 32], sketch-based image retrieval [46, 24, 10],
sketch-based 3D model retrieval [39], and forensic sketch
analysis [14, 28]. Among them, using a sketch to retrieve a
specific object instance, or fine-grained sketch-based image
retrieval (FG-SBIR) [15, 46, 31] is of particular interest due
to its potential in commercial applications such as searching
online product catalogues for shoes, furniture, and hand∗ These authors contributed equally to this work

traced outline
(human edgemap)

edgemap

human free‐hand sketch

Figure 1. FG-SBIR is challenging due to the misalignment of the
domains (left) and subtle local appearance differences between a
true match photo and a visually similar incorrect match (right).

bags by finger-sketching on a smart-phone screen.
FG-SBIR is a very challenging problem and remains unsolved. First, there is a large domain gap between sketch
and photo – a sketch captures mainly object shape/contour
information and contains no information on colour and very
little on texture. Second, FG-SBIR is typically based on
free-hand sketches which are drawn based on mental recollection of reference images shown moments before the
drawing stage, making free-hand sketches distinctly more
abstract than line tracings (human edgemaps). As a result,
a sketch and its matched photo could have large discrepancies in shape and spatial misalignment both globally and
locally. Finally, as an object instance recognition problem,
given a query sketch, there are often many visually similar candidate photos in the gallery; the correct match and
wrong matches may only differ subtly in some localised object parts. Some of these challenges are illustrated in Fig. 1.
Existing FG-SBIR models focus primarily on closing
the semantic gap between the two domains whilst only
partially addressing or completely ignoring the latter two
challenges. Specifically, state-of-the-art FG-SBIR models
[46, 31] adopt a multi-branch deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Each domain has a corresponding branch
which consists of multiple convolutional/pooling layers followed by fully connected (FC) layers. The final FC layer
is used as input to pairwise verification or triplet ranking
losses to align the domains. However, recent efforts [6, 22]
on visualising what each layer of a CNN actually learns
15551

