Regional Interactive Image Segmentation Networks
Jun Hao Liew1
1
2

Yunchao Wei2

Wei Xiong3

Sim-Heng Ong1,2

Jiashi Feng2

NUS Graduate School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National University of Singapore
3

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore

liewjunhao@u.nus.edu

{eleweiyv, eleongsh, elefjia}@nus.edu.sg

Institute for Infocomm Research

wxiong@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract
The interactive image segmentation model allows users
to iteratively add new inputs for refinement until a satisfactory result is finally obtained. Therefore, an ideal interactive segmentation model should learn to capture the
user’s intention with minimal interaction. However, existing models fail to fully utilize the valuable user input information in the segmentation refinement process and thus
offer an unsatisfactory user experience. In order to fully
exploit the user-provided information, we propose a new
deep framework, called Regional Interactive Segmentation
Network (RIS-Net), to expand the field-of-view of the given
inputs to capture the local regional information surrounding them for local refinement. Additionally, RIS-Net adopts
multiscale global contextual information to augment each
local region for improving feature representation. We also
introduce click discount factors to develop a novel optimization strategy for more effective end-to-end training. Comprehensive evaluations on four challenging datasets well
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed RIS-Net over
other state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Interactive image segmentation is a popular research domain with many important applications, such as medical image analysis (e.g. interactive segmentation of brain tumor
for treatment planning [2]), photo editing and image/video
composition. Unlike semantic segmentation that partitions
an image into multiple regions of pre-defined semantic categories, interactive image segmentation aims at extracting
the object of interest based on user inputs.
The primary goal of interactive segmentation is to improve overall user experience by extracting the object of
interest accurately with minimal user effort. The typical
interactive image segmentation working flow is as follows:
the user first provides positive and negative inputs to indicate the interested foreground and background; then the algorithm produces an initial output based on the input; and

User edit

3rd click

4th click

3rd click

4th click

User edit

Existing model

User edit

5th click

User edit

6th click

User edit

5th click

Ground truth

RIS-Net (Ours)

Figure 1: Demonstration of our motivation. Existing interactive segmentation algorithms do not fully utilize the usergiven information during the refinement process, thus requiring substantial additional interactions from the user in
order to obtain an accurate segmentation result (top row).
In contrast, our proposed RIS-Net fully exploits the userprovided information by including the local regional context surrounding the clicks, leading to much faster refinement progress (bottom row). Best viewed in color.

more user inputs are added for refinement until the segmentation result is satisfactory.
To achieve this, many algorithms have been proposed
in the literature, such as graph cut [4, 22, 16], random
walker [11], geodesic segmentation [1, 6], the combination of graph cut and geodesics [21], growcut [26], etc.
However, all these conventional algorithms typically rely
on low-level cues, such as colors, texture or other handcrafted features to predict foreground/background segmentation, leading to low accuracy in cases of similar foreground and background appearances, weak edges and cluttered background.
Recently, Xu et al. [29] proposed to use a deep fully
convolutional network (FCN) [18] to solve the interactive
segmentation problem, which we denote as iFCN to differentiate it from the FCN used in semantic segmenta-

2727

