Learning Feature Pyramids for Human Pose Estimation
Wei Yang1 Shuang Li1 Wanli Ouyang1,2 Hongsheng Li1 Xiaogang Wang1
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, The University of Sydney
{wyang, sli, wlouyang, hsli, xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Articulated human pose estimation is a fundamental yet
challenging task in computer vision. The difficulty is particularly pronounced in scale variations of human body parts
when camera view changes or severe foreshortening happens. Although pyramid methods are widely used to handle
scale changes at inference time, learning feature pyramids
in deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) is still not
well explored. In this work, we design a Pyramid Residual Module (PRMs) to enhance the invariance in scales
of DCNNs. Given input features, the PRMs learn convolutional filters on various scales of input features, which
are obtained with different subsampling ratios in a multibranch network. Moreover, we observe that it is inappropriate to adopt existing methods to initialize the weights
of multi-branch networks, which achieve superior performance than plain networks in many tasks recently. Therefore, we provide theoretic derivation to extend the current
weight initialization scheme to multi-branch network structures. We investigate our method on two standard benchmarks for human pose estimation. Our approach obtains
state-of-the-art results on both benchmarks. Code is available at https://github.com/bearpaw/PyraNet.

1. Introduction
Localizing body parts for human body is a fundamental yet challenging task in computer vision, and it serves
as an important basis for high-level vision tasks, e.g., activity recognition [60, 54], clothing parsing [57, 58, 36],
human re-identification [65], and human-computer interaction. Achieving accurate localization, however, is difficult
due to the highly articulated human body limbs, occlusion,
change of viewpoint, and foreshortening.
Significant progress on human pose estimation has been
achieved by deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) [53, 52, 11, 51, 42, 55, 39]. In these methods, the
DCNNs learn body part detectors from images warped to
the similar scale based on human body size. At inference

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Our predictions on the LSP dataset [31]. When images
are warped to approximately the same scale, scales of different
body parts may still be inconsistent due to camera view change
and foreshortening. In (a), the scale of hand and head are larger
than that of foot. In (b), the scale of foot is larger than that of head.

time, testing images should also be warped to the same scale
as that for training images.
Although the right scale of the full human body is provided, scales for body parts may still be inconsistent due
to inter-personal body shape variations and foreshortening
caused by viewpoint change and body articulation. It results
in difficulty for body part detectors to localize body parts.
For example, severe foreshortening is present in Figure 1.
When the images are warped to the same size according
to human body scale, the hand in Figure 1 (a) has a larger
scale than that in Figure 1 (b). Therefore, the hand detector
that can detect the hand in Figure 1 (a) might not be able
to detect the hand in Figure 1 (b) reliably. In DCNNs, this
problem from scale change happens not only for high-level
semantics in deeper layers, but also exists for low-level features in shallower layers.
To enhance the robustness of DCNNs against scale variations of visual patterns, we design a Pyramid Residual Module to explicitly learn convolutional filters for building feature pyramids. Given input features, the Pyramid Residual
Module obtains features of different scales via subsampling
with different ratios. Then convolution is used to learn filters for features in different scales. The filtered features are
upsampled to the same resolution and are summed together
for the following processing. This Pyramid Residual Module can be used as building blocks in DCNNs for learning

1281

