Recurrent 3D-2D Dual Learning for Large-pose Facial Landmark Detection
Shengtao Xiao1 , Jiashi Feng1 , Luoqi Liu2 , Xuecheng Nie1 , Wei Wang3 , Shuicheng Yan2,1 , Ashraf Kassim1
1
National University of Singapore, 2 Qihoo-360, 3 University of Trento
xiao shengtao@u.nus.edu, elefjia@nus.edu.sg, liuluoqi@360.cn, niexuecheng@u.nus.edu
wei.wang@unitn.it {eleyans,ashraf}@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Despite remarkable progress of face analysis techniques,
detecting landmarks on large-pose faces is still difficult
due to self-occlusion, subtle landmark difference and
incomplete information. To address these challenging
issues, we introduce a novel recurrent 3D-2D dual
learning model that alternatively performs 2D-based
3D face model refinement and 3D-to-2D projection
based 2D landmark refinement to reliably reason about
self-occluded landmarks, precisely capture the subtle
landmark displacement and accurately detect landmarks
even in presence of extremely large poses. The proposed
model presents the first loop-closed learning framework
that effectively exploits the informative feedback from the
3D-2D learning and its dual 2D-3D refinement tasks
in a recurrent manner.
Benefiting from these two
mutual-boosting steps, our proposed model demonstrates
appealing robustness to large poses (up to profile pose)
and outstanding ability to capture fine-scale landmark
displacement compared with existing 3D models.
It
achieves new state-of-the-art on the challenging AFLW
benchmark. Moreover, our proposed model introduces
a new architectural design that economically utilizes
intermediate features and achieves 4× faster speed than its
deep learning based counterparts.

1. Introduction
Facial landmark detection aims to locate key fiducial
points such as eye corners, mouth, nose tips and face
contour points for a given 2D face image.
It is
fundamental in many face-related applications, e.g., face
recognition [21], 3D face reconstruction [30] and face
synthesis [22].
Despite remarkable progress, detecting landmarks on
large-pose faces is still challenging for existing approaches.
For instance, cascaded regression based approaches [25, 18,
27, 24] offer top performance among modern 2D facial
landmark detection approaches [31, 25, 6, 18, 27, 24].

Figure 1. Flowchart of the proposed model. It first predicts
an initial model and obtain initial 2D landmark location via
direct 3D-to-2D projection for an input 2D face image, and then
alternatively refines the 3D face model and 2D landmark locations
in a mutual-boosting manner. The dual-refinement architecture
ensures our model’s robustness and accuracy for 2D landmark
detection under challenging conditions.

However they still fail at detecting landmarks of challenging
large poses, due to self-occlusion and unreliable features
around invisible landmarks.
To tackle such limitations of 2D-based methods, several
recent works [29, 11, 16] resort to 3D face models
to improve detection robustness to large-pose facial
landmarks. The 3D-based models generally align a 3D
morphable face model [1] to the test 2D face image and
infer landmark locations from the 3D face via single
direction 3D-to-2D projection. Although the 3D model
can effectively observe the entire face, it may fail to
capture small variations over appearance and shape of facial
components, e.g. mouth and eyes. Moreover, 3D faces
fitted via morphable face model may have over-smoothed
shapes and limited expressions. As a result, those models
usually fail to precisely detect landmarks at fine scales,
though being able to localize invisible landmarks.
In this work, to address the challenging large-pose facial
landmark detection problem, we propose a novel Recurrent
Dual Refinement (RDR) model that provides a closed-loop
learning process for 2D landmark detection and its dual task
of 3D face model refinement. Benefiting from informative
feedback and mutual-boosting between these two learning
steps, our model presents outstanding robustness to large
face poses as well as strong ability at detecting landmarks
at fine scale.
The proposed RDR model first introduces an effective

1633

