Raster-to-Vector: Revisiting Floorplan Transformation
Chen Liu
Washington University in St. Louis

Jiajun Wu
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

chenliu@wustl.edu

jiajunwu@mit.edu

Pushmeet Kohli†
DeepMind

Yasutaka Furukawa∗
Simon Fraser University

pushmeet@google.com

furukawa@sfu.ca

Figure 1: This paper makes a breakthrough in the problem of converting raster floorplan images to vector-graphics representations. From left
to right, an input floorplan image, reconstructed vector-graphics representation visualized by our custom renderer, and a popup 3D model.

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of converting a rasterized floorplan image into a vector-graphics representation.
Unlike existing approaches that rely on a sequence of lowlevel image processing heuristics, we adopt a learning-based
approach. A neural architecture first transforms a rasterized
image to a set of junctions that represent low-level geometric and semantic information (e.g., wall corners or door
end-points). Integer programming is then formulated to aggregate junctions into a set of simple primitives (e.g., wall
lines, door lines, or icon boxes) to produce a vectorized
floorplan, while ensuring a topologically and geometrically
consistent result. Our algorithm significantly outperforms
existing methods and achieves around 90% precision and
recall, getting to the range of production-ready performance.
The vector representation allows 3D model popup for better
indoor scene visualization, direct model manipulation for
architectural remodeling, and further computational applications such as data analysis. Our system is efficient: we have
∗ At Washington University in St. Louis at the time of the project.
† At Microsoft Research Redmond at the time of the project.

converted hundred thousand production-level floorplan images into the vector representation and generated 3D popup
models.

1. Introduction
Architectural floorplans play a crucial role in designing,
understanding, or remodeling indoor spaces. Their drawings
are very effective in conveying geometric and semantic information of a scene. For instance, we can quickly identify
room extents, the locations of doors, or object arrangements
(geometry). We can also recognize the types of rooms, doors,
or objects easily through texts or icon styles (semantics).
While professional architects or designers draw floorplans
in a vector-graphics representation using software such as
AutoCAD [1], HomeStyler [3], or Sketchup [5], the final use
of an artwork is often just visualization for clients (e.g., home
buyers or renters). As a result, floorplans are rasterized to
print or digital media for publication. This process discards
all the structured geometric and semantic information, limiting human post-processing or further computing capabilities
such as model analysis, synthesis, or modification.
12195

