Performance Guaranteed Network Acceleration via
High-Order Residual Quantization
Zefan Li1 ,

Bingbing Ni1 , Wenjun Zhang1 , Xiaokang Yang1 , Wen Gao2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Peking University

{Leezf, nibingbing, zhangwenjun, xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn,

Abstract
Input binarization has shown to be an effective way
for network acceleration. However, previous binarization
scheme could be regarded as simple pixel-wise thresholding operations (i.e., order-one approximation) and suffers a big accuracy loss. In this paper, we propose a highorder binarization scheme, which achieves more accurate
approximation while still possesses the advantage of binary
operation. In particular, the proposed scheme recursively
performs residual quantization and yields a series of binary
input images with decreasing magnitude scales. Accordingly, we propose high-order binary filtering and gradient propagation operations for both forward and backward
computations. Theoretical analysis shows approximation
error guarantee property of proposed method. Extensive
experimental results demonstrate that the proposed scheme
yields great recognition accuracy while being accelerated.

1. Introduction
Methods to accelerate learning and evaluation of deep
network could be roughly divided into three groups. The
simplest method is to perform network pruning (i.e., by
rounding off near-zero connections) and re-train the pruned
network structure [10, 18, 20]. To achieve more structural
compression rate, structural sparsity approximation techniques are later developed to morph larger sub-Networks
into shallow ones [1, 12, 27]. However, this type of method
is not a general plug-in solution. Namely, for different networks with different network structures, expert knowledge
is required to design the corresponding proper approximation network. Recently, a new set of solutions called network binarization was proposed [4, 5, 21]. The idea behind network binarization is simple: transform the ﬂoating weights of network as well as the corresponding forward or backward data ﬂow to binary, therefore both computation and network storage could be reduced. For example, BinaryConnect-Network [4] shows great performance

wgao@pku.edu.cn

First order binary input

澽濢濤濩濨澮澔濌

binary weight

Binary convolution
Second order binary input

binary weight

Output:

Binary convolution
Third order binary input

binary weight

Binary convolution

…

…

Figure 1. This ﬁgure shows how the High-Order Residual Quantization method operates on a common convolutional layer. X
is the input tensor. Ri (X) is the i-th order residual (deﬁned in
Section 3.2) of X. We use the ﬁrst-order binary quantization B
and α of weight ﬁlter W . The ﬁnal output Y is the sum of outputs in different orders. In a Order-Two Residual Quantization,
Y = Y1 + Y2 .

on datasets like CIFAR-10 and SVHN, but does not perform well enough on large-scale datasets (e.g., ImageNet).
Binary-Weights-Network (BWN) [21] reduces the network
storage by ∼ 32× and reach a state-of-art result on ImageNet dataset.
To further speed up network computation, input image is
also binarized via thresholding operation. However, while
network evaluation speed is reduced dramatically by a factor of ∼ 58×, the recognition accuracy on ImageNet drop
from 56.6% to 27.9% (BNN [5]) and 44.2% (XNOR [21]),
due to large approximation error. Motivated by this limitation, in this work, we propose a High-Order Residual
Quantization (HORQ) framework. The basic idea of this
proposed framework is straightforward: previous input binarization operation, which simply performs positive and
negative thresholding, could be considered as a very coarse
quantization of ﬂoating numbers. In contrast, we propose
a much more precise binary quantization method via recursive thresholding operation. Namely, after one time of
thresholding operation, we could calculate the residual er-

2584

