Saliency Pattern Detection by Ranking Structured Trees
Lei Zhu1,2 , Haibin Ling2,3,∗, Jin Wu1 , Huiping Deng1 , Jin Liu1
1

School of Information Science and Engineering, Wuhan University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
2
Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Temple University, Philadelphia, USA
3
Meitu HiScene Lab, HiScene Information Technologies, Shanghai, China
zhulei@wust.edu.cn, hbling@temple.edu, {wujin, denghuiping, liujin}@wust.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper we propose a new salient object detection method via structured label prediction. By learning
appearance features in rectangular regions, our structural
region representation encodes the local saliency distribution with a matrix of binary labels. We show that the linear combination of structured labels can well model the
saliency distribution in local regions. Representing region
saliency with structured labels has two advantages: 1) it
connects the label assignment of all enclosed pixels, which
produces a smooth saliency prediction; and 2) regularshaped nature of structured labels enables well definition
of traditional cues such as regional properties and center
surround contrast, and these cues help to build meaningful
and informative saliency measures. To measure the consistency between a structured label and the corresponding
saliency distribution, we further propose an adaptive label
ranking algorithm using proposals that are generated by a
CNN model. Finally, we introduce a K-NN enhanced graph
representation for saliency propagation, which is more favorable for our task than the widely-used adjacent-graphbased ones. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method on six popular benchmarks
compared with state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Saliency detection aims to annotate the most attractive
regions in a scene. An accurate saliency detection method
is able to recommend regions that are informative, attentive and above all, it implies the presence of prototype of
objects [12]. Compared with the research focusing on eye
fixation and eye movement tracking, the work on Saliency
Object Detection is more popular in the computer vision
community as it is designed for general salient object discovery from an image [33]. Saliency object detection has
∗ Corresponding author.

been introduced in many tasks such as segmentation [54],
image retrieval [6], and object recognition [46].
Since the first computational attention model [17] was
published, the interest in saliency detection related research
has increased rapidly. Intuitively, a salient object should
visually stands out from its surroundings [23]. Following this idea, it is natural to compute the saliency of a
pixel/region by the center-surround contrast [13, 14, 17, 23].
Features for describing pixels/regions can be empirically
defined, or more comprehensively, can be learned by regressors such as Random Forest, SVM, and Boostingbased approaches [18, 21, 31, 50]. Very recently, deeplearning-based approaches have stepped into this field and
demonstrated the broad prospects of such data driven models [26, 29, 55, 59].
Although the main stream in this field works on contrast
definition and feature selection for improvement, there still
are problems in existing pixel-based and segment-based region representations. Pixel-based approaches compute the
saliency of a pixel as the contrast between a center and a surrounding regions. As the pixel-wise prediction ignores the
relationship between pixels, inner regions of a proto-object
may take very different salient values. Segment-based regions usually refer to superpixels, which are helpful for
smoothing the predictions of nearby pixels with similar appearance. However, features that are extracted from superpixels may result in less informative saliency measures [53].
In this paper, we propose a new saliency detection
method that takes the structural representation of rigid grids
as receptive fields. Inspired by the work of edge pattern [9], we learn a Structured Saliency Pattern (SSP) that
parses the saliency assignment of a local rectangular region.
More specifically, SSP captures the spatial distribution of
binary labels of a local region (patch) and indicates the foreground/background attribute in a region. During training,
we learn SSP by saliency cues such as regional properties
and center-surround contrast. During prediction, we combine a small number of SSPs to vote for pixel-level saliency
in a region with arbitrary appearance.

5467

