Deeper, Broader and Artier Domain Generalization
Da Li Yongxin Yang Yi-Zhe Song Timothy M. Hospedales
Queen Mary University of London University of Edinburgh
{da.li, yongxin.yang, yizhe.song}@qmul.ac.uk, t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk

Abstract

1. Introduction
Learning models that can bridge train-test domain-shift
is a topical issue in computer vision and beyond. In vision this has been motivated recently by the observation of
significant bias across popular datasets [27], and the poor
performance of state-of-the-art models when applied across
datasets. Existing approaches can broadly be categorized
into domain adaptation (DA) methods, that use (un)labeled
target data to adapt source model(s) to a specific target domain [23]; and domain generalization (DG) approaches,
that learn a domain agnostic model from multiple sources
that can be applied to any target domain [12, 10]. While DA
has been more commonly studied, DG is the more valuable

Test

Caltech-Office

Test

Train

VLCS

The problem of domain generalization is to learn from
multiple training domains, and extract a domain-agnostic
model that can then be applied to an unseen domain. Domain generalization (DG) has a clear motivation in contexts where there are target domains with distinct characteristics, yet sparse data for training. For example recognition in sketch images, which are distinctly more abstract and
rarer than photos. Nevertheless, DG methods have primarily been evaluated on photo-only benchmarks focusing on
alleviating the dataset bias where both problems of domain
distinctiveness and data sparsity can be minimal. We argue that these benchmarks are overly straightforward, and
show that simple deep learning baselines perform surprisingly well on them.
In this paper, we make two main contributions: Firstly,
we build upon the favorable domain shift-robust properties of deep learning methods, and develop a low-rank parameterized CNN model for end-to-end DG learning. Secondly, we develop a DG benchmark dataset covering photo,
sketch, cartoon and painting domains. This is both more
practically relevant, and harder (bigger domain shift) than
existing benchmarks. The results show that our method outperforms existing DG alternatives, and our dataset provides
a more significant DG challenge to drive future research.

Train

Domain shift

Photo

Art painting

Cartoon

Sketch

Figure 1: Contrast between prior Caltech Office and VLCS
datasets versus our new PACS dataset. The domain generalization task is to recognize categories in an unseen testing
domain. PACS provides more diverse domains with bigger
more challenging domain-shifts between them.

yet challenging setting, as it does not require acquisition of
a large target domain set for off-line analysis to drive adaptation. Such data may not even exist if the target domain
is sparse. Instead it aims to produce a more human-like
model, where there is a deeper semantic sharing across different domains – a dog is a dog no matter if it is depicted in
the form of a photo, cartoon, painting, or indeed, a sketch.
The most popular existing DA/DG benchmarks define
domains as photos of objects spanning different camera
types [23], or datasets collected with different composition biases [27]. While these benchmarks provide a good
start, we argue that they are neither well motivated nor
hard enough to drive the field. Motivation: The constituent
domains/datasets in existing benchmarks are based upon
conventional photos, albeit with different camera types or
composition bias. However there exist enough photos, that

5542

