A Read-Write Memory Network for Movie Story Understanding
Seil Na1 , Sangho Lee1 , Jisung Kim2 , Gunhee Kim1
1
Seoul National University, 2 SK Telecom
{seil.na, sangho.lee}@vision.snu.ac.kr, joyful.kim@sk.com, gunhee@snu.ac.kr
https://github.com/seilna/RWMN

Abstract

1. Introduction
For many problems of video understanding, including
video classification [1, 14], video captioning [28, 29] and
MovieQA [24], it is key to success for models to correctly
process, represent, and store long sequential information.
In the era of deep learning, one prevailing approach to
model sequential input is to use recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) [16] which store the given information into a hidden memory and update it over time. However, RNNs accumulate information in a single fixed-length memory regardless of the length of an input sequence, thus tend to fail
to utilize far-distant information due to a vanishing gradient
problem, which is still not fully solved even with advanced
models such as LSTM [12] and GRU [3].
As another recent alternative to resolve this issue, many
studies attempt to leverage an external memory structure
for neural networks, often referred to as neural memory

Higher level information

We propose a novel memory network model named ReadWrite Memory Network (RWMN) to perform question and
answering tasks for large-scale, multimodal movie story
understanding. The key focus of our RWMN model is to
design the read network and the write network that consist of multiple convolutional layers, which enable memory
read and write operations to have high capacity and flexibility. While existing memory-augmented network models
treat each memory slot as an independent block, our use of
multi-layered CNNs allows the model to read and write sequential memory cells as chunks, which is more reasonable
to represent a sequential story because adjacent memory
blocks often have strong correlations. For evaluation, we
apply our model to all the six tasks of the MovieQA benchmark [24], and achieve the best accuracies on several tasks,
especially on the visual QA task. Our model shows a potential to better understand not only the content in the story,
but also more abstract information, such as relationships
between characters and the reasons for their actions.

Q. What sports they
play in Hogwarts?

A1. They box
A2. They play golf
Movie
A3. They fight with brooms Question
A4. They play chess
Answering
A5. Quidditch

Read
Network
Write
Network

Figure 1. The intuition of the RWMN (Read-Write Memory Network) model for movie question and answering tasks. Using
read/write networks of multi-layered CNNs, it abstracts a given
series of frames stepwise to capture higher-level sequential information and stores it into memory slots. It eventually helps answer
complex questions of movie QAs.

networks [8, 9, 10, 15, 23, 27]. One key benefit of external memory is to enable a neural model to cache sequential inputs in memory slots, and explicitly utilize even far
early information. Such ability is particularly powerful to
solve question and answering (QA) problems, which often require models to memorize a large amount of information, and correctly access the most relevant information
to a given question. For this reason, memory networks
have been popularly applied as state-of-the-art approaches
to many QA tasks, such as bAbI task [26], SQuAD [21],
and LSMDC [22].
MovieQA [24] is another challenging visual QA dataset,
in which models need to understand movies over two hours
long, and solve QA problems related to movie content and
plots. The MovieQA benchmark consists of six tasks according to which sources of information is usable to solve
the QA problems, including videos, subtitles, DVS, scripts,
plot synopses, and open-end information. Understanding a
movie is a highly challenging task; it is necessary not only
to understand the content of individual video frames such
as a characters’ actions, places of events, but also to infer
more abstract and high-level knowledge such as reasons of a

677

