View Adaptive Recurrent Neural Networks for High Performance
Human Action Recognition from Skeleton Data
Pengfei Zhang 1 ∗, Cuiling Lan 2 †, Junliang Xing 3 , Wenjun Zeng 2 , Jianru Xue 1 , Nanning Zheng 1
1

Xi’an Jiaotong University, Shannxi, China 2 Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
3
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
zpengfei@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {culan,wezeng}@microsoft.com, jlxing@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, {jrxue,nnzheng}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Skeleton-based human action recognition has recently
attracted increasing attention due to the popularity of 3D
skeleton data. One main challenge lies in the large view
variations in captured human actions. We propose a novel
view adaptation scheme to automatically regulate observation viewpoints during the occurrence of an action. Rather
than re-positioning the skeletons based on a human defined
prior criterion, we design a view adaptive recurrent neural network (RNN) with LSTM architecture, which enables
the network itself to adapt to the most suitable observation
viewpoints from end to end. Extensive experiment analyses
show that the proposed view adaptive RNN model strives
to (1) transform the skeletons of various views to much
more consistent viewpoints and (2) maintain the continuity of the action rather than transforming every frame to the
same position with the same body orientation. Our model
achieves significant improvement over the state-of-the-art
approaches on three benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Recognizing human actions has remained one of the
most important and challenging problems in computer vision. Demands on human action recognition techniques are
growing very fast and have expanded in many domains,
such as visual surveillance, human-computer interaction,
video indexing/retrieval, video summary, and video understanding [27, 42].
Considering the differences in inputs, human action
recognition can be categorized into color video-based and
3D skeleton-based approaches. While color video based
human action recognition has been extensively studied over
the past few decades, 3D skeleton based human representa∗ This work was done when P. Zhang was an intern at Microsoft Research Asia.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1: Skeleton representations of the same posture captured from different viewpoints (different camera position,
angle, and the subject orientation) are very different.
tion for action recognition has recently attracted a lot of research attention because of its high level representation and
robustness to variations of viewpoints, appearances, and
surrounding distractions [2, 10, 28, 47]. Biological observations from the early seminal work of Johansson suggest that
humans can recognize actions from just the motion of a few
joints of the human body, even without appearance information [19]. Besides, the prevalence of cost-effective depth
cameras such as Microsoft Kinect [48], Intel RealSense [1],
dual camera devices, and the advance of a powerful technique of human pose estimation from depth [34] make 3D
skeleton data easily obtainable. Like the many previous
works listed in the survey paper [10], we focus on skeletonbased action recognition.
One of the main challenges in skeleton-based human action recognition is the complex viewpoint variations when
capturing human action data. First, in a practical scenario,
the capturing viewpoints of the camera differ among different sequences, e.g., the facing angle, position of the camera, resulting in large differences among skeleton representations. Second, the actor could conduct an action towards
different orientations. Moreover, he/she may dynamically
change his/her orientations as time goes on. As illustrated

2117

