A Self-Balanced Min-Cut Algorithm for Image Clustering
Xiaojun Chen, Joshua Zhexue Haung
College of Computer Science and Software, Shenzhen University
Shenzhen, 518060, P.R. China
xjchen@szu.edu.cn, zx.huang@szu.edu.cn

Feiping Nie (Corresponding author)
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTIMAL, Northwestern Polytechnical University
Xi′ an 710072, Shanxi, P. R. China.
feipingnie@gmail.com

Renjie Chen, Qingyao Wu
School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology
Guangzhou, P. R. China.
chen.renjie@mail.scut.edu.cn, qyw@scut.edu.cn

Abstract

Many spectral clustering algorithms have been proposed
and successfully applied to image data analysis such as
content based image retrieval, image annotation, and image indexing. Conventional spectral clustering algorithms
usually involve a two-stage process: eigendecomposition of
similarity matrix and clustering assignments from eigenvectors by k-means or spectral rotation. However, the final
clustering assignments obtained by the two-stage process
may deviate from the assignments by directly optimize the
original objective function. Moreover, most of these methods usually have very high computational complexities. In
this paper, we propose a new min-cut algorithm for image
clustering, which scales linearly to the data size. In the new
method, a self-balanced min-cut model is proposed in which
the Exclusive Lasso is implicitly introduced as a balance
regularizer in order to produce balanced partition. We propose an iterative algorithm to solve the new model, which
has a time complexity of O(n) where n is the number of
samples. Theoretical analysis reveals that the new method
can simultaneously minimize the graph cut and balance the
partition across all clusters. A series of experiments were
conducted on both synthetic and benchmark data sets and
the experimental results show the superior performance of
the new method.

1. Introduction
Over the past decades, many clustering algorithms have
been proposed for cluster analysis of high-dimensional data,
such as spectral clustering [21], subspace clustering [13, 8],
multi-view clustering [4, 7], etc. Among them, spectral
clustering is a popular method because it often shows good
clustering performance due to the use of manifold information. Various spectral clustering algorithms have been proposed, such as Ratio Cut [12], k-way Ratio Cut [5], Normalized Cut [15], Spectral Embedded Clustering [19] and Constrained Laplacian Rank [18]. They have been successfully
applied to image clustering in applications such as content
based image retrieval, image annotation, and image indexing [10, 23, 3].
Spectral clustering methods usually transform the data
into a weighted, undirected graph based on pairwise similarities. To obtain the final discrete clustering assignments, they often perform eigendecomposition on the similarity matrix first, and then carry out the final clustering
assignments from eigenvectors by k-means or spectral rotation [24]. However, the final clustering assignments obtained by a two-stage process may deviate from the assignments by directly optimize the original objective function.
Moreover, since both graph construction and spectral
analysis are time consuming, spectral clustering usually has
a time complexity of O(n3 ) where n is the number of samples. In recent years, much effort has been devoted to accelerating the spectral clustering process. There are mainly
three ways to handle the scalability issue of spectral clus12061

