Towards More Accurate Iris Recognition Using
Deeply Learned Spatially Corresponding Features
Zijing Zhao, Ajay Kumar
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong
jason.zhao@connect.polyu.hk, ajay.kumar@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
This paper proposes an accurate and generalizable deep
learning framework for iris recognition. The proposed
framework is based on a fully convolutional network (FCN),
which generates spatially corresponding iris feature
descriptors. A specially designed Extended Triplet Loss
(ETL) function is introduced to incorporate the bit-shifting
and non-iris masking, which are found necessary for
learning discriminative spatial iris features. We also
developed a sub-network to provide appropriate
information for identifying meaningful iris regions, which
serves as essential input for the newly developed ETL.
Thorough experiments on four publicly available databases
suggest that the proposed framework consistently
outperforms several classic and state-of-the-art iris
recognition approaches. More importantly, our model
exhibits superior generalization capability as, unlike
popular methods in the literature, it does not essentially
require database-specific parameter tuning, which is
another key advantage over other approaches.

1. Introduction
Iris recognition has emerged as one of the most accurate
and reliable biometric approaches for the human
recognition. Automated iris recognition systems therefore
have been widely deployed for various applications from
border control [22], citizen authentication [23], forensic [24]
to commercial products [25]. The usefulness of iris
recognition has motivated increasing research effort in the
past decades for exploring more accurate and robust iris
matching algorithms under different circumstances [1-6].
In recent years, deep learning has gained tremendous
success especially in the area of computer vision, and
accomplished state-of-the-art performance for a number of
tasks such as general image classification [17], object
detection [18] and face recognition [15] [19]. However,
unlike face, in the field of iris recognition, in the best of to
our knowledge, there is almost nil attention to incorporate
remarkable capabilities of the deep learning and achieve
superior performance than popular or state-of-the-art iris
recognition methods.

3809

In this paper we propose a new deep learning based iris
recognition framework which not only achieves
satisfactory matching accuracy but also exhibits
outstanding generalization capability to different databases.
With the design of effective fully convolutional network,
our model is able to significantly reduce parameter space
and learn comprehensive iris features which generalize well
on different datasets. A newly developed Extended Triplet
Loss (ETL) function provides meaningful and extensive
supervision to the iris feature learning process with limited
size of training data.
The main contributions of this paper can be summarized
as follows: (i) We develop a new deep learning based iris
recognition framework which can be highly generalized for
operating on different databases that represent diverse
deployment environments. A new Extended Triplet Loss
function has been developed to successfully address the
nature of iris pattern for learning comprehensive iris
features (more details in Section 2.2 and 3). Significant
advancement therefore has been made to bridge the gap
between deep learning and iris recognition. (ii) Under fair
comparison, our approach consistently outperforms several
state-of-the-art methods on different datasets. Even under
challenging scenario that without having any parameter
tuning on the target dataset, our model can still achieve
superior performance over state-of-the-art methods that
have been extensively tuned.

1.1. Related Work
One of the most classic and effective approaches for
automated iris recognition was proposed by Daugman [1]
in 2002. In his work, Gabor filter is applied on the
segmented and normalized iris image, and the responses are
then binarized as IrisCode. The hamming distance between
two IrisCodes is used as the dissimilarity score for
verification. Based on [1], 1D log-Gabor filter was
proposed in [2] to replace 2D Gabor filter for more efficient
iris feature extraction. A different approach, developed in
[3] in 2007, has exploited discrete cosine transforms (DCT)
for analyzing frequency information of image blocks and
generating binary iris features. Another frequency
information based approach was proposed in [5] in 2008, in
which 2D discrete Fourier transforms (DFT) was employed.
In 2009, the multi-lobe differential filter (MLDF), which is

