Sublabel-Accurate Discretization of Nonconvex Free-Discontinuity Problems
Thomas Möllenhoff
Daniel Cremers
Technical University of Munich
{thomas.moellenhoff,cremers}@tum.de

Abstract
In this work we show how sublabel-accurate multilabeling approaches [15, 18] can be derived by approximating a
classical label-continuous convex relaxation of nonconvex
free-discontinuity problems. This insight allows to extend
these sublabel-accurate approaches from total variation to
general convex and nonconvex regularizations. Furthermore, it leads to a systematic approach to the discretization
of continuous convex relaxations. We study the relationship to existing discretizations and to discrete-continuous
MRFs. Finally, we apply the proposed approach to obtain
a sublabel-accurate and convex solution to the vectorial
Mumford-Shah functional and show in several experiments
that it leads to more precise solutions using fewer labels.

1. Introduction
1.1. A class of continuous optimization problems
Many tasks particularly in low-level computer vision
can be formulated as optimization problems over mappings
u : Ω → Γ between sets Ω and Γ. The energy functional
is usually designed in such a way that the minimizing argument corresponds to a mapping with the desired solution properties. In classical discrete Markov random field
(MRF) approaches, which we refer to as fully discrete optimization, Ω is typically a set of nodes (e.g., pixels or superpixels) and Γ a set of labels {1, . . . , ℓ}.
However, in many problems such as image denoising,
stereo matching or optical flow where Γ ⊂ Rd is naturally
modeled as a continuum, this discretization into labels can
entail unreasonably high demands in memory when using a
fine sampling, or it leads to a strong label bias when using
a coarser sampling, see Figure 1. Furthermore, as jump discontinuities are ubiquitous in low-level vision (e.g., caused
by object edges, occlusion boundaries, changes in albedo,
shadows, etc.), it is important to model them in a meaningful manner. By restricting either Ω or Γ to a discrete set,
one loses the ability to mathematically distinguish between
continuous and discontinuous mappings.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: The classical way to discretize continuous convex
relaxations such as the vectorial Mumford-Shah functional
[26] leads to solutions (b), top-left) with a strong bias towards the chosen labels (here an equidistant 5 × 5 × 5 sampling of the RGB space). This can be seen in the bottom
left part of the image, where the green color is truncated
to the nearest label which is gray. The proposed sublabelaccurate approximation of the continuous relaxation leads
to bias-free solutions (b), bottom-right).
Motivated by these two points we consider fullycontinuous optimization approaches, where the idea is to
postpone the discretization of Ω ⊂ Rn and Γ ⊂ R as long
as possible. The prototypical class of continuous optimization problems which we consider in this work are nonconvex free-discontinuity problems, inspired by the celebrated
Mumford-Shah functional [4, 19]:
Z
f (x, u(x), ∇u(x)) dx
E(u) =
Ω\Ju
Z
(1)

d x, u− (x), u+ (x), νu (x) dHn−1 (x).
+
Ju

The first integral is defined on the region Ω \ Ju where u
is continuous. The integrand f : Ω × Γ × Rn → [0, ∞]
can be thought of as a combined data term and regularizer,
where the regularizer can penalize variations in terms of the
(weak) gradient ∇u. The second integral is defined on the
(n − 1)-dimensional discontinuity set Ju ⊂ Ω and d : Ω ×
Γ × Γ × S n−1 → [0, ∞] penalizes jumps from u− to u+
in unit direction νu . The appropriate function space for (1)
are the special functions of bounded variation. These are
11183

