Low-Dimensionality Calibration through Local Anisotropic
Scaling for Robust Hand Model Personalization

Abstract
We present a robust algorithm for personalizing a spheremesh tracking model to a user from a collection of depth
measurements. Our core contribution is to demonstrate
how simple geometric reasoning can be exploited to build
a shape-space, and how its performance is comparable to shape-spaces constructed from datasets of carefully calibrated models. We achieve this goal by first reparameterizing the geometry of the tracking template, and
introducing a multi-stage calibration optimization. Our
novel parameterization decouples the degrees of freedom
for pose and shape, resulting in improved convergence
properties. Our analytically differentiable multi-stage calibration pipeline optimizes for the model in the natural
low-dimensional space of local anisotropic scalings, leading to an effective solution that can be easily embedded in
other tracking/calibration algorithms. Compared to existing sphere-mesh calibration algorithms, quantitative experiments assess our algorithm possesses a larger convergence
basin, and our personalized models allows to perform motion tracking with superior accuracy.

1. Introduction
Recent developments in visualization and motion tracking
technologies are rapidly bringing virtual and augmented reality products to the mainstream consumer market. Such
technologies have a much wider target than the gaming and
entertainment industry alone, with new exciting applications in a variety of fields, ranging from education to medical industry. One of the main technical challenges that
VR/AR has to face is to be able to offer the user the capability of interacting naturally with the surrounding virtual environment. In real life we interact with objects using
our hands: can hand tracking enable natural and accurate
interactions with virtual objects? This task is particularly
challenging, as hands are highly articulated, undergo fre∗ equal contributors

shape-space

c̃y
r̃

δ̃
c̃x

model in front of depth data
model behind depth data
model near depth data

frame 1

Mark Pauly
EPFL

frame 2

...

frame N
initialization

Andrea Tagliasacchi
University of Victoria

Anastasia Tkach∗
EPFL

calibrated

Edoardo Remelli∗
EPFL

Figure 1: Our low-dimensional latent space directly encodes shape variations as local anisotropic scalings of a
template model. (left) A visualization of the shape-space,
encoding palm/finger length compression/stretching and
sphere-mesh radii. (right) Calibrating in the reduced shapespace followed by a fine scale refinement leads to a robust
calibration algorithm – remaining errors are largely due to
sensor artefacts.

quent occlusions and self-occlusions, fingers have similar
appearance, and global pose is unconstrained. With the advent of consumer depth cameras, there has been substantial progress towards the development of robust hand trackers [13, 21, 27, 28]. Most approaches leverage a combination of discriminative and generative algorithms, where
the former require no temporal history but can provide a
rough initialization, the latter can exploit such initialization,
temporal coherency, and shape priors to accurately resolve
alignment. The better the generative model can fit to the
user, the better tracking accuracy can be achieved.
Robust hand model calibration. State of the art techniques such as [27, 28] achieve high-precision tracking by
personalizing the template to the given subject. Given (1)
a set of depth images and (2) a sufficiently close initialization, calibration optimization algorithms can be employed
to generate a personalized triangular-mesh [26] or spheremesh [28] model of the observed user’s hand. Recently, Tan
et al. [24] relaxed the necessity to have a tight initialization
12535

