Visual Transformation Aided Contrastive Learning
for Video-based Kinship Verification

1

Hamdi Dibeklioğlu1,2
Pattern Recognition & Bioinformatics Group, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands
2
Department of Computer Engineering, Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey
h.dibeklioglu@tudelft.nl

Abstract
Automatic kinship verification from facial information is
a relatively new and open research problem in computer vision. This paper explores the possibility of learning an efficient facial representation for video-based kinship verification by exploiting the visual transformation between facial
appearance of kin pairs. To this end, a Siamese-like coupled convolutional encoder-decoder network is proposed.
To reveal resemblance patterns of kinship while discarding
the similarity patterns that can also be observed between
people who do not have a kin relationship, a novel contrastive loss function is defined in the visual appearance
space. For further optimization, the learned representation
is fine-tuned using a feature-based contrastive loss. An expression matching procedure is employed in the model to
minimize the negative influence of expression differences
between kin pairs. Each kin video is analyzed by a sliding temporal window to leverage short-term facial dynamics. The effectiveness of the proposed method is assessed
on seven different kin relationships using smile videos of
kin pairs. On the average, 93.65% verification accuracy is
achieved, improving the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Identifying relatives of a person from visual attributes is
a common practice for humans. For instance, when we see
a woman and a young kid standing next to each other in a
social gathering, we can decide whether the woman is the
mother of that kid based on their visual similarity. To this
end, humans use an aggregate of different features such as
facial appearance and color of hair and eyes [6]. In contrast
to strong capability of humans for kinship recognition, automatic identification of kin relationships from facial images
is a very challenging task. This is a relatively new research
problem, and it has gained a large interest in recent years
due to the fact that unobtrusive and rapid computer vision

solutions for detecting kinship would have several potential
applications such as searching missing child/parent, social
media analysis, and family album organization [20].
Most studies in the literature approach kinship analysis as a verification problem [27, 34] while a few works
define it as a recognition task [33, 13]. In kinship verification, given a pair of face images, the aim is to identify whether the subjects shown in these images have a
kin relationship or not. Kinship recognition, on the other
hand, aims at classifying the type of kin relationship such
as Mother-Daughter, Mother-Son, Father-Daughter, FatherSon, etc. [13]. This paper focuses on kinship verification.
Recent findings of [24, 8] indicate that temporal appearance and dynamics of facial expressions can also be hereditary. For instance, it has been shown that blind-born people display similar facial expressions with those of their
sighted relatives [24]. Yet, all previous studies except two
works [8, 3], solely focus on static face images for kinship
verification instead of exploring temporal patterns of kin relationships. This paper aims to reveal kinship patterns hidden in facial appearance and short-term expression dynamics in a combined manner. To this end, smile videos of kin
pairs are employed, rather than static face images.
In contrast to earlier studies, this paper proposes to learn
an efficient representation by modeling a visual mapping
that can transform facial appearance of a subject to a very
similar form of his/her kin’s face while reducing the similarity patterns that can also be observed between non-kins.
The model is then fine-tuned in a supervised way to verify
kinship between a given pair of subjects. Optimizing facial representation in the visual space can be thought as an
extension of unsupervised pre-training (e.g. deep autoencoders). Earlier studies have explored the action of unsupervised pre-training as a regularizer. Such studies state that
direct supervised optimization in the feature space disproportionately affects the models due to their extreme flexibility. According to [10], this is the reason of effectiveness of initializing representation by pre-training since supervised training cannot escape from the basin of attraction

2459

