Towards a Unified Compositional Model for Visual Pattern Modeling
Wei Tang, Pei Yu, Jiahuan Zhou and Ying Wu
Northwestern University
2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208
{wtt450, pyi980, jzt011, yingwu}@eecs.northwestern.edu

Abstract
Compositional models represent visual patterns as hierarchies of meaningful and reusable parts. They are attractive to vision modeling due to their ability to decompose
complex patterns into simpler ones and resolve the lowlevel ambiguities in high-level image interpretations. However, current compositional models separate structure and
part discovery from parameter estimation, which generally
leads to suboptimal learning and fitting of the model. Moreover, the commonly adopted latent structural learning is not
scalable for deep architectures. To address these difficult issues for compositional models, this paper quests for a unified framework for compositional pattern modeling, inference and learning. Represented by And-Or graphs (AOGs),
it jointly models the compositional structure, parts, features, and composition/sub-configuration relationships. We
show that the inference algorithm of the proposed framework is equivalent to a feed-forward network. Thus, all
the parameters can be learned efficiently via the highlyscalable back-propagation (BP) in an end-to-end fashion.
We validate the model via the task of handwritten digit
recognition. By visualizing the processes of bottom-up composition and top-down parsing, we show that our model
is fully interpretable, being able to learn the hierarchical
compositions from visual primitives to visual patterns at increasingly higher levels. We apply this new compositional
model to natural scene character recognition and generic
object detection. Experimental results have demonstrated
its effectiveness.

1. Introduction
Compositionality [9, 15] refers to the evident capability of humans to represent entities as hierarchies of parts,
which themselves are meaningful and reusable entities. It
is believed to be fundamental to all of cognition [7, 1]. For
human vision, compositionality enables a unique high-level
interpretation of most natural images despite the existence
of abundant low-level ambiguities. Besides, compared with
the whole objects, potentially with enormous variations,

Figure 1. (a) Our approach, based on AOGs, models the compositional structure, parts, features and composition/sub-configuration
relationships in a unified framework. The And-node characterizes
subpart-part compositions in a local window and involves longerrange contexts via multiscale modeling. Or-nodes point to switchable sub-configurations with different biases (indicated by the line
widths). Leaf-nodes model primitives, the lowest-level parts, via
CNNs. The structure is discovered via learning the connection polarities and strengths (detailed in Sec. 3.3) between And-nodes
and their children, respectively indicated by the line colors and
widths. (b) The inference is equivalent to a feed-forward network.
All the parameters in (a) can be learned end-to-end via BP.

their parts and subparts are less complex. Thus, it is attractive to incorporate compositionality in vision modeling.
Compositional models1 aim at modeling the compositionality of patterns. They have been studied in several lines
of vision research [44, 15, 43] and exploited in tasks like semantic segmentation [35], object detection [42, 37, 41, 29],
and image parsing [44, 24]. Jin and Geman [15] propose a
composition machine based on a Bayesian network for constructing probabilistic hierarchical image models, designed
to accommodate arbitrary contextual relationships. Zhu and
Mumford [44] quest for a stochastic and context sensitive
grammar of images, embodied in a simple And-Or graph
(AOG), to model a large number of object categories. Zhu
et al. [43] also exploit the AOG to design the recursive compositional model but put more emphasis on discriminative
techniques and efficient inference and learning algorithms.
However, there are problems with all the existing com1 We focus on multilevel compositional models in this paper.

2784

