A geometric framework for statistical analysis of trajectories with distinct
temporal spans∗
Rudrasis Chakraborty1 , Vikas Singh2 , Nagesh Adluru2 , and Baba C. Vemuri1
1
Department of CISE, University of Florida
2
University of Wisconsin–Madison
https://youtu.be/PeID4r9SSxM

Abstract
Analyzing data representing multifarious trajectories is
central to the many fields in Science and Engineering; for
example, trajectories representing a tennis serve, a gymnast’s parallel bar routine, progression/remission of disease and so on. We present a novel geometric algorithm
for performing statistical analysis of trajectories with distinct number of samples representing longitudinal (or temporal) data. A key feature of our proposal is that unlike
existing schemes, our model is deployable in regimes where
each participant provides a different number of acquisitions
(trajectories have different number of sample points or temporal span). To achieve this, we develop a novel method
involving the parallel transport of the tangent vectors along
each given trajectory to the starting point of the respective trajectories and then use the span of the matrix whose
columns consist of these vectors, to construct a linear subspace in Rm . We then map these linear subspaces (possibly
of distinct dimensions) of Rm on to a single high dimensional hypersphere. This enables computing group statistics over trajectories by instead performing statistics on the
hypersphere (equipped with a simpler geometry). Given a
point on the hypersphere representing a trajectory, we also
provide a “reverse mapping” algorithm to uniquely (under
certain assumptions) reconstruct the subspace that corresponds to this point. Finally, by using existing algorithms
for recursive Fréchet mean and exact principal geodesic
analysis on the hypersphere, we present several experiments
on synthetic and real (vision and medical) data sets showing how group testing on such diversely sampled longitudinal data is possible by analyzing the reconstructed data in
the subspace spanned by the first few principal components.
∗ We thank Anuj Srivastava (FSU) for feedback on a preliminary version
of the paper and Yunyang Xiong (Wisconsin) for carefully curating the
Gymnastics dataset used here. This research was funded in part by the NSF
grant IIS-1525431 and IIS-1724174 (RC, BCV), Waisman IDDRC U54HD090256 (NA), NSF CAREER award 1252725 (VS), and NIH grants
AI117924/NIH CPCP and R01EB022883 (NA, VS).

1. Introduction
In many fields of science and engineering, one encounters data in the form of trajectories i.e., a one parameter
family of multi-variate data, where the parameter describing the family is most commonly time or scale but can be
any other parameter pertinent to the application. In Computer Vision (specifically in sports vision), a common example is the actions of an athlete such as the serve of a tennis player, a gymnast’s routine, a golfer’s swing and so on.
In medical applications, analyzing a time course of structural or functional images to assess progress or remission
of a disease in response to treatment is central to effective diagnosis. There is abundant literature on longitudinal (time course) data analysis where features of choice are
scalar and/or vector-valued. However, with the advent of
high throughput computing resources, applications are increasingly using sophisticated and rich feature sets such as
manifold-valued features that are capable of capturing much
more information contained in the raw imaging data than,
say, scalar and vector-valued features.
There is a rigorous body of work in vision demonstrating how leveraging the structure (or geometry) of the data
can yield advantages. For example in medical applications,
papers in the mid-1990s already showed that the analysis
of shapes [21] improved our ability to quantify a diseasespecific signal, not otherwise possible. The interface between geometry/structure and analysis methods has offered
effective practical tools — for instance, in Medical imaging applications, analysis of diffusion weighted Magnetic
Resonance images where manifold-valued features such as
the diffusion tensors that are symmetric positive definite
(SPD) matrices that capture the diffusional behavior of water molecules at each image voxel may be inferred from the
raw diffusion MRI data. Motivated by other applications,
we have extensions of standard statistical machine learn1172

