Multi-scale Deep Learning Architectures for Person Re-identification
Xuelin Qian1 Yanwei Fu2,5, * Yu-Gang Jiang1,3 Tao Xiang4 Xiangyang Xue1,2
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Info. Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University;
2
School of Data Science, Fudan University; 3 Tencent AI Lab;
4
Queen Mary University of London; 5 University of Technology Sydney;
{15110240002,yanweifu,ygj,xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn; t.xiang@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
Person Re-identification (re-id) aims to match people
across non-overlapping camera views in a public space. It
is a challenging problem because many people captured in
surveillance videos wear similar clothes. Consequently, the
differences in their appearance are often subtle and only detectable at the right location and scales. Existing re-id models, particularly the recently proposed deep learning based
ones match people at a single scale. In contrast, in this paper, a novel multi-scale deep learning model is proposed.
Our model is able to learn deep discriminative feature representations at different scales and automatically determine
the most suitable scales for matching. The importance of
different spatial locations for extracting discriminative features is also learned explicitly. Experiments are carried
out to demonstrate that the proposed model outperforms the
state-of-the art on a number of benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-id) is defined as the task of
matching two pedestrian images crossing non-overlapping
camera views [11]. It plays an important role in a number of applications in video surveillance, including multicamera tracking [2, 41], crowd counting [3, 10], and multicamera activity analysis [54, 53]. Person re-id is extremely
challenging and remains unsolved for a number of reasons.
First, in different camera views, one person’s appearance
often changes dramatically caused by the variances in body
pose, camera viewpoints, occlusion and illumination conditions. Second, in a public space, many people often wear
very similar clothes (e.g., dark coats in winter). The differences that can be used to tell them apart are often subtle,
which could be the global, e.g., one person is bulkier than
the other, or local, e.g., the two people wear different shoes.
Early re-id methods use hand-crafted features for per* Corresponding Author

(a) The cognitive process a human may take to match
people

(b) Our model aims to imitate the human cognitive process

Figure 1. Multi-scale learning is adopted by our MuDeep to learn
discriminative features at different spatial scales and locations.

son appearance representation and employ distance metric
learning models as matching functions. They focus on either designing cross-view robust features [7, 13, 26, 62, 32],
or learning robust distance metrics [31, 33, 63, 25, 49,
60, 38, 32], or both [24, 32, 57, 59]. Recently, inspired
by the success of convolutional neural networks (CNN) in
many computer vision problems, deep CNN architectures
[1, 48, 27, 51, 44, 50, 4] have been widely used for person re-id. Using a deep model, the tasks of feature representation learning and distance metric learning are tackled
jointly in a single end-to-end model. The state-of-the-art reid models are mostly based on deep learning; deep re-id is
thus the focus of this paper.
Learning discriminative feature representation is the key
objective of a deep re-id model. These features need to be
computed at multiple scales. More specifically, some people can be easily distinguished by some global features such
as gender and body build, whilst for some others, detecting
local images patches corresponding to, say a handbag of a
particular color or the type of shoes, would be critical for

5399

