PolyFit: Polygonal Surface Reconstruction from Point Clouds
Liangliang Nan
Visual Computing Center, KAUST

Peter Wonka
Visual Computing Center, KAUST

liangliang.nan@gmail.com

pwonka@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose a novel framework for reconstructing
lightweight polygonal surfaces from point clouds. Unlike
traditional methods that focus on either extracting good
geometric primitives or obtaining proper arrangements of
primitives, the emphasis of this work lies in intersecting
the primitives (planes only) and seeking for an appropriate
combination of them to obtain a manifold polygonal
surface model without boundary.
We show that reconstruction from point clouds can be
cast as a binary labeling problem. Our method is based on
a hypothesizing and selection strategy. We first generate a
reasonably large set of face candidates by intersecting the
extracted planar primitives. Then an optimal subset of the
candidate faces is selected through optimization. Our optimization is based on a binary linear programming formulation under hard constraints that enforce the final polygonal
surface model to be manifold and watertight. Experiments
on point clouds from various sources demonstrate that our
method can generate lightweight polygonal surface models
of arbitrary piecewise planar objects. Besides, our method
is capable of recovering sharp features and is robust to
noise, outliers, and missing data.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D models from sampled points has been
a major problem in both computer vision and computer
graphics. Although it has been extensively researched in
the past few decades [8, 13, 22, 11, 3, 17, 27, 25, 12, 2, 15,
20, 26, 16], obtaining faithful reconstructions of real-world
objects from unavoidable noisy and possibly incomplete
point clouds remains an open problem.
In this work, we focus on reconstructing piecewise
planar objects (i.e., man-made objects such as buildings).
Our inputs are point clouds sampled from real-world objects
that could be captured by various means (e.g., drones, handheld scanners, and depth cameras). Our goal is to achieve
lightweight polygonal surface models of the objects.
We consider a method to be effective to this problem if it

meets the following requirements. First, the reconstructed
model should be an oriented 2-manifold and watertight,
ensuring physically valid models. This is essential for many
applications, e.g., simulation and fabrication. Second, it
should be able to recover sharp features of the objects.
Third, the method should not closely follow surface details
due to imperfections (i.e., noise, outliers, and missing data).
Instead, a lightweight representation is more preferred and
beneficial for many applications (e.g., Augmented Reality/Virtual Reality) that may involve many objects and
large scenes. Besides, it is also helpful to provide a way
to control the detail levels of the reconstructed models
within the reconstruction pipeline. We proposed a novel
reconstruction framework that all the above requirements
are satisfied in a single optimization process.
Instead of fitting dense smooth polygonal surfaces [8, 13,
22, 11], we seek for a more compact representation (i.e.,
simple polygonal surfaces) for piecewise planar objects.
Our method is based on a hypothesizing and selection
strategy. Specifically, we chose an optimal set of faces from
a large number of candidate faces to assemble a compact
polygonal surface model. The optimal set of faces is selected through optimization that encourages good point support
and compactness of the final model. The manifold and
watertight requirements are enforced as hard constraints.
Figure 1 shows an example of our reconstruction. Our work
makes the following contributions:
• we cast polygonal surface reconstruction from point
clouds as a binary labeling problem based on a hypothesizing and selection strategy.
• a surface reconstruction framework that is dedicated to
reconstructing piecewise planar objects.
• a binary linear programming formulation for face selection that guarantees lightweight, manifold, and watertight reconstructions and meanwhile recovers sharp
features of the objects.

2. Related Work
In literature, a large body of research on polygonal
surface reconstruction from point clouds aim at obtaining
12353

