A Joint Intrinsic-Extrinsic Prior Model for Retinex
Bolun Cai1
Xianming Xu1∗
Kailing Guo1
Kui Jia1
Bin Hu2
Dacheng Tao3
1
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
2
Ubiquitous Awareness and Intelligent Solutions Lab, Lanzhou University, China
3
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of IT, FEIT, The University of Sydney, Australia

Abstract
We propose a joint intrinsic-extrinsic prior model to
estimate both illumination and reflectance from an observed
image. The 2D image formed from 3D object in the scene
is affected by the intrinsic properties (shape and texture)
and the extrinsic property (illumination). Based on a
novel structure-preserving measure called local variation
deviation, a joint intrinsic-extrinsic prior model is proposed
for better representation. Better than conventional Retinex
models, the proposed model can preserve the structure information by shape prior, estimate the reflectance with fine
details by texture prior, and capture the luminous source
by illumination prior. Experimental results demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed method on simulated and
real data. Compared with the other Retinex algorithms
and state-of-the-art algorithms, the proposed model yields
better results on both subjective and objective assessments.

1. Introduction
Retinex theory is a color perception model of human
vision and is used to remove illumination effects in images.
The primary goal of Retinex is to decompose the observed
images into illumination and reflectance. In such a decomposition, the illumination represents the light intensity
on the objects, and the reflectance represents the physical
characteristics of objects. There are many applications
derived from Retinex, such as backlit enhancement [13],
low-light enhancement [14], and color correction [15].
It is an ill-posed problem to estimate illumination and
reflectance from a single observed image. Based on the
Retinex theory [28, 27], many algorithms have been proposed to handle this problem. Among them, path-based
algorithms, PDE-based algorithms, and center/surround
algorithms are three kinds of classical Retinex algorithms.
Path-based algorithms [26, 4] consider that the reflectance
depends on the multiplication of the ratios along random
∗ X. Xu is the corresponding author. (Email: xmxu@scut.edu.cn)

walks, which bring along high computational complexity.
In [12, 16], the path computation is replaced by a recursive
matrix calculation to make the algorithm more efficient,
but the number of iterations is not clearly defined and
can strongly influence the final result. In the PDE-based
algorithms [21, 29], a partial differential equation (PDE)
is adopted to obtain the reflectance, which can be solved
efficiently by fast fourier transformation (FFT). However,
the non-sparse divergence free vector field results in the
gradient without the expected piece-wise continuity. The
center/surround algorithms, including single-scale Retinex
(SSR) [23], multi-scale Retinex (MSR) [22] and multi-scale
Retinex with color restoration (MSRCR) [33], constrain the
illumination component to be smooth, and the constraint is
contrary for the reflectance. Because Gaussian filter without
structure-preserving is used to estimate the illumination,
they are prone to have halo artifacts near structural edges.
Recently, several variational methods are introduced to
estimate illumination and reflectance. The first variational
framework (VF) for Retinex is introduced by Kimmel et al.
[24], and its objective function is established based on the
smooth illumination assumption. But the consideration of
reflectance assumption is lacking in the variational framework. In [30], a total variation model (TVM) for reflectance
decomposition is proposed by adopting Bregman iteration.
However, the restored reflectance is over-smoothed and fine
details are lost due to the side effect of the logarithmic transformation. Fu et al. [13] propose a probabilistic method
for simultaneous reflectance and illumination estimation
(SRIE) in the linear domain, which can better preserve the
details than the logarithmic domain does. Furthermore, the
most recent work in [15] proposes a weighted variational
model (WVM) to reinforce the regularization of bright
regions in the logarithmic domain. Both SRIE and WVM
are based on the simplified assumption that illumination
tends to change smoothly. However, different surfaces
in different directions is faced with different illumination,
which may result in incorrect estimation of illumination
near edges. Moreover, the information of luminous source
in the scene may be damaged due to the unconstrained
14000

