Curriculum Dropout
Pietro Morerio1 , Jacopo Cavazza1,2 , Riccardo Volpi1,2 , René Vidal3 and Vittorio Murino1,4
1

Pattern Analysis & Computer Vision (PAVIS) – Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia – Genova, 16163, Italy
2
Electrical, Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering and Naval Architecture Department
(DITEN) – Università degli Studi di Genova – Genova, 16145, Italy
3
Department of Biomedial Engineering – Johns Hopkins University – Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
4
Computer Science Department – Università di Verona – Verona, 37134, Italy
{pietro.morerio,jacopo.cavazza,riccardo.volpi,vittorio.murino}@iit.it, rvidal@cis.jhu.edu

Abstract
Dropout is a very effective way of regularizing neural
networks. Stochastically “dropping out” units with a certain probability discourages over-specific co-adaptations of
feature detectors, preventing overfitting and improving network generalization. Besides, Dropout can be interpreted
as an approximate model aggregation technique, where an
exponential number of smaller networks are averaged in order to get a more powerful ensemble. In this paper, we show
that using a fixed dropout probability during training is a
suboptimal choice. We thus propose a time scheduling for
the probability of retaining neurons in the network. This induces an adaptive regularization scheme that smoothly increases the difficulty of the optimization problem. This idea
of “starting easy” and adaptively increasing the difficulty
of the learning problem has its roots in curriculum learning
and allows one to train better models. Indeed, we prove that
our optimization strategy implements a very general curriculum scheme, by gradually adding noise to both the input and intermediate feature representations within the network architecture. Experiments on seven image classification datasets and different network architectures show that
our method, named Curriculum Dropout, frequently yields
to better generalization and, at worst, performs just as well
as the standard Dropout method.

1. Introduction
Since [17], deep neural networks have become ubiquitous in most computer vision applications. The reason is
generally ascribed to the powerful hierarchical feature representations directly learnt from data, which usually outperform classical hand-crafted feature descriptors.
As a drawback, deep neural networks are difficult to train

Figure 1. From left to right, during training (red arrows), our curriculum dropout
gradually increases the amount of Bernoulli multiplicative noise, generating multiple
partitions (orange boxes) within the dataset (yellow frame) and the feature representation layers (not shown here). Differently, the original dropout [13, 25] (blue
arrow) mainly focuses on the hardest partition only, complicating the learning from
the beginning and potentially damaging the network classification performance.

because non-convex optimization and intensive computations for learning the network parameters. Relying on availability of both massive data and hardware resources, the
aforementioned training challenges can be empirically tackled and deep architectures can be effectively trained in an
end-to-end fashion, exploiting parallel GPU computation.
However, overfitting remains an issue. Indeed, such a
gigantic number of parameters is likely to produce weights
that are so specialized to the training examples that the network’s generalization capability may be extremely poor.
The seminal work of [13] argues that overfitting occurs
as the result of excessive co-adaptation of feature detectors which manage to perfectly explain the training data.
This leads to overcomplicated models which unsatisfactory fit unseen testing data points. To address this issue,
the Dropout algorithm was proposed and investigated in
[13, 25] and is nowadays extensively used in training neural networks. The method consists in randomly suppressing neurons during training according to the values r sampled from a Bernoulli distribution. More specifically, if
r = 1 that unit is kept unchanged, while if r=0 the unit
is suppressed. The effect of suppressing a neuron is that the
value of its output is set to zero during the forward pass of
13544

