Video Fill In the Blank using LR/RL LSTMs with Spatial-Temporal Attentions
Amir Mazaheri, Dong Zhang, and Mubarak Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816
amirmazaheri@cs.ucf.edu, dzhang@cs.ucf.edu, shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
Given a video and a description sentence with one
missing word, “source sentence”, Video-Fill-In-the-Blank
(VFIB) problem is to find the missing word automatically.
The contextual information of the sentence, as well as visual cues from the video, are important to infer the missing word accurately. Since the source sentence is broken
into two fragments: the sentence’s left fragment (before the
blank) and the sentence’s right fragment (after the blank),
traditional Recurrent Neural Networks cannot encode this
structure accurately because of many possible variations of
the missing word in terms of the location and type of the
word in the source sentence. For example, a missing word
can be the first word or be in the middle of the sentence and
it can be a verb or an adjective. In this paper, we propose
a framework to tackle the textual encoding: Two separate
LSTMs (the LR and RL LSTMs) are employed to encode the
left and right sentence fragments and a novel structure is introduced to combine each fragment with an external memory corresponding to the opposite fragments. For the visual
encoding, end-to-end spatial and temporal attention models
are employed to select discriminative visual representations
to find the missing word. In the experiments, we demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed method on
challenging VFIB problem. Furthermore, we introduce an
extended and more generalized version of VFIB, which is
not limited to a single blank. Our experiments indicate the
generalization capability of our method in dealing with such
more realistic scenarios.

1. Introduction & Related Works
In computer vision, due to Deep Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) [1, 2, 3, 4] dramatic success has been
achieved in detection (e.g. object detection [5]) and classification (e.g. action classification [6]). Likewise, Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNN) [7, 8, 9] have been demonstrated
to be very useful in Natural Language Processing (NLP)
for language translation. Recently, new problems such as
Visual Captioning (VC) [10, 11, 12] and Visual Question

Figure 1. Two examples of the Video-Fill-in-the-Blank
problem[19] with a single blank and multiple blanks.

Answering (VQA) [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18] have drawn a lot
of interest, as these are very challenging problems and extremely valuable for both computer vision and natural language processing. Both Visual Captioning and Visual Question Answering are related to the Video-Fill-in-the-Blank
(VFIB) problem, which is addressed in this paper.
Visual Captioning (VC) needs deep understanding of
both visual (i.e. image or video) and textual cues. Recently,
several approaches for VC have been introduced. Some of
these algorithms focus on leveraging RNNs, which take visual input, focus on different regions of the image and leverage attention models to produce captions [12, 20]. Furthermore, a dense captioning method is proposed in [20],
where for a given image, multiple captions are generated
and for each caption a corresponding bounding box is produced. Visual Question Answering (VQA) has deep roots
in textual question answering [21, 22, 23]. The goal of textual question answering is to answer a question based on a
collection of sentences.
The major difference between VQA and VC problems is
that in VQA there is a “question” as a sentence in addition to
the image or video. This makes the problem harder since the
question can be about details of the image or video; However, for the VC problem, any factual sentence about the
image can be a correct caption. Some methods use a combination of the question and the image/video features through

1407

