MarioQA: Answering Questions by Watching Gameplay Videos
Jonghwan Mun*
Paul Hongsuck Seo*
Ilchae Jung
Bohyung Han
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Korea
{choco1916, hsseo, chey0313, bhhan}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
We present a framework to analyze various aspects of
models for video question answering (VideoQA) using customizable synthetic datasets, which are constructed automatically from gameplay videos. Our work is motivated by the
fact that existing models are often tested only on datasets
that require excessively high-level reasoning or mostly contain instances accessible through single frame inferences.
Hence, it is difficult to measure capacity and flexibility of
trained models, and existing techniques often rely on adhoc implementations of deep neural networks without clear
insight into datasets and models. We are particularly interested in understanding temporal relationships between
video events to solve VideoQA problems; this is because
reasoning temporal dependency is one of the most distinct
components in videos from images. To address this objective,
we automatically generate a customized synthetic VideoQA
dataset using Super Mario Bros. gameplay videos so that it
contains events with different levels of reasoning complexity. Using the dataset, we show that properly constructed
datasets with events in various complexity levels are critical
to learn effective models and improve overall performance.

1. Introduction
While deep convolutional neural networks trained on
large-scale datasets have been making significant progress
on various visual recognition problems, most of these tasks
focus on the recognition in the same or similar levels, e.g., objects [16, 17], scenes [27], actions [15, 19], attributes [2, 26],
face identities [21], etc. On the other hand, image question
answering (ImageQA) [3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 14, 22, 23, 24, 25, 28]
addresses a holistic image understanding problem, and handles diverse recognition tasks in a single framework. The
main objective of ImageQA is to find an answer relevant
to a pair of an input image and a question by capturing information in various semantic levels. This problem is often
formulated with deep neural networks, and has been suc* Both authors contributed equally.

cessfully investigated thanks to advance of representation
learning techniques and release of outstanding pretrained
deep neural network models [3, 6, 10, 23, 25].
Video question answering (VideoQA) is a more challenging task and is recently introduced as a natural extension
of ImageQA in [13, 18, 29]. In VideoQA, it is possible to
ask a wide range of questions about temporal relationship
between events such as dynamics, sequence, and causality.
However, there is only limited understanding about how effective VideoQA models in capturing various information
from videos, which is partly because there is no proper framework including dataset to analyze models. In other words,
it is not straightforward to identify main reason of failure in
VideoQA problems—dataset vs. trained model.
There exist a few independent datasets for VideoQA [13,
18, 29], but they are not well-organized enough to estimate
capacity and flexibility of models accurately. For example,
answering questions in MovieQA dataset [18] requires too
high-level understanding about movie contents, which is almost impossible to extract from visual cues only (e.g., calling
off one’s tour, corrupt business, and vulnerable people) and
consequently needs external information or additional modalities. On the other hand, questions in other datasets [13, 29]
often rely on static or time-invariant information, which allows to find answers by observing a single frame with no
consideration of temporal dependency.
To facilitate understanding of VideoQA models, we introduce a novel analysis framework, where we generate a
customizable dataset using Super Mario video gameplays,
referred to as MarioQA. Our dataset is automatically generated from gameplay videos and question templates to contain
desired properties for analysis. We employ the proposed
framework to analyze the impact of a properly constructed
dataset to answering questions, where we are particularly
interested in the questions related to temporal reasoning of
events. The generated dataset consists of three subsets, each
of which contains questions with a different level of difficulty
in temporal reasoning. Note that, by controlling complexity
of questions, individual models can be trained and evaluated
on different subsets. Due to its synthetic nature, we can
eliminate ambiguity in answers, which is often problematic

2867

