MIHash: Online Hashing with Mutual Information
Fatih Cakir∗

Kun He∗ Sarah Adel Bargal Stan Sclaroff
Department of Computer Science
Boston University, Boston, MA

{fcakir,hekun,sbargal,sclaroff}@cs.bu.edu

Abstract
Learning-based hashing methods are widely used for
nearest neighbor retrieval, and recently, online hashing
methods have demonstrated good performance-complexity
trade-offs by learning hash functions from streaming data.
In this paper, we first address a key challenge for online
hashing: the binary codes for indexed data must be recomputed to keep pace with updates to the hash functions.
We propose an efficient quality measure for hash functions,
based on an information-theoretic quantity, mutual information, and use it successfully as a criterion to eliminate
unnecessary hash table updates. Next, we also show how to
optimize the mutual information objective using stochastic
gradient descent. We thus develop a novel hashing method,
MIHash, that can be used in both online and batch settings.
Experiments on image retrieval benchmarks (including a
2.5M image dataset) confirm the effectiveness of our formulation, both in reducing hash table recomputations and
in learning high-quality hash functions.

1. Introduction
Hashing is a widely used approach for practical nearest
neighbor search in many computer vision applications. It
has been observed that adaptive hashing methods that learn
to hash from data generally outperform data-independent
hashing methods such as Locality Sensitive Hashing [4]. In
this paper, we focus on a relatively new family of adaptive
hashing methods, namely online adaptive hashing methods
[1, 2, 6, 11]. These techniques employ online learning in the
presence of streaming data, and are appealing due to their
low computational complexity and their ability to adapt to
changes in the data distribution.
Despite recent progress, a key challenge has not been
addressed in online hashing, which motivates this work:
the computed binary representations, or the “hash table”,
may become outdated after a change in the hash mapping.
To reflect the updates in the hash mapping, the hash table
∗ First two authors contributed equally.

Figure 1: We study online hashing for efficient nearest
neighbor retrieval. Given a hash mapping Φ, an image x̂,
along with its neighbors in x̂ and non-neighbors in x̂ ,
are mapped to binary codes, yielding two distributions of
Hamming distances. In this example, Φ1 has higher quality
than Φ2 since it induces more separable distributions. The
information-theoretic quantity Mutual Information can be
used to capture the separability, which gives a good quality
indicator and learning objective for online hashing.
may need to be recomputed frequently, causing inefficiencies in the system such as successive disk I/O, especially
when dealing with large datasets. We thus identify an important question for online adaptive hashing systems: when
to update the hash table? Previous online hashing solutions
do not address this question, as they usually update both the
hash mapping and hash table concurrently.
We make the observation that achieving high quality
nearest neighbor search is an ultimate goal in hashing systems, and therefore any effort to limit computational complexity should preserve, if not improve, that quality. Therefore, another important question is: how to quantify quality? Here, we briefly describe our answer to this question,
but first introduce some necessary notation. We would like
to learn a hash mapping Φ from feature space X to the bdimensional Hamming space Hb , whose outputs are b-bit

437

