Robust Video Super-Resolution with Learned Temporal Dynamics
Ding Liu1 Zhaowen Wang2 Yuchen Fan1 Xianming Liu3
Zhangyang Wang4 Shiyu Chang5 Thomas Huang1
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 Adobe Research
3
Facebook 4 Texas A&M University 5 IBM Research

Abstract
Video super-resolution (SR) aims to generate a highresolution (HR) frame from multiple low-resolution (LR)
frames in a local temporal window. The inter-frame temporal relation is as crucial as the intra-frame spatial relation
for tackling this problem. However, how to utilize temporal
information efﬁciently and effectively remains challenging
since complex motion is difﬁcult to model and can introduce adverse effects if not handled properly. We address
this problem from two aspects. First, we propose a temporal
adaptive neural network that can adaptively determine the
optimal scale of temporal dependency. Filters on various
temporal scales are applied to the input LR sequence before
their responses are adaptively aggregated. Second, we reduce the complexity of motion between neighboring frames
using a spatial alignment network which is much more robust and efﬁcient than competing alignment methods and
can be jointly trained with the temporal adaptive network in
an end-to-end manner. Our proposed models with learned
temporal dynamics are systematically evaluated on public
video datasets and achieve state-of-the-art SR results compared with other recent video SR approaches. Both of the
temporal adaptation and the spatial alignment modules are
demonstrated to considerably improve SR quality over their
plain counterparts.

1. Introduction
Video super-resolution (SR) is the task of inferring a
high-resolution (HR) video sequence from a low-resolution
(LR) one. This problem has drawn growing attention in
both the research community and industry recently. From
the research perspective, this problem is challenging because video signals vary in both temporal and spatial dimensions. In the meantime, with the prevalence of highdeﬁnition (HD) display such as HDTV in the market, there
is an increasing need for converting low quality video sequences to high-deﬁnition ones so that they can be played
on the HD displays in a visually pleasant manner.

There are two types of relations that are utilized for
video SR: the intra-frame spatial relation and the interframe temporal relation. In the past few years, neural
network based models have successfully demonstrated the
strong capability of modeling the spatial relation for image SR [4, 30, 5, 14, 15, 26, 6]. Compared with the intraframe spatial relation, the inter-frame temporal relation is
more important for video SR, as researches in vision system suggest that human vision system is more sensitive to
motion [7]. Thus it is essential for video SR algorithm to
capture and model the effect of motion information on visual perception. To meet this need, a number of video SR
algorithms are proposed [8, 28, 2, 20, 23, 17] to conduct
pixel-level motion and blur kernel estimation based on image priors, e.g., sparsity and total variation. These methods usually formulate a sophisticated optimization problem
which requires heavy computational cost and thus is rather
time-consuming to solve. Recently, neural network based
models have also emerged in this domain [17, 9, 12]. Some
of them model the temporal relation on a ﬁxed temporal
scale via explicitly conducting motion compensation to generate inputs to the network model [17, 12], while the rest develops recurrent network architectures to use the long-term
temporal dependency [9].
As the key of temporal dependency modeling, motion
estimation can inﬂuence video SR drastically. Rigid and
smooth motion is usually easy to model among neighboring
frames, in which case it is beneﬁcial to include neighboring
frames to super-resolve the center frame. In contrast, with
complex motion or parallax presented across neighboring
frames, motion estimation becomes challenging and erroneous motion compensation can undermine SR.
In this paper, we propose a temporal adaptive neural
network that is able to robustly handle various types of
motion and adaptively select the optimal range of temporal dependency to alleviate the detrimental effect of erroneous motion estimation between consecutive frames. Our
network takes as input a number of aligned LR frames after
motion compensation, and applies ﬁlters of different temporal sizes to generate multiple HR frame estimates. The
12507

