Learning Discriminative Data Fitting Functions for Blind Image Deblurring
Jinshan Pan1 Jiangxin Dong2 Yu-Wing Tai3 Zhixun Su2 Ming-Hsuan Yang4
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology 2 Dalian University of Technology
3
Tencent Youtu Lab 4 UC Merced
Abstract
Solving blind image deblurring usually requires defining a data fitting function and image priors. While existing algorithms mainly focus on developing image priors for
blur kernel estimation and non-blind deconvolution, only
a few methods consider the effect of data fitting functions.
In contrast to the state-of-the-art methods that use a single
or a fixed data fitting term, we propose a data-driven approach to learn effective data fitting functions from a large
set of motion blurred images with the associated ground
truth blur kernels. The learned data fitting function facilitates estimating accurate blur kernels for generic scenes
and domain-specific problems with corresponding image
priors. In addition, we extend the learning approach for
data fitting function to latent image restoration and nonuniform deblurring. Extensive experiments on challenging
motion blurred images demonstrate the proposed algorithm
performs favorably against the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
The goal of blind image deblurring is to recover a blur
kernel and a sharp latent image from a blurred input. It is a
classical vision problem, and significant progress has been
made in recent years [10, 11, 14]. When the blur is spatially
invariant, the blur process can be modeled by a convolution
operation:
B = I ∗ k + n,
(1)
where B, I, k, and n denote the blur image, latent image,
blur kernel, and noise, respectively; and ∗ is the convolution
operator. Blind image deblurring is an ill-posed problem
because there are infinite pairs of I and k which satisfy (1),
and a trivial solution exists, i.e., original blurred image and
delta blur kernel.
Although the number of solutions is infinite, the solution space of natural images can be constrained. Numerous
methods [2, 4, 15, 16] have been developed based on sparsity of image gradients for kernel estimation. On the other
hand, recent algorithms exploit various image priors to recover sharp images, e.g., normalized sparsity prior [13], re-

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Effect of data fitting functions on kernel estimation. (a)
Blurred image. (b) Results of [16] by a data fitting function based
on intensity. (c) Results of [16] by a data fitting function based
on image gradient. (d) Our results. All the results are generated
with the same settings for fair comparisons. The parts enclosed in
the red boxes in (b) and (c) contain significant blur residual and
artifacts (Best viewed on high-resolution displays with zoom-in).

current internal patch recurrence [18], text image prior [20],
and dark channel prior [23]. These image priors are based
on statistical assumptions of clear images and have been
shown to be effective in deblurring. Discriminative methods [32, 37] have been developed to learn effective image
priors [25] for blur kernel estimation. In contrast to statistical priors, several methods use exemplars for kernel estimation [1, 6, 19, 28].
In addition to image priors, another group of methods
focus on sharp edge predictions for blur kernel estimation.
However, these methods usually involve heuristic edge selection steps [3, 33] to estimate blur kernels.
We note that the aforementioned methods focus on developing effective image priors for deblurring. Among the
methods in the literature, intensity information is commonly used to define the data fitting term. Levin et al. [16] show
that proper use of image gradients in a data fitting function
helps improve blur kernel estimation. Some recent algorithms [3, 20, 22, 23, 33, 35] use intensity in latent image
restoration (e.g., minimizing ℓ2 reconstruction errors) and
gradient in the kernel estimation (e.g., minimizing ℓ2 errors). However, the effect of intensity and gradient information in blind image deblurring has not been well analyzed.
In this paper, instead of proposing image priors, we study
the effect of data fitting functions for kernel estimation. We
show that the data fitting function also plays a crucial role
in blind image deblurring as it measures the goodness-of-fit
to the motion blur model in (1). Figure 1 demonstrates the
importance of different data fitting functions on blur kernel
estimation.
11068

