Pose-Invariant Face Alignment with a Single CNN
Amin Jourabloo1 , Mao Ye2 , Xiaoming Liu1 , and Liu Ren2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, MI
2
Bosch Research North America, Palo Alto, CA
1,2
{jourablo, liuxm}@msu.edu, {mao.ye2, liu.ren}@us.bosch.com

Abstract
Face alignment has witnessed substantial progress in the
last decade. One of the recent focuses has been aligning a dense 3D face shape to face images with large head
poses. The dominant technology used is based on the cascade of regressors, e.g., CNNs, which has shown promising results. Nonetheless, the cascade of CNNs suffers from
several drawbacks, e.g., lack of end-to-end training, handcrafted features and slow training speed. To address these
issues, we propose a new layer, named visualization layer,
which can be integrated into the CNN architecture and enables joint optimization with different loss functions. Extensive evaluation of the proposed method on multiple datasets
demonstrates state-of-the-art accuracy, while reducing the
training time by more than half compared to the typical cascade of CNNs. In addition, we compare across multiple
CNN architectures, all with the visualization layer, to further demonstrate the advantage of its utilization.

1. Introduction
Face alignment, also known as face landmark detection, is an essential process for many facial analysis tasks,
such as face recognition [36], expression estimation [1] and
3D face reconstruction [20, 30]. During the last decade,
face alignment technologies have been substantially improved [8–10, 32, 41]. One recent advancement in this area
is to tackle challenging cases with large face poses, e.g.,
profile views with ±90◦ yaw angles [18, 19, 23, 24, 47, 50].
The dominant technology for large-pose face alignment
(LPFA) utilizes a cascade of regressors which combines different types of regression designs [23, 49, 50] with feature
extraction methods [18]. At each stage of this procedure,
the target parameters, e.g., the 2D landmarks or the head
pose, as well as the 3D face shape, are refined by regressThis work was performed mostly during the first author’s internship at
Bosch Research North America, Palo Alto, CA.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. For the purpose of learning an end-to-end face alignment
model, our novel visualization layer reconstructs the 3D face shape
(a) from the estimated parameters inside the CNN and synthesizes
a 2D image (b) via the surface normal vectors of visible vertexes.

ing an update of these parameters. Due to the proven power
of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) in vision tasks,
it is also adopted as the regressor in this framework and
has achieved the state-of-the-art performance on face alignment [18, 23, 34, 50].
Despite the recent success, the cascade of CNNs, when
applied to LPFA, still suffers from the following drawbacks.
Lack of end-to-end training: It is a consensus that endto-end training is desired for CNN [6, 14]. However, in
the existing methods, the CNNs are typically trained independently at each cascade stage. Sometimes even multiple CNNs are applied independently at each stage. For
example, locations of different landmark sets are estimated
by various CNNs and combined via a separate fusing module [33]. Therefore, these CNNs can not be jointly optimized and might lead to a sub-optimal solution.
Hand-crafted feature extraction: Since the CNNs are
trained independently, feature extraction is required to utilize the result of a previous CNN and provide input to the
current CNN. Simple feature extraction methods are used,
e.g., extracting patches based on 2D or 3D face shapes without considering other factors including pose and expression [33, 45] . Normally, the cascade of CNNs is a collection of shallow CNNs where each one has less than five layers. Hence, this framework can not extract deep features by
building upon the extracted features of early-stage CNNs.
Slow training speed: Training a cascade of CNNs is
13200

