A Novel Space-Time Representation on the Positive Semidefinite Cone
for Facial Expression Recognition
Anis Kacem1 , Mohamed Daoudi1 , Boulbaba Ben Amor1 , and Juan Carlos Alvarez-Paiva2
1

IMT Lille Douai, Univ. Lille, CNRS, UMR 9189 – CRIStAL –
Centre de Recherche en Informatique Signal et Automatique de Lille, F-59000 Lille, France
2
Univ. Lille, CNRS, UMR 8524, Laboratoire Paul Painlevé, F-59000 Lille, France.

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of facial expression
recognition using a novel space-time geometric representation. We describe the temporal evolution of facial landmarks as parametrized trajectories on the Riemannian manifold of positive semidefinite matrices of fixed-rank. Our
representation has the advantage to bring naturally a second desirable quantity when comparing shapes – the spatial covariance – in addition to the conventional affineshape representation. We derive then geometric and computational tools for rate-invariant analysis and adaptive
re-sampling of trajectories, grounding on the Riemannian
geometry of the manifold. Specifically, our approach involves three steps: 1) facial landmarks are first mapped
into the Riemannian manifold of positive semidefinite matrices of rank 2, to build time-parameterized trajectories;
2) a temporal alignment is performed on the trajectories,
providing a geometry-aware (dis-)similarity measure between them; 3) finally, pairwise proximity function SVM
(ppfSVM) is used to classify them, incorporating the latter (dis-)similarity measure into the kernel function. We
show the effectiveness of the proposed approach on four
publicly available benchmarks (CK+, MMI, Oulu-CASIA,
and AFEW). The results of the proposed approach are comparable to or better than the state-of-the-art methods when
involving only facial landmarks.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Automated Facial Expression Recognition (AFER) has aroused considerable interest [8]. Earlier
literature mostly focused on static faces grounding on either
shape (geometry) or appearance features. Recently, there
have been a general shift to exploit the dynamics (motion)
in facial videos [14, 20, 25], as conveying an expression
is obviously a temporal process. In particular, advances

in landmarks detection [3, 34, 44] have opened the door
to accurate geometry-driven approaches. Besides, it has
been stated that in unconstrained scenario, geometric features outperform appearance features [23]. However, analyzing temporal shape features brings new challenges – (1)
which suitable representation to facial shape analysis under
rigid transformations due to changes in head position and
orientation? (2) Which temporal representation for modeling the dynamic of facial expression? (3) How to compare
and classify temporal sequences for the purpose of facial
expression recognition? To tackle these challenges, we introduce in this work a comprehensive geometric framework
which involves the temporal evolution of facial landmarks.
Our framework incorporates a novel shape representation
using Gramian matrices derived from centered facial landmark configurations and its extension to time-parametrized
trajectories on the positive semidefinite cone. We use then
appropriate tools to compare and classify trajectories in a
rate-invariant fashion, grounding on the geometry of the
manifold of interest.

2. Related Work
In the appearance-based (A) category, first works extend conventional local features such us SIFT, LBP, and
HOG to suit video-based data, giving rise to 3D SIFT [33],
LBP-TOP [46], and 3D HOG [21]. In [25], the authors
exploit the dynamics of facial expressions and propose a
semantics-aware representation. They model a video clip
as a Spatio-Temporal Manifold (STM) spanned by local
spatio-temporal features called Expressionlets built from
low-level appearance features. These features are based on
clustering cuboids of pre-defined sizes extracted from facial
sequences in order to model the manifold of facial expression variations. A temporal alignment among STMs is performed to allow a rate-invariant analysis of facial expressions. Deep Networks based on appearance features have
been recently applied on facial image sequences for the pur-

3180

