Learning Spread-out Local Feature Descriptors
Xu Zhang1 , Felix X. Yu2 , Sanjiv Kumar2 , Shih-Fu Chang1
1
Columbia University, 2 Google Research
{xu.zhang, sc250}@columbia.edu, {felixyu, sanjivk}@google.com

Abstract
We propose a simple, yet powerful regularization technique that can be used to significantly improve both the
pairwise and triplet losses in learning local feature descriptors. The idea is that in order to fully utilize the expressive
power of the descriptor space, good local feature descriptors should be sufficiently “spread-out” over the space. In
this work, we propose a regularization term to maximize
the spread in feature descriptor inspired by the property of
uniform distribution. We show that the proposed regularization with triplet loss outperforms existing Euclidean distance based descriptor learning techniques by a large margin. As an extension, the proposed regularization technique
can also be used to improve image-level deep feature embedding.

1. Introduction
Computing image patch correspondences based on local descriptor matching is important in many computer vision problems such as image retrieval, wide baseline stereo
matching and panorama building. The main challenge of
finding correct correspondences is that the appearance of
the image patches varies due to changes of scaling, view
angle, illumination and imaging condition etc. Designing
local feature descriptors that are invariant to such changes
is therefore essential. Efforts of local descriptor fall into
two categories: hand-crafted and learning-based. Handcrafted descriptors try to achieve the invariance by manually selected rules. One of the most popular hand-crafted
descriptors is SIFT [10] and its variants [2, 24], which are
widely used in the computer vision community. The main
issue of the hand-crafted descriptors is that they can only
consider a limited predefined set of variations.
One approach to take all variations into consideration
is learning local descriptors from a large patch correspondence dataset [3, 20]. The state-of-the-art descriptor learning methods are based on neural networks [1, 8, 19, 26].
In addition to the model itself, the most important aspect
of learning-based method is the loss function which defines

the goal of descriptor learning: matching patches should
be close in the descriptor space, while the non-matching
patches should be far-away1 . The pairwise loss and triplet
loss (Section 2) are the commonly used loss functions to
achieve the desired properties. Recently, there are a lot of
works such as smart sampling strategies [1, 12] and structured loss [23] that improve the triplet loss. In particular,
Kumar et al. [8] propose to use a global loss to separate
the distance distributions of the matching pairs and nonmatching pairs. This approach avoids the design of complicated sampling strategies and is also shown to provide
results that are robust to training with outliers.
The success of global loss motivates us to further explore
the desired properties of the descriptor space and design a
robust regularization term based on these properties. Our
main idea is that the good local feature descriptors should
be sufficiently “spread-out” in the descriptor space in order
to fully utilize the expressive power of the space. Specifically, we introduce a regularization term that induces the
spread-out condition, inspired by the properties of the uniform distribution on unit sphere (Section 3). The regularization can be easily used to improve all methods where
pairwise or triplet loss is used. We show that the proposed
regularization with triplet loss, without hard sample mining,
outperforms all the Euclidean distance based descriptors by
a large margin (Section 5). In particular, it outperforms the
global loss [8] in the patch pair classification task. As an
extension of descriptor learning, we show that the proposed
regularization can also be used in improving image-level
deep feature embedding (Section 6).

2. Background
We begin by reviewing some commonly used loss functions in learning local feature descriptors. Let X =
{x1 , . . . , xN }, xi ∈ Rm×n denote a set of N training
patches with m × n pixels. {yij , 1 ≤ i, j ≤ N } is a set
of pairwise labels for X indicating whether xi and xj belong to the same class (yij = 1) or not (yij = 0). In this
paper, we call the pairs with yij = 1 the matching pairs,
1 We use Euclidean distance in this paper. See Section 2 for more details, and Section 3 for the discussion on alternatives.

4595

