Corner-Based Geometric Calibration of Multi-Focus Plenoptic Cameras
Sotiris Nousias1,2

Francois Chadebecq1,2
Jonas Pichat2
Pearse Keane3
Sebastien Ourselin1,2 Christos Bergeles1,2
1
Wellcome/EPSRC Centre for Interventional and Surgical Sciences, UCL, London, UK
2
Centre for Medical Image Computing, UCL, London, UK
3
NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, UK
sotiris.nousias.15@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a method for geometric calibration of multifocus plenoptic cameras using raw images. Multi-focus
plenoptic cameras feature several types of micro-lenses spatially aligned in front of the camera sensor to generate
micro-images at different magnifications. This multi-lens
arrangement provides computational-photography benefits
but complicates calibration. Our methodology achieves
the detection of the type of micro-lenses, the retrieval of
their spatial arrangement, and the estimation of intrinsic
and extrinsic camera parameters therefore fully characterising this specialised camera class. Motivated from classic pinhole camera calibration, our algorithm operates on
a checker-board’s corners, retrieved by a custom microimage corner detector. This approach enables the introduction of a reprojection error that is used in a minimisation framework. Our algorithm compares favourably to
the state-of-the-art, as demonstrated by controlled and freehand experiments, making it a first step towards accurate
3D reconstruction and Structure-from-Motion.

1. Introduction
Classic pinhole cameras project the multi-dimensional
information of the light flowing through a scene into a single 2D snapshot. This projection limits the information that
can be reconstructed from the 2D acquisition. Plenoptic (or
light-field) cameras, on the other hand, capture a 4D slice
of the plenoptic function [1], termed the “light-field”. These
cameras provide both spatial and angular information on the
light flowing through a scene; multiple views are captured
in a single photographic exposure [1].
Adelson and Wang [2] used a lenticular array placed in
front of the sensor of a traditional pinhole camera to create one of the first plenoptic cameras. Micro-manufacturing
and computing advances allowed Ng to replace the lentic-

Figure 1: Illustration of a multi-focus plenoptic camera
from RaytrixTM and a raw plenoptic image.

ular array with a micro-lens array positioned at the main
lens’ focal length (unfocused plenoptic camera), resulting
in the first hand-held light-field camera [21]. Designs that
balance the trade-off between angular and spatial resolution
place the micro-lenses behind the focal plane of the main
lens (Keplerian) [20], or in front (Galilean) [23, 10].
The multi-dimensional acquisitions of plenoptic cameras facilitate the recovery of 3D information. Using the
encoded light-ray directions, images can be digitally refocused [21], while single-shot depth maps can be obtained
by combining defocus and multiple-view cues [28]. Therefore, plenoptic cameras are increasingly considered in computer vision [23, 30, 16, 29, 18, 19], robotics [7, 5], and
even life-sciences [24] and medical imaging [3, 26].
Using well-calibrated cameras will improve application
and algorithm performance. As newer plenoptic cameras feature not a single but several different types of
micro-lenses (multi-focus plenoptic cameras), calibrating
the imaging system geometrically, i.e. end-to-end from 3D
points to 2D image points, becomes critical.
Related Work: Johannsen et al. presented metric calibration and distortion correction for multi-focus plenoptic

957

