Deep Free-Form Deformation Network for Object-Mask Registration
Haoyang Zhang
ANU, Data61 CSIRO
Canberra, Australia

Xuming He
ShanghaiTech University
Shanghai, China

haoyang.zhang@anu.edu.au

hexm@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of object-mask registration, which aligns a shape mask to a target object instance. Prior work typically formulate the problem as an
object segmentation task with mask prior, which is challenging to solve. In this work, we take a transformation
based approach that predicts a 2D non-rigid spatial transform and warps the shape mask onto the target object. In
particular, we propose a deep spatial transformer network
that learns free-form deformations (FFDs) to non-rigidly
warp the shape mask based on a multi-level dual mask feature pooling strategy. The FFD transforms are based on
B-splines and parameterized by the offsets of predefined
control points, which are differentiable. Therefore, we are
able to train the entire network in an end-to-end manner
based on L2 matching loss. We evaluate our FFD network on a challenging object-mask alignment task, which
aims to refine a set of object segment proposals, and our
approach achieves the state-of-the-art performance on the
Cityscapes, the PASCAL VOC and the MSCOCO datasets.

1. Introduction
Aligning a shape mask to object instances is a commonly
used strategy in segmenting objects from background or
inferring shape deformation of individual objects, and has
wide applications in semantic instance segmentation [34],
object proposal generation [14] and visual object tracking [19], etc. While it can be viewed as a special case of
image registration problem [39], such object-mask alignment task is more challenging as the mask lacks internal
structure for finding the dense correspondence between the
target object and itself.
Most existing approaches address this problem by formulating it as an object segmentation task, in which the
shape mask is used as an initialization, such as contour
matching [5], or an instance shape prior for binary object
segmentation [23, 31]. However, the resulting segmentation task is usually equally challenging, and does not pro-

Figure 1. An illustration of the object-mask alignment problem
and the transformation implemented by the deep free-form deformation network.

vide shape alignment between mask and object.
An alternative, and sometimes more natural approach to
the object-mask alignment problem is to predict a 2D spatial transformation that registers mask onto the target object,
as shown in Figure 1. Such a transformation-based strategy
has several advantages in practice. First, the problem of
predicting 2D transforms is typically simpler due to the fact
that the common transformation families, such as affine or
TPS [27], have fewer degrees of freedom and thus the output of prediction lies in a lower dimensional space. Second,
for slightly mis-aligned mask and object, transforming binary masks is more efficient than recomputing the segmentation or doing image registration. Finally, the predicted
transformation allows us to infer the detailed shape deformation of an instance relative to its canonical shape mask.
In this paper, we propose a deep learning approach to
address the object-mask alignment problem. Given an input image containing the target object and an initial mask,
our approach learns a non-rigid 2D transform that warps the
mask onto the target object. To achieve this, we design a
novel spatial transformer network that predicts a free-form
deformation (FFD) [33] transform and applies the non-rigid
transform to the input mask to generate a better alignment
between the mask and object.
Specifically, we build a deep convolutional neural network consisting of two modules. The first module computes
the convolutional feature maps from the input image, and
extracts a feature representation of the image region covered by the mask. To encode the shape information of the
initial mask, and the image cues around object, we develop a
multi-level dual mask feature pooling method to capture the
14251

