Hierarchical Multimodal LSTM for Dense Visual-Semantic Embedding

1

Zhenxing Niu1
Mo Zhou2
Le Wang3
Xinbo Gao2
Gang Hua4
2
3
4
Alibaba Group, Xidian University, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Microsoft Research

{zhenxingniu,ganghua}@gmail.com, lewang@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, xinbogao@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract

濚濸瀁濸瀅濴濿澳濜瀀濴濺濸澳濖濴瀃瀇濼瀂瀁濼瀁濺濍

•‘A man is standing in front of towers.’

We address the problem of dense visual-semantic embedding that maps not only full sentences and whole images
but also phrases within sentences and salient regions within
images into a multimodal embedding space. Such dense
embeddings, when applied to the task of image captioning,
enable us to produce several region-oriented and detailed
phrases rather than just an overview sentence to describe
an image. Specifically, we present a hierarchical structured
recurrent neural network (RNN), namely Hierarchical Multimodal LSTM (HM-LSTM). Compared with chain structured RNN, our proposed model exploits the hierarchical relations between sentences and phrases, and between whole
images and image regions, to jointly establish their representations. Without the need of any supervised labels, our
proposed model automatically learns the fine-grained correspondences between phrases and image regions towards
the dense embedding. Extensive experiments on several
datasets validate the efficacy of our method, which compares favorably with the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Visual-semantic embedding is to map both images and
their captions into a common space, so that we can retrieve/rank captions given images or retrieve/rank images
given captions. Particularly, it has been broadly used for
image captioning which aims to describe images with sentences. Recently, the advances in deep learning have made
signiﬁcant progress on visual-semantic embedding. Generally, image representations are produced by Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN), and caption representations are
produced by Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN). A ranking loss is subsequently optimized to make the corresponding representations as close as possible in the embedding
space [11] [6] [29] [15].
Most previous methods only map full sentences and
whole images into an embedding space. As a result, they are
only able to describe an image with a general and overview
sentence, i.e., coarsely and generally depict the image con-

濥濸濺濼瀂瀁激瀂瀅濼濸瀁瀇濸濷澿澳濷濸瀇濴濼濿濸濷澿澳濴瀁濷澳瀃濻瀅濴瀆濸激濿濸瀉濸濿澳濖濴瀃瀇濼瀂瀁濼瀁濺濍

•‘a man with a blue hat and sunglasses’
•‘a girl in red jacket and black dress’
•‘several white towers with golden spire’

Figure 1. Region-oriented, detailed, and phrase-level image captioning. It is desired to produce several region-oriented and detailed phrases rather than just an overview sentence for describing
an image.

tent. However, different users may be interested in distinct
objects/regions in an image, and hence it is desired to individually depict them with speciﬁc descriptions. As shown
in Fig. 1, some users may be interested in ‘the man with
sunglasses’ while others may be interested in ‘the girl in red
jacket’. Therefore, it is desired to produce several regionoriented and detailed phrases (e.g., ‘a man with a blue hat
and sunglasses’) rather than just an overview sentence (e.g.,
‘A man is standing in front of towers’) to describe an image.
An intuitive solution is to map not only the full sentences
but also the phrases within the sentences into a common
space. As such, for a given image after detecting salient
image regions, detailed phrases can be retrieved to describe
those image regions. Since long sentences are decomposed
as short phrases, many diverse and subtle phrases could be
produced. Besides, since more diverse phrases are mapped
into the embedding space, we can learn a much denser embedding space so that it is possible to ﬁnd a better and more
expressive phrase to describe an image or an image region.
However, most previous methods cannot naturally represent the phrases within sentences, and hence cannot map
them into the embedding space. The main reason is that the
neural networks (e.g., RNN [10] [9]) adopted for building
sentence representations often have a chain structure, i.e., a
basic unit is unfolded one by one through a chain structure.
Therefore, the full sentences are naturally represented with
the last hidden state of the chain structured neural network
since it encodes all the words within the sentence. But it is
difﬁcult to directly build representations for phrases within
sentences.
11881

