Detail-revealing Deep Video Super-resolution∗
Xin Tao1 Hongyun Gao1 Renjie Liao2,3 Jue Wang4 Jiaya Jia1,5
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 University of Toronto
3
Uber Advanced Technologies Group 4 Megvii Inc. 5 Youtu Lab, Tencent
{xtao,hygao}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk rjliao@cs.toronto.edu
arphid@gmail.com

Abstract
Previous CNN-based video super-resolution approaches
need to align multiple frames to the reference. In this paper, we show that proper frame alignment and motion compensation is crucial for achieving high quality results. We
accordingly propose a “sub-pixel motion compensation”
(SPMC) layer in a CNN framework. Analysis and experiments show the suitability of this layer in video SR. The
final end-to-end, scalable CNN framework effectively incorporates the SPMC layer and fuses multiple frames to reveal
image details. Our implementation can generate visually
and quantitatively high-quality results, superior to current
state-of-the-arts, without the need of parameter tuning.

1. Introduction
As one of the fundamental problems in image processing
and computer vision, video or multi-frame super-resolution
(SR) aims at recovering high-resolution (HR) images from a
sequence of low-resolution (LR) ones. In contrast to singleimage SR where details have to be generated based on only
external examples, an ideal video SR system should be
able to correctly extract and fuse image details in multiple
frames. To achieve this goal, two important sub-problems
are to be answered: (1) how to align multiple frames to construct accurate correspondence; and (2) how to effectively
fuse image details for high-quality outputs.
Motion Compensation While large motion between consecutive frames increases the difficulty to locate corresponding image regions, subtle sub-pixel motion contrarily benefits restoration of details. Most previous methods
compensate inter-frame motion by estimating optical flow
[2, 7, 19, 20, 23] or applying block-matching [28]. After
motion is estimated, traditional methods [7, 20, 23] reconstruct the HR output based on various imaging models and
∗ This work is in part supported by a grant from the Research Grants
Council of the Hong Kong SAR (project No. 413113).

leojia9@gmail.com

image priors, typically under an iterative estimation framework. Most of these methods involve rather intensive caseby-case parameter-tuning and costly computation.
Recent deep-learning-based video SR methods [2, 14]
compensate inter-frame motion by aligning all other frames
to the reference one, using backward warping. We show that
such a seemingly reasonable technical choice is actually not
optimal for video SR, and improving motion compensation
can directly lead to higher quality SR results. In this paper,
we achieve this by proposing a sub-pixel motion compensation (SPMC) strategy, which is validated by both theoretical
analysis and extensive experiments.
Detail Fusion Besides motion compensation, proper image detail fusion from multiple frames is the key to the success of video SR. We propose a new CNN framework that
incorporates the SPMC layer, and effectively fuses image
information from aligned frames. Although previous CNNbased video SR systems can produce sharp-edge images, it
is not entirely clear whether the image details are those inherent in input frames, or learned from external data. In
many practical applications such as face or text recognition,
only true HR details are useful. In this paper we provide
insightful ablation study to verify this point.
Scalability A traditionally-overlooked but practicallymeaningful property of SR systems is the scalability. In
many previous learning-based SR systems, the network
structure is closely coupled with SR parameters, making
them less flexible when new SR parameters need to be applied. For example, ESPCN [26] output channel number is
determined by the scale factor. VSRnet [14] and VESPCN
[2] can only take a fixed number of temporal frames as input, once trained.
In contrast, our system is fully scalable. First, it can
take arbitrary-size input images. Second, the new SPMC
layer does not contain trainable parameters and can be applied for arbitrary scaling factors during testing. Finally, the
ConvLSTM-based [29] network structure makes it possible
to accept an arbitrary number of frames for SR in testing
14472

