Introspective Neural Networks for Generative Modeling
Justin Lazarow∗
Dept. of CSE, UCSD

Long Jin∗
Dept. of CSE, UCSD

Zhuowen Tu
Dept. of CogSci, UCSD

jlazarow@ucsd.edu

lojin@ucsd.edu

ztu@ucsd.edu

Abstract
We study unsupervised learning by developing a generative model built from progressively learned deep convolutional neural networks. The resulting generator is additionally a discriminator, capable of “introspection” in a
sense — being able to self-evaluate the difference between
its generated samples and the given training data. Through
repeated discriminative learning, desirable properties of
modern discriminative classiﬁers are directly inherited by
the generator. Speciﬁcally, our model learns a sequence
of CNN classiﬁers using a synthesis-by-classiﬁcation algorithm. In the experiments, we observe encouraging results
on a number of applications including texture modeling,
artistic style transferring, face modeling, and unsupervised
feature learning. 1

1. Introduction
Supervised learning techniques have made a substantial impact on tasks that can be formulated as a classiﬁcation/regression problem [43, 11, 5, 27]. Unsupervised learning, where no task-speciﬁc labeling/feedback is provided on
top of the input data, still remains one of the most difﬁcult
problems in machine learning but holds a bright future since
a large number of tasks have little to no supervision.
Popular unsupervised learning methods include mixture
models [9], principal component analysis (PCA) [24], spectral clustering [38], topic modeling [4], and autoencoders
[3, 2]. In a nutshell, unsupervised learning techniques are
mostly guided by the minimum description length principle (MDL) [35] to best reconstruct the data whereas supervised learning methods are primarily driven by minimizing
error metrics to best ﬁt the input labeling. Unsupervised
learning models are often generative and supervised classiﬁers are often discriminative; generative model learning
has been traditionally considered to be a much harder task
than discriminative learning [12] due to its intrinsic learning complexity, as well as many assumptions and simpliﬁcations made about the underlying models.
1∗ equal contribution.

Figure 1. The ﬁrst row shows the development of two 64 × 64 pseudonegative samples (patches) over the course of the training process on the
“tree bark” texture at selected stages. We can see the initial “scaffold”
created and then reﬁned by the networks in later stages. The input “tree
bark” texture and a synthesized image by our INNg algorithm are shown
in the second row. This texture was synthesized by INNg using 20 CNN
classiﬁers each with 4 layers.

Generative and discriminative models have traditionally
been considered distinct and complementary to each other.
In the past, connections have been built to combine the two
families [12, 28, 41, 22]. In the presence of supervised
information with a large amount of data, a discriminative
classiﬁer [26] exhibits superior capability in making robust
classiﬁcation by learning rich and informative representations; unsupervised generative models do not require supervision but at a price of relying on assumptions that are often
too ideal in dealing with problems of real-world complexity. Attempts have previously been made to learn generative
models directly using discriminative classiﬁers for density
estimation [45] and image modeling [40]. There is also a
wave of recent development in generative adversarial networks (GAN) [14, 34, 37, 1] in which a discriminator helps
a generator try not to be fooled by “fake” samples. We will
discuss in detail the relations and connections of our model
with these existing literature in the later sections.
In [45], a self supervised boosting algorithm was proposed to train a boosting algorithm by sequentially adding
features as weak classiﬁers on additionally self-generated
negative samples. Furthermore, the generative discrimi-

2774

