Attentive Semantic Video Generation using Captions
Tanya Marwah∗
IIT Hyderabad

Gaurav Mittal∗
gaurav.mittal.191013@gmail.com

vineethnb@iith.ac.in

ee13b1044@iith.ac.in

Abstract
This paper proposes a network architecture to perform
variable length semantic video generation using captions.
We adopt a new perspective towards video generation where
we allow the captions to be combined with the long-term
and short-term dependencies between video frames and
thus generate a video in an incremental manner. Our experiments demonstrate our network architecture’s ability
to distinguish between objects, actions and interactions in
a video and combine them to generate videos for unseen
captions. The network also exhibits the capability to perform spatio-temporal style transfer when asked to generate videos for a sequence of captions. We also show that
the network’s ability to learn a latent representation allows
it generate videos in an unsupervised manner and perform
other tasks such as action recognition.

1. Introduction
What does the mention of a video evoke in a listener’s
mind? A long sequence of images (frames) with multiple
changing scenes which are temporally and spatially linked
to each other. Making a machine generate such an entity is a
highly involved task as it requires the machine to learn how
to coordinate between the long-term and short-term correlations existing between the various elements of a video. This
is the primary motivation behind our work where we take
the first steps towards semantic video generation with captions generating variable length videos one frame at a time.
There have been efforts in the recent past which attempt
to perform unsupervised video generation [26, 16] in general, without any specific conditioning on captions. However, from an application perspective, it may not be very
useful as there doesn’t exist any semantic control over what
will be generated at run time. In this work, we propose an
approach that attempts to provide this control and streamlines video generation by using captions.
Since a video can be arbitrarily long, generation of such
videos necessitates a step-by-step generation mechanism.
∗ Equal Contribution

Vineeth N. Balasubramanian
IIT Hyderabad

Therefore, our model approaches video generation iteratively by creating one frame at a time, and conditioning the
generation of the subsequent frames by the frames generated so far. Also, every frame is itself an amalgamation of
several objects moving and interacting with each other. In
order to generate such frames, we follow a recurrent attentive approach similar to [3], which focuses on one part of
the frame at each time step for generation, and completes
the frame generation over multiple time steps. By iteratively generating the frame over a number of time-steps
in response to a given caption, our network adds captiondriven semantics to the generated video. A key advantage
of following such an approach is the possibility to generate
videos with multiple captions and thus change the contents
of the video midway according to the new caption.
In order to achieve the aforementioned objectives, the
proposed network is required to not only account for the local correlations between any two consecutively generated
frames but also has to ensure that the long-term spatiotemporal nature of the video is preserved so that the generated video is not just a loosely coupled set of frames but exhibits a holistic portrayal of the given caption. In this work,
we adopt a fresh perspective in this direction, by devising
a network that learns these long-term and short-term video
semantics separately but simultaneously. To create a frame
based on a caption, instead of trivially conditioning the generation on the caption text, we introduce a soft-attention
over the captions separately for the long-term and shortterm contexts. This attention mechanism serves the crucial
role of allowing the network to selectively combine the various parts of the caption with these two contexts and hence,
significantly improves the quality of the generated frame.
Experiments show that the network, when given multiple
captions, is even able to transition between scenes transferring the spatio-temporal semantics it has learned thus far,
dynamically during generation.
This paper makes the following contributions: (1) A
novel methodology that can perform variable length semantic video generation with captions by separately and simultaneously learning the long-term and short-term context of
the video; (2) A methodology for selectively combining in-

1426

