Weakly-supervised learning of visual relations
Julia Peyre1,2

Ivan Laptev1,2

Cordelia Schmid2,4

Josef Sivic1,2,3

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel approach for modeling visual relations between pairs of objects. We call relation a
triplet of the form (subject, predicate, object) where the
predicate is typically a preposition (eg. ’under’, ’in front
of’) or a verb (’hold’, ’ride’) that links a pair of objects
(subject, object). Learning such relations is challenging
as the objects have different spatial configurations and appearances depending on the relation in which they occur.
Another major challenge comes from the difficulty to get annotations, especially at box-level, for all possible triplets,
which makes both learning and evaluation difficult. The
contributions of this paper are threefold. First, we design
strong yet flexible visual features that encode the appearance and spatial configuration for pairs of objects. Second,
we propose a weakly-supervised discriminative clustering
model to learn relations from image-level labels only. Third
we introduce a new challenging dataset of unusual relations
(UnRel) together with an exhaustive annotation, that enables accurate evaluation of visual relation retrieval. We
show experimentally that our model results in state-of-theart results on the visual relationship dataset [32] significantly improving performance on previously unseen relations (zero-shot learning), and confirm this observation on
our newly introduced UnRel dataset.

1. Introduction
While a great progress has been made on the detection
and localization of individual objects [41, 53], it is now time
to move one step forward towards understanding complete
scenes. For example, if we want to localize “a person sitting
on a chair under an umbrella”, we not only need to detect the
objects involved : “person”, “chair”, “umbrella”, but also
need to find the correspondence of the semantic relations
“sitting on” and “under” with the correct pairs of objects
in the image. Thus, an important challenge is automatic
1 Département d’informatique de l’ENS, Ecole normale supérieure,
CNRS, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France.
2 INRIA
3 Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at the Czech
Technical University in Prague.
4 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000
Grenoble, France.

car under elephant

person in cart

person ride dog

person on top of traffic light

Figure 1: Examples of top retrieved pairs of boxes in UnRel
dataset for unusual queries (indicated below each image)
with our weakly-supervised model described in 3.2.
understanding of how entities in an image interact with each
other.
This task presents two main challenges. First, the appearance of objects can change significantly due to interactions with other objects (person cycling, person driving).
This visual complexity can be tackled by learning “visual
phrases” [44] capturing the pair of objects in a relation as
one entity, as opposed to first detecting individual entities in
an image and then modeling their relations. This approach,
however, does not scale to the large number of relations
as the number of such visual phrases grows combinatorially, requiring large amounts of training data. To address
this challenge, we need a method that can share knowledge
among similar relations. Intuitively, it seems possible to
generalize frequent relations to unseen triplets like those depicted in Figure 1 : for example having seen “person ride
horse” at training could help recognizing “person ride dog”
at test time.
The second main challenge comes from the difficulty to
provide exhaustive annotations on the object level for relations that are by their nature non mutually-exclusive (i.e.
“on the left of” is also “next to”). A complete labeling of R
relations for all pairs of N objects in an image would indeed

5179

