Jointly Attentive Spatial-Temporal Pooling Networks for Video-based
Person Re-Identification
Shuangjie Xu1∗
1

Yu Cheng2∗

Kang Gu1

Yang Yang3

Shiyu Chang4

Pan Zhou1

2
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
AI Foundations, IBM Research
4
3
Northwestern University
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center

Video a

Abstract
Person Re-Identification (person re-id) is a crucial task
as its applications in visual surveillance and humancomputer interaction. In this work, we present a novel joint
Spatial and Temporal Attention Pooling Network (ASTPN)
for video-based person re-identification, which enables the
feature extractor to be aware of the current input video sequences, in a way that interdependency from the matching
items can directly influence the computation of each other’s
representation. Specifically, the spatial pooling layer is
able to select regions from each frame, while the attention
temporal pooling performed can select informative frames
over the sequence, both pooling guided by the information
from distance matching. Experiments are conduced on the
iLIDS-VID, PRID-2011 and MARS datasets and the results
demonstrate that this approach outperforms existing stateof-art methods. We also analyze how the joint pooling in
both dimensions can boost the person re-id performance
more effectively than using either of them separately 1 .

1. Introduction
Person Re-Identification has been viewed as one of the
key subproblems of the generic object recognition task. It
is also important due to its applications in surveillance, and
human-computer interaction communities. Given a query
image, the task is to identify a set of matching person images from a pool, usually captured from the same/different
cameras, from different viewpoints, at the same/different
time points. It is a very challenging task due to the
large variations of lighting conditions, viewing angles, body
poses and occlusions.
Methods for re-identification in still images setting have
been extensively investigated, including feature represen∗ indicates equal contributions.
1 the code is available at https://github.com/shuangjiexu/SpatialTemporal-Pooling-Networks-ReID

Video a

Distance

Distance

Video b

Video c

Figure 1. Sample video frames from one person captured by three
cameras a, b and c, simulating how human compare different video
pairs. The regions under the cycles are the parts which visual attentions are drawn on.

tation learning [11, 19, 15, 38], distance metric learning
[14, 41, 30, 36, 37, 21] and CNN-based schemes [33, 32,
24, 25]. Very recently, researchers began to explore solving
this problem in video-based setting, which is a more natural
way to perform re-identification. The intuition of this kind
of methods is that temporal information related to person
motion can be captured from video. Moreover, sequences of
images provide rich samples of persons’ appearances, helping boosting the re-identification performance with more
discriminative features. In [20], a temporal deep neural
network architecture combines optical flow, recurrent layers and mean-pooling and achieves reasonable success. The
work in [32] exploited a novel recurrent feature aggregation framework, which is capable of learning discriminative
sequence level representation from simple frame-wise features.
The main idea of video-based methods is first to extract useful representations from video images with RNN
(or CNN-RNN) models. Then exploit a distance function to
judge their extent of matching. However, most of these ap14733

