Joint learning of object and action detectors
Vicky Kalogeiton1,2

Philippe Weinzaepfel3

Vittorio Ferrari2

Abstract
dog-jumping

While most existing approaches for detection in videos
focus on objects or human actions separately, we aim at
jointly detecting objects performing actions, such as cat
eating or dog jumping. We introduce an end-to-end multitask objective that jointly learns object-action relationships.
We compare it with different training objectives, validate
its effectiveness for detecting objects-actions in videos, and
show that both tasks of object and action detection benefit from this joint learning. Moreover, the proposed architecture can be used for zero-shot learning of actions: our
multitask objective leverages the commonalities of an action performed by different objects, e.g. dog and cat jumping, enabling to detect actions of an object without training
with these object-actions pairs. In experiments on the A2D
dataset [50], we obtain state-of-the-art results on segmentation of object-action pairs. We finally apply our multitask
architecture to detect visual relationships between objects
in images of the VRD dataset [24].

1. Introduction
Video understanding has received increased attention
over the past decade leading to significant advances [39,
43]. However, most existing approaches focus either on
object recognition [14, 34] or on human action recognition [29, 48] separately. For both tasks, the community has
moved from small datasets [35] to large ones with thousands of videos and hundreds of classes [1, 12], from controlled environments [38] to videos in-the-wild [15]. Given
the impressive success of Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) for object detection [23, 34], action localization
has benefited as well from this improvement. In particular, Faster R-CNN [34] has been enhanced for videos by
using a two-stream variant [9, 29, 48], in which both appearance and motion are used as inputs. Modern approaches
first use such a detector to localize human actions in individual frames, and then either link them or track them over
time to create spatio-temporal detections [9, 29, 48]. These
1 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000
Grenoble, France
2 University of Edinburgh
3 Naver Labs Europe

Cordelia Schmid1

dog-jumping

dog-running

adultrunning

catclimbing
car-running

catjumping

cat-none
cat-none

car-rolling

car-rolling
adult-none

adult-running

adult-running

Figure 1: Detection examples of different object-action
pairs for the videos of the A2D dataset [50].
methods focus exclusively on human action recognition.
While humans or actions alone are building blocks of
video understanding, the relationship between objects and
actions can yield a more complete interpretation. For instance, an autonomous car should not only be able to detect another car (object) or a human walking (action), but
also a dog running or a ball flying (object-action). Other
applications include content-based retrieval, video captioning [43, 52] and health-care robots, for instance helping
blind people crossing streets. Therefore, to better understand videos, we need to go beyond these two independent
tasks of object and human action recognition and understand the relationship between objects and actions.
In this paper, we propose to jointly detect object-action
instances in uncontrolled videos, e.g. cat eating, dog running or car rolling, see Figure 1. We build an end-to-end
two stream network architecture for joint learning of objects
and actions. We cast this joint learning problem by leveraging a multitask objective. We compare our proposed end-toend multitask architecture with alternative ones (Figure 3):
(i) treating every possible combination of actions and objects as a separate class (Cartesian) and (ii) considering a
hierarchy of objects-actions: the first level corresponds to
objects and the second one to the valid actions for each object (hierarchical). We show that our method performs as
well as these two alternatives while (a) requiring fewer parameters and (b) enabling zero-shot learning of the actions
performed by a specific object, i.e., when training for an ob14163

