Depth and Image Restoration from Light Field in a Scattering Medium
Jiandong Tian1 Zak Murez2 Tong Cui1,3 Zhen Zhang1,3 David Kriegman2 Ravi Ramamoorthi2
1
State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences;
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, San Diego;
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{tianjd,cuitong,zhangzhen}@sia.cn, {zmurez,kriegman,ravir}@cs.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Traditional imaging methods and computer vision algorithms are often ineffective when images are acquired in
scattering media, such as underwater, fog, and biological
tissue. Here, we explore the use of light field imaging and
algorithms for image restoration and depth estimation that
address the image degradation from the medium. Towards
this end, we make the following three contributions. First,
we present a new single image restoration algorithm which
removes backscatter and attenuation from images better
than existing methods do, and apply it to each view in the
light field. Second, we combine a novel transmission based
depth cue with existing correspondence and defocus cues to
improve light field depth estimation. In densely scattering
media, our transmission depth cue is critical for depth estimation since the images have low signal to noise ratios
which significantly degrades the performance of the correspondence and defocus cues. Finally, we propose shearing
and refocusing multiple views of the light field to recover
a single image of higher quality than what is possible from
a single view. We demonstrate the benefits of our method
through extensive experimental results in a water tank.

1. Introduction
Images captured in scattering media such as underwater or in fog are degraded by light absorption and scattering.
This seriously affects the performance of standard computer
vision algorithms which were developed to work well in
clear air. As such, there has been a lot of effort to adapt
these algorithms to handle scattering [18, 23, 1, 31, 15]. In
this work, we introduce the use of light field cameras in
scattering media.
Recently, light field cameras have become commercially
available. These cameras use an array of micro lenses to
capture enough spatial and angular information to allow
post capture change of view point and refocusing. This enables the extraction of correspondence and defocus cues, for
depth estimation, from a single shot [28, 36, 32, 14].
There has been a lot of previous work on restoring
images affected by scattering. Most work on dehazing

Figure 1. Depth estimation and image restoration comparison. (a)
The center view of an image captured by a light field camera in
a densely scattering medium. (b) Restoration of the center view
by the recent method of Drews et al. [6]. (c) Restoration of the
center view by the recent method of Tsiotsios et al. [31]. Notice
the noise on the orange lobster and the greenish tint of the entire
image, especially on the white bunny. (d) Our restoration. (e)
Depth estimation without accounting for scattering by the recent
method of Wang et al. [32]. (f) Our depth.

2401

