Volumetric Flow Estimation for Incompressible Fluids
using the Stationary Stokes Equations
Katrin Lasinger1
1
ETH Zurich

Christoph Vogel2
Konrad Schindler1
2
Graz University of Technology

Abstract
In experimental fluid dynamics, the flow in a volume of
fluid is observed by injecting high-contrast tracer particles
and tracking them in multi-view video. Fluid dynamics researchers have developed variants of space-carving to reconstruct the 3D particle distribution at a given time-step,
and then use relatively simple local matching to recover
the motion over time. On the contrary, estimating the optical flow between two consecutive images is a long-standing
standard problem in computer vision, but only little work
exists about volumetric 3D flow. Here, we propose a variational method for 3D fluid flow estimation from multi-view
data. We start from a 3D version of the standard variational flow model, and investigate different regularization
schemes that ensure divergence-free flow fields, to account
for the physics of incompressible fluids. Moreover, we propose a semi-dense formulation, to cope with the computational demands of large volumetric datasets. Flow is estimated and regularized at a lower spatial resolution, while
the data term is evaluated at full resolution to preserve the
discriminative power and geometric precision of the local
particle distribution. Extensive experiments reveal that a
simple sum of squared differences (SSD) is the most suitable data term for our application. For regularization, an
energy whose Euler-Lagrange equations correspond to the
stationary Stokes equations leads to the best results. This
strictly enforces a divergence-free flow and additionally penalizes the squared gradient of the flow.

1. Introduction
The basis of experimental fluid dynamics is to observe
the flow in a volume of fluid. In order to densely visualize the flow of the (transparent) fluid in the whole volume,
one can use a method called Particle Imaging Velocimetry (PIV) [1, 31]: Tracer particles are injected into the fluid
and their motion is recorded with multiple high-speed cameras. The 3D setup is illustrated in Fig. 1 and an exemplary
video frame is shown in Fig. 2.
Applications include the analysis and design of hydro-

Figure 1. Volumetric flow estimation. From 3D particle distributions at consecutive time-steps (top), reconstruct a dense motion
field V. xyz-components of the estimated flow field (bottom).

dynamically efficient vehicles and machines, or behavioral
studies of aquatic organisms that live in flowing water.
While early variants of PIV operated in a 2D plane (implemented by illuminating only a thin slice of the volume
with a laser light-sheet), the trend is to observe fluid flow
in 3D. The (synchronized) multi-view video is processed
in two steps. First, per time-step, all views are used to recover the 3D particle distribution, often using variants of
space-carving (so-called tomographic particle imaging velocimetry, or Tomo-PIV). Second, motion vectors are estimated by dense matching between consecutive 3D reconstructions. From the perspective of computer vision, the
matching step employs rather simplistic methods, essentially exhaustive winner-takes-all matching of local 3D windows, followed by some sort of heuristic smoothing. Here,
we ask the obvious question: Can we improve PIV with
modern optic flow estimators, while still handling realistic,
high-resolution fluid dynamics data?
We base our approach on a 3D extension of the primaldual solution [5, 28] of variational flow estimation [17].
Modeling the problem in the 3D domain allows us to exploit the physical properties of our scenario for regularization, which no longer hold in a 2D image projection. Here,
we prefer a variational approach and first-order methods [5],
because these methods have a manageable memory foot-

2565

