Submodular Trajectory Optimization for Aerial 3D Scanning
Mike Roberts1,2
Shital Shah2
1

Debadeepta Dey2 Anh Truong3 Sudipta Sinha2
Ashish Kapoor2 Pat Hanrahan1 Neel Joshi2

Stanford University

2

Microsoft Research

3

Adobe Research

Abstract
Drones equipped with cameras are emerging as a powerful tool for large-scale aerial 3D scanning, but existing
automatic flight planners do not exploit all available information about the scene, and can therefore produce inaccurate and incomplete 3D models. We present an automatic method to generate drone trajectories, such that the
imagery acquired during the flight will later produce a highfidelity 3D model. Our method uses a coarse estimate of the
scene geometry to plan camera trajectories that: (1) cover
the scene as thoroughly as possible; (2) encourage observations of scene geometry from a diverse set of viewing angles; (3) avoid obstacles; and (4) respect a user-specified
flight time budget. Our method relies on a mathematical
model of scene coverage that exhibits an intuitive diminishing returns property known as submodularity. We leverage
this property extensively to design a trajectory planning algorithm that reasons globally about the non-additive coverage reward obtained across a trajectory, jointly with the
cost of traveling between views. We evaluate our method by
using it to scan three large outdoor scenes, and we perform
a quantitative evaluation using a photorealistic video game
simulator.

1. Introduction
Small consumer drones equipped with high-resolution
cameras are emerging as a powerful tool for large-scale
aerial 3D scanning. In order to obtain high-quality 3D reconstructions, a drone must capture images that densely
cover the scene. Additionally, 3D reconstruction methods
typically require surfaces to be viewed from multiple viewpoints, at an appropriate distance, and with sufficient angular separation (i.e., baseline) between views. Existing
autonomous flight planners do not always satisfy these requirements, which can be difficult to reason about, even for
a skilled human pilot manually controlling a drone. Furthermore, the limited battery life of consumer drones provides
only 10–15 minutes of flight time, making it even more
challenging to obtain high-quality 3D reconstructions.

Figure 1. 3D reconstruction results obtained using our algorithm
for generating aerial 3D scanning trajectories, as compared to an
overhead trajectory. Top row: Google Earth visualizations of the
trajectories. Middle and bottom rows: results obtained by flying
a drone along each trajectory, capturing images, and feeding the
images to multi-view stereo software. Our trajectories lead to noticeably more detailed 3D reconstructions than overhead trajectories. In all our experiments, we control for the flight time, battery
consumption, number of images, and quality settings used in the
3D reconstruction.

In lieu of manual piloting, commercial flight planning
tools generate conservative trajectories (e.g., a lawnmower
or orbit pattern at a safe height above the scene) that attempt to cover the scene while respecting flight time bud15324

