Cross-Modal Deep Variational Hashing
Venice Erin Liong1,3 , Jiwen Lu2,∗, Yap-Peng Tan3 , and Jie Zhou2
1
Rapid-Rich Object Search (ROSE) Laboratory, Interdisciplinary Graduate School,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
veniceer001@e.ntu.edu.sg; lujiwen@tsinghua.edu.cn; eyptan@ntu.edu.sg; jzhou@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a cross-modal deep variational hashing (CMDVH) method for cross-modality multimedia retrieval. Unlike existing cross-modal hashing methods
which learn a single pair of projections to map each example as a binary vector, we design a couple of deep neural
network to learn non-linear transformations from imagetext input pairs, so that unified binary codes can be obtained. We then design the modality-specific neural networks in a probabilistic manner where we model a latent
variable as close as possible from the inferred binary codes,
which is approximated by a posterior distribution regularized by a known prior. Experimental results on three benchmark datasets show the efficacy of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed that learning-based hashing
is an active research topic for efficient large-scale multimedia search [8, 9, 16, 24, 29, 34]. The basic idea of learningbased hashing methods aims to learn a series of hash functions from the training set to map each visual sample into a
compact binary feature vector such that samples of the same
semantic content are mapped into same binary codes.
While recent works have achieved reasonably good performance in large-scale multimedia search, most existing
hashing methods are developed for single-modal retrieval,
which means that the query example and the examples stored in the database are from the same source of multimedia data. In many real-applications, it is easy to access
multi-modal data for multimedia retrieval. For example, images uploaded into social networks such as the Flickr and
Facebook websites are usually tagged with some text descriptions. Hence, it is desirable to retrieve semantically-

similar texts/images by using a query image/text. Because
there are large-scale multi-modal data over the Internet, it is
only necessary to develop an effective cross-modal similarity search methods for multimedia search. In this paper, we
propose a cross-modal deep variational hashing (CMDVH)
method for cross-modality retrieval. Figure 1 illustrates the
basic idea of the proposed approach. Unlike existing shallow cross-modal hashing methods which learn a single pair
of linear or nonlinear projections to map each example into
a binary vector, we employ an end-to-end hashing network
to learn multiple pairs of hierarchical non-linear transformations, under which the nonlinear relationship of samples can
be well exploited, the binarized neural codes having same
semantic are similar as possible, and neural codes having
different semantic are dissimilar as possible. Our model is
trained under two main steps: First, we perform binary code
inference to learn unified binary codes for each training pair
using a cross-modal fusion network such that we obtain
a common hamming space for the two modalities and the
modality gap can be implicitly reduced. We perform this in
a discrete and discriminative manner to avoid approximate
optimization loss caused by relaxing the binary constraint and strengthen the semantic correlation between modalities by using a classification-based hinge loss criterion, respectively. Second, we model the modality-specific hashing
networks which have a probabilistic interpretation such that
the latent variable is modeled similar to the inferred binary
code from the fusion network through a log likelihood criterion, which is also sampled based on an approximate posterior distribution regularized by a prior through a KullbackLiebler Divergence (KLD) criterion. By doing so, the hashing network can be in generative form, which is suitable for
out-of-sample extension. We perform learning in these two steps through a batch-wise gradient descent procedure.
Experimental results on three benchmark datasets show the
efficacy of the proposed approach.

∗ Corresponding author.

14077

