Taking the Scenic Route to 3D: Optimising Reconstruction from Moving Cameras
Oscar Mendez
University of Surrey
Guildford GU2

Simon Hadfield
University of Surrey
Guildford GU2

Nicolas Pugeault
University of Exeter
Exeter EX4

Richard Bowden
University of Surrey
Guildford GU2

o.mendez@surrey.ac.uk

s.hadfield@surrey.ac.uk

n.pugeault@exeter.ac.uk

r.bowden@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
Reconstruction of 3D environments is a problem that
has been widely addressed in the literature. While many
approaches exist to perform reconstruction, few of them
take an active role in deciding where the next observations
should come from. Furthermore, the problem of travelling
from the camera’s current position to the next, known as
pathplanning, usually focuses on minimising path length.
This approach is ill-suited for reconstruction applications,
where learning about the environment is more valuable than
speed of traversal.
We present a novel Scenic Route Planner that selects
paths which maximise information gain, both in terms of
total map coverage and reconstruction accuracy. We also
introduce a new type of collaborative behaviour into the
planning stage called opportunistic collaboration, which
allows sensors to switch between acting as independent
Structure from Motion (SfM) agents or as a variable baseline
stereo pair.
We show that Scenic Planning enables similar performance to state-of-the-art batch approaches using less than
0.00027% of the possible stereo pairs (3% of the views).
Comparison against length-based pathplanning approaches
show that our approach produces more complete and more
accurate maps with fewer frames. Finally, we demonstrate
the Scenic Pathplanner’s ability to generalise to live scenarios by mounting cameras on autonomous ground-based
sensor platforms and exploring an environment.

1. Introduction
One of the frontiers in vision is its use in autonomous
vehicles. Vision-Based 3D reconstruction has the capability
to provide autonomous agents with detailed reconstructions
that can be used to reason about the environment. However,
as datasets have grown, and real-time computer-vision has become prevalent, the focus has shifted from how to reconstruct,
to what to reconstruct. A number of recent techniques have
been proposed, that take an active role in the data collection
process, reducing computation time by pre-selecting the most
informative views of the scene. However, unless the dataset
has been collected offline, the sensor must travel between

these viewpoints. During this travel time, the sensor may
not be contributing significantly to the model. In this paper
we propose an active approach to visual reconstruction, that
considers not only the next best viewpoint, but the path (or
sequence of viewpoints) for it to take. We achieve this by
adapting techniques from the robotic pathplanning literature;
introducing a computer-vision based cost space and applying
pathplanning to this cost space rather than the traditional
Euclidean world.
We also propose an extension to this, which allows us to
use multiple monocular cameras to operate in a collaborative
manner. The naive solution is to have multiple sensors
operating independently in the same physical space and
then fusing the resulting maps. However, this does not fully
exploit the potential for collaboration. Reasoning jointly
about the cameras’ observations allows us to exploit valuable
information. Collaborative building of the map, by two or
more cameras, has the potential to dramatically increase
reliability, while reducing the time needed to perform the
reconstruction.
To summarise, we present a novel approach that is capable
of using multiple mobile cameras in order to automatically
reconstruct a scene from monocular images. Our main contributions are a Scenic Pathplanner that efficiently searches
Special Euclidean Space (SE(3)) for paths of high information gain and an Opportunistic Collaboration framework that
determines the behaviour of the cameras jointly during the
pathplanning stage, to act either as a wide-baseline stereo
pair, or as independent SfM agents. It is important to note
that every step along the Scenic Route is not necessarily a
local optima. Instead, the Scenic Pathplanner trades information gain against path length. In order to validate our
approach’s capabilities, we perform guided reconstruction of
a room from an offline dataset consisting of ∼8500 images.
To validate online capabilities, we mount cameras on mobile
ground-based robots and autonomously reconstruct a room
in real time.

2. Related Work
Collaborative sensors capable of intelligently reconstructing an environment have four fundamental problems to over-

4677

