Click Here: Human-Localized Keypoints as Guidance for Viewpoint Estimation
Ryan Szeto and Jason J. Corso
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of Michigan
{szetor,jjcorso}@umich.edu

Abstract

It is well understood that humans and computers have
complementary abilities. Humans, for example, are good
at visual perception—even in rather challenging scenarios such as finding a toy in a cluttered room—and, consequently, subsequent abstract reasoning from visually acquired information. On the other hand, computers are good
at processing large amounts of data quickly and with great
precision, such as predicting viewpoints for millions of images within an exact, but possibly inaccurate, degree. Although we, as a community, design automatic systems that
seek to extract information from images automatically—
and have done this quite well, e.g., [9, 17]—there are indeed situations that are beyond the capabilities of current
systems, such as inferring the extent of damage to two vehicles involved in a car accident from data acquired by a
dash-cam.

0

180

360

0

180

360

0

180

360

R4CNN

Image
features
Keypoint
features

"Back left wheel"

Prediction layers

1. Introduction

Image
features

Prediction layers

We motivate and address a human-in-the-loop variant of
the monocular viewpoint estimation task in which the location and class of one semantic object keypoint is available at
test time. In order to leverage the keypoint information, we
devise a Convolutional Neural Network called Click-Here
CNN (CH-CNN) that integrates the keypoint information
with activations from the layers that process the image. It
transforms the keypoint information into a 2D map that can
be used to weigh features from certain parts of the image
more heavily. The weighted sum of these spatial features
is combined with global image features to provide relevant
information to the prediction layers. To train our network,
we collect a novel dataset of 3D keypoint annotations on
thousands of CAD models, and synthetically render millions
of images with 2D keypoint information. On test instances
from PASCAL 3D+, our model achieves a mean class accuracy of 90.7%, whereas the state-of-the-art baseline only
obtains 85.7% mean class accuracy, justifying our argument for human-in-the-loop inference.

CH-CNN

Figure 1: Semantic keypoint information can help address
ambiguities that are difficult to resolve from the image
alone. Each diagram shows the available information on
the left, the high-level structure of the model in the middle, and the confidences of the azimuth angle on the right.
In the black bars, gray indicates confidence, magenta marks
the final prediction, and the green triangle marks the ground
truth. The orange star indicates the human-provided keypoint. Both the light mask and orange star on the bottom
left image are for visualization purposes only, and are not
part of the input to any network.
In such exceptionally challenging cases, integrating the
abilities of both humans and computers during inference
is necessary; we call this methodology hybrid intelligence,
borrowing a term from social computing [18]. This strategy
can lead to pipelines that achieve better performance than
fully automatic systems without incurring a significant burden on the human (Figure 1 illustrates such an example).
Indeed, numerous computer vision researchers have begun
to investigate tasks inspired by this methodology, such as
learning on a budget [24] and Markov Decision Processbased fusion [20].
Continuing in this vein of work, we focus on integrating

1595

