Low Compute and Fully Parallel Computer Vision with HashMatch
Sean Ryan Fanello1∗ Julien Valentin1∗ Adarsh Kowdle1 Christoph Rhemann1
Vladimir Tankovich1 Carlo Ciliberto2 Philip Davidson1 Shahram Izadi1
perceptiveIO1

University College London2

Abstract
Numerous computer vision problems such as stereo
depth estimation, object-class segmentation and foreground/background segmentation can be formulated as perpixel image labeling tasks. Given one or many images as
input, the desired output of these methods is usually a spatially smooth assignment of labels. The large amount of
such computer vision problems has lead to significant research efforts, with the state of art moving from CRF-based
approaches to deep CNNs and more recently, hybrids of
the two. Although these approaches have significantly advanced the state of the art, the vast majority has solely
focused on improving quantitative results and are not designed for low-compute scenarios. In this paper, we present
a new general framework for a variety of computer vision
labeling tasks, called HashMatch. Our approach is designed to be both fully parallel, i.e. each pixel is independently processed, and low-compute, with a model complexity an order of magnitude less than existing CNN and CRFbased approaches. We evaluate HashMatch extensively
on several problems such as disparity estimation, image
retrieval, feature approximation and background subtraction, for which HashMatch achieves high computational efficiency while producing high quality results.

1. Introduction
Since the groundbreaking work of Krizhevsky et al. [29],
deep learning is now the method of choice for a variety
of computer vision problems. Although significant efforts
have been undertaken to improve the performance of CNNs
on various labeling tasks, these models are still far from being computationally efficient. Most of the work on efficient
deep learning focuses on trying to compress deep models
without losing precision and accuracy [38, 20, 11]. For example in [38], the authors train a deep architecture making
use of binary weights for both the input and the filters. In
∗ Authors equally contributed to this work.

[20], the authors try to remove redundant connections and
force multiple neurons to share the same quantized weights.
Others like [22] attempt at designing more compact layers
that use a reduced number of parameters. Similar to [38],
methods proposed in [11, 12] try to binarize the full network. However, these solutions still require many computational layers that involve multiple convolutions to infer
per-pixel labels. Although there is an improved efficiency
from the computational perspective, they suffer from accessing image patches stored in memory multiple times, and
hence these algorithms are both memory and computationally bound.
Prior to the deep learning era, Conditional Random
Fields (CRFs) were used as one of the major tools for image
labeling problems. In their ‘simplest’ form, CRFs are composed of a pairwise term, encouraging structural coherence
in the solution and a unary term, which is responsible for
modeling the compatibility between each data point/pixel
and a pre-defined set of labels. Machine learning is commonly used to predict this compatibility function. It is accepted that the more sophisticated the unary potential, the
better the results obtained after solving the CRF. As a consequence, practitioners tend to use expensive feature representations, e.g. HOG [13], SIFT [30] or even deep-learning
intermediate representations, followed by advanced classifiers such as kernel-SVM [42]. Once the unary potential has
been estimated for each pixel, the actual CRF inference can
be performed. Unfortunately, solving multi-label CRFs is a
NP hard problem [7]. The high demand for fast and accurate
solvers resulted in significant research efforts in this space,
each offering different trade-offs in terms of compute and
closeness to the posterior captured by the CRF. It is worth
noting that it is possible to compute unary potentials and
solve the CRF at interactive rates (e.g. [10, 48]) but these
approaches still have some sequential steps and have large
model complexity.
In this paper, we propose to bridge this gap in the literature by introducing HashMatch, a generic and extremely
low-compute framework that has been designed from the
ground-up for parallel, i.e. pixel independent, processing.

3874

