Orientation Invariant Feature Embedding and Spatial Temporal Regularization
for Vehicle Re-identification
Zhongdao Wang1,2 , Luming Tang1,2 , Xihui Liu1,2 , Zhuliang Yao1,2 , Shuai Yi1 , Jing Shao1 , Junjie Yan1 ,
Shengjin Wang2 , Hongsheng Li3 , Xiaogang Wang3
1
SenseTime Group Limited 2 Tsinghua University 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
yishuai@sensetime.com

hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the vehicle Re-identification
(ReID) problem which is of great importance in urban
surveillance and can be used for multiple applications. In
our vehicle ReID framework, an orientation invariant feature embedding module and a spatial-temporal regularization module are proposed. With orientation invariant feature embedding, local region features of different orientations can be extracted based on 20 key point locations and
can be well aligned and combined. With spatial-temporal
regularization, the log-normal distribution is adopted to
model the spatial-temporal constraints and the retrieval results can be refined. Experiments are conducted on public
vehicle ReID datasets and our proposed method achieves
state-of-the-art performance. Investigations of the proposed
framework is conducted, including the landmark regressor
and comparisons with attention mechanism. Both the orientation invariant feature embedding and the spatio-temporal
regularization achieve considerable improvements. 1 2 3

1. Introduction
In this paper, we target on the problem of vehicle reidentiﬁcation (ReID), which aims to identify all the images
of the same vehicle from a large gallery database. Such a
task is particularly useful when the car licence plate is occluded or cannot be seen clearly. Vehicle ReID methods can
be used in these scenarios to effectively locate vehicles of
interest from surveillance databases. They have extensive
1 Z. Wang and L. Tang share equal contribution.
2 S. Yi and H. Li are the corresponding authors.
3 This work is supported in part by SenseTime Group Limited, in part by
the General Research Fund through the Research Grants Council of Hong
Kong under Grants CUHK14213616, CUHK14206114, CUHK14205615,
CUHK419412, CUHK14203015, CUHK14239816, CUHK14207814, in
part by the Hong Kong Innovation and Technology Support Programme
Grant ITS/121/15FX, and in part by the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under Grant 2014M552339.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)
Location

(e)
Snapshot

A

B
߬ ൌ ͵ͻǤ͸͸‫ݏ‬

C

߬ ൌ ͶͶǤ͵͵‫ݏ‬

Figure 1. Difﬁculties of the problem of vehicle ReID. (a-b) Vehicle
image pairs that share quite similar overall appearances. They can
only be distinguished from local regions like the wheels in (a) and
the logos in (b). (c-d) Different faces of one vehicle may have different visibility, which results in difﬁculties in aligning the features
of different faces. In our proposed orientation invariant network,
visible faces such as the right faces in (c) and the back faces in (d)
are assigned with a larger weight in the ﬁnal feature embedding
process. (e) Spatio-temporal constraints of a vehicle’s appearance
should be satisﬁed, e.g. around 39.66 seconds between A and B
and 44.33 seconds between B and C.

applications in intelligent surveillance and attract increasing attention in recent years. Compared with the problem
of person ReID, which has been studied for years, vehicle
ReID is a recently proposed research topic. There exist speciﬁc characteristics and challenges for this problem.
Firstly, some speciﬁc regions in vehicle images are important for vehicle ReID. Different from person images,
which contain rich textures, the vehicles are generally solidcolored and sometimes the color patterns between different
vehicles can be quite similar. For example, as shown in
Fig. 1 (a-b), the cars are all red and are difﬁcult to distinguish based on their general appearances. The wheel regions in (a) and the logo regions in (b) are keys to determine
whether those vehicles are the same ones. Most existing
1379

