Coherent Online Video Style Transfer
Dongdong Chen1 ,

Jing Liao2 ,

Lu Yuan2 ,

Nenghai Yu1,∗,

Gang Hua2

1

2
University of Science and Technology of China
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
cd722522@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
{jliao, luyuan, ganghua}@microsoft.com,
ynh@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Training a feed-forward network for the fast neural style
transfer of images has proven successful, but the naive extension of processing videos frame by frame is prone to
producing flickering results. We propose the first end-toend network for online video style transfer, which generates
temporally coherent stylized video sequences in near realtime. Two key ideas include an efficient network by incorporating short-term coherence, and propagating short-term
coherence to long-term, which ensures consistency over a
longer period of time. Our network can incorporate different image stylization networks and clearly outperforms
the per-frame baseline both qualitatively and quantitatively.
Moreover, it can achieve visually comparable coherence to
optimization-based video style transfer, but is three orders
of magnitude faster.

1. Introduction
Inspired by the success of work from Gatys et al. [18]
on neural style transfer, there has been a number of recent works [38, 29, 9, 19] addressing the problem of style
transfer using deep neural networks. In their approaches,
style transfer is formulated as an optimization problem, i.e.
searching for a new image presenting similar neural activations as the content image and similar feature correlations as
the style image. Notwithstanding their impressive results,
these methods are very slow in runtime. To mitigate this
issue, many recent works[25, 40, 30, 10, 12, 31] train feedforward networks to speed up the transfer process. Such
techniques have been successfully applied to a number of
popular apps such as Prisma, Pikazo, and DeepArt.
Extending neural style transfer from image to video
may produce new and impressive effects, whose appeal
is especially strong in short video sharing, live-view effects, and entertainment video. The approaches discussed
∗ Corresponding Author

above, when naively extended to process each frame independently, often lead to flickering and false discontinuities. This is because the solution of the style transfer task
is not stable. For optimization-based methods (e.g., [18]),
the instability stems from the random initialization and local minima of the loss function. For feed-forward methods
(e.g., [25]), small perturbations in the content images, e.g.,
lighting, noises and motions may cause large variations in
stylized results ( Figure 1). Consequently, it is essential to
explore temporal consistency in videos for stable outputs.
Anderson et al. [1] and Ruder et al. [37] address the problem of flickers in the optimization-based method by introducing optical flow to constrain both the initialization and
the loss function. Although very impressive and smoothing stylized video sequences are obtained, their runtime is
quite slow (usually several minutes per frame), making it
less practical in real-world applications.
In this paper, we present the first feed-forward network
leveraging temporal information for video style transfer,
which follows a recurrent formulation. By incorporating
a flow sub-network and a mask sub-network into a certain intermediate layer of a pre-trained stylization network
(e.g., [25, 10]), our method is able to produce consistent and
stable stylized video sequences in near real-time.
The flow sub-network, motivated by [45], estimates
dense feature correspondences between consecutive frames.
It helps all consistent points along the motion trajectory
align in the feature domain. The mask sub-network identifies the occlusion or motion discontinuity regions. It helps
adaptively blend feature maps from previous frames and the
current frame to avoid ghosting artifacts. The entire architecture is trained end-to-end with a new loss function,
jointly considering stylization and temporal coherence.
To obtain stable video stylization results, long-term consistency should be considered and was enforced by additional loss terms with distant frames [37]. Instead, our feedforward network adopts a new Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN) architecture [15]. In contrast to traditional RNNs,
we only consider short-term consistency (e.g., two frames)

1105

