SegFlow: Joint Learning for Video Object Segmentation and Optical Flow
Jingchun Cheng1,2 Yi-Hsuan Tsai2,4 Shengjin Wang1∗ Ming-Hsuan Yang2,3
1
Tsinghua University 2 University of California, Merced
3
NVIDIA Research 4 NEC Laboratories America
1

chengjingchun@gmail.com, wgsgj@tsinghua.edu.cn

2

{ytsai2, mhyang}@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
This paper proposes an end-to-end trainable network,
SegFlow, for simultaneously predicting pixel-wise object
segmentation and optical flow in videos. The proposed
SegFlow has two branches where useful information of
object segmentation and optical flow is propagated bidirectionally in a unified framework. The segmentation
branch is based on a fully convolutional network, which has
been proved effective in image segmentation task, and the
optical flow branch takes advantage of the FlowNet model.
The unified framework is trained iteratively offline to learn
a generic notion, and fine-tuned online for specific objects.
Extensive experiments on both the video object segmentation and optical flow datasets demonstrate that introducing
optical flow improves the performance of segmentation and
vice versa, against the state-of-the-art algorithms.

1. Introduction
Video analysis has attracted much attention in recent
years due to the numerous vision applications, such as autonomous driving [15, 9, 33], video surveillance [40, 10, 20]
and virtual reality [1]. To understand the video contents for
vision tasks, it is essential to know the object status (e.g., location and segmentation) and motion information (e.g., optical flow). In this paper, we address these problems simultaneously, i.e., video object segmentation and optical flow
estimation, in that these two tasks have been known to be
closely related to each other [41, 35]. Figure 1 illustrates
the main idea of this paper.
For video object segmentation [25], it assumes that the
object mask is known in the first frame, and the goal is
to assign pixel-wise foreground/background labels through
the entire video. To maintain temporally connected object
segmentation, optical flow is typically used to improve the
smoothness across the time [28]. However, flow estimation itself is a challenging problem and is often inaccurate,
∗ Corresponding Author

Figure 1. An illustration of the main idea in the proposed SegFlow
model. Our model produces better segmentation results than the
one without using the optical flow (Ours-flo), where the flow
within the object is smooth and complete, providing a guidance
to improve segmentation outputs.

and thus the provided information does not always help segmentation. For instance, when an object moves fast, the optical flow methods [2, 5, 37] are not effective in capturing
the movement and hence generate incomplete flow within
the object (see Figure 4 for an example). To overcome this
problem, bringing the objectness information (i.e., segmentation) can guide the algorithm to determine where the flow
should be smooth (within the object). A few algorithms
have been developed to leverage both information from the
objectness and motion discussed above. In [41], a method
is proposed to simultaneously perform object segmentation
and flow estimation, and then updates both results iteratively. However, the entire process is optimized online and
is time-consuming, which limits the applicability to other
tasks.
Based on the above observations, we propose a learningbased approach to jointly predict object segmentation and
optical flow in videos, which allows efficient inference during testing. We design a unified, end-to-end trainable convolutional neural network (CNN), which we refer to as the
SegFlow, that contains one branch for object segmentation
and another one for optical flow. For each branch, we learn
the feature representations for each task, where the segmentation branch focuses on the objectness and the optical flow one exploits the motion information. To bridge

686

