Semi Supervised Semantic Segmentation Using Generative Adversarial Network
Nasim Souly∗

Concetto Spampinato †

Mubarak Shah∗

nsouly@eecs.ucf.edu

cspampin@dieei.unict.it

shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, i.e., assigning a label from a set
of classes to each pixel of the image, is one of the most challenging tasks in computer vision due to the high variation
in appearance, texture, illumination, etc. of visual scenes
as well as multiple viewpoints and poses of different objects. Nevertheless, despite the enormous work during past
years [4], [14], this problem is still not fully solved, even
though recent deep methods have demonstrated to be very
valuable. However, deep networks require substantial anno∗ Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
† Department of Electrical, Electronics and Computer Engineering,
University of Catania

Labeled
Data

Generated Data

Layer n

…

Supervised‐Loss

Layer 1

Semi‐Supervised
Loss
s

Layer 2

Semantic segmentation has been a long standing challenging task in computer vision. It aims at assigning a label to each image pixel and needs a significant number of
pixel-level annotated data, which is often unavailable. To
address this lack of annotations, in this paper, we leverage, on one hand, a massive amount of available unlabeled
or weakly labeled data, and on the other hand, non-real
images created through Generative Adversarial Networks.
In particular, we propose a semi-supervised framework –
based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) – which
consists of a generator network to provide extra training
examples to a multi-class classifier, acting as discriminator in the GAN framework, that assigns sample a label y
from the K possible classes or marks it as a fake sample
(extra class). The underlying idea is that adding large fake
visual data forces real samples to be close in the feature
space, which, in turn, improves multiclass pixel classification. To ensure a higher quality of generated images by
GANs with consequently improved pixel classification, we
extend the above framework by adding weakly annotated
data, i.e., we provide class level information to the generator. We test our approaches on several challenging benchmarking visual datasets, i.e. PASCAL, SiftFLow, Stanford
and CamVid, achieving competitive performance compared
to state-of-the-art semantic segmentation methods.

Unlabeled Data

Output

Figure 1. Our idea is to employ a small set of labeled data together with large available unlabeled data (both realistic and fake)
to identify hidden patterns supporting semantic segmentation.

tated visual data. In case of semantic segmentation, annotation should be at the pixel-level (i.e., each pixel of training images must be annotated), which is expensive to obtain. An alternative to supervised learning is unsupervised
learning leveraging a large amount of available unlabeled
visual data. Unfortunately, unsupervised learning methods
have not been very successful for semantic segmentation,
because they lack the notion of classes and merely try to
identify consistent regions and/or region boundaries [28].
Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) is halfway between supervised and unsupervised learning, where in addition to
unlabeled data, some supervision is also given, e.g., some
of the samples are labeled. In semi-supervised learning,
the idea is to identify some specific hidden structure – p(x)
from unlabeled data x –under certain assumptions - that can
support classification p(y|x), with y class label. In this paper, we aim to leverage unlabeled data to find a data structure that can support the semantic segmentation phase, as
shown in Fig. 1. In particular, we exploit the assumption
that if two data points x1 , x2 are close in the input feature space, then the corresponding outputs (classifications)
y1 , y2 should also be close (smoothness constraint) [3]. This
concept can be applied to semantic segmentation, i.e., pixels

5688

