Towards Large-Pose Face Frontalization in the Wild
Xi Yin†∗, Xiang Yu‡ , Kihyuk Sohn‡ , Xiaoming Liu† and Manmohan Chandraker§‡
†
Michigan State University
§
University of California, San Diego
‡
NEC Laboratories America
{yinxi1,liuxm}@cse.msu.edu, {xiangyu,ksohn,manu}@nec-labs.com

Abstract
Despite recent advances in face recognition using deep
learning, severe accuracy drops are observed for large pose
variations in unconstrained environments. Learning poseinvariant features is one solution, but needs expensively labeled large-scale data and carefully designed feature learning algorithms. In this work, we focus on frontalizing faces
in the wild under various head poses, including extreme profile views. We propose a novel deep 3D Morphable Model
(3DMM) conditioned Face Frontalization Generative Adversarial Network (GAN), termed as FF-GAN, to generate
neutral head pose face images. Our framework differs from
both traditional GANs and 3DMM based modeling. Incorporating 3DMM into the GAN structure provides shape and
appearance priors for fast convergence with less training
data, while also supporting end-to-end training. The 3DMMconditioned GAN employs not only the discriminator and
generator loss but also a new masked symmetry loss to retain
visual quality under occlusions, besides an identity loss to
recover high frequency information. Experiments on face
recognition, landmark localization and 3D reconstruction
consistently show the advantage of our frontalization method
on faces in the wild datasets. 1

1. Introduction
Frontalization of face images observed from extreme
viewpoints is a problem of fundamental interest in both human and machine facial processing and recognition. Indeed,
while humans are innately skilled at face recognition, newborns do not perform better than chance on recognition from
profile views [31], although this ability seems to develop
rapidly within a few months of birth [8]. Similarly, dealing
with profile views of faces remains an enduring challenge
∗ This work was supported by a research gift from NEC Laboratories
America to Michigan State University.
1 Detail results and resource can be refered to: http://cvlab.cse.
msu.edu/project-face-frontalization.html.

3DMM Coeﬃcients

FF-GAN

Recogni8on Engine

Generator

D
Pose-Variant Input

Discriminator

Frontalized Output

Extreme Pose
Input

Frontalized
Output

Figure 1: The proposed FF-GAN framework. Given a nonfrontal face image as input, the generator produces a highquality frontal face. Learned 3DMM coefficients provide
global pose and low frequency information, while the input
image injects high frequency local information. A discriminator distinguishes generated faces against real ones, where
high-quality frontal faces are considered real. A face recognition engine is used to preserve identity information. The
output is a high quality frontal face that retains identity.
for computer vision too. The advent of deep convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) has led to large strides in face recognition, with verification accuracy surpassing human levels
[28, 27] on datasets such as LFW. But even representations
learned with state-of-the-art CNNs suffer for profile views,
with severe accuracy drops reported in recent studies [16, 26].
Besides aiding recognition, frontalization of faces is also a
problem of independent interest, with potential applications
such as face editing, accessorizing and creation of models
for use in virtual and augmented reality.
In recent years, CNNs have leveraged the availability of
large-scale face datasets to also learn pose-invariant representations for recognition, using either a joint single framework [18] or multi-view pose-specific networks [46, 16].
Early works on face frontalization in computer vision rely
13990

