Optimal Transformation Estimation with Semantic Cues
Danda Pani Paudel
Computer Vision Laboratory
D-ITET, ETH Zurich

Adlane Habed
ICube Laboratory
CNRS, University of Strasbourg

Luc Van Gool
Computer Vision Laboratory
D-ITET, ETH Zurich

paudel@vision.ee.ethz.ch

adlane.habed@icube.unistra.fr

vangool@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of estimating the geometric transformation relating two distinct visual modalities (e.g. an image and a map, or a projective structure and
a Euclidean 3D model) while relying only on semantic cues,
such as semantically segmented regions or object bounding boxes. The proposed approach differs from the traditional feature-to-feature correspondence reasoning: starting from semantic regions on one side, we seek their possible corresponding regions on the other, thus constraining
the sought geometric transformation. This entails a simultaneous search for the transformation and for the regionto-region correspondences. This paper is the first to derive
the conditions that must be satisfied for a convex region,
defined by control points, to be transformed inside an ellipsoid. These conditions are formulated as Linear Matrix
Inequalities and used within a Branch-and-Prune search to
obtain the globally optimal transformation. We tested our
approach, under mild initial bound conditions, on two challenging registration problems for aligning: (i) a semantically segmented image and a map via a 2D homography;
(ii) a projective 3D structure and its Euclidean counterpart.

1. Introduction
Estimating a geometric transformation relating two overlapping instances of a scene, be it images or 3D point
clouds, typically relies on establishing cross-instance (e.g.
2D-2D, 2D-3D or 3D-3D) correspondences of low-level
features such as points [38], lines [6], planes [18], skylines [35], or scene constraints [22]. The success of establishing such correspondences may be undermined by the
absence of such features or by the difficulty of matching
them. Such difficulty would be high in case of very different
modalities (e.g. matching an image and a map). Methods,
such as [13, 32], do not require initial correspondences yet
they rely on detecting such low-level features.
Mainly spurred by significant advances in Machine

Learning [21, 20], detecting higher level features (objects,
regions, and their semantic labels) is nowadays reaching
unparalleled levels of performance in a variety of imaging
modalities including 2D images [20], videos [16], and 3D
point clouds [41]. In many applications, the use of traditional hand-crafted features (such as SIFT) is outperformed
by that of high-level features learned by Neural Networks.
As semantic labels for 2D images and 3D data can be
obtained quite accurately nowadays [23, 24, 48], it is becoming particularly appealing to use these for solving geometric problems. Matching high-level features and estimating the underlying aligning transformation is a challenging
problem that we address in this paper. Supporting transformation estimation with semantic cues has the potential to
improve the success rate, speed and accuracy of the process.
Owing to their success in many applications, Machine
Learning techniques have been tried to solve a wide range
of problems in Computer Vision, including that of learning
geometric parameters directly from images [12, 45, 44, 25].
This said, attempts towards the latter have only met with
limited success. The results were often not on par with those
of model-based methods. Although model-based transformation estimation may potentially benefit from semantics,
methods to do so have obtained little attention.
Semantic cues have been successfully exploited to support several 3D vision tasks such as, keypoint matching [19], 3D reconstruction [10, 39], and robot navigation [7]. In the context of transformation estimation, the
method in [11] learns and estimates the relative homography between a pair of images using deep convolutional
neural networks. For producing a semantic map from
multi-view street-level imagery, [40] considers a homography relationship between semantically labeled pixels of the
ground plane in one image and a sub-set in another. These
methods fully rely on the ability of learning methods and
do not provide guaranties on the optimality of the estimated
parameters. In this regard, a global method for uncalibrated
2D-3D alignment was proposed in [31]. The method relies on multi-convex conditions for associating corresponding multi-view 2D pixels and 3D bounding boxes. Yet, that

4658

