3D-PRNN: Generating Shape Primitives with Recurrent Neural Networks
Chuhang Zou†
†

Ersin Yumer‡

Jimei Yang‡

Duygu Ceylan‡
‡

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{czou4, dhoiem}@illinois.edu

Adobe Research

{yumer, jimyang, ceylan}@adobe.com

Abstract
The success of various applications including robotics,
digital content creation, and visualization demand a structured and abstract representation of the 3D world from limited sensor data. Inspired by the nature of human perception of 3D shapes as a collection of simple parts, we explore
such an abstract shape representation based on primitives.
Given a single depth image of an object, we present 3DPRNN, a generative recurrent neural network that synthesizes multiple plausible shapes composed of a set of primitives. Our generative model encodes symmetry characteristics of common man-made objects, preserves long-range
structural coherence, and describes objects of varying complexity with a compact representation. We also propose a
method based on Gaussian Fields to generate a large scale
dataset of primitive-based shape representations to train
our network. We evaluate our approach on a wide range
of examples and show that it outperforms nearest-neighbor
based shape retrieval methods and is on-par with voxelbased generative models while using a significantly reduced
parameter space.

1. Introduction
Many robotics and graphics applications require 3D interpretations of sensory data. For example, picking up a
cup, moving a chair, predicting whether a stack of blocks
will fall, or looking for keys on a messy desk all rely
on at least a vague idea of object position, shape, contact and connectedness. A major challenge is how to represent 3D object geometry in a way that (1) can be predicted from noisy or partial observations; and (2) is useful for reasoning about contact, support, extent, and so on.
Recent efforts often focus on voxelized volumetric representations (e.g., [41, 40, 13, 9]). Instead, we propose to
represent objects with 3D primitives (oriented 3D rectangles, i.e. cuboids). Compared to voxels, the primitives are
much more compact, for example 45-D for 5 primitives parameterized by scale-rotation-translation vs 32,256-D for a

Derek Hoiem†

Input depth image
3D-PRNN
Multiple
generations

Figure 1. A step-by-step primitive-based shape generation by 3DPRNN. As an illustration, given single depth image, we sequentially predicts sets of primitives that form the shape. Each time we
randomly sample one primitive from a set and generate the next
set of primitives conditioning on the current sample.

32x32x32 voxel grid. Also, primitives are holistic — representing an object with a few parts greatly simplifies reasoning about stability, connectedness, and other important
properties. Primitive-based 3D object representations have
long been popular in psychology (e.g. “geons” by Biederman [3]) and interactive graphics (e.g. “Teddy” [18]), but
they are less commonly employed in modern computer vision due to the challenges of learning and predicting models
that consist of an arbitrary number of parameterized components.
Our goal is to learn 3D primitive representations of objects from unannotated 3D meshes. We follow an encoderdecoder strategy, inspired by recent work [14, 38], using a
recursive neural network (RNN) to encode an implicit shape
representation and then sequentially generate primitives to
approximate the shape as shown in Fig. 1. One challenge
in training such a primitive generation network is acquiring
ground truth data for primitive-based shape representations.
To address this challenge, we propose an efficient method
based on Gaussian Fields and energy minimization [6] to
iteratively parse shapes into primitive components. We op1900

