Learning 3D Object Categories by Looking Around Them
David Novotny1,2

Diane Larlus2

1
Visual Geometry Group
Dept. of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
{david,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Andrea Vedaldi1
2

Computer Vision Group
Naver Labs Europe
diane.larlus@naverlabs.com

Abstract
Traditional approaches for learning 3D object categories use either synthetic data or manual supervision. In
this paper, we propose a method which does not require
manual annotations and is instead cued by observing objects from a moving vantage point. Our system builds on
two innovations: a Siamese viewpoint factorization network
that robustly aligns different videos together without explicitly comparing 3D shapes; and a 3D shape completion network that can extract the full shape of an object from partial
observations. We also demonstrate the benefits of configuring networks to perform probabilistic predictions as well as
of geometry-aware data augmentation schemes. We obtain
state-of-the-art results on publicly-available benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Despite their tremendous effectiveness in tasks such as
object category detection, most deep neural networks do not
understand the 3D nature of object categories. Reasoning
about objects in 3D is necessary in many applications, for
physical reasoning, or to understand the geometric relationships between different objects or scene elements.
The typical approach to learn 3D objects is to make use
of large collections of high quality CAD models such as [5]
or [42], which can be used to fully supervise models to recognize the objects’ viewpoint and 3D shape. Alternatively,
one can start from standard image datasets such as PASCAL VOC [8], augmented with other types of supervision,
such as object segmentations and keypoint annotations [4].
Whether synthetically generated or manually collected, annotations have so far been required in order to overcome
the significant challenges of learning 3D object categories,
where both viewpoint and geometry are variable.
In this paper, we develop an alternative approach that
can learn 3D object categories in an unsupervised manner
(fig. 1), replacing synthetic or manual supervision with motion. Humans learn about the visual word by experiencing it
continuously, through a variable viewpoint, which provides

Figure 1. We propose a convolutional neural network architecture
to learn the 3D geometry of object categories from videos only,
without manual supervision. Once learned, the network can predict i) viewpoint, ii) depth, and iii) a point cloud, all from a single
image of a new object instance.

very strong cues on its 3D structure. Our goal is to build
on such cues in order to learn the 3D geometry of object
categories, using videos rather than images of objects. We
are motivated by the fact that videos are almost as cheap as
images to capture, and do not require annotations.
We build on mature structure-from-motion (SFM) technology to extract 3D information from individual video sequences. However, these cues are specific to each object
instance as contained in different videos. The challenge is
to integrate this information in a global 3D model of the object category, as well as to work with noisy and incomplete
reconstructions from SFM.
We propose a new deep architecture composed of three
modules (fig. 2). The first module estimates the absolute viewpoint of objects in all video sequences (sec. 3.2).
This aligns different object instances to a common reference
frame where geometric relationships can be modeled more
15218

