When Unsupervised Domain Adaptation Meets Tensor Representations∗
Hao Lu† , Lei Zhang‡ , Zhiguo Cao† , Wei Wei‡ , Ke Xian† , Chunhua Shen§ , Anton van den Hengel§
†
School of Automation, Huazhong Unviersity of Science and Technology, China
‡
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
§
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Australia
{poppinace,zgcao}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain adaption (DA) allows machine learning methods trained on data sampled from one distribution to be applied to data sampled from another. It is thus of great practical importance to the application of such methods. Despite the fact that tensor representations are widely used in
Computer Vision to capture multi-linear relationships that
affect the data, most existing DA methods are applicable to
vectors only. This renders them incapable of reflecting and
preserving important structure in many problems. We thus
propose here a learning-based method to adapt the source
and target tensor representations directly, without vectorization. In particular, a set of alignment matrices is introduced to align the tensor representations from both domains
into the invariant tensor subspace. These alignment matrices and the tensor subspace are modeled as a joint optimization problem and can be learned adaptively from the
data using the proposed alternative minimization scheme.
Extensive experiments show that our approach is capable of
preserving the discriminative power of the source domain,
of resisting the effects of label noise, and works effectively
for small sample sizes, and even one-shot DA. We show that
our method outperforms the state-of-the-art on the task of
cross-domain visual recognition in both efficacy and efficiency, and particularly that it outperforms all comparators
when applied to DA of the convolutional activations of deep
convolutional networks.

1. Introduction
The difficulty of securing an appropriate and exhaustive set of training data, and the tendency for the domain
of application to drift over time, often lead to variations
between the distributions of the training (source) and test
∗ H. Lu and L. Zhang contributed equally. This work was done when
H. Lu, L. Zhang, and K. Xian were visiting The University of Adelaide.
Z. Cao is the corresponding author.

(target) data. In Machine Learning this problem is labeled
domain mismatch. Failing to model such a distribution shift
may cause significant performance degradation. Domain
adaptation (DA) techniques capable of addressing this problem of distribution shift have thus received significant attention recently [23].
The assumption underpinning DA is that, although the
domains differ, there is sufficient commonality to support
adaptation. Many approaches have modeled this commonality by learning an invariant subspace, or set of subspaces [1, 10, 12, 13]. These methods are applicable to vector data only, however. Applying these methods to structured high-dimensional representations (e.g., convolutional
activations), thus requires that the data be vectorized first.
Although this solves the algebraic issue, it does not solve
the underlying problem.
Tensor arithmetic is a generalization of matrix and vector arithmetic, and is particularly well suited to representing multi-linear relationships that neither vector nor matrix
algebra can capture naturally [33]. The higher-order statistics of a vector-valued random variables are most naturally
expressed as tensors, for instance. The power of tensor
representations has also been demonstrated for a range of
computer vision tasks (see Section 2 for examples). Deep
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [18] represent the
state-of-the-art method for a substantial number of visual
tasks [15, 20, 24], which makes DA a critical issue for their
practical application. The activations of such CNNs, and the
interactions between them, are naturally represented as tensors, meaning that DA should also be applied using this representation. We show in Section 5 that the proposed method
outperforms all comparators in DA of the convolutional activations of CNNs.
Vectorization also often results in the so-called curse of
dimensionality [27], as the matrices representing the relationships between vectorized tensors have n2 elements,
where n is the number of elements in the tensor. This leads
to errors in the estimation of this large number of parameters and high computational complexity. Furthermore, after

599

