A Lightweight Single-Camera Polarization Compass with Covariance Estimation
Wolfgang Stürzl
Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics, German Aerospace Center (DLR)
wolfgang.stuerzl@dlr.de

Abstract
A lightweight visual compass system is presented as well
as a direct method for estimating sun direction and its covariance. The optical elements of the system are described
enabling estimation of sky polarization in a FOV of approx.
56◦ with a single standard camera sensor. Using the proposed direct method, the sun direction and its covariance
matrix can be estimated based on the polarization measured in the image plane. Experiments prove the applicability of the polarization sensor and the proposed estimation method, even in difficult conditions. It is also shown
that in case the sensor is not leveled, combination with an
IMU allows to determine all degrees of orientation. Due
to the low weight of the sensor and the low complexity of
the estimation method the polarization system is well suited
for MAVs which have limited payload and computational
resources. Furthermore, since not just the sun direction but
also its covariance is estimated an integration in a multisensor navigation framework is straight forward.

1. Introduction
Scattering of sun light in the atmosphere creates a characteristic polarization pattern in the sky that is symmetric
with respect to the position of the sun. The degree of polarization increases with angular distance from the sun up to
90◦ and decreases for larger angles [4, 13]. The orientation
of the predominantly linearly polarized light is perpendicular to the observer-sun axis. If the expected sun position in a
geo-referenced frame for given date and location is known,
the estimated position of the sun can be used as an absolute compass. Having some kind of compass is essential for
long range path integration or odometry as otherwise small
errors in the estimated heading direction soon add up, rendering any directed navigation impossible [3].
Honey-bees and many other insect species, like desert
ants, are known to have a specialized region in the upper
part of their eyes with photoreceptors sensitive to polarization and it has been shown that they use the polarization
pattern of the sky as a compass cue [11]. The indirect ap-

proach based on the sky polarization pattern can estimate
sun direction even if the sun itself is not visible, e.g. due to
occlusion by clouds or trees.
Compass systems based on the polarization have been
used on air planes traveling along or close to the north pole.
In this region polarization information is particularly useful
during winter as the polarization pattern is strongest 90◦
away from the sun and continues to be detectable after sun
set, i.e. when sun is below the horizon. It has even been
discussed whether Vikings could have used sky polarization
to guide navigation on open sea [8].
Having a compass system that operates independent of
the magnetic field of the earth is also advantageous for mobile robots, since magnetic compasses can be easily be disturbed by nearby magnetic objects or electrical devices.

2. Previous Work
In recent years, a number of devices have been built
that allow to measure polarization of sky light [12]. Those
actually used on robots have usually small FOV and estimate sun azimuth only [5, 2, 22]. Horváth et al. [10]
proposed a full-sky polarization sensor consisting of three
cameras. Another three-camera system having smaller FOV
was described in [22]. A considerably smaller four-camera
system has been presented in [20]. The use of multiple
cameras make such devices heavy and expensive. Furthermore, cameras have to be synchronized to be applicable
to moving platforms. Alternatively, cameras with builtin beam splitters and multiple sensors have been proposed
[18], which are usually expensive and bulky. Also, special image sensors have been designed that have pixels with
different polarization sensitivity [17, 12]. In contrast, the
device presented in this paper is based on a single standard
VGA CMOS sensor. While there are several alternative approaches for obtaining polarization information with a single camera sensor, e.g. [9, 15, 23], a particularly small and
lightweight solution is described in the following section.
The proposed direct method for determining the direction of the sun improves the approach of [20] by removing
the bias and, more importantly, provides an estimate of the
covariance matrix.

5353

