Semantic Image Synthesis via Adversarial Learning
Hao Dong∗, Simiao Yu∗ , Chao Wu, Yike Guo
Imperial College London
{hao.dong11, simiao.yu13, chao.wu, y.guo}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
The bird has blue

In this paper, we propose a way of synthesizing realistic
images directly with natural language description, which
has many useful applications, e.g. intelligent image manipulation. We attempt to accomplish such synthesis: given a
source image and a target text description, our model synthesizes images to meet two requirements: 1) being realistic
while matching the target text description; 2) maintaining
other image features that are irrelevant to the text description. The model should be able to disentangle the semantic information from the two modalities (image and text),
and generate new images from the combined semantics. To
achieve this, we proposed an end-to-end neural architecture that leverages adversarial learning to automatically
learn implicit loss functions, which are optimized to fulfill
the aforementioned two requirements. We have evaluated
our model by conducting experiments on Caltech-200 bird
dataset and Oxford-102 flower dataset, and have demonstrated that our model is capable of synthesizing realistic
images that match the given descriptions, while still maintain other features of original images.

1. Introduction
Synthesizing realistic images directly from natural language descriptions is desirable but also challenging. In this
work, we proposed a novel idea of manipulating a source
image semantically with text descriptions, while still maintain features that are irrelevant to what text descriptions.
Figure 1 shows some examples.
The main challenges of this problem are twofold. First,
the model should be capable of mapping the relevant descriptions of text to the corresponding area of images. This
requires the model to disentangle the semantics contained
in image and text information. Second, the model should
be able to combine the disentangle semantics and generate
realistic images. We build our model upon Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [7, 3, 26, 33], in which we lever∗ Indicates equal contributions.

and wings, and =
+ crownwhite
breast.

A red bird with blue
+ head
has grey wings. =

This flower has white

with yellow =
+ petals
round stamens.
This flower is pink and

in color, and has =
+ white
no visible stamens.

Figure 1. Examples of flower and bird images synthesized by
our model from given source images and target text descriptions.
Both source images and target text descriptions are unseen during
training, demonstrating zero-shot learning ability of our model.

age its adversarial learning process to achieve implicit loss
functions that are adaptive to the objectives.
Previous works [29, 28, 41] have succeeded in generating plausible images that match the target text descriptions. By contrast, our model defines a new condition (i.e.
the given images) in the image generation process. In doing so, the searching space of synthesized images is much
reduced. On the other hand, there are many proposed approaches [17, 35, 11, 42, 18, 40, 1, 37, 19, 12] that condition GAN on images to synthesize images for various tasks.
However, none of them involve employing natural language
descriptions as conditions.
The core contribution of our work is that we proposed
to semantically synthesize image with text, which has many
useful applications. The key is to learn the shared representation of two modalities (e.g. image and text). To achieve
this, we designed an end-to-end neural architecture built
upon GAN framework, conditioning on both image and text
information. We also proposed a training strategy based on
adversarial learning.
More specifically, our proposed method consists of a
generator network and a discriminator network. The gen15706

