Learning Visual N-Grams from Web Data
Ang Li∗
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742, USA

Allan Jabri

Armand Joulin Laurens van der Maaten
Facebook AI Research
770 Broadway, New York, NY 10025, USA

angli@umiacs.umd.edu

{ajabri,ajoulin,lvdmaaten}@fb.com

Abstract

Predicted n-grams
lights
Burning Man
Mardi Gras
parade in progress

Real-world image recognition systems need to recognize
tens of thousands of classes that constitute a plethora of visual concepts. The traditional approach of annotating thousands of images per class for training is infeasible in such a
scenario, prompting the use of webly supervised data. This
paper explores the training of image-recognition systems on
large numbers of images and associated user comments,
without using manually labeled images. In particular, we
develop visual n-gram models that can predict arbitrary
phrases that are relevant to the content of an image. Our
visual n-gram models are feed-forward convolutional networks trained using new loss functions that are inspired by
n-gram models commonly used in language modeling. We
demonstrate the merits of our models in phrase prediction,
phrase-based image retrieval, relating images and captions,
and zero-shot transfer.

1. Introduction
Research on visual recognition models has traditionally
focused on supervised learning models that consider only a
small set of discrete classes, and that learn their parameters
from datasets in which (1) all images are manually annotated for each of these classes and (2) a substantial number of annotated images is available to define each of the
classes. This tradition dates back to early image-recognition
benchmarks such as CalTech-101 [18] but is still common
in modern benchmarks such as ImageNet [47] and COCO
[42]. The assumptions that are implicit in such benchmarks
are at odds with many real-world applications of imagerecognition systems, which often need to be deployed in
an open-world setting [3]. In the open-world setting, the
number of classes to recognize is potentially very large and
class types are wildly varying [13]: they include generic
objects such as “dog” or “car”, landmarks such as “Golden
Gate Bridge” or “Times Square”, scenes such as “city park”
∗ This work was done while Ang Li was at Facebook AI Research.

Predicted n-grams
GP
Silverstone Classic
Formula 1
race for the

Predicted n-grams
navy yard
construction on the
Port of San Diego
cargo
Figure 1. Four high-scoring visual n-grams for three images in our
test set according to our visual n-gram model, which was trained
solely on unsupervised web data. We selected the n-grams that
are displayed in the figure from the five highest scoring n-grams
according to our model, in such a way as to minimize word overlap
between the n-grams. For all figures in the paper, we refer the
reader to the supplementary material for license information.

or “street market”, and actions such as “speed walking” or
“public speaking”. The traditional approach of manually
annotating images for training does not scale well to the
open-world setting because of the amount of effort required
to gather and annotate images for all relevant classes. To
circumvent this problem, several recent studies have tried to
use image data from photo-sharing websites such as Flickr
to train their models [5, 9, 19, 28, 41, 46, 57, 58, 62]: such
images have no manually curated annotations, but they do
have metadata such as tags, captions, comments, and geolocations that provide weak information about the image
content, and are readily available in nearly infinite numbers.

4183

