Using Sparse Elimination for Solving Minimal Problems in Computer Vision
Janne Heikkilä
Center for Machine Vision and Signal Analysis
University of Oulu, Finland
janne.heikkila@oulu.fi

Abstract
Finding a closed form solution to a system of polynomial
equations is a common problem in computer vision as well
as in many other areas of engineering and science. Gröbner basis techniques are often employed to provide the solution, but implementing an efficient Gröbner basis solver
to a given problem requires strong expertise in algebraic
geometry. One can also convert the equations to a polynomial eigenvalue problem (PEP) and solve it using linear
algebra, which is a more accessible approach for those who
are not so familiar with algebraic geometry. In previous
works PEP has been successfully applied for solving some
relative pose problems in computer vision, but its wider exploitation is limited by the problem of finding a compact
monomial basis. In this paper, we propose a new algorithm
for selecting the basis that is in general more compact than
the basis obtained with a state-of-the-art algorithm making
PEP a more viable option for solving polynomial equations.
Another contribution is that we present two minimal problems for camera self-calibration based on homography, and
demonstrate experimentally using synthetic and real data
that our algorithm can provide a numerically stable solution to the camera focal length from two homographies of
unknown planar scene.

1. Introduction
Many camera pose estimation and calibration problems boil
down to solving a system of polynomial equations. These
are often so-called minimal problems, where the camera
parameters are computed from a minimal number of constraints so that there are essentially as many unknowns as
equations, but the relationship between the unknown variables and the measurements follows a polynomial model
that makes the dependence nonlinear and difficult to solve
by means of linear algebra. Such minimal problems include for example, the classical P3P (Perspective-ThreePoint) problem for a calibrated camera where an image of
three points with known distances is sufficient to compute
the camera pose, but it requires solving a system of three

quadratic equations in three variables [9]. Another classical example is the five-point problem that allows finding the relative pose between two views from an unknown
scene using five point correspondences. Nistér [17] converted the resulting system of polynomial equations to a
tenth degree univariate polynomial that can be efficiently
solved using standard numerical techniques. The relative
pose problem has been modified in various studies to incorporate also unknown camera parameters that enable the
use of uncalibrated cameras and makes it a self-calibration
problem. To mention few of them, Stewenius et al. [20]
used six point correspondences to solve the relative pose
together with the focal length. Fitzgibbon [8] augmented
the fundamental matrix estimation to include one term of
radial lens distortion, and solved them from 9 point correspondences. Kukelova and Pajdla [15] used an additional
constraint to solve the same problem from 8 point correspondences, and Jiang et al. [11] added still one constraint
and they were able to solve the problem from 7 point correspondences. A comprehensive list of minimal problems in
computer vision and related papers can be found in [18].
Planar objects are commonly used for estimating the
camera pose and intrinsic parameters. Well-known Zhang’s
calibration method [23] provides a closed form solution to
the calibration problem from images of a known planar target. Also, OpenCV and Matlab include tools to perform calibration with a similar setup. Despite of the extensive number of minimal problems introduced in recent years, it is
surprising that homography has not been much considered
in this context, and there are only few related works. Minimal solutions to panorama stitching in [1] and [2] assume
that the camera centers coincide which reduces the motion
to pure rotation. Methods for decomposing a homography
into rotation, translation, and surface normal parameters
have been proposed e.g. in [7] and [24]. Saurer et al. [19]
consider a minimal solution to a 3-point plus a common direction relative pose problem using homography. Recently,
Kukelova et al. [14] have presented two algorithms for estimating the homography between two cameras with different
radial distortions. However, none of these works address the

76

