Visual Semantic Planning using Deep Successor Representations
Yuke Zhu∗3
Daniel Gordon∗ 4
Eric Kolve1
Dieter Fox4
Li Fei-Fei3
Abhinav Gupta1,2
Roozbeh Mottaghi1
Ali Farhadi1,4
1

Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence 2 Carnegie Mellon University
3
Stanford University 4 University of Washington

Abstract

Overhead view of Visual Dynamic Environment

Task: Put bowl in microwave

Initial State

1. Introduction
Humans demonstrate levels of visual understanding that
go well beyond current formulations of mainstream vision
tasks (e.g. object detection, scene recognition, image segmentation). A key element to visual intelligence is the ability to interact with the environment and plan a sequence of
actions to achieve specific goals; This, in fact, is central to
the survival of agents in dynamic environments [2, 37].
Visual semantic planning, the task of interacting with
a visual world and predicting a sequence of actions that
achieves a desired goal, involves addressing several challenging problems. For example, imagine the simple task
of putting the bowl in the microwave in the
visual dynamic environment depicted in Figure 1. A successful plan involves first finding the bowl, navigating to it,
then grabbing it, followed by finding and navigating to the
microwave, opening the microwave, and finally putting the
bowl in the microwave.
The first challenge in visual planning is that performing
∗ indicates equal contribution.

navigate to bowl
1

2

put bowl in microwave

navigate to microwave

5

3

pick up bowl

A crucial capability of real-world intelligent agents is
their ability to plan a sequence of actions to achieve their
goals in the visual world. In this work, we address the problem of visual semantic planning: the task of predicting a
sequence of actions from visual observations that transform
a dynamic environment from an initial state to a goal state.
Doing so entails knowledge about objects and their affordances, as well as actions and their preconditions and effects. We propose learning these through interacting with a
visual and dynamic environment. Our proposed solution involves bootstrapping reinforcement learning with imitation
learning. To ensure cross task generalization, we develop a
deep predictive model based on successor representations.
Our experimental results show near optimal results across a
wide range of tasks in the challenging THOR environment.

4

open microwave

Figure 1. Given a task and an initial configuration of a scene, our
agent learns to interact with the scene and predict a sequence of
actions to achieve the goal based on visual inputs.

each of the above actions in a visual dynamic environment
requires deep visual understanding of that environment, including the set of possible actions, their preconditions and
effects, and object affordances. For example, to open a microwave an agent needs to know that it should be in front
of the microwave, and it should be aware of the state of
the microwave and not try to open an already opened microwave. Long explorations that are required for some tasks
imposes the second challenge. The variability of visual observations and possible actions makes naı̈ve exploration intractable. To find a cup, the agent might need to search several cabinets one by one. The third challenge is emitting a
sequence of actions such that the agent ends in the goal state
and the effects of the preceding actions meet the preconditions of the proceeding ones. Finally, a satisfactory solution
to visual planning should enable cross task transfer; previous knowledge about one task should make it easier to learn
the next one. This is the fourth challenge.
In this paper, we address visual semantic planning as a
policy learning problem. We mainly focus on high-level
actions and do not take into account the low-level details of
motor control and motion planning. Visual Semantic Planning (VSP) is the task of predicting a sequence of semantic
actions that moves an agent from a random initial state in a

483

