BIER - Boosting Independent Embeddings Robustly
Michael Opitz, Georg Waltner, Horst Possegger, Horst Bischof
Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision
Graz University of Technology, Austria
{michael.opitz, waltner, possegger, bischof}@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
Learning similarity functions between image pairs with
deep neural networks yields highly correlated activations
of large embeddings. In this work, we show how to improve
the robustness of embeddings by exploiting independence
in ensembles. We divide the last embedding layer of a deep
network into an embedding ensemble and formulate training this ensemble as an online gradient boosting problem.
Each learner receives a reweighted training sample from
the previous learners. This leverages large embedding sizes
more effectively by significantly reducing correlation of the
embedding and consequently increases retrieval accuracy
of the embedding. Our method does not introduce any additional parameters and works with any differentiable loss
function. We evaluate our metric learning method on image retrieval tasks and show that it improves over state-ofthe-art methods on the CUB-200-2011, Cars-196, Stanford
Online Products, In-Shop Clothes Retrieval and VehicleID
datasets by a significant margin.

1. Introduction
Deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based metric learning methods map images to a high dimensional feature space. In this space semantically similar images should
be close to each other, whereas semantically dissimilar images should be far apart from each other. Metric learning has a large variety of applications, such as image or
object retrieval (e.g. [35, 48, 53]), single-shot object classification (e.g. [35, 48, 51]), keypoint descriptor learning
(e.g. [25, 43]), face verification (e.g. [36, 40]), person reidentification (e.g. [42, 48]), object tracking (e.g. [46]), etc.
To learn such metrics, several approaches based on image
pairs [9, 13], triplets [40, 52] or quadruples [26, 56] have
been proposed in the past. In this work we focus on learning simple similarity functions based on the dot product,
since they can be computed rapidly and can be used by approximate search methods (e.g. [33]) for large scale image
retrieval. Typically, especially with large embedding sizes,

Figure 1. BIER divides a large embedding into an ensemble of several smaller embeddings. During training we reweight the training
set for successive learners in the ensemble with the negative gradient of the loss function. During test time we concatenate the individual embeddings of all learners into a single embedding vector.

the accuracy of these methods saturates or declines due to
over-fitting [35].
To address this issue, we present a learning approach,
called Boosting Independent Embeddings Robustly (BIER),
which leverages large embedding sizes more effectively.
The main idea is to divide the last embedding layer of a
CNN into multiple non-overlapping groups (see Figure 1).
Each group is a separate metric network on top of a shared
feature representation. The accuracy of an ensemble depends on the accuracy of individual learners as well as the
correlation between them [7]. Ideally, individual learners are highly accurate and have low correlation with each
other, so that they complement each other during test time.
Naively optimizing a global loss function for this ensemble cannot show any benefits since all learners have access
to the same feature representation and the same training
samples. All groups will end up learning a highly correlated embedding, which results in no performance improvements. To overcome this problem, we formulate the ensemble training as an online gradient boosting problem. In
online gradient boosting each learner reweights a training
sample for successive learners according to the gradient of
the loss function. Consequently, successive learners will focus on distinct samples from the previous learners, resulting
15189

