MirrorFlow:
Exploiting Symmetries in Joint Optical Flow and Occlusion Estimation
Junhwa Hur
Stefan Roth
Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt

Figure 1. Results of our symmetric optical flow approach given two consecutive images from the KITTI benchmark [12]. Our method
jointly predicts forward and backward optical flow (overlaid on top row, from left to right, color coding of the benchmark) as well as
corresponding occlusion maps for each view (overlaid on bottom row).

Abstract
Optical flow estimation is one of the most studied problems in computer vision, yet recent benchmark datasets continue to reveal problem areas of today’s approaches. Occlusions have remained one of the key challenges. In this
paper, we propose a symmetric optical flow method to address the well-known chicken-and-egg relation between optical flow and occlusions. In contrast to many state-ofthe-art methods that consider occlusions as outliers, possibly filtered out during post-processing, we highlight the
importance of joint occlusion reasoning in the optimization and show how to utilize occlusion as an important cue
for estimating optical flow. The key feature of our model
is to fully exploit the symmetry properties that characterize optical flow and occlusions in the two consecutive images. Specifically through utilizing forward-backward consistency and occlusion-disocclusion symmetry in the energy,
our model jointly estimates optical flow in both forward and
backward direction, as well as consistent occlusion maps in
both views. We demonstrate significant performance benefits on standard benchmarks, especially from the occlusiondisocclusion symmetry. On the challenging KITTI dataset
we report the most accurate two-frame results to date.

1. Introduction
Optical flow estimation has been studied intensely for
several decades. Yet, recent optical flow benchmark
datasets [8, 12] reveal challenges that current methods are
still struggling to handle. Besides complex large motion and
severe illumination changes, occlusions continue to pose a
key challenge. Proper occlusion handling, especially in the
presence of large motion, is becoming one of the critical
factors to a method’s success in challenging scenes.
Occlusion estimation is a well-known chicken-and-egg
problem that optical flow has been entangled with for a long
time [1, 22, 30, 35]. Accurate knowledge of occluded areas
is crucial for reliable optical flow estimation in order to prevent non-occluded areas from being adversely affected by
occluded pixels. Yet, occlusion is a consequence of motion.
Estimating accurate optical flow, conversely, is required for
localizing occlusions reliably. We thus posit that their mutual dependency necessitates taking a joint approach and argue that this has not been done to the extent possible.
The majority of recent work instead addresses this challenging joint problem indirectly by considering occlusions
as outliers of low-level correspondence estimation, e.g.
[3, 9, 13, 17, 51]. Such approaches aim to mitigate the effects of occlusion by exploiting that occluded pixels gener-

312

