RGB-Infrared Cross-Modality Person Re-Identification
Ancong Wu1 , Wei-Shi Zheng2,5,6∗ , Hong-Xing Yu2 , Shaogang Gong4 , and Jianhuang Lai2,3
1

School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
3
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security, China
4
Queen Mary University of London, United Kingdom
5
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
6
Collaborative Innovation Center of High Performance Computing, NUDT, China
wuancong@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org, xKoven@gmail.com,
s.gong@qmul.ac.uk, stsljh@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Person re-identification (Re-ID) is an important problem in video surveillance, aiming to match pedestrian images across camera views. Currently, most works focus
on RGB-based Re-ID. However, in some applications, RGB
images are not suitable, e.g. in a dark environment or at
night. Infrared (IR) imaging becomes necessary in many
visual systems. To that end, matching RGB images with
infrared images is required, which are heterogeneous with
very different visual characteristics. For person Re-ID, this
is a very challenging cross-modality problem that has not
been studied so far. In this work, we address the RGB-IR
cross-modality Re-ID problem and contribute a new multiple modality Re-ID dataset named SYSU-MM01, including RGB and IR images of 491 identities from 6 cameras,
giving in total 287,628 RGB images and 15,792 IR images. To explore the RGB-IR Re-ID problem, we evaluate existing popular cross-domain models, including three
commonly used neural network structures (one-stream, twostream and asymmetric FC layer) and analyse the relation
between them. We further propose deep zero-padding for
training one-stream network towards automatically evolving domain-specific nodes in the network for cross-modality
matching. Our experiments show that RGB-IR crossmodality matching is very challenging but still feasible using the proposed model with deep zero-padding, giving the
best performance. Our dataset is available at http://
isee.sysu.edu.cn/project/RGBIRReID.htm.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) is an important field in
video surveillance. A large number of models for Re-ID
problem have been proposed, including feature learning
[29, 48, 23], distance metric learning [55, 15, 22, 28, 23, 24,
∗ Corresponding author

RGB camera
in the day

RGB camera
in the night

IR camera
in the night

Figure 1. Examples of RGB images and infrared (IR) images captured in two outdoor scenes in the day time and in the night, respectively. The images in every two columns are of the same person. Captured by devices receiving light of different wavelength,
RGB images and IR images of the same person look very different.

49, 57, 21, 44, 56] and end-to-end learning [20, 1, 47, 46].
Most Re-ID methods are based on RGB-RGB matching, the
most common single-modality Re-ID problem.
However, RGB-RGB Re-ID can be limited in surveillance when lighting is either poor or unavailable. For instance, RGB images become uninformative at night (Figure 1). In such a case, imaging devices without relying
on visible light should be applied. Infrared (IR) cameras
are commonly used in video surveillance systems. While
depth images captured by RGB-D cameras such as Kinect
are also independent of visible light, but they are rarely deployed because they are more expensive, used indoor only
and with distance limitations. Since most surveillance cameras are able to automatically switch from RGB to IR mode
in the dark, it is necessary to study RGB-IR cross-modality
matching in 24-hour surveillance systems.
In this work, we introduce the RGB-IR cross-modality
Re-ID problem. Although RGB-IR Re-ID is common and
significant in real-world applications, to our best knowledge, it has been rarely explored and remains an open is-

5380

