Grad-CAM:
Visual Explanations from Deep Networks via Gradient-based Localization
Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju1∗

Michael Cogswell1 Abhishek Das1 Ramakrishna Vedantam1∗
Devi Parikh1,2
Dhruv Batra1,2
1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Facebook AI Research

{ramprs, cogswell, abhshkdz, vrama, parikh, dbatra}@gatech.edu

Abstract
We propose a technique for producing ‘visual explanations’ for decisions from a large class of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)-based models, making them more transparent. Our approach – Gradient-weighted Class Activation
Mapping (Grad-CAM), uses the gradients of any target concept (say logits for ‘dog’ or even a caption), flowing into
the final convolutional layer to produce a coarse localization map highlighting the important regions in the image for
predicting the concept. Unlike previous approaches, GradCAM is applicable to a wide variety of CNN model-families:
(1) CNNs with fully-connected layers (e.g. VGG), (2) CNNs
used for structured outputs (e.g. captioning), (3) CNNs used
in tasks with multi-modal inputs (e.g. visual question answering) or reinforcement learning, without architectural
changes or re-training. We combine Grad-CAM with existing fine-grained visualizations to create a high-resolution
class-discriminative visualization, Guided Grad-CAM, and
apply it to image classification, image captioning, and visual
question answering (VQA) models, including ResNet-based
architectures. In the context of image classification models, our visualizations (a) lend insights into failure modes
of these models (showing that seemingly unreasonable predictions have reasonable explanations), (b) outperform previous methods on the ILSVRC-15 weakly-supervised localization task, (c) are more faithful to the underlying model,
and (d) help achieve model generalization by identifying
dataset bias. For image captioning and VQA, our visualizations show even non-attention based models can localize
inputs. Finally, we design and conduct human studies to
measure if Grad-CAM explanations help users establish appropriate trust in predictions from deep networks and show
that Grad-CAM helps untrained users successfully discern a
‘stronger’ deep network from a ‘weaker’ one even when both
make identical predictions. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/ramprs/grad-cam/ along with a demo
on CloudCV [2]1 and video at youtu.be/COjUB9Izk6E.
∗ Work done at Virginia Tech.
1 http://gradcam.cloudcv.org

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and other deep
networks have enabled unprecedented breakthroughs in a
variety of computer vision tasks, from image classification [24, 16] to object detection [15], semantic segmentation [27], image captioning [43, 6, 12, 21], and more recently,
visual question answering [3, 14, 32, 36]. While these deep
neural networks enable superior performance, their lack of
decomposability into intuitive and understandable components makes them hard to interpret [26]. Consequently, when
today’s intelligent systems fail, they fail spectacularly disgracefully, without warning or explanation, leaving a user
staring at an incoherent output, wondering why.
Interpretability matters. In order to build trust in intelligent systems and move towards their meaningful integration into our everyday lives, it is clear that we must build
‘transparent’ models that explain why they predict what they
predict. Broadly speaking, this transparency is useful at
three different stages of Artificial Intelligence (AI) evolution. First, when AI is significantly weaker than humans and
not yet reliably ‘deployable’ (e.g. visual question answering
[3]), the goal of transparency and explanations is to identify
the failure modes [1, 17], thereby helping researchers focus
their efforts on the most fruitful research directions. Second,
when AI is on par with humans and reliably ‘deployable’
(e.g., image classification [22] on a set of categories trained
on sufficient data), the goal is to establish appropriate trust
and confidence in users. Third, when AI is significantly
stronger than humans (e.g. chess or Go [39]), the goal of
explanations is in machine teaching [20] – i.e., a machine
teaching a human about how to make better decisions.
There typically exists a trade-off between accuracy and
simplicity or interpretability. Classical rule-based or expert systems [18] are highly interpretable but not very accurate (or robust). Decomposable pipelines where each stage
is hand-designed are thought to be more interpretable as
each individual component assumes a natural intuitive explanation. By using deep models, we sacrifice interpretable
modules for uninterpretable ones that achieve greater perfor1618

