Multimodal Gaussian Process Latent Variable Models
with Harmonization
Guoli Song1,2 , Shuhui Wang2 , Qingming Huang1,2 , Qi Tian3
1

2

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at San Antonio, TX, 78249, USA
guoli.song@vipl.ict.ac.cn, wangshuhui@ict.ac.cn, qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn, qi.tian@utsa.edu

Abstract

tual descriptions) that are semantically consistent or relevant to the queries.

In this work, we address multimodal learning problem
with Gaussian process latent variable models (GPLVMs)
and their application to cross-modal retrieval. Existing
GPLVM based studies generally impose individual priors
over the model parameters and ignore the intrinsic relations among these parameters. Considering the strong complementarity between modalities, we propose a novel joint
prior over the parameters for multimodal GPLVMs to propagate multimodal information in both kernel hyperparameter spaces and latent space. The joint prior is formulated as a harmonization constraint on the model parameters,
which enforces the agreement among the modality-specific
GP kernels and the similarity in the latent space. We incorporate the harmonization mechanism into the learning
process of multimodal GPLVMs. The proposed methods are evaluated on three widely used multimodal datasets
for cross-modal retrieval. Experimental results show that
the harmonization mechanism is beneficial to the GPLVM
algorithms for learning non-linear correlation among heterogeneous modalities.

Various methods have been proposed recently to model
the correlation across different modalities. Among these,
latent variable models are typically used to relate heterogeneous modalities to a latent space, where a joint representation is learned across content modalities. Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) [1, 8, 9] is one of the representative
schemes for latent variable modeling, where the shared subspace is learned by maximizing the correlation between the
projections of data modalities. However, the deterministic
mappings in CCA-based methods generally lack probabilistic interpretation on the interactions between modalities and
flexibilities to content divergence. In this work, we study
generative non-linear and non-parametric model for crossmodal correlation learning.

1. Introduction
In real-world applications, we have access to rich data
that involves multiple modalities, such as image with text [1, 2], or video with audio [3]. Better multimodal representations are required to describe the complementary information of heterogeneous modalities with intrinsic topic
and semantic relations. In this work, we consider multimodal learning problem and its application to cross-modal
retrieval [4–7] that has attracted much attention in computer vision community. Specifically, given queries from one
modality (e.g., image), the goal of cross-modal retrieval is
to retrieve database entries from other modalities (e.g., tex-

As a probabilistic extension of PCA [10], a probabilistic
Gaussian process mapping is defined in Gaussian process
latent variable model (GPLVM) [10] from low dimensional
latent space to high dimensional observation space. Further, multimodal GPLVMs [11–15] are proposed to learn
a latent representation to capture the shared information among multimodal data. Due to the non-parametric nature,
they can effectively learn low dimensional representations of heterogeneous data sources. The latent representation
can be used for various tasks such as robotic imitation learning [11], facial recognition [15], tracking [16], and crossmodal retrieval [12].
In the context of multimodal GPLVM learning, how to
learn the relation on heterogeneous data modalities is still
a critical issue that is left to be further investigated. Typically, manifold alignment [17] is used to build connections
between manifolds by fitting the point-wise related observations. By learning Gaussian process (GP) projections from
each original data modality, alignment-based approaches
[11, 13, 14, 18] attempt to discover a shared latent manifold

5029

