High-Quality Correspondence and Segmentation Estimation
for Dual-Lens Smart-Phone Portraits∗
Xiaoyong Shen1 Hongyun Gao2 Xin Tao2 Chao Zhou2 Jiaya Jia2,1
1
Youtu Lab, Tencent 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{dylanshen,jiayajia}@tencent.com

Abstract
Estimating correspondence between two images and extracting the foreground object are two challenges in computer vision. With dual-lens smart phones, such as iPhone
7+ and Huawei P9, coming into the market, two images of
slightly different views provide us new information to unify
the two topics. We propose a joint method to tackle them simultaneously via a joint fully connected conditional random
field (CRF) framework. The regional correspondence is
used to handle textureless regions in matching and make our
CRF system computationally efficient. Our method is evaluated over 2,000 new image pairs, and produces promising
results on challenging portrait images.

1. Introduction
It is convenient now to capture and share photos. It
is reported that over one billion new images [24, 36] are
shared every day over Internet and most of them are portraits [30, 18]. New dual-lens smart phones, on the other
hand, provide a special way to capture two images simultaneously, which actually contain more intriguing information for photo-related applications.
It seems a well-studied problem in computer vision that
the two-camera output can be used to estimate depth with
pixel correspondence established by optical flow estimation [19, 49] or stereo matching [41, 33]. Meanwhile it is
also known in this community that producing pixel-levelaccurate results is still difficult due primarily to diverse and
complex content, textureless regions, noise, blur, occlusion,
etc. An example is shown in Figure 1 where (a) and (e) are
the input from a dual-lens camera. (b) and (c) show optical
flow estimates of MDP [49] and LDOF [11] where errors
are clearly noticeable. These types of errors are actually
common when applying low-level image matching.
In this paper, we exploit extra information in dual-lens
∗ This work is in part supported by a grant from the Research Grants
Council of the Hong Kong SAR (project No. 413113).

{hygao,xtao,zhouc}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

images to tackle this challenging problem on portraits. We
incorporate high-level human-body clues in pixel correspondence estimation and propose a joint scheme to simultaneously refine pixel matching and object segmentation.
Analysis of Correspondence Estimation Dual-lens images could be unrectified and with different resolutions.
We thus resort to optical flow estimation instead of stereo
matching for correspondence estimation. As briefly discussed above, several issues influence these methods even
with robust outlier rejection schemes [10, 8, 44, 50]. Complicated nonlinear systems or discrete methods [23, 14, 5]
have their respective optimization and accuracy limitations.
Difficulty of Semantic Segmentation About semantic
segmentation, state-of-the-art methods are based on fully
convolutional networks (FCN) [29], which generate an perpixel prediction score on all classes. Hierarchical convolution, pooling, rectification and deconvolution layers are
adopted in the network. Even this advanced technique, semantic segmentation is still a challenging problem in terms
of creating very accurate object boundaries. For the example shown in Figure 1(f), the small background area near
the boy’s left arm is labeled as foreground. Although CRFs
are applied to incorporate original image structure [52, 13],
improvement is limited as shown in (g) [52]. The reason is
that the CNNs predicted score is already wrong in this case.
Our Approach and Contribution We propose a joint update method for portrait photos, taking initialization of simple optical flow estimates and FCN [29] segments. Then
we form a joint fully connected conditional random fields
(CRF) model to incorporate mutual information between
correspondence and segmentation features. To make optimization tractable, we propose regional correspondence to
greatly reduce CRF solution space. As a result, less then
40 labels are produced for effective inference. Our method
also handles textureless and outlier regions to improve estimation. To evaluate our approach, we collect 2,000 image
pairs with labeled segmentation and correspondence. Our
experiment shows that this method notably improves the ac13257

