Phrase Localization and Visual Relationship Detection with Comprehensive
Image-Language Cues
Bryan A. Plummer

Arun Mallya
Christopher M. Cervantes
Svetlana Lazebnik
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Julia Hockenmaier

{bplumme2, amallya2, ccervan2, juliahmr, slazebni}@illinois.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a framework for localization or
grounding of phrases in images using a large collection
of linguistic and visual cues. We model the appearance,
size, and position of entity bounding boxes, adjectives that
contain attribute information, and spatial relationships between pairs of entities connected by verbs or prepositions.
Special attention is given to relationships between people
and clothing or body part mentions, as they are useful for
distinguishing individuals. We automatically learn weights
for combining these cues and at test time, perform joint inference over all phrases in a caption. The resulting system
produces state of the art performance on phrase localization on the Flickr30k Entities dataset [33] and visual relationship detection on the Stanford VRD dataset [27].1

1. Introduction
Today’s deep features can give reliable signals about a
broad range of content in natural images, leading to advances in image-language tasks such as automatic captioning [6, 14, 16, 17, 42] and visual question answering [1, 8, 44]. A basic building block for such tasks is localization or grounding of individual phrases [6, 16, 17, 28,
33, 40, 42]. A number of datasets with phrase grounding
information have been released, including Flickr30k Entities [33], ReferIt [18], Google Referring Expressions [29],
and Visual Genome [21]. However, grounding remains
challenging due to open-ended vocabularies, highly unbalanced training data, prevalence of hard-to-localize entities
like clothing and body parts, as well as the subtlety and variety of linguistic cues that can be used for localization.
The goal of this paper is to accurately localize a bounding box for each entity (noun phrase) mentioned in a caption
for a particular test image. We propose a joint localization
objective for this task using a learned combination of singlephrase and phrase-pair cues. Evaluation is performed on the
1 Code: https://github.com/BryanPlummer/pl-clc

Input Sentence and Image!
A man carries a baby under a red
and blue umbrella next to a woman
in a red jacket!

Cues!
1)! Entities!
2)! Candidate Box Position!
3)! Candidate Box Size!
Common Object !
4)!
Detectors!
5)! Adjectives!
6)! Subject - Verb!
7)! Verb – Object!
8)! Verbs!
9)! Prepositions!
10)!Clothing & Body Parts!

Examples!
man, baby, umbrella,
woman, jacket!
——!
——!

man →! person!
baby →! person!
woman →! person!
umbrella →! red!
umbrella →! blue!
jacket →! red!
(man, carries)!
(carries, baby)!
(man, carries, baby)!
(baby, under, umbrella)!
(man, next to, woman)!
(woman, in, jacket)!

Figure 1: Left: an image and caption, together with ground truth bounding
boxes of entities (noun phrases). Right: a list of all the cues used by our
system, with corresponding phrases from the sentence.

challenging recent Flickr30K Entities dataset [33], which
provides ground truth bounding boxes for each entity in the
five captions of the original Flickr30K dataset [43].
Figure 1 introduces the components of our system using
an example image and caption. Given a noun phrase extracted from the caption, e.g., red and blue umbrella, we obtain single-phrase cue scores for each candidate box based
on appearance (modeled with a phrase-region embedding as
well as object detectors for common classes), size, position,
and attributes (adjectives). If a pair of entities is connected
by a verb (man carries a baby) or a preposition (woman
in a red jacket), we also score the pair of corresponding
candidate boxes using a spatial model. In addition, actions
may modify the appearance of either the subject or the object (e.g., a man carrying a baby has a characteristic appearance, as does a baby being carried). To account for this, we
learn subject-verb and verb-object appearance models for
the constituent entities. We give special treatment to relationships between people, clothing, and body parts, as these
are commonly used for describing individuals, and are also
among the hardest entities for existing approaches to localize. To extract as complete a set of relationships as possible,
we use natural language processing (NLP) tools to resolve
pronoun references within a sentence: e.g., by analyzing the

1928

