CDTS: Collaborative Detection, Tracking, and Segmentation for Online Multiple
Object Segmentation in Videos
Yeong Jun Koh
Korea University

Chang-Su Kim
Korea University

yjkoh@mcl.korea.ac.kr

changsukim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
A novel online algorithm to segment multiple objects in
a video sequence is proposed in this work. We develop the
collaborative detection, tracking, and segmentation (CDTS)
technique to extract multiple segment tracks accurately.
First, we jointly use object detector and tracker to generate multiple bounding box tracks for objects. Second, we
transform each bounding box into a pixel-wise segment, by
employing the alternate shrinking and expansion (ASE) segmentation. Third, we refine the segment tracks, by detecting
object disappearance and reappearance cases and merging
overlapping segment tracks. Experimental results show that
the proposed algorithm significantly surpasses the state-ofthe-art conventional algorithms on benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Multiple object segmentation (MOS) is the task to extract multiple segment tracks by separating objects from one
another and from the background in a video sequence. It is
challenging to segment multiple objects in a video, without any prior information about objects or user annotations.
Furthermore, MOS is difficult due to background clutters,
object overlapping, occlusion, disappearance, appearance
variation, and fast motion.
MOS algorithms [1, 2, 4, 15, 16, 21–23, 30–32, 34, 37, 42]
attempt to achieve pixel-wise delineation of as many objects as possible without user annotations. Most conventional algorithms [1, 2, 4, 15, 16, 21–23, 30, 31, 34, 37, 42]
are offline approaches, which process all frames at once.
In other words, the entire information in a video is required to achieve the segmentation. These algorithms
gather motion trajectories [1, 2, 4, 21–23, 31] or region proposals [15, 16, 30, 34, 37, 42] from all frames, and then cluster them into segments. On the other hand, an online approach, such as [32], extracts objects from each frame using the information in the current and past frames only. An
offline approach may achieve more accurate segmentation,

but it demands future frames, thereby increasing memory
and computational complexities. In contrast, an online approach can extract objects sequentially from the first to the
last frames. In this regard, online MOS is more practical
than offline one.
We propose a novel online MOS algorithm to extract segment tracks for multiple objects in a video sequence. We
develop the collaborative detection, tracking, and segmentation (CDTS) technique to achieve accurate online MOS.
First, we use object detector and tracker jointly to generate bounding box tracks for multiple objects. Second,
we transform each bounding box into a pixel-wise segment, by shrinking and expanding foreground regions alternately, and then link it to the corresponding segment track.
This alternate shrinking and expansion (ASE) is performed
sequentially to achieve online MOS. Third, we present
a scheme for segment track management, which exploits
segmentation results to detect object disappearance, object
reappearance, and duplicated segment tracks. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art MOS algorithms on
the YouTube-Objects dataset [27] and FBMS dataset [23].
To summarize, this work has the following contributions.
• We simultaneously perform object detection, tracking, and segmentation to achieve MOS online, whereas
most conventional algorithms are offline approaches.
• We develop the segment track management scheme to
detect disappearing and reappearing objects and merge
duplicated segment tracks for the same object.
• The proposed algorithm yields remarkable performances on the YouTube-Objects and FBMS benchmarks datasets.

2. Related Work
2.1. Video Object Segmentation
Video object segmentation (VOS) can be classified into
three categories: semi-supervised VOS, single VOS, and
MOS.

3601

