Unrestricted Facial Geometry Reconstruction Using Image-to-Image Translation
Matan Sela
Elad Richardson
Ron Kimmel
Department of Computer Science, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
{matansel,eladrich,ron}@cs.technion.ac.il

Figure 1: Results of the proposed method. Reconstructed geometries are shown next to the corresponding input images.

Abstract
It has been recently shown that neural networks can recover the geometric structure of a face from a single given
image. A common denominator of most existing face geometry reconstruction methods is the restriction of the solution space to some low-dimensional subspace. While such
a model significantly simplifies the reconstruction problem,
it is inherently limited in its expressiveness. As an alternative, we propose an Image-to-Image translation network
that jointly maps the input image to a depth image and a
facial correspondence map. This explicit pixel-based mapping can then be utilized to provide high quality reconstructions of diverse faces under extreme expressions, using a
purely geometric refinement process. In the spirit of recent
approaches, the network is trained only with synthetic data,
and is then evaluated on “in-the-wild” facial images. Both
qualitative and quantitative analyses demonstrate the accuracy and the robustness of our approach.

face recognition methods deform the recovered geometry
for producing a neutralized and frontal version of the input face in a given image, reducing the variations between
images of the same subject [49, 19]. As for medical applications, acquiring the structure of a face allows for fine
planning of aesthetic operations and plastic surgeries, designing of personalized masks [2, 37] and even bio-printing
facial organs.
Here, we focus on the recovery of the geometric structure
of a face from a single facial image under a wide range of
expressions and poses. This problem has been investigated
for decades and most existing solutions involve one or more
of the following components.
• Facial landmarks [25, 46, 32, 47] - a set of automatically detected key points on the face such as the tip of
the nose and the corners of the eyes, which can guide
the reconstruction process [49, 26, 1, 12, 29].
• A reference facial model - an average neutral face that
is used as an initialization of optical flow or shape from
shading procedures [19, 26].

1. Introduction
Recovering the geometric structure of a face is a fundamental task in computer vision with numerous applications. For example, facial characteristics of actors in realistic movies can be manually edited with facial rigs that
are carefully designed for manipulating the expression [42].
While producing animation movies, tracking the geometry
of an actor across multiple frames allows transferring the
expression to an animated avatar [14, 8, 7]. Image-based

• A three-dimensional morphable model - a prior lowdimensional linear subspace of plausible facial geometries which allows an efficient, yet rough, recovery of
a facial structure [4, 6, 49, 36, 23, 33, 43],
While using these components can simplify the reconstruction problem, they introduce some inherent limitations.
Methods that rely only on landmarks are limited to a sparse
set of constrained points. Classical techniques that use a

1576

