Learned Watershed: End-to-End Learning of Seeded Segmentation
Steffen Wolf∗, Lukas Schott∗, Ullrich Köthe and Fred Hamprecht
HCI/IWR, Heidelberg University, 69120 Germany
firstname.lastname@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
Learned boundary maps are known to outperform handcrafted ones as a basis for the watershed algorithm. We
show, for the first time, how to train watershed computation
jointly with boundary map prediction. The estimator for the
merging priorities is cast as a neural network that is convolutional (over space) and recurrent (over iterations). The
latter allows learning of complex shape priors. The method
gives the best known seeded segmentation results on the
CREMI segmentation challenge.
T

loss gradient
∇LSL

1. Introduction
The watershed algorithm is an important computational
primitive in low-level computer vision. Since it does not
penalize segment boundary length, it exhibits no shrinkage bias like multi-terminal cuts or (conditional) random
fields and is especially suited to segment objects with high
surface-to-volume ratio, e.g. neurons in biological images.
In its classic form, the watershed algorithm comprises
three basic steps: altitude computation, seed definition, and
region assignment. These steps are designed manually for
each application of interest. In a typical setup, the altitude
is the output of an edge detector (e.g. the gradient magnitude or the gPb detector [2]), the seeds are located at the
local minima of the altitude image, and pixels are assigned
to seeds according to the drop-of-water principle [9].
In light of the very successful trend towards learningbased image analysis, it is desirable to eliminate handcrafted heuristics from the watershed algorithm as well.
Existing work shows that learned edge detectors significantly improve segmentation quality, especially when convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are used [7, 27, 33, 4].
We take this idea one step further and propose to learn altitude estimation and region assignment jointly, in an endto-end fashion: Our approach no longer employs an auxiliary objective (e.g. accurate boundary strength prediction),
but trains the altitude function together with the subsequent
region assignment decisions so that the final segmentation
∗ Authors contributed equally

T (m1 , ·)

T (m2 , ·)

(c)
Figure 1. Illustration of watershed learning. (a) Raw data with two
seeds m1 , m2 , ground truth boundary (green), and false boundary (red) at an early training stage. (b) A hole in the altitude map
causes the left region to bleed out along the orange path, meeting
the blue path at a false watershed. (c) Profile of topographic distances T along the two paths. Training increases the altitude at the
missed edge (green) and decreases it at the false edge (red). Upon
convergence, dotted paths meet at the correct location.

error is minimized directly. The resulting training algorithm
is closely related to reinforcement learning.
Our method keeps the basic structure of the watershed
algorithm intact: Starting from given seeds1 , we maintain a
priority queue storing the topographic distance of candidate
pixels to their nearest seed. Each iteration assigns the currently best candidate to “its” region and updates the queue.
The topographic distance is induced by an altitude function
estimated with a CNN. Crucially, and deviating from prior
work, we compute altitudes on demand, allowing their conditioning on prior decisions, i.e. partial segmentations. The
CNN thus gets the opportunity to learn priors for likely region shapes in the present data. We show how these models
1 Incorporating seed definition into end-to-end learning is a future goal
of our research, but beyond the scope of this paper.

2011

