Colored Point Cloud Registration Revisited
Jaesik Park

Qian-Yi Zhou
Intel Labs

Abstract
We present an algorithm for aligning two colored point
clouds. The key idea is to optimize a joint photometric
and geometric objective that locks the alignment along both
the normal direction and the tangent plane. We extend a
photometric objective for aligning RGB-D images to point
clouds, by locally parameterizing the point cloud with a virtual camera. Experiments demonstrate that our algorithm
is more accurate and more robust than prior point cloud
registration algorithms, including those that utilize color
information. We use the presented algorithms to enhance
a state-of-the-art scene reconstruction system. The precision of the resulting system is demonstrated on real-world
scenes with accurate ground-truth models.

1. Introduction
We are concerned with the following problem: given two
roughly aligned three-dimensional point clouds, compute a
tight alignment between them. This is a well-known problem in computer vision, computer graphics, and robotics.
The problem is typically addressed with variants of the ICP
algorithm [1, 3, 31]. The algorithm alternates between finding correspondences and optimizing an objective function
that minimizes distances between corresponding points. A
common failure mode of ICP is instability in the presence of
smooth surfaces [14, 46]. The alignment can slip when geometric features do not sufficiently constrain the optimization.
This ambiguity can be alleviated if the points are associated with color. This is often the case. Modern depth
cameras commonly produce pairs of depth and color images. Many industrial 3D scanners are also equipped with
synchronized color cameras and provide software that associates color information with the 3D scans. Multi-view
stereo pipelines reconstruct colored point clouds from image collections [8, 13, 39]. Considering color along with
the geometry can increase the accuracy of point cloud registration.
The standard formulation for integrating color into geometric registration algorithms is to lift the alignment into

Vladlen Koltun

a higher-dimensional space, parameterized by both position and color. Typically, correspondences are established
in a four- or six-dimensional space rather than the physical
three-dimensional space [21, 22, 27, 28]. This is an elegant approach, but it is liable to introducing erroneous correspondences between points that are distant but have similar color. These correspondences can pull away from the
correct solution and prevent the method from establishing a
maximally tight alignment.
In this work, we develop a different approach to aligning
colored point clouds. Our approach establishes correspondences in the physical three-dimensional space, but defines
a joint optimization objective that integrates both geometric
and photometric terms. A key challenge is that color is only
defined on discrete points in the three-dimensional space.
To optimize a continuous joint objective, we need to define
a continuous and differentiable photometric term, the gradient of which indicates how color varies as a function of position. This is challenging because unstructured point clouds
do not provide a natural parameterization domain. We build
on dense and direct formulations for RGB-D image alignment, which use the two-dimensional image plane as the
parameterization domain [35, 25, 44, 40]. To define a photometric objective for point cloud alignment, we introduce
a virtual image on the tangent plane of every point, which
provides a local approximation to the implicit color variation. Using this construct, we generalize the photometric
objectives used for RGB-D image alignment to unstructured
point cloud alignment. The resulting photometric objective
is integrated with a geometric objective defined using the
same virtual image planes. This enables efficient joint photometric and geometric optimization for point cloud alignment. Our formulation unifies RGB-D image registration
and colored point cloud registration. We show that our algorithm achieves tighter alignment than state-of-the-art registration algorithms, including those that use color information.
Our primary contribution is a new approach to colored
point cloud registration. Beyond this, we make two supporting contributions. Since point cloud registration plays
a central role in high-fidelity scene reconstruction, we have
used the presented algorithms to enhance a state-of-the-art
1143

