Learning Gaze Transitions from Depth to Improve Video Saliency Estimation
George Leifman
Amazon

Dmitry Rudoy
Intel Corporation

Tristan Swedish
MIT Media Lab

gleifman@amazon.com

dmitry.rudoy@gmail.com

tswedish@mit.edu

Eduardo Bayro-Corrochano
CINVESTAV

Ramesh Raskar
MIT Media Lab

edb@gdl.cinvestav.mx

raskar@mit.edu

Abstract
In this paper we introduce a novel Depth-Aware Video
Saliency approach to predict human focus of attention when
viewing videos that contain a depth map (RGBD) on a 2D
screen. Saliency estimation in this scenario is highly important since in the near future 3D video content will be easily
acquired yet hard to display. Despite considerable progress
in 3D display technologies, most are still expensive and require special glasses for viewing, so RGBD content is primarily viewed on 2D screens, removing the depth channel
from the final viewing experience. We train a generative
convolutional neural network that predicts the 2D viewing
saliency map for a given frame using the RGBD pixel values
and previous fixation estimates in the video. To evaluate the
performance of our approach, we present a new comprehensive database of 2D viewing eye-fixation ground-truth
for RGBD videos. Our experiments indicate that it is beneficial to integrate depth into video saliency estimates for
content that is viewed on a 2D display. We demonstrate
that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods for
video saliency, achieving 15% relative improvement.

1. Introduction
In recent years we have witnessed a dramatic improvement of 3D-capable acquisition equipment; 3D cameras,
e.g. Kinect and RealSense, have become highly popular
and affordable. Moreover, in the near future many laptops
and tablets are expected to be shipped with integrated 3D
cameras. We also see a considerable progress in 3D display technologies. However, high-quality 3D displays are
still expensive and not easily accessible to the average consumer. Combination of the factors above leads to a world
where the 3D content is easy to acquire but hard to display.
For these reasons, we explore the problem of predicting the
human foci of attention when viewing content that contains

Ground-truth

Our approach

Rudoy et al. [34]

Figure 1. Our depth-aware video saliency is more similar to the
ground-truth than the state-of-the-art method [34].

a depth map on regular 2D screens.
Saliency detection in video sequences has attracted a lot
of attention in recent years because of its contribution for
various computer vision applications, which include segmentation, classification, key-frame selection, retargeting
and compression. 3D visual information supplies a powerful cue for saliency analysis. This has been shown by
numerous studies that investigate the effect of depth information for image and video saliency [3, 17, 24, 30, 31].
The eye movement patterns in 3D stereoscopic movies have
been investigated as well [13] and were proven to differ
from the eye movement when viewing the same content on
a 2D screen. This difference is beyond the scope of this
paper. We focus on the scenarios where depth information
exists but is not displayed to the viewer.
We propose a novel Depth-Aware Video Saliency approach that exploits depth information to establish saliency
in video sequences (Figure 1). Since depth influence on the
saliency is not clear, integrating such information into video
saliency is not as simple as adding a prior. Figure 2 demonstrates that sometimes the closest object attracts the most attention, while sometimes distant objects are the salient ones.
To determine the correct impact of depth on saliency, we
11698

