Multi-label Learning of Part Detectors
for Heavily Occluded Pedestrian Detection
Chunluan Zhou
Junsong Yuan
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
czhou002@e.ntu.edu.sg, jsyuan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

(Blue bounding box) is only ranked at 5th among five detections by a full-body detector.
A common solution to occlusion handling for pedestrian
detection is to learn a set of part/occlusion-specific detectors
which can be properly integrated to detect partially occluded pedestrians [10, 9, 16, 14, 19, 17, 36, 26]. When a fullbody detector fails to detect a partially occluded pedestrian,
the detectors of the parts which are still visible may give
high detection scores (See Fig. 1(b-c)). For this solution,
the reliability of part detectors is of great importance, since
part detectors are its building blocks. Usually, part detectors
are learned independently [10, 9, 16, 14, 19, 36, 26]. This
way of learning part detectors has two drawbacks: (1) Correlations among parts are ignored during learning, which
would affect the reliability of the learned part detectors; (2)
The computational cost of applying a set of part detectors
increases linearly with the number of parts. In [17], part
detector learning and integration are done in a single convolutional neural network. However, this approach only uses class labels and part detectors are learned implicitly in a
weakly supervised fashion. We believe part-level supervision can be exploited to further improve its performance.
In this paper, we propose a multi-label learning approach
to jointly learn part detectors. The goal of joint learning
is to (1) improve the part detectors by exploiting correlations among parts, e.g. some parts of the body tend to appear/disappear together, and (2) reduce the computational
cost of applying the learned part detectors for pedestrian
detection. Since the combination of boosting and decision
trees works well for pedestrian detection [6, 35, 5, 33], we
choose decision trees to form our part detectors. However, instead of training a set of decision trees for each part
detector, we only construct one set of decision trees which
are shared by all the part detectors. To exploit part correlations, these decision trees are learned and combined to capture the overall distribution of all the parts. We adapt AdaBoost.MH [22], which is a multi-class, multi-label version
of AdaBoost, to learn these decision trees. When used for
pedestrian detection individually, the part detectors learned

Detecting pedestrians that are partially occluded remains a challenging problem due to variations and uncertainties of partial occlusion patterns. Following a commonly used framework of handling partial occlusions by part
detection, we propose a multi-label learning approach to
jointly learn part detectors to capture partial occlusion patterns. The part detectors share a set of decision trees via
boosting to exploit part correlations and also reduce the
computational cost of applying these part detectors. The
learned decision trees capture the overall distribution of all
the parts. When used as a pedestrian detector individually,
our part detectors learned jointly show better performance
than their counterparts learned separately in different occlusion situations. The learned part detectors can be further
integrated to better detect partially occluded pedestrians.
Experiments on the Caltech dataset show state-of-the-art
performance of our approach for detecting heavily occluded pedestrians.

1. Introduction
Occlusions present a great challenge for pedestrian detection in real-world applications. Most state-of-the-art
pedestrian detection approaches [20, 35, 33, 4] train a fullbody detector and show promising performance for detecting pedestrians which are non-occluded or slightly occluded. These approaches would often suffer when pedestrians
are heavily occluded. For example, RPN+BF [33] achieves
a log-average miss rate of 9.6% on the Reasonable subset
of the Caltech dataset [8], but its performance drops dramatically to 74% on the Heavy subset in which pedestrian
examples are heavily occluded. Since most of the body of a
heavily occluded pedestrian is invisible, a full-body detector
would probably be misled by the background region inside
its detection window so that it tends to miss the pedestrian. As shown in Fig. 1(a-b), a heavily occluded pedestrian

3486

