Supplementary Meta-Learning: Towards a Dynamic Model
For Deep Neural Networks
Feihu Zhang
Benjamin W. Wah
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong
hi.yexu@gmail.com

bwah@cuhk.eud.hk

33

Abstract

30

32.8

1. Introduction
A lot of attention has been directed to deep neural networks (DNN), with numerous breakthroughs on both lowlevel computer-vision applications, such as image superresolution [8] and denoising [4, 15, 40], and high-level classification [11, 21], recognition [32] and detection [37].
Training neural networks (NNs) for computer-vision applications often requires a large amount of diverse training data for the NN to learn its features and to generalize
Demo code and models are available at https://github.com/
feihuzhang/MLNN.

Individual
CNN
MLNN

29
28.5

32.6

PSNR

Data diversity in terms of types, styles, as well as radiometric, exposure and texture conditions widely exists
in training and test data of vision applications. However,
learning in traditional neural networks (NNs) only tries to
find a model with fixed parameters that optimize the average
behavior over all inputs, without using data-specific properties. In this paper, we develop a meta-level NN (MLNN)
model that learns meta-knowledge on data-specific properties of images during learning and that dynamically adapts
its weights during application according to the properties of
the images input. MLNN consists of two parts: the dynamic supplementary NN (SNN) that learns meta-information
on each type of inputs, and the fixed base-level NN (BLNN)
that incorporates the meta-information from SNN into its
weights at run time to realize the generalization for each
type of inputs. We verify our approach using over ten network architectures under various application scenarios and
loss functions. In low-level vision applications on image
super-resolution and denoising, MLNN has 0.1∼0.3 dB improvements on PSNR, whereas for high-level image classification, MLNN has accuracy improvement of 0.4∼0.6%
for Cifar10 and 1.2∼2.1% for ImageNet when compared to
convolutional NNs (CNNs). Improvements are more pronounced as the scale or diversity of data is increased.

PSNR

29.5

32.4

CNN Testing
CNN Training
MLNN Testing
MLNN Training

32.2
32

28

31.8

27.5

31.6
0

20

40

epochs

60

0

20

40

epochs

60

Figure 1: Using image super-resolution (Sec. 4) to illustrate the
benefit of dynamic model adaptation to inputs. Left: Test errors for
each type of inputs with a mixture of nature images (solid lines)
and screenshots (dashed lines) as training data. Our MLNN (red
lines) with model adaptation performs better than training with
static manual classification (orange lines) and original CNNs without data classification (blue lines). Right: Training and testing results for a mixture of five types of images.

them to unseen inputs. These diversities include those at the
image-level (such as type, style and radiometric), regionlevel (smooth or textured), and pixel/patch-level (such as
noise, location and artifact).
Traditional NNs are trained by maximizing an objective
based on a loss function across all training data in order to
find a model with fixed structure and weights. It optimizes
the average behavior across all training data, without specializing to their variations. NNs with fixed structure and
weights may under-perform when compared to NNs that
can dynamically adapt to training data. Fig. 1 shows reduced errors when we manually classify training data into
multiple classes according to their meta-level differences,
and train each to learn a unique model. Obviously, such
an approach is onerous. In some low-level vision tasks in
which each pixel is an input as well as a target, it is impossible to manually classify them. Alternatively, we can train
a second classifier to categorize the data before selecting
the proper model. Its drawback is that it is hard for the new
classifier to accurately classify every input, leading to possibly an improper model selected. Moreover, the number of
classes is unknown and can be infinitely many.
To address the problem of simultaneous automatic classification and dynamic model selection with generalization,
14344

