A Revisit of Sparse Coding Based Anomaly Detection
in Stacked RNN Framework
Weixin Luo∗
ShanghaiTech University

Wen Liu∗
ShanghaiTech University

Shenghua Gao†
ShanghaiTech University

luowx@shanghaitech.edu.cn

liuwen@shanghaitech.edu.cn

gaoshh@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Motivated by the capability of sparse coding based
anomaly detection, we propose a Temporally-coherent
Sparse Coding (TSC) where we enforce similar neighbouring frames be encoded with similar reconstruction coefficients. Then we map the TSC with a special type of stacked
Recurrent Neural Network (sRNN). By taking advantage of
sRNN in learning all parameters simultaneously, the nontrivial hyper-parameter selection to TSC can be avoided,
meanwhile with a shallow sRNN, the reconstruction coefficients can be inferred within a forward pass, which reduces the computational cost for learning sparse coefficients. The contributions of this paper are two-fold: i) We
propose a TSC, which can be mapped to a sRNN which
facilitates the parameter optimization and accelerates the
anomaly prediction. ii) We build a very large dataset which
is even larger than the summation of all existing dataset for
anomaly detection in terms of both the volume of data and
the diversity of scenes. Extensive experiments on both a toy
dataset and real datasets demonstrate that our TSC based
and sRNN based method consistently outperform existing
methods, which validates the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection has been extensively studied in computer vision because of its potential applications in video
surveillance, activity recognition and scene understanding,
etc. An anomaly detection system would greatly reduce human labor and time. However, anomaly detection is still
an extremely challenging task because of the unbounded
property of anomaly. In real applications, on the one hand,
compared with normal events, anomaly is rare and it is extremely expensive to collect abnormal events; On the other
hand, it is infeasible to collect all possible abnormal events.
Therefore for a typical anomaly detection dataset, only nor∗ The authors contributed equally and are listed in alphabetical order.
† Corresponding author.

mal scenarios are given in a training set. To identify whether
an abnormal event occurs, a common approach is to exploit
regular patterns in terms of appearance and motion on the
training set. Any pattern that does not agree with these regular ones would be classified as irregular ones.
Dictionary learning based approaches have demonstrated their success for anomaly detection [17][29]. In
these approaches, learning a dictionary to encode all normal events on the training set and an abnormal event would
result in a large reconstruction error. However, the optimization of sparse coefficients is extremely time consuming, which becomes the bottleneck of dictionary learning
based anomaly detection approaches. Further, features govern the performance of anomaly detection, while dictionary
learning based approaches are mainly based on hand-crafted
features, which may not be optimal for video representation.
Recently, in light of the great successes of deep learning in
many computer vision tasks[15][22], it has been introduced
to the anomaly detection. Specifically, an Auto-Encoder is
learnt on the normal training data under an assumption that
regular data can be reconstructed by themselves while irregular ones cannot [11]. However, such a solution is based on
a 3D Convolutional Neural Network (ConvNet), while previous work has shown that extracting appearance and motion information separately with a two-stream network is a
better solution for feature extraction in videos [7]. Further,
such a solution either takes a video cube as its input, and
regular/irregular frames in this cube may affect the classification of each other. To avoid this, video cubes have to
be sampled by centering the cube over all frames, which is
computationally expensive.
In this paper, we propose a sparse coding based approach
for anomaly detection. More specifically, a dictionary is
learnt to encode regular patterns in terms of appearance, and
features corresponding to normal events be sparsely reconstructed by this dictionary with a small reconstruction error. Further, to improve the smoothness of prediction over
neighboring frames, a temporally-coherent term is imposed.
Then we arrive at a Temporally-coherent Sparse Coding
(TSC) formulation. It is interesting that our TSC formu1341

