Learning Discriminative Aggregation Network for Video-based Face Recognition
Yongming Rao1,2,3 , Ji Lin1,2,3 , Jiwen Lu1,2,3∗, Jie Zhou1,2,3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, Beijing, China
3
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList), Beijing, China
1

raoyongming95@gmail.com; lin-j14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {lujiwen,jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a discriminative aggregation
network (DAN) method for video face recognition, which
aims to integrate information from video frames effectively and efficiently. Unlike existing aggregation methods, our
method aggregates raw video frames directly instead of the
features obtained by complex processing. By combining
the idea of metric learning and adversarial learning, we
learn an aggregation network that produces more discriminative synthesized images compared to raw input frames.
Our framework reduces the number of frames to be processed and significantly speed up the recognition procedure.
Furthermore, low-quality frames containing misleading information are filtered and denoised during the aggregation
process, which makes our system more robust and discriminative. Experimental results show that our method can generate discriminative images from video clips and improve
the overall recognition performance in both the speed and
accuracy on three widely used datasets.

  

 
 F

  

   
 
G



  

 F


 









   

  

Figure 1. The basic idea of our proposed frames aggregation
method. For each video clip, we integrate the information of
videos to produce few synthesized images with discriminative
aggregation network (DAN). The supervision signal of our proposed framework makes the synthesized images more discriminative than original frames in the feature space. Besides, we only
need to pass the few aggregated images into feature extraction network and thus greatly speed up the overall system.

1. Introduction
Video face recognition has been attracting increasing efforts in the past few years [1, 3, 4, 13, 29, 34, 37, 43, 44, 45],
which has many practical applications in surveillance, person identiﬁcation, video search. Compared to still image
recognition, video face recognition is more challenging because there are many noisy frames in videos which contain unfavorable poses and viewing angles. Furthermore,
as the video usually consists of more than 100 frames, it
brings considerable computational burdens for the state-ofthe-art recognition methods such as the deep neural networks. Therefore, it is desirable to propose a framework
that can denoise the original video by extracting useful information from noisy data and reduce the overall runtime.
In other words, a new framework which can aggregate the
∗ Corresponding author.

information from the video keep the same discriminative ability for efﬁcient face recognition is required.
There have been varieties of efforts on integrating information from different frames to represent the whole
video [2, 16, 19, 32, 45]. However, most of them focuses
on extracting features from raw video frames, which means that feature extraction is performed at ﬁrst before other
operations. This kind of procedure will harm the recognition performance because some frames have low quality
will mislead the system into wrong decisions, which cannot
be easily distinguished in the feature space because such information is usually lost during the feature extraction stage.
Therefore, it is important to conduct aggregation process
before feature extraction.
Generative adversarial networks (GAN) have achieved
great success in many ﬁelds of computer vision [5, 8, 22, 27,
13781

