Video Frame Interpolation via Adaptive Separable Convolution
Simon Niklaus
Portland State University

Long Mai
Portland State University

Feng Liu
Portland State University

sniklaus@pdx.edu

mtlong@cs.pdx.edu

fliu@cs.pdx.edu

Abstract
Standard video frame interpolation methods first estimate optical flow between input frames and then synthesize an intermediate frame guided by motion. Recent approaches merge these two steps into a single convolution
process by convolving input frames with spatially adaptive
kernels that account for motion and re-sampling simultaneously. These methods require large kernels to handle large
motion, which limits the number of pixels whose kernels can
be estimated at once due to the large memory demand. To
address this problem, this paper formulates frame interpolation as local separable convolution over input frames using pairs of 1D kernels. Compared to regular 2D kernels,
the 1D kernels require significantly fewer parameters to be
estimated. Our method develops a deep fully convolutional
neural network that takes two input frames and estimates
pairs of 1D kernels for all pixels simultaneously. Since our
method is able to estimate kernels and synthesizes the whole
video frame at once, it allows for the incorporation of perceptual loss to train the neural network to produce visually pleasing frames. This deep neural network is trained
end-to-end using widely available video data without any
human annotation. Both qualitative and quantitative experiments show that our method provides a practical solution
to high-quality video frame interpolation.

1. Introduction
Traditional video frame interpolation methods estimate
optical flow between input frames and synthesizing intermediate frames guided by optical flow [3]. However, their
performance largely depends on the quality of optical flow,
which is challenging to estimate accurately in regions with
occlusion, blur, and abrupt brightness change.
Based on the observation that the ultimate goal of frame
interpolation is to produce high-quality video frames and
optical flow estimation is only an intermediate step, recent methods formulate frame interpolation [36] or extrapolation [14, 21, 58] as a convolution process. Specifihttp://graphics.cs.pdx.edu/project/sepconv

(a) Ground truth

(b) Niklaus et al. [36]

(c) Ours - L1

(d) Ours - LF

Figure 1: Video frame interpolation. Compared to the recent convolution approach that utilizes 2D kernels [36] (b),
our separable convolution methods, especially the one with
perceptual loss (d), incorporate 1D kernels that allow for
full-frame interpolation and produce higher-quality results.
cally, they estimate spatially-adaptive convolution kernels
for each output pixel and convolve the kernels with the input frames to generate a new frame. The convolution kernels jointly account for the two separate steps of motion
estimation and re-sampling involved in traditional frame interpolation methods. In order to handle large motion, large
kernels are required. For example, Niklaus et al. employ a
neural network to output two 41×41 kernels for each output
pixel [36]. To generate the kernels for all pixels in a 1080p
video frame, the output kernels alone will require 26 GB
of memory. The memory demand increases quadratically
with the kernel size and thus limits the maximal motion to
be handled. Given this limitation, Niklaus et al. trained a
neural network to output the kernels pixel by pixel.

261

