Fast Face-swap Using Convolutional Neural Networks
Iryna Korshunova1,2
Wenzhe Shi1
1
Twitter

Joni Dambre2
Lucas Theis1
2
IDLab, Ghent University

{iryna.korshunova, joni.dambre}@ugent.be

{wshi, ltheis}@twitter.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of face swapping in images,
where an input identity is transformed into a target identity while preserving pose, facial expression and lighting.
To perform this mapping, we use convolutional neural networks trained to capture the appearance of the target identity from an unstructured collection of his/her photographs.
This approach is enabled by framing the face swapping
problem in terms of style transfer, where the goal is to render an image in the style of another one. Building on recent advances in this area, we devise a new loss function
that enables the network to produce highly photorealistic
results. By combining neural networks with simple pre- and
post-processing steps, we aim at making face swap work in
real-time with no input from the user.

1. Introduction and related work
Face replacement or face swapping is relevant in many
scenarios including the provision of privacy, appearance
transfiguration in portraits, video compositing, and other
creative applications. The exact formulation of this problem varies depending on the application, with some goals
easier to achieve than others.
Bitouk et al. [2], for example, automatically substituted
an input face by another face selected from a large database
of images based on the similarity of appearance and pose.
The method replaces the eyes, nose, and mouth of the face
and further makes color and illumination adjustments in order to blend the two faces. This design has two major limitations which we address in this paper: there is no control
over the output identity and the expression of the input face
is altered.
A more difficult problem was addressed by Dale et
al. [4]. Their work focused on the replacement of faces
in videos, where video footage of two subjects performing
similar roles are available. Compared to static images, sequential data poses extra difficulties of temporal alignment,
tracking facial performance and ensuring temporal consistency of the resulting footage. The resulting system is com-

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: (a) The input image. (b) The result of face swapping with
Nicolas Cage using our method. (c) The result of a manual face
swap (source: http://niccageaseveryone.blogspot.
com).

plex and still requires a substantial amount of time and user
guidance.
One notable approach trying to solve the related problem
of pupeteering – that is, controlling the expression of one
face with another face – was presented by Suwajanakorn
et al. [29]. The core idea is to build a 3D model of both
the input and the replacement face from a large number of
images. That is, it only works well where a few hundred
images are available but cannot be applied to single images.
The abovementioned approaches are based on complex multistage systems combining algorithms for face reconstruction, tracking, alignment and image compositing.
These systems achieve convincing results which are sometimes indistinguishable from real photographs. However,
none of these fully addresses the problem which we introduce below.
Problem outline: We consider the case where given a
single input image of any person A, we would like to replace
his/her identity with that of another person B, while keeping
the input pose, facial expression, gaze direction, hairstyle
and lighting intact. An example is given in Figure 1, where
the original identity (Figure 1a) was altered with little or no
changes to the other factors (Figure 1b).
We propose a novel solution which is inspired by recent
progress in artistic style transfer [7, 14], where the goal is
to render the semantic content of one image in the style of
another image. The foundational work of Gatys et al. [7]
defines the concepts of content and style as functions in the

3677

