Weakly Supervised Object Localization Using Things and Stuff Transfer
Miaojing Shi1,2

Holger Caesar1
1
University of Edinburgh 2 Tencent Youtu Lab

Vittorio Ferrari1

name.surname@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose to help weakly supervised object localization
for classes where location annotations are not available, by
transferring things and stuff knowledge from a source set
with available annotations. The source and target classes
might share similar appearance (e.g. bear fur is similar to
cat fur) or appear against similar background (e.g. horse
and sheep appear against grass). To exploit this, we acquire
three types of knowledge from the source set: a segmentation model trained on both thing and stuff classes; similarity relations between target and source classes; and cooccurrence relations between thing and stuff classes in the
source. The segmentation model is used to generate thing
and stuff segmentation maps on a target image, while the
class similarity and co-occurrence knowledge help refining
them. We then incorporate these maps as new cues into a
multiple instance learning framework (MIL), propagating
the transferred knowledge from the pixel level to the object proposal level. In extensive experiments, we conduct
our transfer from the PASCAL Context dataset (source) to
the ILSVRC, COCO and PASCAL VOC 2007 datasets (targets). We evaluate our transfer across widely different thing
classes, including some that are not similar in appearance,
but appear against similar background. The results demonstrate significant improvement over standard MIL, and we
outperform the state-of-the-art in the transfer setting.

1. Introduction
The goal of object class detection is to place a tight
bounding box on every instance of an object class. Given
an input image, recent object detectors [1, 2, 3, 4] first extract object proposals [5, 6, 7] and then score them with
a classifier to determine their probabilities of containing an
instance of the class. Manually annotated bounding boxes
are typically required for training (full supervision).
Annotating bounding boxes is tedious and timeconsuming. In order to reduce the annotation cost, many
previous works learn the detector in a weakly supervised
setting [8, 9, 4, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15], i.e. given a set of

images known to contain instances of a certain object class,
but without their locations. This weakly supervised object
localization (WSOL) bypasses the need for bounding box
annotation and substantially reduces annotation time.
Despite the low annotation cost, the performance of
WSOL is considerably lower than that of full supervision.
To improve WSOL, various advanced cues can be added,
e.g. objectness [10, 16, 4, 12, 17, 15], which gives an estimation of how likely a proposal contains an object; cooccurrence among multiple classes in the same training
images [18]; object size estimates based on an auxiliary
dataset with size annotations [15]; and appearance models
transferred from object classes with bounding box annotations to new object classes [19, 20, 21].
There are two types of classes that can be transferred
from a source set with manually annotated locations: things
(objects) and stuff (materials and backgrounds). Things
have a specific spatial extent and shape (e.g. helicopter,
cow, car), while stuff does not (e.g. sky, grass, road). Current transfer works mostly focus on transferring appearance
models among similar thing classes [19, 21, 20] (things-tothings). In contrast, using stuff to find things [22, 23] is
largely unexplored, particularly in the WSOL setting (stuffto-things).
In this paper, we transfer a fully supervised segmentation model from the source set to help WSOL on the target
set. We introduce several schemes to conduct the transfer
of both things and stuff knowledge, guided by the similarity
between classes. Particularly, we transfer the co-occurrence
knowledge between thing and stuff classes in the source via
a second order scheme to thing classes in the target. We
propagate the transferred knowledge from the pixel level to
the object proposal level and inject it as a new cue into a
multiple instance learning framework (MIL).
In extensive experiments, we show that our method: (1)
improves over a standard MIL baseline on three datasets:
ILSVRC [24], COCO [25], PASCAL VOC 2007 [26];
(2) outperforms the things-to-things transfer method [21]
and the state-of-the-art WSOL methods [27, 4, 28] on
VOC 2007; (3) outperforms another things-to-things transfer method (LSDA [20]) on ILSVRC.

3381

