GANs for Biological Image Synthesis
Anatole Chessel
École Polytechnique‡,
France

Rafael E. Carazo Salas
University of Bristol, UK

Federico Vaggi
ENS∗, France
Amazon, USA

Abstract

Proteins

Generated images

In this paper, we propose a novel application of Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) to the synthesis of cells
imaged by fluorescence microscopy. Compared to natural
images, cells tend to have a simpler and more geometric
global structure that facilitates image generation. However,
the correlation between the spatial pattern of different fluorescent proteins reflects important biological functions, and
synthesized images have to capture these relationships to be
relevant for biological applications. We adapt GANs to the
task at hand and propose new models with casual dependencies between image channels that can generate multichannel images, which would be impossible to obtain experimentally. We evaluate our approach using two independent
techniques and compare it against sensible baselines. Finally, we demonstrate that by interpolating across the latent
space we can mimic the known changes in protein localization that occur through time during the cell cycle, allowing
us to predict temporal evolution from static images.

Alp14

Anton Osokin
INRIA/ENS∗, France
HSE†, Russia

1. Introduction
In the life sciences, the last 20 years saw the rise of light
fluorescence microscopy as a powerful way to probe biological events in living cells and organisms with unprecedented
resolution. The need to analyze quantitatively this deluge of
data has given rise to the field of bioimage informatics [29]
and is the source of numerous interesting and novel data
analysis problems, which current machine learning developments could, in principle, help solve.
Generative models of natural images are among the most
long-standing and challenging goals in computer vision.
Recently, the community has made significant progress in
this task by adopting neural network machinery. Examples
of recent models include denoising autoencoders [2], variational autoencoders [20], PixelCNNs [44] and Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) [14].
∗ DI École normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University, Paris
† National Research University Higher School of Economics, Moscow
‡ LOB, École Polytechnique, CNRS, INSERM, Université Paris-Saclay

Real images

Arp3
Cki2
Mkh1
Sid2
Tea1

Figure 1. Real (left) and generated (right) images of fission yeast
cells with protein Bgs4 depicted in the red channel and 6 other
proteins depicted in the green channel. The synthetic images were
generated with our star-shaped GAN. The star-shaped model can
generate multiple green channels aligned with the same red channel whereas the training images have only one green channel.

GANs [14] are family of successful models, which have
recently received widespread attention. Unlike most other
generative models, GANs do not rely on training objectives
connected to the log likelihood. Instead, GAN training can
be seen as a minimax game between two models: the generator aims to output images similar to the training set given
random noise; while the discriminator aims to distinguish
the output of the generator from the training set.
Originally, GANs were applied to the MNIST dataset
of handwritten digits [21, 14]. The consequent DCGAN
model [38] was applied to the CelebA dataset [24] of human faces, the LSUN [52, 38] and ImageNet [7] datasets
of natural images. We are not aware of any works applying
GANs to biological images.
We work with a recently created bioimage dataset used
to extract functional relationships between proteins, called
the LIN dataset [9] comprising 170,000 fluorescence microscopy images of cells. In the LIN dataset, each image corresponds to a cell and is composed of signals from
two independent fluorescence imaging channels (“red” and
“green”), corresponding to the two different proteins tagged
with red or green-emitting fluorophores, respectively.
12233

