Non-Uniform Blind Deblurring by Reblurring
Yuval Bahat *
Netalee Efrat *
Michal Irani
Dept. of Computer Science and Applied Math
The Weizmann Institute of Science, ISRAEL
http://www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/˜vision/DeblurringByReblurring

Abstract
We present an approach for blind image deblurring,
which handles non-uniform blurs. Our algorithm has two
main components: (i) A new method for recovering the unknown blur-field directly from the blurry image, and (ii) A
method for deblurring the image given the recovered nonuniform blur-field. Our blur-field estimation is based on
analyzing the spectral content of blurry image patches by
Re-blurring them. Being unrestricted by any training data,
it can handle a large variety of blur sizes, yielding superior blur-field estimation results compared to trainingbased deep-learning methods. Our non-uniform deblurring
algorithm is based on the internal image-specific patchrecurrence prior. It attempts to recover a sharp image
which, on one hand – results in the blurry image under
our estimated blur-field, and on the other hand – maximizes the internal recurrence of patches within and across
scales of the recovered sharp image. The combination of
these two components gives rise to a blind-deblurring algorithm, which exceeds the performance of state-of-the-art
CNN-based blind-deblurring by a significant margin, without the need for any training data.

1. Introduction
Images taken in our daily lives are often corrupted by
blur. This blur may be caused by camera motion, defocus,
movement of rigid or non-rigid objects in the scene, and
more. Recovering the sharp image solely from the blurry
image without any knowledge of the blur function, has been
the focus of many studies in the past years and is termed
“blind” image deblurring. Some methods assume a uniform image blur (e.g., [2, 22, 20, 15, 18]), while others assume a varying blur-field [7, 16, 21, 23, 3, 9, 10, 19]
When the blur is uniform in the image, the relation between the sharp and blurry images is a simple convolution:
Ib = k ∗ Is + n

(1)

where Is is the sharp image, Ib is the blurry image, k is the
spatially uniform blur kernel and n is noise. When the blur

kernel k is known, recovering Is reduces to a deconvolution
with k (an ill-posed problem on its own, since k has many
zeros in the frequency domain). The problem becomes
much harder in the blind case, where both the sharp image
Is and the blur kernel k are unknown [2, 22, 20, 15, 18],
since many different pairs of Is and k can give rise to the
same input blurry image Ib . The problem becomes even
more ill-posed in the case where the blur is no longer uniform. This case can no longer be modeled as a convolution.
Nevertheless, it can still be written as the linear transformation
Ib = KIs + n
(2)
where the matrix K denotes a very large blur matrix, in
which each row corresponds to a kernel that models the blur
at a specific pixel. It is a matrix similar to a convolution
matrix with the exception that each row contains a different
kernel (it is no longer Toeplitz).
Non-uniform blind deblurring has attracted much attention in recent years. Some methods [7, 16, 21, 23] assume that the blur is caused by a general 3D camera shake;
these do not handle dynamic scenes with blur discontinuities. Other methods [3, 1, 8, 13] detect boundaries and blurfields of moving objects, but assume that the blur within
each moving object is either uniform [1, 8, 13] or parametric
[3]. The method of [10] handles general blurs, but assumes
the input is a video sequence. The methods of [9, 19] allow a non-uniform non-parametric blur-field, with different
blur per pixel, however assume that the blur at each pixel is
linear. Our method belongs to that category. In [19] CNNs
have been recruited to the task, and to the best of our knowledge, this method provides the current state-of-the-art results in non-uniform bind deblurring. Nonetheless, being a
learning-based approach, CNNs are restricted by the type
of data they are trained on (e.g., restricted blur sizes). In
contrast, our method (which is not learning-based) is not
restricted to specific motion sizes or image types. In particular, it can handle very large blurs (e.g., see Figs. 1,2).
In this paper we propose an algorithm for non-uniform
blind image deblurring. Our algorithm has two major components: (i) A new method for recovering the unknown
blur-field directly from the blurry image, and (ii) A method
for deblurring the image given the recovered non-uniform

* equal contributors

Funded in part by the Israel Science Foundation (Grant 931/14)

13286

