Compressive Quantization for Fast Object Instance Search in Videos
Tan Yu, Zhenzhen Wang, Junsong Yuan
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{tyu008, zwang033, jsyuan}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Most of current visual search systems focus on imageto-image (point-to-point) search such as image and object
retrieval. Nevertheless, fast image-to-video (point-to-set)
search is much less exploited. This paper tackles object instance search in videos, where efficient point-to-set matching is essential. Through jointly optimizing vector quantization and hashing, we propose compressive quantization method to compress M object proposals extracted from
each video into only k binary codes, where k ≪ M . Then
the similarity between the query object and the whole video
can be determined by the Hamming distance between the
query’s binary code and the video’s best-matched binary
code. Our compressive quantization not only enables fast
search but also significantly reduces the memory cost of
storing the video features. Despite the high compression
ratio, our proposed compressive quantization still can effectively retrieve small objects in large video datasets. Systematic experiments on three benchmark datasets verify the effectiveness and efficiency of our compressive quantization.

1. Introduction
Given an image of the query object, the video-level object instance search [27, 28] is to retrieve all relevant videos
in the database that contain the query object. Retrieving
small objects in big videos has many applications in social
media, video surveillance, and robotics, but is much less
explored compared with object search in images.
Despite the recent progress of object instance search in
images [15, 24, 11, 25, 31, 23, 22, 6, 3, 5, 19, 18, 37],
video-level object instance search [22, 38, 36] remains a
difficult problem due to the following challenges: (1) The
query object can be a small one and appear only in a small
portion of frames of a video. A direct matching between
the small query object with the whole video usually cannot
bring satisfactory search performance. (2) Different from
image search which mainly addresses point-to-point matching in the feature space, object-to-video search is a pointto-set matching problem, where the query object requires to

Pr
opos
al
Ext
r
ac
t
i
on

...

...

...

Compr
e
s
s
i
ve
Quant
i
zat
i
on

kbi
nar
yc
ode
s
mf
r
ame
s
m x tobj
e
c
tpr
opos
al
s

Figure 1. The overview of the proposed algorithm. Given a video
of m frames, we extract t object proposals for each frame and
further compress the m × t object proposals into k binary codes
using the proposed compressive quantization.

match a set of object candidates in the video to determine
its relevance to that video. Considering the big video corpus
of video clips, a fast point-to-set search is critical.
To address the above challenges, in this work, we propose to utilize the spatio-temporal redundancy of the videodata to enable fast object-to-video (i.e., point-to-set) search.
For each video clip in the database, we can represent it as
a collection of object proposals generated from its frames.
However, instead of storing all the object proposals from
one video, we propose compressive quantization to compress the set of object proposals into only a few binary
codes, where each binary code is a compact representative
of the object proposals. As a compact representation of a
set of object proposals, our compressive quantization targets at (1) quantizing the set of object proposals into fewer
codewords and (2) hashing the codewords into binary codes.
Nevertheless, instead of following a two-step optimization,
we propose a joint optimization framework that can simultaneously optimize the distortion errors from quantization
and hashing. It directly compresses M object proposals into
k binary codes, where k ≪ M .
As our compressive quantization simultaneously performs vector quantization and hashing, it is different from
either conventional vector quantization or hashing methods. On one hand, different from conventional vector quantization [20], our compressive quantization constrains the
codewords to be binary codes to achieve higher compression ratio. On the other hand, unlike hashing methods
[8, 32, 10, 14] mapping one real-value vector to one binary

726

