EnhanceNet: Single Image Super-Resolution
Through Automated Texture Synthesis
Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi

Bernhard Schölkopf

Michael Hirsch

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Spemanstr. 34, 72076 Tübingen, Germany
{msajjadi,bs,mhirsch}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Single image super-resolution is the task of inferring
a high-resolution image from a single low-resolution input. Traditionally, the performance of algorithms for this
task is measured using pixel-wise reconstruction measures
such as peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) which have been
shown to correlate poorly with the human perception of image quality. As a result, algorithms minimizing these metrics tend to produce over-smoothed images that lack highfrequency textures and do not look natural despite yielding
high PSNR values.
We propose a novel application of automated texture synthesis in combination with a perceptual loss focusing on
creating realistic textures rather than optimizing for a pixelaccurate reproduction of ground truth images during training. By using feed-forward fully convolutional neural networks in an adversarial training setting, we achieve a significant boost in image quality at high magnification ratios.
Extensive experiments on a number of datasets show the effectiveness of our approach, yielding state-of-the-art results
in both quantitative and qualitative benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Enhancing and recovering a high-resolution (HR) image
from a low-resolution (LR) counterpart is a theme both of
science fiction movies and of the scientific literature. In the
latter, it is known as single image super-resolution (SISR),
a topic that has enjoyed much attention and progress in recent years. The problem is inherently ill-posed as no unique
solution exists: when downsampled, a large number of different HR images can give rise to the same LR image. For
high magnification ratios, this one-to-many mapping problem becomes worse, rendering SISR a highly intricate problem. Despite considerable progress in both reconstruction
accuracy and speed of SISR, current state-of-the-art methods are still far from image enhancers like the one operated

State of the art by PSNR

Our result

Figure 1. Comparing the new state of the art by PSNR (ENet-E)
with the sharper, perceptually more plausible result produced by
ENet-PAT at 4x super-resolution on an image from ImageNet.

by Harrison Ford alias Rick Deckard in the iconic Blade
Runner movie from 1982. A crucial problem is the loss of
high-frequency information for large downsampling factors
rendering textured regions in super-resolved images blurry,
overly smooth, and unnatural in appearance (c.f . Fig. 1, left,
the new state of the art by PSNR, ENet-E).
The reason for this behavior is rooted in the choice of the
objective function that current state-of-the-art methods employ: most systems minimize the pixel-wise mean squared
error (MSE) between the HR ground truth image and its reconstruction from the LR observation, which has however
been shown to correlate poorly with human perception of
image quality [28, 54]. While easy to minimize, the optimal
MSE estimator returns the mean of many possible solutions
which makes SISR results look unnatural and implausible
(c.f . Fig. 2). This regression-to-the-mean problem in the
context of super-resolution is a well-known fact, however,
modeling the high-dimensional multi-modal distribution of
natural images remains a challenging problem.

4491

