Weakly- and Self-Supervised Learning for Content-Aware Deep Image
Retargeting
Donghyeon Cho
KAIST

Jinsun Park
KAIST

Tae-Hyun Oh
KAIST

Yu-Wing Tai
Tencent Youtu

In So Kweon
KAIST

{cdh12242, zzangjinsun, thoh.kaist.ac.kr, yuwing}@gmail.com, iskweon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
This paper proposes a weakly- and self-supervised deep
convolutional neural network (WSSDCNN) for contentaware image retargeting. Our network takes a source image
and a target aspect ratio, and then directly outputs a retargeted image. Retargeting is performed through a shift map,
which is a pixel-wise mapping from the source to the target
grid. Our method implicitly learns an attention map, which
leads to a content-aware shift map for image retargeting.
As a result, discriminative parts in an image are preserved,
while background regions are adjusted seamlessly. In the
training phase, pairs of an image and its image-level annotation are used to compute content and structure losses. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method for a
retargeting application with insightful analyses.

1. Introduction
Cameras and display devices are designed depending on
diverse targets of customers’ needs, and hence the resolution and aspect ratio of each module are different. Considering a full screen display scenario of an image, the original
image may not perfectly fit the display in full screen, due
to the different aspect ratios between the display device and
the image. It may rather introduce clipping, stretching or
shrinking, as shown in Fig. 1-(b).
Image retargeting research has been actively carried out
in computer vision and image processing. Image retargeting techniques adjust the aspect ratio (or size) of an image
to fit the target aspect ratio, while not discarding important
content in an image. Content-aware image retargeting aims
to preserve important content as much as possible, and various methods have been suggested [25, 42, 41, 49, 15, 18,
1, 32, 35, 16, 10, 6].
In traditional content-aware approaches, salient region
information is widely used. The saliency is conventionally generated from edge map or hand-crafted features,
which are restricted by fixed design principles and limit

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Content-aware retargeting examples. (a) An input
image. (b) Linear scaling. (c) Content-aware retargeting
(OURS). Our method tends to preserve important parts of
the given image well.
its generality. In recent years, deep learning studies have
been actively conducted to extract high-level semantic features [34, 38, 40, 14, 13] of an image. Furthermore, research
on deep learning has shown excellent performance in lowlevel image processing tasks [43, 44, 7, 30, 5, 45, 27, 24].
Motivated by this, in this paper, we propose a contentaware image retargeting method using high-level semantic
information through deep learning. In order to resize input images within a network, we introduce a shift layer
that maps each pixel from the source to the target grid.
We demonstrate that end-to-end training is possible through
the shift layer, and retargeted images are directly produced
using input images with target aspect ratios. The spatial
semantic information is learned from image-level annotations, and passed to the shift layer. Image-level annotations
are used to compute content loss on the retargeted images.
Moreover, input images are used for structure loss to suppress unwanted visual effects after retargeting. In summary,
this paper provides the following contributions:
1. We introduce a weakly- and self-supervised learning for
content-aware deep image retargeting. We utilize images
and its corresponding image-level annotations for structure and content loss computations, respectively. They

4558

