Benchmarking Single-Image Reflection Removal Algorithms
Renjie Wan†,§,∗

Boxin Shi‡,∗

Ling-Yu Duan♦

Ah-Hwee Tan¶

Alex C. Kot§

†

Interdisciplinary Graduate School, § School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
¶
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
‡
Artificial Intelligence Research Center, National Institute of AIST, Japan
♦
Institute of Digital Media, Peking University, China
rjwan001@e.ntu.edu.sg, boxin.shi@aist.go.jp, lingyu@pku.edu.cn, {asahtan,eackot}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Removing undesired reflections from a photo taken in
front of a glass is of great importance for enhancing the
efficiency of visual computing systems. Various approaches have been proposed and shown to be visually plausible
on small datasets collected by their authors. A quantitative
comparison of existing approaches using the same dataset
has never been conducted due to the lack of suitable benchmark data with ground truth. This paper presents the first
captured SIngle-image Reflection Removal dataset ‘SIR2 ’
with 40 controlled and 100 wild scenes, ground truth of
background and reflection. For each controlled scene, we
further provide ten sets of images under varying aperture
settings and glass thicknesses. We perform quantitative and
visual quality comparisons for four state-of-the-art singleimage reflection removal algorithms using four error metrics. Open problems for improving reflection removal algorithms are discussed at the end.

1. Introduction
How to obtain a reflection-free image taken through the
glass is of great interests to computer vision researchers.
Removing the undesired reflection not only enhances the
visibility of target object, but also benefits various computer vision tasks, such as image classification [29]. The
mixture image is composed of two components, the background target objects behind the glass and the reflected objects in front of the glass, in a weighted additive manner.
Reflection removal aims at separating the reflection (while
obtaining the clear background) from the mixture image using one or more shots, where the former is a highly ill-posed
problem. The reflection removal problem can be solved by
exploring gradient distribution using a single image [16],

motion cues from an image sequence [36], or physics constraint from polarized light [14]. Almost all existing works
evaluate the separation quality by checking subjective visual quality; quantitative evaluation is performed only using
synthetic data, but seldom on real data due to the lack of appropriate dataset. Benchmark datasets have been served as
stimuli to future research for various physics-based vision
problems such as intrinsic image decomposition [11] and
photometric stereo [28]. This motivates us to benchmark
reflection removal algorithms.
This paper starts from a brief survey of existing reflection removal algorithms. We categorize existing methods according to different number of images required as input. Multiple images or special hardware makes reflection removal less ill-posed and show more promising results
than the single-image approaches. But the single-image approach still attracts great attention due to its simplicity in
setup and practicability for non-professional users. Therefore, we propose the SIR2 benchmark dataset and evaluations focusing on the single-image methods using different
priors and constraints.
Our SIR2 dataset contains a total of 1, 500 images. We
capture 40 controlled indoor scenes with complex textures,
and each scene contains a triplet of images (mixture image,
ground truth of background and reflection) under seven different depth of field and three controlled thickness of glass.
We also capture 100 wild scenes with different camera settings, uncontrolled illuminations and thickness of glass. We
conduct quantitative evaluations for state-of-the-art singleimage reflection removal algorithms [17, 21, 29, 34] using
four different error metrics. We analyze the pros and cons
per method and per error metric and the consistencies between quantitative results and visual qualities. The major
contributions of our work are summarized as follows:
• Benchmark dataset. We construct the first dataset
for the quantitative evaluations of single-image reflection removal algorithms with ground truth for 140 d-

∗ Corresponding authors

3922

