Dense and Low-Rank Gaussian CRFs Using Deep Embeddings
Siddhartha Chandra1

Nicolas Usunier2

siddhartha.chandra@inria.fr

usunier@fb.com

1

Iasonas Kokkinos2
iasonask@fb.com
2

INRIA GALEN, CentraleSupélec

Facebook AI Research, Paris

Abstract
In this work we introduce a structured prediction model
that endows the Deep Gaussian Conditional Random Field
(G-CRF) with a densely connected graph structure. We
keep memory and computational complexity under control
by expressing the pairwise interactions as inner products of
low-dimensional, learnable embeddings. The G-CRF system matrix is therefore low-rank, allowing us to solve the
resulting system in a few milliseconds on the GPU by using conjugate gradient. As in G-CRF, inference is exact, the
unary and pairwise terms are jointly trained end-to-end by
using analytic expressions for the gradients, while we also
develop even faster, Potts-type variants of our embeddings.
We show that the learned embeddings capture pixelto-pixel affinities in a task-specific manner, while our approach achieves state of the art results on three challenging benchmarks, namely semantic segmentation, human
part segmentation, and saliency estimation. Our implementation is fully GPU based, built on top of the Caffe
library, and is available at https://github.com/
siddharthachandra/gcrf-v2.0.

1. Introduction
Structured prediction combined with deep learning has
delivered excellent results on a variety of computer vision
benchmarks [2, 5, 7, 8, 33, 34, 40]. Deeplab [5, 7] successfully exploited the Dense-CRF [20] framework, allowing a CNN trained for semantic segmentation to refine object boundaries while compensating for the effects of spatial
downsampling within the network. Several works extended
this approach to allow for (a) end-to-end training (b) learning of pairwise interaction terms, and (c) using exact inference (table 1). Regarding (a), [2, 26, 27, 28, 33, 34, 40]
showed that structured prediction can be unfolded in time
and thus be trained end-to-end with CNNs for both sparselyconnected [33] and fully-connected [26, 28, 34, 40] graphical structures. Regarding (b), [2, 26, 28, 33, 34] learned
non-parametric, CNN-based pairwise terms for sparsely-

Input Image

Pairwise Terms (A)

Ax = B

Unary (B)

Saliency
Human Parts
Segmentation
Figure 1. Method overview: each image patch amounts to a node
in our fully-connected graph structure. As in the G-CRF model,
we infer the prediction x by solving a system of linear equations
Ax = B, based on CNN-based unary (B) and pairwise (A) terms.
We express pairwise terms as dot products of low-dimensional embeddings (Ai,j = hAi , Aj i) , delivered by a devoted sub-network.
This ensures that A is low-rank, allowing for efficient, conjugate
gradient-based solutions. The embeddings are optimized in a taskspecific manner through end-to-end training.

connected CRFs, while [40, 15] back-propagated on the
parameters of the bilateral filter-type kernels defining their
dense pairwise terms. Regarding (c), [2] showed that
efficient exact inference can be used for the sparselyconnected case using conjugate gradient, while [1] showed
that for densely-connected graphs with bilateral-type pairwise terms linear system methods can be used for efficient
inference and backpropagation.
Our work is the first to combine all of the above advances in the case of densely-connected CRFs: we show
that we can train in end-to-end manner densely-connected
CRFs with non-parametric pairwise terms, while using efficient and exact inference by relying on linear system methods. For this, we build on [2] which combined these advances for sparsely-connected CRFs and extend it to make
the densely-connected case tractable. Figure 1 provides an
overview of our approach. As in [2] we perform structured
prediction by solving a linear system Ax = B, where A

5103

