S U B I C: A supervised, structured binary code for image search
Himalaya Jain1,2 , Joaquin Zepeda3 , Patrick Pérez1 , and Rémi Gribonval2
1

Technicolor, Rennes, France

2

INRIA Rennes, France

3

Amazon, Seattle, WA

We introduce S U B I C, a supervised structured binary code (concatenation of one-hot blocks). It is produced by a novel
supervised deep convolutional network and is well adapted to efficient visual search, including category retrieval for which
it outperforms the state-of-the-art supervised deep binary hashing techniques.

Abstract
For large-scale visual search, highly compressed yet
meaningful representations of images are essential. Structured vector quantizers based on product quantization and
its variants are usually employed to achieve such compression while minimizing the loss of accuracy. Yet, unlike binary hashing schemes, these unsupervised methods have
not yet benefited from the supervision, end-to-end learning and novel architectures ushered in by the deep learning revolution. We hence propose herein a novel method to
make deep convolutional neural networks produce supervised, compact, structured binary codes for visual search.
Our method makes use of a novel block-softmax nonlinearity and of batch-based entropy losses that together
induce structure in the learned encodings. We show that
our method outperforms state-of-the-art compact representations based on deep hashing or structured quantization
in single and cross-domain category retrieval, instance retrieval and classification. We make our code and models
publicly available online.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
proven to be versatile image representation tools with great
generalization power, a quality that has rendered them indispensable in image search. A given network trained on the
ImageNet dataset [16], for example, can achieve excellent

performance when transferred to a variety of other datasets
[20, 30], or even to other visual search tasks [41]. This
quality of transferability is important in large-scale image
search, where the time or resources to compile annotations
in order to train a new network for every new dataset or task
are not available.
A second desirable property of image representations
for large-scale visual search is that of being compact yet
functional. A paramount example of such a representation is provided by image indexing schemes, such as Product Quantization (PQ) [24] and others, that rely on vector quantization with structured, unsupervised codebooks
[2, 12, 47]. PQ can be seen as mapping a feature vector
into a binary vector consisting of a concatenation of onehot encoded codeword indices. One can directly compare
an uncompressed query feature with these binary vectors by
means of an inner product between the binary vectors and a
real-valued mapping of the query feature vector.
It is not surprising that, with the dawn of the deep learning revolution, many recent research efforts have been directed towards supervised learning of deep networks that
produce compact and functional binary features [15, 17, 31,
32, 33, 45, 46, 48]. One commonality between these approaches – which we refer to collectively as deep hashing methods – is their reliance on element-wise binarization mechanisms consisting of either sigmoid/tanh nonlinearities [15, 31, 32, 33, 45, 46, 48] or element-wise binarizing penalties such as [15, 17]. Indeed, to our knowledge,
ours is the first approach to impose a structure on the learned
binary representation: We employ two entropy-based losses
1833

