Shadow Detection with Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks
Vu Nguyen, Tomas F. Yago Vicente, Maozheng Zhao, Minh Hoai, Dimitris Samaras
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA
{vhnguyen, tyagovicente, mazhao, minhhoai, samaras}@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
We introduce scGAN, a novel extension of conditional
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) tailored for the
challenging problem of shadow detection in images. Previous methods for shadow detection focus on learning the
local appearance of shadow regions, while using limited local context reasoning in the form of pairwise potentials in a
Conditional Random Field. In contrast, the proposed adversarial approach is able to model higher level relationships
and global scene characteristics. We train a shadow detector that corresponds to the generator of a conditional GAN,
and augment its shadow accuracy by combining the typical GAN loss with a data loss term. Due to the unbalanced
distribution of the shadow labels, we use weighted cross entropy. With the standard GAN architecture, properly setting
the weight for the cross entropy would require training multiple GANs, a computationally expensive grid procedure.
In scGAN, we introduce an additional sensitivity parameter w to the generator. The proposed approach effectively
parameterizes the loss of the trained detector. The resulting shadow detector is a single network that can generate
shadow maps corresponding to different sensitivity levels,
obviating the need for multiple models and a costly training
procedure. We evaluate our method on the large-scale SBU
and UCF shadow datasets, and observe up to 17% error reduction with respect to the previous state-of-the-art method.

1. Introduction
Images contain shadows and shadows provide useful
cues about the depicted scenes, from light sources [12,
22, 23, 24], object shapes [21], camera parameters and
geo-location [7], and geometry [8]. Shadow detection is
therefore a fundamental component of scene understanding. However, automatic shadow detection is challenging
because it requires both local and global reasoning—the appearance of a shadow area depends on the material of a local
surface and the global scene structure and illumination condition. Unfortunately, most existing methods for shadow
detection are based on local region classification, failing to

Input image

w
Generator

Figure 1: We propose scGAN for shadow detection. scGAN has a tunable sensitivity parameter w that regulates
the amount of shadow pixels in the predicted shadow map.
This figure shows scGAN with several generated shadow
maps corresponding to different values of the sensitivity parameter w. A larger parameter w leads to a shadow map
with a larger shadow area.

reason about the global image semantics. Some methods
use Conditional Random Fields [11] as a way to incorporate
pairwise contextual cues. However, this post processing approach is still local—global consistency and high order interaction between scene elements are not enforced.
In this paper, we propose a method for shadow detection
based on the Conditional Generative Adversarial Network
(cGAN) [20], a special type of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [3]. A cGAN has two components: a discriminator and a generator. The generator can be trained
to generate an output image conditioned on an input image.
In our case, we will train the generator of a cGAN to produce the shadow mask given the input scene image. Unlike
a local region classifier, the generator of a cGAN has a full
view of the entire image and it can reason about the global
structure and context. The generator is also trained to output
a shadow mask that sufficiently harmonizes with the scene
image; otherwise, the discriminator can easily distinguish
between a generated shadow mask and a real shadow mask.

4510

