Practical Projective Structure from Motion (P2 SfM)
Ludovic Magerand, Alessio Del Bue
Visual Geometry and Modelling (VGM) Lab, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT)
Via Morego 30, 16163 Genova, Italy
ludovic@magerand.fr, Alessio.DelBue@iit.it

Abstract
This paper presents a solution to the Projective Structure from Motion (PSfM) problem able to deal efficiently
with missing data, outliers and, for the first time, large
scale 3D reconstruction scenarios. By embedding the projective depths into the projective parameters of the points
and views, we decrease the number of unknowns to estimate
and improve computational speed by optimizing standard
linear Least Squares systems instead of homogeneous ones.
In order to do so, we show that an extension of the linear
constraints from the Generalized Projective Reconstruction
Theorem can be transferred to the projective parameters,
ensuring also a valid projective reconstruction in the process. We use an incremental approach that, starting from a
solvable sub-problem, incrementally adds views and points
until completion with a robust, outliers free, procedure. Experiments with simulated data shows that our approach is
performing well, both in term of the quality of the reconstruction and the capacity to handle missing data and outliers with a reduced computational time. Finally, results on
real datasets shows the ability of the method to be used in
medium and large scale 3D reconstruction scenarios with
high ratios of missing data (up to 98%).

Notation. Homogeneous coordinates of a vector v are
⊤
written as ṽ = [v⊤ 1] and Im×n is the m × n identity
matrix. A m × n matrix of 0 (or 1) is denoted 0m×n (or
1m×n ) and 0n (or 1n ) is a n-vector of 0 (or 1). Symbols
⊙ and ⊗ are used for the element-wise and tensor product
respectively. The Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse of a real
vector v is written v+ = v⊤ /kvk2 and its associated skew
symmetric matrix is noted [v]× .

1. Introduction
Robust factorization methods have been highly successful in delivering a solution to affine Structure from Motion
(SfM) even in the presence of large amounts of missing data

and outliers [17, 24]. However, the Projective Structure
from Motion (PSfM) [26] problem still entails difficulties
and despite considerable efforts, there are clear limitations
in current approaches [22, 6, 31, 13, 5, 18, 19, 15, 8, 9, 14].
These problems span from the non-linearity given by the
perspective camera model to the relevant presence of missing data, noise and outliers in the measurement matrix
containing the 2D observations. These nuisances have restricted the applicability of PSfM to relatively small 3D reconstruction scenarios with few points and small percentages of missing data. Differently, this paper shows how
PSfM can be solved for challenging real datasets by lessening the non-linearities of previous approaches.
In detail, given f images of a scene and correspondences
between a set of n image points in multiple-views, SfM estimates the 3D position of each point and the camera poses.
The simplest instance of SfM adopts affine cameras for 3D
projection that leads to a bilinear model in the form of:
M = PS. The measurement matrix M (of size 3f × n)
contains the homogeneous image projections m̃i,j while P
(of size 3f × 4) represents the vertical concatenations of the
3 × 4 camera matrices Pi and S (of size 4 × n) is the horizontal concatenation of the homogeneous 3D points s̃j . As
M is resulting from a product of fixed size matrices, a rank4 constraint exists and it has been used in [28] to factorize
such matrix into (P, S) up to an ambiguity using standard
computational tools (e.g. Singular Value Decomposition –
SVD). This factorization approach to the SfM problem has
been successfully applied to obtain a global solution, meaning that all the data is used at once, and usually providing
closed-form solution without the need of an initialisation.
However the affine model restricts applicability to specific scenarios while current challenges in computer vision
go towards reconstructing large scenes where the assumptions of affine cameras are no longer satisfied. Upgrading
the camera model to perspective leads image projections
that also depend on the 3D points depths with respect to
the camera, resulting in a different problem defined as:
M ⊙ (D ⊗ 13 ) = P S,
1 39

(1)

