Depth estimation using structured light ﬂow
— analysis of projected pattern ﬂow on an object’s surface —
Ryo Furukawa
Hiroshima City University, Japan

Ryusuke Sagawa
AIST, Japan

Abstract
Shape reconstruction techniques using structured light
have been widely researched and developed due to their
robustness, high precision, and density. Because the techniques are based on decoding a pattern to ﬁnd correspondences, it implicitly requires that the projected patterns be
clearly captured by an image sensor, i.e., to avoid defocus
and motion blur of the projected pattern. Although intensive researches have been conducted for solving defocus
blur, few researches for motion blur and only solution is
to capture with extremely fast shutter speed. In this paper,
unlike the previous approaches, we actively utilize motion
blur, which we refer to as a light ﬂow, to estimate depth.
Analysis reveals that minimum two light ﬂows, which are
retrieved from two projected patterns on the object, are required for depth estimation. To retrieve two light ﬂows at
the same time, two sets of parallel line patterns are illuminated from two video projectors and the size of motion blur
of each line is precisely measured. By analyzing the light
ﬂows, i.e. lengths of the blurs, scene depth information is
estimated. In the experiments, 3D shapes of fast moving objects, which are inevitably captured with motion blur, are
successfully reconstructed by our technique.

1. Introduction
3D shape reconstruction techniques by projecting special light to objects (i.e., active lighting techniques) have
been important research topics. Since they have signiﬁcant
advantages, e.g., a textureless object can be robustly reconstructed with dense and high accuracy irrespective of light
conditions, commercial 3D scanners are primarily based
on active lighting techniques. Among two important active lighting techniques, such as structured light and photometric stereo, structured light techniques, which encode
the positional information of projector pixels into projected
patterns, have been widely researched and developed due to
their robustness, high precision, and density.
Recently, capturing 3D shapes of moving objects from a
moving sensor has become increasingly important, such as
measuring a scene from self-driving cars, etc., and solution
is strongly desired. The one-shot scanning technique, which

Hiroshi Kawasaki
Kyushu University, Japan

is one of structured light techniques, is a promising technique because it required just single image and unaffected
by motion. In general, one-shot scanning techniques embed
the pattern’s positional information into a small area of the
pattern for decoding [11, 6, 10, 20], and thus, the projected
pattern tends to be complicated to increase robustness and
density. If object/sensor motion is faster than an assumption, the reﬂected patterns are easily blurred out, resulting
in unstable and inaccurate reconstruction.
To solve such motion blur problem, one may consider applying an algorithm developed for deblurring photographs. However, although the phenomena look similar,
the optical processes are completely different1 and such algorithms cannot be applied to structured light. In this paper,
we analyze the information that is implied in the motion of
a projected pattern (hereafter “light ﬂow”) to recover the
shape. In fact, it is shown that light ﬂows are explained by
three factors such as depth, normal, and velocity of the object surface and extracting one of them from a single light
ﬂow is impossible, but possible with two light ﬂows. In this
paper, we propose a technique to decouple the three values from multiple light ﬂows. It is also revealed that light
ﬂows includes only little depth information, and thus, accurate detection of motion blur is required for practical depth
estimation. To achieve this, we project the pattern of parallel lines onto the objects so that a blur size is precisely
measured as the width of the band of motion blur of each
line.
The contributions of this paper is as follows: (1) Depth
from light ﬂows, which does not require a decoding process, or a matching process, is presented. (2) Shape recovery of “fast motion,” where motion speed is faster than
the shutter speed causing blurred patterns, is achieved. (3)
Two algorithms using two different patterns are proposed
to reconstruct shapes of fast moving objects. By using our
technique, multiple fast moving objects, which are almost
impossible to scan with state of the art techniques, can be
reconstructed, for example, rotating blades of a fan are reconstructed by using a normal camera and a video projector.
1 Imagine the case where a planar board moves perpendicular direction
to its surface normal. It is obvious that no blur effect appears on projected
pattern.

14640

