RoomNet: End-to-End Room Layout Estimation
Chen-Yu Lee

Vijay Badrinarayanan Tomasz Malisiewicz
Magic Leap, Inc.

Andrew Rabinovich

{clee,vbadrinarayanan,tmalisiewicz,arabinovich}@magicleap.com

Abstract
This paper focuses on the task of room layout estimation from a monocular RGB image. Prior works break the
problem into two sub-tasks: semantic segmentation of floor,
walls, ceiling to produce layout hypotheses, followed by an
iterative optimization step to rank these hypotheses.
In contrast, we adopt a more direct formulation of this
problem as one of estimating an ordered set of room layout
keypoints. The room layout and the corresponding segmentation is completely specified given the locations of these ordered keypoints. We predict the locations of the room layout
keypoints using RoomNet, an end-to-end trainable encoderdecoder network. On the challenging benchmark datasets
Hedau and LSUN, we achieve state-of-the-art performance
along with 200× to 600× speedup compared to the most recent work. Additionally, we present optional extensions to
the RoomNet architecture such as including recurrent computations and memory units to refine the keypoint locations
under the same parametric capacity.

1. Introduction
Room layout estimation from a monocular image, which
aims to delineate a 2D boxy representation of an indoor
scene, is an essential step for a wide variety of computer
vision tasks, and has recently received great attention from
several applications. These include indoor navigation [29],
scene reconstruction/rendering [19], and augmented reality [46, 25, 10].
The field of room layout estimation has been primarily
focused on using bottom-up image features such as local
color, texture, and edge cues followed by vanishing point
detection. A separate post-processing stage is used to clean
up feature outliers and generate/rank a large set of room
layout hypotheses with structured SVMs or conditional random fields (CRFs) [15, 11, 16, 36, 49]. In principle, the 3D
reconstruction of the room layout can be obtained (up to
scale) with knowledge of the 2D layout and the vanishing
points. However, in practice, the accuracy of the final layout prediction often largely depends on the quality of the

Feature
Extraction

(a)

Vanishing Point
Detection
Layout Hypotheses
Generation/Ranking

2
1

(b)

End-to-End
Trainable
RoomNet

4
5

3

6

Figure 1. (a) Typical multi-step pipeline for room layout estimation. (b) Room layout estimation with RoomNet is direct and simple: run RoomNet, extract a set of room layout keypoints, and
connect the keypoints in a specific order to obtain the layout.

extracted low-level image features, which in itself is susceptible to local noise, scene clutter and occlusion.
Recently, with the rapid advances in deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for semantic segmentation
[5, 27, 32, 2], researchers have been exploring the possibility of using such CNNs for room layout estimation. More
specifically, Mallya et al. [28] first train a fully convolutional network (FCN) [27] model to produce “informative
edge maps” that replace hand engineered low-level image
feature extraction. The predicted edge maps are then used
to sample vanishing lines for layout hypotheses generation
and ranking. Dasgupta et al. [7] use the FCN to learn semantic surface labels such as left wall, front wall, right wall,
ceiling, and ground. Then connected components and hole
filling techniques are used to refine the raw per pixel prediction of the FCN, followed by the classic vanishing point/line
sampling methods to produce room layouts. However, despite the improved results, these methods use CNNs to generate a new set of “low-level” features and fall short of exploiting the end-to-end learning ability of CNNs. In other
words, the raw CNN predictions need to be post-processed
by an expensive hypotheses testing stage to produce the final layout. This, for example, takes the pipeline of Dasgupta et al. [7] 30 seconds to process each frame.
In this work, we address the problem top-down by di-

4865

