Online Video Object Detection using Association LSTM
Yongyi Lu
HKUST

Cewu Lu
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Chi-Keung Tang
HKUST

yluaw@cse.ust.hk

lucewu@sjtu.edu.cn

cktang@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Video object detection is a fundamental tool for many
applications. Since direct application of image-based object detection cannot leverage the rich temporal information inherent in video data, we advocate to the detection
of long-range video object pattern. While the Long ShortTerm Memory (LSTM) has been the de facto choice for such
detection, currently LSTM cannot fundamentally model object association between consecutive frames. In this paper,
we propose the association LSTM to address this fundamental association problem. Association LSTM not only
regresses and classifiy directly on object locations and categories but also associates features to represent each output object. By minimizing the matching error between these
features, we learn how to associate objects in two consecutive frames. Additionally, our method works in an online
manner, which is important for most video tasks. Compared
to the traditional video object detection methods, our approach outperforms them on standard video datasets.

1. Introduction
Object detection assigns a label and a bounding box to
detected objects in a single image. With the rapid growth of
video data, video object detection has attracted more attention, since it forms the basic tool for various useful video
tasks such as action recognition and event understanding. A
video provides richer visual information than a still image,
and many computer vision applications (e.g., self-driving
cars) can only use video but not still images to perform the
recognition task.
Comparing to image-based object detection, temporal
coherence information in video can be employed to significantly improve the accuracy of object detection. For example, if an object is detected in neighboring frames but not
in the current frame, we can recover the missing object in
the current frame by applying temporal coherence. Another
example is that mistakenly-labeled objects can be corrected
by checking the semantic labels across the frames. Therefore, the key to video object detection lies on how to capture

Figure 1. ConvNet-based object detection results (top) and our association LSTM results (bottom). Note that even though the detector produces one missing detection due to a high confidence
threshold of 0.9, our association LSTM can recover the false
negative successfully thanks to its ability of regressing the category scores and locations as well as associating features between
frames.

the temporal coherence information inherent in the video
data, and integrate such information with spatial object detection. Early work such as Kalman filter [9] and particle
filter [2] attempted to achieve this goal and had produced
reasonable results. However, they still fall short of capturing long-range frames information due to their limited parameter space. With the recent advent in deep learning, recurrent neural network (RNN) has since become a dominating tool for sequence tasks such as sequential learning [6],
tracking [19], object recognition [15] and detection [26, 3]
thanks to its power in long-range temporal representation.
However, video object detection is a much more challenging problem in comparison to the common sequence
problem. First, in detection tasks, RNN should capture multiple objects at the same time, whereas the number of object
varies from frame to frame. Second, how to associate object
in the RNN structure across multiple frames is a challenging
problem. Without a principled way for object association,
the power of temporal information cannot be fully utilized.
In this paper, we propose a novel association LSTM
framework to advance the state-of-the-arts in video ob-

2344

