No Fuss Distance Metric Learning using Proxies
Yair Movshovitz-Attias, Alexander Toshev, Thomas K. Leung, Sergey Ioffe, Saurabh Singh
Google Research
{yairmov, toshev, leungt, sioffe, saurabhsingh}@google.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Distance metric learning (DML) is a major tool for a variety of problems in computer vision. It has successfully
been employed for image retrieval [14], near duplicate detection [19], clustering [4] and zero-shot learning [8].
A wide variety of formulations have been proposed. Traditionally, these formulations encode a notion of similar and
dissimilar data points. For example, contrastive loss [2, 3],
which is defined for a pair of either similar or dissimilar data
points. Another commonly used family of losses is triplet
loss, which is defined by a triplet of data points: an anchor
point, and a similar and dissimilar data points. The goal in

0.7
0.6

R@1

We address the problem of distance metric learning
(DML), defined as learning a distance consistent with a notion of semantic similarity. Traditionally, for this problem
supervision is expressed in the form of sets of points that follow an ordinal relationship – an anchor point x is similar to
a set of positive points Y , and dissimilar to a set of negative
points Z, and a loss defined over these distances is minimized. While the specifics of the optimization differ, in this
work we collectively call this type of supervision Triplets
and all methods that follow this pattern Triplet-Based methods. These methods are challenging to optimize. A main
issue is the need for finding informative triplets, which is
usually achieved by a variety of tricks such as increasing
the batch size, hard or semi-hard triplet mining, etc. Even
with these tricks, the convergence rate of such methods is
slow. In this paper we propose to optimize the triplet loss
on a different space of triplets, consisting of an anchor data
point and similar and dissimilar proxy points which are
learned as well. These proxies approximate the original
data points, so that a triplet loss over the proxies is a tight
upper bound of the original loss. This proxy-based loss is
empirically better behaved. As a result, the proxy-loss improves on state-of-art results for three standard zero-shot
learning datasets, by up to 15% points, while converging
three times as fast as other triplet-based losses.

0.8

0.5

Triplet [12]
Lifted Struct [8]
Npairs [14]
Struct Clust [15]
Proxy-NCA

0.4
0.3
0.2

0

44

88

132

177

221

Training Epochs

265

Figure 1: Recall@1 as a function of training step on the
Cars196 dataset. Proxy-NCA converges about three times
as fast compared with the baseline methods, and results in
higher Recall@1 values.

a triplet loss is to learn a distance in which the anchor point
is closer to the similar point than to the dissimilar one.
The above losses, which depend on pairs or triplets of
data points, empirically suffer from sampling issues – selecting informative pairs or triplets is crucial for successfully optimizing them and improving convergence rates. In
this work we address this aspect and propose to re-define
triplet based losses over a different space of points, which
we call proxies. This space approximates the training set of
data points (for each data point in the original space there
is a proxy point close to it), additionally, it is small enough
so that we do not need to sample triplets but can explicitly write the loss over all (or most) of the triplets involving
proxies. As a result, this re-defined loss is easier to optimize, and it trains faster (See Figure 1). Note that the proxies are learned as part of the model parameters.
In addition, we show that the proxy-based loss is an upper bound to triplet loss and that, empirically, the bound
tightness improves as training converges, which justifies the
use of proxy-based loss to optimize the original loss.
Further, we demonstrate that the resulting distance metric learning problem has several desirable properties. First
1360

