Joint Convolutional Analysis and Synthesis Sparse Representation for
Single Image Layer Separation
Shuhang Gu1 , Deyu Meng2 , Wangmeng Zuo3 , Lei Zhang1,∗
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 2 Xi′ an Jiaotong University, 3 Harbin Institute of Technology
{shuhanggu@gmail.com, dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, cswmzuo@gmail.com, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk}
1

Abstract
Analysis sparse representation (ASR) and synthesis sparse representation (SSR) are two representative approaches for sparsity-based image modeling. An image is
described mainly by the non-zero coefficients in SSR, while
is mainly characterized by the indices of zeros in ASR. To
exploit the complementary representation mechanisms of
ASR and SSR, we integrate the two models and propose a
joint convolutional analysis and synthesis (JCAS) sparse
representation model. The convolutional implementation
is adopted to more effectively exploit the image global information. In JCAS, a single image is decomposed into two layers, one is approximated by ASR to represent image
large-scale structures, and the other by SSR to represent
image fine-scale textures. The synthesis dictionary is adaptively learned in JCAS to describe the texture patterns for
different single image layer separation tasks. We evaluate
the proposed JCAS model on a variety of applications, including rain streak removal, high dynamic range image tone
mapping, etc. The results show that our JCAS method outperforms state-of-the-arts in these applications in terms of
both quantitative measure and visual perception quality.

1. Introduction
In many computer vision and photography applications
such as rain streak removal [24], high dynamic range (HDR)
image tone mapping [10], reflection removal [23], cartoontexture decomposition [3], etc., image layer separation is a
key step to produce satisfactory results. Given an input image y, image layer separation aims to decompose the image
as the summation of two components:
Y = U + V.

(1)

Since the number of unknowns U and V are larger than the
input Y, singe image layer separation is a challenging ill∗ This work is supported by HK RGC General Research Fund (PolyU
152124/15E) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no.
61672446).

posed problem. Based on the requirements on the property
of separating results, different priors have been suggested to
regularize the decomposition results. As a powerful model
for image prior modeling, the sparsity prior has been widely
adopted in different kinds of layer separation applications
[39, 23, 25].
One category of methods utilize analysis sparse representation (ASR) models to characterize the piece-wise smooth layer, and impose the sparsity prior on the filter responses (analysis representation coefficients) over the latent
estimation. The Total-Variation (TV) approach [31] and its
extensions [39], which are proposed to regularize the gradients of latent estimation, have been successfully used in
extracting the piece-wise smooth component from the input
image. However, since a sparse analysis coefficient implies
that the signal (an image patch in image contexts) should
be orthogonal to most of the filters, such a prior modeling
mechanism impedes ASR to take benefit from increased redundancy of the analysis dictionary. Despite its success on
approximating the major structure of an image, ASR often
shows limited capacity in modeling textures or fine-scale
details with complex patterns.
Another category of sparse representation models, i.e.
synthesis sparse representation (SSR) model, has also been
utilized to deal with image layer separation applications.
Compared with the ASR model, the SSR approach investigates signals from a synthesis point of view: x = DαS .
The sparse representation coefficients αS select a few atoms from the dictionary D to reconstruct the signal vector x.
Such a mechanism enables SSR taking advantage of an
over-complete dictionary to provide flexible prior. Given
an appropriate dictionary (learned from training data), signals with specific patterns can be reconstructed with highly
sparse coefficients. Recently, several SSR-based methods
have been suggested by learning different dictionaries for
separating an input image into two layers.
Fig. 1 provides a visual example to illustrate how ASR and SSR represent a target image. An ASR dictionary
learning [28] and an SSR dictionary learning [15] methods
are used to train dictionaries on the target image, respective11708

