An Optimal Transportation based Univariate Neuroimaging Index
Liang Mi1
Wen Zhang1
Junwei Zhang2
Yonghui Fan1
Dhruman Goradia3
Kewei Chen3
Eric M. Reiman3
Xianfeng Gu2
Yalin Wang1
2
3
1
Arizona State Unversity Stony Brook University Banner Alzheimer’s Institute
http://gsl.lab.asu.edu.

Abstract
The alterations of brain structures and functions have
been considered closely correlated to the change of cognitive performance due to neurodegenerative diseases such
as Alzheimer’s disease. In this paper, we introduce a variational framework to compute the optimal transformation
(OT) in 3D space and propose a univariate neuroimaging index based on OT to measure such alterations. We
compute the OT from each image to a template and measure the Wasserstein distance between them. By comparing the distances from all the images to the common template, we obtain a concise and informative index for each
image. Our framework makes use of the Newton’s method,
which reduces the computational cost and enables itself
to be applicable to large-scale datasets. The proposed
work is a generic approach and thus may be applicable
to various volumetric brain images, including structural
magnetic resonance (sMR) and fluorodeoxyglucose positron
emission tomography (FDG-PET) images. In the classification between Alzheimer’s disease patients and healthy controls, our method achieves an accuracy of 82.30% on the
Alzheimers Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) baseline sMRI dataset and outperforms several other indices.
On FDG-PET dataset, we boost the accuracy to 88.37%
by leveraging pairwise Wasserstein distances. In a longitudinal study, we obtain a 5% significance with p-value =
1.13 × 105 in a t-test on FDG-PET. The results demonstrate
a great potential of the proposed index for neuroimage analysis and the precision medicine research.

1. Introduction
Neuroimaging studies the measurement of brain structures and functions and their changes during development, aging, learning, disease, and evolution [27]. Modern techniques analyze noninvasive neuroimaging data typically obtained from structural Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(sMRI) and fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) by using mathematical and statistical

methods. A ubiquitous approach for neuroimaging research
is population based analysis, e.g. voxel based morphometry (VBM) [46] [5] [45] [7] and tensor based morphometry (TBM) [16] [12] [44]. They are being widely used to
identify differences in the local composition of brain tissue
while discounting large-scale differences in gross anatomy
and position [26]. VBM/TBM studies the brain abnormality
by non-linearly registering the brain images and comparing
the local differences among brain tissues and their functions
voxel by voxel in order to obtain the statistical significance
between groups and to discover the general trend of disease
burden and progression. The past decade has witnessed a
growing interest in developing new techniques to automatically quantify the abnormality of brain structure and functions, especially for the study of neurodegenerative diseases
such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD) [10] [40].
However, prior works (e.g. [38]) have shown that the statistically significant voxels obtained from the group difference studies do not necessarily carry strong statistical power
for computer-aided diagnosis (CAD). In clinical settings,
doctors prefer single indices as biomarkers because single
indices best quantify the brain structures and functions for
individuals rather than in the group level which has less
clinical effectiveness. A single neuroimaging index provides a practical reference for evaluating disease progression and for effective treatments. Yet the automated analysis of brain diseases (e.g. AD) based on single indices faces
many challenges largely because these single indices can
hardly represent the complicated shape or metabolic activity of the entire human cerebral cortex. Most researchers
focus on developing indices from region of interest (ROI)
study (e.g. [10]). However, the ROI-based techniques require prior knowledge and precise segmentation which is
a major limitation that could result in inconsistency across
different studies [42]. In randomized clinical trials (RCT),
the regulatory agencies prefer single valued outcome measure which does not require statistical correction for multiple regional comparisons. Moreover, functional imaging
techniques such as FDG-PET often suffer from low resolution and noises, which prevents traditional methods from
1182

