Unsupervised Adaptation for Deep Stereo
Alessio Tonioni, Matteo Poggi, Stefano Mattoccia, Luigi Di Stefano
University of Bologna,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI)
Viale del Risorgimento 2, Bologna
{alessio.tonioni, matteo.poggi8, stefano.mattoccia, luigi.distefano}@unibo.it

Abstract
Recent ground-breaking works have shown that deep
neural networks can be trained end-to-end to regress dense
disparity maps directly from image pairs. Computer generated imagery is deployed to gather the large data corpus
required to train such networks, an additional fine-tuning
allowing to adapt the model to work well also on real and
possibly diverse environments. Yet, besides a few public
datasets such as Kitti, the ground-truth needed to adapt the
network to a new scenario is hardly available in practice.
In this paper we propose a novel unsupervised adaptation
approach that enables to fine-tune a deep learning stereo
model without any ground-truth information. We rely on
off-the-shelf stereo algorithms together with state-of-the-art
confidence measures, the latter able to ascertain upon correctness of the measurements yielded by former. Thus, we
train the network based on a novel loss-function that penalizes predictions disagreeing with the highly confident disparities provided by the algorithm and enforces a smoothness constraint. Experiments on popular datasets (KITTI
2012, KITTI 2015 and Middlebury 2014) and other challenging test images demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposal.

1. Introduction
Availability of accurate 3D data is key to a large variety
of high-level computer vision tasks, such as autonomous
driving, 3D reconstruction and many others. Thus, several depth estimation techniques exhibiting different degrees of effectiveness and deployability have been proposed
throughout the years. Among them, stereo vision proved to
be one of the most promising methodologies to infer accurate depth information in both indoor and outdoor settings. However, recent datasets, such as KITTI [4, 12] and
Middlebury 2014 [19], emphasized major shortcomings of
stereo in the challenging environmental conditions found in
most practical applications [11].

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Effectiveness of unsupervised adaptation. (a),(b): Left
and right images belonging to a challenging stereo pair of the
dataset without ground-truth proposed in [11]. (c): Output provided by Dispnet-Corr1D [10]. (d): Output achieved after unsupervised adaptation of Dispnet-Corr1D.

The widespread diffusion of deep learning in computer
vision has also affected stereo vision. In particular, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) proved very effective
to compute matching costs between the patches of a stereo
pair [25, 2, 9], although these novel approaches still requires to be plugged into well established disparity optimization and refinement pipelines (e.g., [25]) to achieve
state-of-the-art accuracy. A ground-breaking forward step
is DispNet , [10], a deep architecture trained from scratch
to regress dense disparity measurements end-to-end from
image pairs, thereby dismissing all the machinery traditionally deployed to optimize/refine disparities and speeding up
the computation considerably. However, due to the high
capacity of the model as well as the input consisting in image pairs rather than patch pairs, this approach mandates
11605

