TORNADO: A Spatio-Temporal Convolutional Regression Network for Video
Action Proposal
Hongyuan Zhu⋆
I R, A∗ Star, Singapore

Romain Vial∗
MINES ParisTech, France

Shijian Lu
NTU, Singapore

zhuh@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

romain.vial@mines-paristech.fr

Shijian.Lu@ntu.edu.sg

2

Abstract
Given a video clip, action proposal aims to quickly generate a number of spatio-temporal tubes that enclose candidate human activities. Recently, the regression-based networks and long-term recurrent convolutional network (LRCN) have demonstrated superior performance in object
detection and action recognition. However, the regressionbased detectors perform inference without considering the
temporal context among neighboring frames, and the LRCN using global visual percepts lacks the capability to capture local temporal dynamics. In this paper, we present a
novel framework called TORNADO for human action proposal detection in un-trimmed video clips. Specifically, we
propose a spatio-temporal convolutional network that combines the advantages of regression-based detector and LRCN by empowering Convolutional LSTM with regression
capability. Our approach consists of a temporal convolutional regression network (T-CRN) and a spatial regression
network (S-CRN) which are trained end-to-end on both RGB and optical flow streams. They fuse appearance, motion and temporal contexts to regress the bounding boxes
of candidate human actions simultaneously in 28 FPS. The
action proposals are constructed by solving dynamic programming with peak trimming of the generated action boxes. Extensive experiments on the challenging UCF-101 and
UCF-Sports datasets show that our method achieves superior performance as compared with the state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Human can understand a video by analyzing how many
peoples are inside, where are they and how they interact
with each other in a single glance. Developing a fast and
accurate algorithm which can well mimic this human capability can unlock great potentials for a series of responsive and automatic applications, such as assistive robots and
video surveillance [7, 43, 24, 20]. However, directly feeding
∗ H.Zhu and R.Vial are first authors with equal contributions.

raw video volumes to existing learning algorithms is computationally extensive. On the other hand, human visual
system assigns computational resources to a small number
of regions that correspond to salient and meaningful human
actions, which highly motivates the development of video
action proposal.
Action proposal takes an un-trimmed video as input and
outputs a number of tubes which consist of the potential
human action boxes. It is a challenging task due to the illumination variation, abrupt motion changes, background
clutters, etc., and so requires a systematic and principled
modeling approach. In contrast to static object proposal [4, 44, 29] which considers appearance cue only, action
proposal in videos is much more complex and requires to
integrate several components including (1) a fast and accurate candidate action box generator that can simultaneously consider appearance, motion and temporal context; (2)
a robust and accurate actionness estimator for the generated
proposals; (3) an efficient association mechanism to link the
candidate boxes into action proposals.
With the above objectives in mind, a number of action
proposal methods [11, 22, 39, 42, 16, 9] have been developed in recent years and very promising results have been
achieved. Different approaches have been explored including segmentation-and-merging [11, 22, 19], dense trajectories clustering [39], human detection [42], deep learning [16], etc. However, segmentation-and-merging [11, 22,
39, 26] and human detection [42] approaches rely on lowlevel cues which fall behind the state-of-the-art. Recently,
Li et al.[16] explored to use Region Proposal Network (RPN) [29] for action box detection, but RPN processes each
video frame individually and ignores the temporal context
among adjacent video frames. They trained additional detector using low-level descriptors to remedy detection misses, but such separate sequential processing approach accumulates error and is also difficult to optimize.
To handle these challenges, we propose a new framework TORNADO for video action proposal. The TORNADO consists of a temporal convolutional regression network
(T-CRN) and a spatial convolutional regression network (S15813

