SCNet: Learning Semantic Correspondence
Kai Han1
1

Rafael S. Rezende4,5
Bumsub Ham2
Kwan-Yee K. Wong1
Minsu Cho3
Cordelia Schmid4,∗
Jean Ponce5,4

2
3
4
The University of Hong Kong
Yonsei Univ.
POSTECH
Inria
5
Department of Computer Science, ENS / CNRS / PSL Research University

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of establishing semantic correspondences between images depicting different instances of the same object or scene category. Previous
approaches focus on either combining a spatial regularizer with hand-crafted features, or learning a correspondence model for appearance only. We propose instead a
convolutional neural network architecture, called SCNet,
for learning a geometrically plausible model for semantic
correspondence. SCNet uses region proposals as matching primitives, and explicitly incorporates geometric consistency in its loss function. It is trained on image pairs obtained from the PASCAL VOC 2007 keypoint dataset, and
a comparative evaluation on several standard benchmarks
demonstrates that the proposed approach substantially outperforms both recent deep learning architectures and previous methods based on hand-crafted features.

1. Introduction
Our goal in this paper is to establish semantic correspondences across images that contain different instances
of the same object or scene category, and thus feature much
larger changes in appearance and spatial layout than the pictures of the same scene used in stereo vision, which we take
here to include broadly not only classical (narrow-baseline)
stereo fusion (e.g., [31, 34]), but also optical flow computation (e.g., [15, 33, 42]) and wide-baseline matching
(e.g., [30, 43]). Due to such a large degree of variations,
the problem of semantic correspondence remains very challenging. Most previous approaches to semantic correspondence [2, 17, 20, 26, 37, 43] focus on combining an effective spatial regularizer with hand-crafted features such as
SIFT [28], DAISY [39] or HOG [6]. With the remarkable
success of deep learning approaches in visual recognition,
several learning-based methods have also been proposed for
∗ Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000
Grenoble, France.

Figure 1: Learning semantic correspondence. We propose
a convolutional neural network, SCNet, to learn semantic
correspondence using both appearance and geometry. This
allows us to handle a large degree of intra-class and scene
variations. This figure shows a pair of input images (top)
and a warped image (bottom) using its semantic correspondence by our method. (Best viewed in color.)

both stereo vision [9, 12, 47, 48] and semantic correspondence [5, 21, 50]. Yet, none of these methods exploits the
geometric consistency constraints that have proven to be
a key factor to the success of their hand-crafted counterparts. Geometric regularization, if any, occurs during postprocessing but not during learning (e.g., [47, 48]).
In this paper we propose a convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture, called SCNet, for learning geometrically plausible semantic correspondence (Figure 1).
Following the proposal flow approach to semantic correspondence of Ham et al. [11], we use object proposals [29, 40, 51] as matching primitives, and explicitly incorporate the geometric consistency of these proposals in
our loss function. Unlike [11] with its hand-crafted features, however, we train our system in an end-to-end manner
using image pairs extracted from the PASCAL VOC 2007
keypoint dataset [7]. A comparative evaluation on several
11831

