Editable Parametric Dense Foliage from 3D Capture
Gaurav Chaurasia
Disney Research Zurich

Paul Beardsley
Disney Research Zurich

gaurav.chaurasia@disneyresearch.com

pab@disneyresearch.com

Abstract
We present an algorithm to compute parametric models of dense foliage. The guiding principles of our work
are automatic reconstruction and compact artist friendly
representation. We use Bézier patches to model leaf surface, which we compute from images and point clouds of
dense foliage. We present an algorithm to segment individual leaves from colour and depth data. We then reconstruct
the Bézier representation from segmented leaf points clouds
using non-linear optimisation. Unlike previous work, we
do not require laboratory scanned exemplars or user intervention. We also demonstrate intuitive manipulators to edit
the reconstructed parametric models. We believe our work
is a step towards making captured data more accessible to
artists for foliage modelling.

1. Introduction
Foliage is a commonly occurring element in synthesised
imagery. Production quality foliage is usually modelled using polygon meshes that are attached to procedurally generated branches [29]. This entails two main challenges: quantity and variety. Foliage requirements rapidly rise to hundreds of thousands of leaves, at which point polygon meshes
become prohibitively expensive to create, store and render.
Curve-based parametric models can alleviate this problem,
but current models lack expressiveness. Foliage variety is
limited because of the high cost of modelling individual
leaves. Generating foliage from 3D capture is a possible
solution, as shown by recent work on high quality 3D reconstruction of ﬂowers [18, 53, 19, 55, 38]. For dense foliage
however, 3D reconstruction algorithms lack robustness due
to self-similarity and non-rigidity. They generate noisy unordered point clouds with no semantic structure which are
hard to mesh and edit. These challenges have so far restricted virtual foliage to simple shapes created manually.
We address these challenges by capturing parametric
models of foliage from imagery. We are guided by the
principles of automation and editability. We use Bézier
curves, the simplest non-linear parametric primitives. We

identify salient components of a leaf, namely midrib, silhouettes, and cross-section, and model each with a Bézier
curve. This semantically aware model can express a wide
variety of single-lobed leaves including silhouette, symmetry and curvature variations. Reconstructing and manipulating the leaf amounts to estimating and editing the control
points of 4 Bézier curves. It is more compact than polygon meshes and more expressive than 2D silhouette based
leaf models. It also aids editability compared to meshes and
generic parametric representations like NURBS. Our model
has a canonical NURBS representation and inherits all existing NURBS editing techniques. Howsoever powerful,
editing interfaces can be improved if the underlying model
has semantics. We add semantics by modelling salient leaf
components with dedicated Béziers. We demonstrate that
semantics allow editing leaves with a very simple UI. These
edits are also feasible on meshes or NURBS, but would require a more complex UI for vertex or segment selection.
We choose Béziers for simplicity; other semantically aware
parametric models may be equally effective.
We compute this model from colour and depth data of
dense foliage, obtained using multi-view stereo or RGB-D
sensors. We propose an automatic leaf segmentation algorithm that ﬁrst extracts the most prominently visible leaves
using colour and geometric heuristics, and then extracts partially occluded leaves in subsequent passes. This is a significant departure from semantic segmentation which focuses
on large salient objects [4, 50]. Our segmentation is designed for small, repeating, partially visible elements. The
Bézier model gives a closed-form expression for every point
on the leaf surface. This underpins a non-linear optimisation to reconstruct the parametric model. We demonstrate
robustness to occlusions, outliers and missing data.
In this work, we focus on a simple model for the simple yet dominant class of single-lobed leaves like beech,
holly, cherry etc. We do not handle multi-lobed species like
maple1 . Single-lobed leaves are most common in nature: of
the 203 species found in northeastern US and Canada, 99
were single-lobed, 59 multi-lobed, and 45 grasses or needle shaped which do not require modelling [25]. Thus,
1 http://leafsnap.com/species/

5305

