Joint Estimation of Camera Pose, Depth, Deblurring, and Super-Resolution from
a Blurred Image Sequence
Haesol Park
Kyoung Mu Lee
Department of ECE, ASRI, Seoul National University, 151-742, Seoul, Korea
haseol.park@gmail.com, kyoungmu@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
The conventional methods for estimating camera poses
and scene structures from severely blurry or low resolution
images often result in failure. The off-the-shelf deblurring
or super-resolution methods may show visually pleasing results. However, applying each technique independently before matching is generally unprofitable because this naı̈ve
series of procedures ignores the consistency between images. In this paper, we propose a pioneering unified framework that solves four problems simultaneously, namely,
dense depth reconstruction, camera pose estimation, superresolution, and deblurring. By reflecting a physical imaging process, we formulate a cost minimization problem and
solve it using an alternating optimization technique. The
experimental results on both synthetic and real videos show
high-quality depth maps derived from severely degraded images that contrast the failures of naı̈ve multi-view stereo
methods. Our proposed method also produces outstanding deblurred and super-resolved images unlike the independent application or combination of conventional video
deblurring, super-resolution methods.

1. Introduction
Structure from motion or multi-view stereo (MVS) is a
very interesting problem in computer vision that aims to
determine the underlying 3D scene structure and camera
configuration from multiple images. Despite the inherent
difficulty of this inverse problem, contemporary algorithms
show a satisfactory performance when applied on public
datasets [10, 20].
Despite their encouraging achievements, some limitations prevent the aforementioned methods from being applied in highly realistic scenarios. Among these challenges
are the blurs resulting from camera motion [14, 17], which
becomes serious when using handheld cameras or cameras
attached to moving vehicles. Blur operation acts differently
on each pixel according to the scene depth and camera mo-

Figure 1: Comparison of depth estimation and image
restoration results for blurry, low-resolution images. The
left column shows the estimated latent images, while the
right column shows their corresponding depth maps. The
images from top to bottom are obtained via (a) a simple
bicubic interpolation, (b) the independent use of deblurring [30] after applying the super-resolution algorithm [25],
and (c) the proposed method, respectively. The depth maps
for the first two rows are estimated via baseline variational
depth estimation.

tion, and it breaks brightness constancy assumption among
consecutive frames.
Low-resolution (LR) input images also often affect
stereo matching accuracy [5, 15], because low-quality cameras are frequently used considering the limitations in cost
or space for some applications. However, even in a highresolution (HR) image, the actual scene resolution is spatially uneven and dependent on depth because of the perspective projection.
The aforementioned problem becomes especially challenging when the image frames are simultaneously corrupted by blur and low resolution. This problem can be
directly addressed by applying the super-resolution [24] or
14613

