Learning a Recurrent Residual Fusion Network for Multimodal Matching
Yu Liu
Yanming Guo
Erwin M. Bakker
Michael S. Lew
LIACS Media Lab, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands
{y.liu, y.guo, e.m.bakker, m.s.lew}@liacs.leidenuniv.nl

Abstract
A major challenge in matching between vision and
language is that they typically have completely different
features and representations. In this work, we introduce a
novel bridge between the modality-specific representations
by creating a co-embedding space based on a recurrent
residual fusion (RRF) block. Specifically, RRF adapts the
recurrent mechanism to residual learning, so that it can
recursively improve feature embeddings while retaining the
shared parameters. Then, a fusion module is used to
integrate the intermediate recurrent outputs and generates
a more powerful representation. In the matching network,
RRF acts as a feature enhancement component to gather
visual and textual representations into a more discriminative embedding space where it allows to narrow the crossmodal gap between vision and language. Moreover, we
employ a bi-rank loss function to enforce separability of the
two modalities in the embedding space. In the experiments,
we evaluate the proposed RRF-Net using two multi-modal
datasets where it achieves state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, multimedia data in various media types (e.g.
image, video, text, and audio) is growing exponentially
due to the increasing popularity of the Internet and social
networks. These heterogeneous data offers us the opportunity to understand the world better, while giving rise to
the challenges of understanding and bridging the semantic
gap between multiple modalities. Specifically, the matching
problem between images and texts [42, 32, 18, 25, 39, 40]
is one of the most important tasks in the area of multimodal research. This task remains challenging due to
the heterogenous representations and the cross-modal gap
between vision and language, which is also a core issue for
other multi-modal tasks such as image captioning [15, 27,
38] and visual question answering [2, 26, 31].
A main line of research for multi-modal matching is to
learn a latent embedding space where related images and
texts can be unified into similar representations [5, 6, 14].

Particularly, Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) [11]
has been a well-tested and representative embedding technique for decades. It learns a linear transformation to
project two modalities into a common space where their
correlations are maximized. Also, some extensive techniques are applied to the classical CCA, such as randomized
CCA [30], nonparametric CCA [28], and kernel CCA [7].
Driven by the successful developments of deep learning,
more and more works extract powerful visual and textual
features using deep neural networks. For example, recent
works [18, 32, 15, 20, 39, 25] employ convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) [19] to extract deep image features, and
capture descriptive text features based on recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) [35]. Then they incorporate deep learning
features with traditional embedding techniques (e.g. CCA
and its variants). Also, extensive research efforts [1, 42]
have been dedicated to directly learning a deep CCA model
that can be end-to-end trainable. Instead of using CCA,
recent works developed a variety of multi-modal deep
neural networks to model the matching task [14, 15, 25, 39,
4]. Nevertheless, the multi-modal matching performance is
still far from competitive with that of the intra-modal tasks,
such as image retrieval and machine translation. One key
issue is: how to improve latent embeddings to unify images
and texts into a more discriminative space?
To address this issue, we propose a deep matching
network using recurrent residual fusion (RRF) as building
blocks for improving feature embeddings. This new matching network (RRF-Net) has two branches for representing
images and texts, respectively. Each branch consists of
four fully-connected layers that are used to project a source
representation into a common latent space. The proposed
RRF building block (in Fig. 2) is introduced in the third
fully-connected layer of the two branches. Importantly,
RRF integrates three main components to improve the
feature embedding procedure in the network.
The first component in RRF is inspired by the residual
learning in ResNet [9]. We add an identity connection to
sum the input of a fully-connected layer with its output.
This component enables the fully-connected layer to learn a
residual embedding feature and provides high performance.

4107

