Illuminating Pedestrians via Simultaneous Detection & Segmentation
Garrick Brazil, Xi Yin, Xiaoming Liu
Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824
{brazilga, yinxi1, liuxm}@msu.edu

Abstract
Pedestrian detection is a critical problem in computer vision with significant impact on safety in urban autonomous
driving. In this work, we explore how semantic segmentation can be used to boost pedestrian detection accuracy
while having little to no impact on network efficiency. We
propose a segmentation infusion network to enable joint
supervision on semantic segmentation and pedestrian detection. When placed properly, the additional supervision
helps guide features in shared layers to become more sophisticated and helpful for the downstream pedestrian detector. Using this approach, we find weakly annotated boxes
to be sufficient for considerable performance gains. We provide an in-depth analysis to demonstrate how shared layers
are shaped by the segmentation supervision. In doing so, we
show that the resulting feature maps become more semantically meaningful and robust to shape and occlusion. Overall, our simultaneous detection and segmentation framework achieves a considerable gain over the state-of-the-art
on the Caltech pedestrian dataset, competitive performance
on KITTI, and executes 2× faster than competitive methods.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian detection from an image is a core capability of
computer vision, due to its applications such as autonomous
driving and robotics [14]. It is also a long-standing vision
problem because of its distinct challenges including low
resolution, occlusion, cloth variations, etc [30]. There are
two central approaches for detecting pedestrians: object detection [2, 29] and semantic segmentation [4, 5]. The two
approaches are highly related by nature but have their own
strengths and weaknesses. For instance, object detection is
designed to perform well at localizing distinct objects but
typically provides little information on object boundaries.
In contrast, semantic segmentation does well at distinguishing pixel-wise boundaries among classes but struggles to
separate objects within the same class.
Intuitively, we expect that knowledge from either task
will make the other substantially easier. This has been

Figure 1. Detection results on the Caltech test set (left), feature
map visualization from the RPN of conventional Faster R-CNN
(middle), and feature map visualization of SDS-RCNN (right).
Notice that our feature map substantially illuminates the pedestrian shape while suppressing the background region, both of
which make positive impact to downstream pedestrian detection.

demonstrated for generic object detection, since having segmentation masks of objects would clearly facilitate detection. For example, Fidler et al. [13] utilize predicted segmentation masks to boost object detection performance via
a deformable part-based model. Hariharan et al. [18] show
how segmentation masks generated from MCG [1] can be
used to mask background regions and thus simplify detection. Dai et al. [6] utilize the two tasks in a 3-stage cascaded
network consisting of box regression, foreground segmentation, and classification. Their architecture allows each task
to share features and feed into one another.
In contrast, the pairing of these two tasks is rarely studied
in pedestrian detection, despite the recent advances [2, 21,
29]. This is due in part to the lack of pixel-wise annotations
available in classic pedestrian datasets such as Caltech [8]
and KITTI [14], unlike the detailed segmentation labels in
the COCO [22] dataset for generic object detection. With
the release of Cityscapes [5], a high quality dataset for urban semantic segmentation, it is expected that substantial
research efforts will be on how to leverage semantic segmentation to boost the performance of pedestrian detection,
which is the core problem to be studied in this paper.
Given this objective, we start by presenting a competitive two-stage baseline framework of pedestrian detection
deriving from RPN+BF [29] and Faster R-CNN [23]. We
contribute a number of key changes to enable the secondstage classifier to specialize in stricter supervision and additionally fuse the refined scores with the first stage RPN.
These changes alone lead to state-of-the-art performance on

4950

