A Multimodal Deep Regression Bayesian Network for Affective Video Content
Analyses

1

Quan Gan1 , Shangfei Wang∗,1 , Longfei Hao1 , and Qiang Ji2
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, China
2
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180, USA

gqquan@mail.ustc.edu.cn, sfwang@ustc.edu.cn, hlf101@mail.ustc.edu.cn, qji@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract
The inherent dependencies between visual elements and
aural elements are crucial for affective video content analyses, yet have not been successfully exploited. Therefore,
we propose a multimodal deep regression Bayesian network
(MMDRBN) to capture the dependencies between visual elements and aural elements for affective video content analyses. The regression Bayesian network (RBN) is a directed
graphical model consisting of one latent layer and one visible layer. Due to the explaining away effect in Bayesian
networks (BN), RBN is able to capture both the dependencies among the latent variables given the observation and
the dependencies among visible variables. We propose a
fast learning algorithm to learn the RBN. For the MMDRBN, first, we learn several RBNs layer-wisely from visual
modality and audio modality respectively. Then we stack
these RBNs and obtain two deep networks. After that, a
joint representation is extracted from the top layers of the
two deep networks, and thus captures the high order dependencies between visual modality and audio modality. In
order to predict the valence or arousal score of video contents, we initialize a feed-forward inference network from
the MMDRBN whose inference is intractable by minimizing
the KullbackCLeibler (KL)divergence between the two networks. The back propagation algorithm is adopted for finetuning the inference network. Experimental results on the
LIRIS-ACCEDE database demonstrate that the proposed
MMDRBN successfully captures the dependencies between
visual and audio elements, and thus achieves better performance compared with state-of-the-art work.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen increasingly big amount of video
data, in particular user-created videos, with the rapid development in consumer electronics and the proliferation of
∗ This is the corresponding author.

mobile devices. For example, there are tens of thousands of videos uploaded to YouTube each day. In addition to
the exponential growth in digital video repositories, users’ purposes for consuming videos are also evolving due to
the popularity of social networks. Emotional decisions are
more and more widely utilized when querying and browsing video databases. Both the significant increase in video
data size and the change in users’ video viewing purposes
demand a new way to effectively organize the videos to better meet users’ specific needs. Therefore, affective video
content analyses have attracted increasing attentions.
Current study of affective video content analyses can be
categorized into two groups: direct approaches and implicit
approaches. Direct video affective content analyses assign
emotion tags to videos from the visual and audio features
of videos. Implicit video affective content analyses, on the
other hand, infer videos’ emotion tags from a user’s spontaneous nonverbal response while watching the videos [40].
Compared with implicit video affective content analyses,
the direct approach is more practical, since it requires only
video data without users’ spontaneous nonverbal behavior
signals. Therefore, this paper focuses on direct approaches
of affective video content analyses.
The video content can be captured by various visual
and audio features. The main stream of current affective
video content analyses adopt either feature-level fusion or
decision-level fusion to integrate visual and audio features.
The former simply concatenates all the visual and audio features to one feature vector as the input to a classifier, and
the later directly combines the classification results from
visual features and audio features. These kinds of data fusion may not successfully model the inherent dependencies
among visual features and audio features for video emotion tagging, since the dependencies between visual content
and audio content as well as the influence of video content on users’ emotions are very complex. Only very recently, Pang et al. [29] proposed to use multimodal deep
Boltzmann machines (MMDBMs) to learn a joint density
model over visual, auditory, and textual modalities for emo15113

