Primary Video Object Segmentation via Complementary CNNs
and Neighborhood Reversible Flow
Jia Li1,2∗ , Anlin Zheng1 , Xiaowu Chen1∗ , Bin Zhou1
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
2

International Research Institute for Multidisciplinary Science, Beihang University

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel approach for segmenting
primary video objects by using Complementary Convolutional Neural Networks (CCNN) and neighborhood reversible flow. The proposed approach first pre-trains CCNN on massive images with manually annotated salient objects in an end-to-end manner, and the trained CCNN
has two separate branches that simultaneously handle two
complementary tasks, i.e., foregroundness and backgroundness estimation. By applying CCNN on each video frame,
the spatial foregroundness and backgroundness maps can
be initialized, which are then propagated between various
frames so as to segment primary video objects and suppress
distractors. To enforce efficient temporal propagation, we
divide each frame into superpixels and construct neighborhood reversible flow that reflects the most reliable temporal
correspondences between superpixels in far-away frames.
Within such flow, the initialized foregroundness and backgroundness can be efficiently and accurately propagated along the temporal axis so that primary video objects gradually pop-out and distractors are well suppressed. Extensive experimental results on three video datasets show that
the proposed approach achieves impressive performance in
comparisons with 18 state-of-the-art models.

1. Introduction
Segmenting primary objects in images and videos is an
important step in many computer vision applications. In
recent years, the segmentation of primary image objects,
namely image-based salient object detection, has achieved
impressive success since powerful models can be directly trained on large image datasets by using Random Forest [12], Multi-instance Learning [42], Stacked Autoencoders [8] and Deep Neural Networks [13, 15, 18, 45]. In
contrast, segmenting primary video objects remains a chal* Correspondence should be addressed to Xiaowu Chen and Jia Li.
E-mail: {chen, jiali}@buaa.edu.cn

Figure 1. Primary objects may co-occur with or be occluded by
various distractors. They may not always be the most salient ones
in each separate frame but can consistently pop-out in most video
frames (frames and masks are taken from the dataset [17]).

lenging task since the amount of video data with per-frame
pixel-level annotations is much less than that of images,
which may prevent the direct end-to-end training of spatiotemporal model. Moreover, due to the camera or object motion, the same primary objects may co-occur with
or be occluded by various distractors in different frames
(see Fig. 1), making them difficult to consistently pop-out
throughout the whole video.
To address the problem of primary video object segmentation, there exist three major categories of models
that can be recognized as fully-automatic, interactive and
weakly-supervised, respectively. In these models, interactive ones require manually annotated primary objects in the
first frame or several key frames before starting the automatic segmentation [5, 19, 26, 27], while weakly-supervised
ones often assume that the semantic tags of primary video
objects are known before segmentation so that additional
tools like object detectors can be reused [31, 44]. However, the requirement of interaction or semantic tags prevents
their usage in processing large-scale video data [40].
Beyond these models, fully-automatic models aim to directly segment primary objects in a single video [10, 22,
40, 36] or co-segment the primary objects shared by a collection of videos [2, 7, 41]. Typically, these models propose assumptions on what spatial attributes primary objects
should have and how they should behave along the temporal axis. For example, Papazoglou and Ferrari [22] assume that foreground objects should move differently from
its surrounding background in a good fraction of the video.
4321
1417

