A Coarse-Fine Network for Keypoint Localization
Shaoli Huang1
Mingming Gong2
Dacheng Tao1
1
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, SIT, FEIT, The University of Sydney
2
CAI, FEIT, University of Technology Sydney
shaol.huang@sydney.edu.au gongmingnju@gmail.com dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
We propose a coarse-fine network (CFN) that exploits
multi-level supervisions for keypoint localization. Recently,
convolutional neural networks (CNNs)-based methods have
achieved great success due to the powerful hierarchical features in CNNs. These methods typically use confidence
maps generated from ground-truth keypoint locations as supervisory signals. However, while some keypoints can be
easily located with high accuracy, many of them are hard
to localize due to appearance ambiguity. Thus, using strict
supervision often fails to detect keypoints that are difficult
to locate accurately. To target this problem, we develop a
keypoint localization network composed of several coarse
detector branches, each of which is built on top of a feature layer in a CNN, and a fine detector branch built on top
of multiple feature layers. We supervise each branch by a
specified label map to explicate a certain supervision strictness level. All the branches are unified principally to produce the final accurate keypoint locations. We demonstrate
the efficacy, efficiency, and generality of our method on several benchmarks for multiple tasks including bird part localization and human body pose estimation. Especially, our
method achieves 72.2% AP on the 2016 COCO Keypoints
Challenge dataset, which is an 18% improvement over the
winning entry.

1. Introduction
Predicting a set of semantic keypoints, such as human
body joints or bird parts, is an essential component of understanding objects in images. For example, keypoints help
align objects and reveal their subtle differences that are useful for handling the problems with small inter-class variations such as fine-grained categorization [51, 48, 17].
Despite dramatic progress over recent years, keypoint
prediction remains a significant challenge due to appearance variations, pose changes, and occlusions. For instance,
the local appearances of bird parts may differ vastly across
species or different poses (e.g. perching, flying, and walk-

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: An illustration of the predicted keypoints from our
CFN architecture. The left image contains highly accurate
keypoints detected by the fine detector with strict supervision, the middle image contains keypoints from coarse detectors with loose supervisions, and the right image shows
the final predictions by unifying the fine and coarse detectors.

ing). Localizing keypoints on the human body must be invariant to appearance changes caused by factors like clothing and lighting, and robust to large layout changes of parts
due to articulations [40]. To tackle these difficulties, early
works combined handcrafted part appearance features and
with an associated spatial model to capture both local and
global information [24, 33, 31, 46].
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [38, 36,
16] have significantly reshaped the conventional pipeline
by replacing handcrafted features and explicit spatial models with more powerful learned hierarchical representations
[40, 35, 43, 27]. The hierarchical representations in CNNs
provide us a natural way to implicitly model part appearances and spatial interactions between parts. Thus, considerable effort has been placed into leveraging hierarchical
features in CNNs to build a fine keypoint detector which is
expected to achieve high localization accuracy [29, 2].
13028

