Spatio-temporal Person Retrieval via Natural Language Queries
Masataka Yamaguchi1 , Kuniaki Saito1 , Yoshitaka Ushiku1 , Tatsuya Harada1,2
1
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo 2 RIKEN
{yamaguchi, ksaito, ushiku, harada}@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of spatio-temporal
person retrieval from videos using a natural language
query, in which we output a tube (i.e., a sequence of bounding boxes) which encloses the person described by the
query. For this problem, we introduce a novel dataset consisting of videos containing people annotated with bounding boxes for each second and with five natural language
descriptions. To retrieve the tube of the person described
by a given natural language query, we design a model that
combines methods for spatio-temporal human detection and
multimodal retrieval. We conduct comprehensive experiments to compare a variety of tube and text representations
and multimodal retrieval methods, and present a strong
baseline in this task as well as demonstrate the efficacy of
our tube representation and multimodal feature embedding
technique. Finally, we demonstrate the versatility of our
model by applying it to two other important tasks.

1. Introduction
As the number of videos uploaded on the web or stored
in personal devices continues to increase, systems capable
of finding a person in videos are in greater demand. Although object instance search methods [32, 19] can be used
to find a person in videos, such methods require an example
image of that person. In terms of usability, it would be more
desirable if the person could be retrieved using more easily
available types of queries.
Motivated by this demand, we address the problem of
retrieving a person from multiple video clips via a natural
language description, which can be easily input and used
even if no image of the person is available. Specifically, we
output the target people in the form of tubes (i.e., sequences
of bounding boxes), which provide rich information that can
be used for various applications, such as video editing. The
overview of our task is shown in Figure 1.
To address this problem, we constructed a novel dataset
as a platform for evaluating this task. We first collected
5,293 video clips from the ActivityNet dataset [1], which

Figure 1. Overview of our task. Given a natural language query,
we aim to retrieve a person described by it from the videos in the
form of a spatio-temporal tube.

contains videos including diverse human actions. We then
chose 6,073 people in those clips and annotated each of
them with a bounding box for each second and also with five
descriptions. The total duration of our dataset is 13.7 hours,
the number of bounding boxes is 62,627, and the number of
descriptions is 30,365.
To solve this problem, we design a model in which we
first obtain candidate tubes and then retrieve the top K tubes
suitable for a given natural language query. To obtain candidate tubes, we utilize a spatio-temporal human detection
method based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
To retrieve tubes via a given query, we utilize a multimodal
retrieval method in combination with rich tube and description representations. We construct a strong baseline in this
task by conducting comprehensive experiments to compare
a variety of tube and text representations and multimodal
feature embedding methods. Through the experiments we
also demonstrate the efficacy of our novel tube representation and feature embedding technique.
Moreover, the model trained with our dataset can be used
for various purposes. To verify the versatility of our model,
we apply our model to two important tasks: (1) video-clip
retrieval and (2) spatio-temporal action detection, and show
our model is also effective in these tasks.
We will make the code, features, and annotations pub-

1453

