Open Vocabulary Scene Parsing
Hang Zhao1 , Xavier Puig1 , Bolei Zhou1 , Sanja Fidler2 , Antonio Torralba1
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
2
University of Toronto, Canada

Abstract
Recognizing arbitrary objects in the wild has been a
challenging problem due to the limitations of existing classification models and datasets. In this paper, we propose a
new task that aims at parsing scenes with a large and open
vocabulary, and several evaluation metrics are explored for
this problem. Our approach is a joint image pixel and word
concept embeddings framework, where word concepts are
connected by semantic relations. We validate the open vocabulary prediction ability of our framework on ADE20K
dataset which covers a wide variety of scenes and objects.
We further explore the trained joint embedding space to
show its interpretability.

1. Introduction
One of the grand goals in computer vision is to recognize
and segment arbitrary objects in the wild. Recent efforts
in image classification/detection/segmentation have shown
this trend: emerging image datasets enable recognition on
a large scale [6, 30, 32], while image captioning can be
seen as a special instance of this task [12]. However, nowadays most recognition models are still not capable of classifying objects at the level of a human, in particular, taking
into account the taxonomy of object categories. Ordinary
people or laymen classify things on the entry-levels, and
experts give more specific labels: there is no object with
a single correct label, so the prediction vocabulary is inherently open-ended. Furthermore, there is no widely-accepted
way to evaluate open-ended recognition tasks, which is also
a main reason this direction is not pursued more often.
In this work, we are pushing towards open vocabulary
scene parsing: model predictions are not limited to a fixed
set of categories, but also concepts in a larger dictionary,
or even a knowledge graph. Considering existing image
parsing datasets only contain a small number of categories
(~100 classes), there is much more a model can learn from
those images given extra semantic knowledge, like WordNet dictionary (~100,000 synsets) or Word2Vec from external corpus.

(a) Input Image

(b) Scene Parsing

(c) Concept Retrieval

(d) Concept Synthesis

Figure 1. We propose an open vocabulary framework such that
given (a) an input image, we can perform (b) scene parsing, (c)
concept retrieval (”table”), and (d) concept synthesis (intersection
of “game equipment” and “table”) through arithmetic operations
in the joint image-concept embedding space.

To solve this new problem, we propose a framework that
is able to segment all objects in an image using open vocabulary labels. In particular, while the method strives to label
each pixel with the same word as the one used by the human
annotator, it resorts to a taxonomy when it is not sure about
its prediction. As a result, our model can make plausible
predictions even for categories that have not been shown
during training, e.g. if the model has never seen tricycle,
it may still give a confident guess on vehicle, performing
more like a human.
Our framework incorporates hypernym/hyponym relations from WordNet [18] to help with parsing. More concretely, word concepts and image pixel features are embedded into a joint high-dimentional vector space so that (1) hypernym/hyponym relations are preserved for the concepts,
(2) image pixel embeddings are close to concepts related
to their annotations according to some distance measures.
This framework offers three major advantages: (1) predictions are made in a structured way, i.e., they can be intermediate nodes in WordNet, and thus yielding more reasonable
mistakes; (2) it is an end-to-end trainable system, its vocab12002

