Realistic Dynamic Facial Textures from a Single Image using GANs
Kyle Olszewski∗1,3,4 , Zimo Li†1 , Chao Yang ‡1 , Yi Zhou§1 , Ronald Yu¶1,3 , Zeng Huangk1 , Sitao
Xiang∗∗1 , Shunsuke Saito††1,3 , Pushmeet Kohli‡‡2 , and Hao Li§§1,3,4
1

University of Southern California
2
DeepMind
3
Pinscreen
4
USC Institute for Creative Technologies

Abstract
We present a novel method to realistically puppeteer and
animate a face from a single RGB image using a source
video sequence. We begin by fitting a multilinear PCA
model to obtain the 3D geometry and a single texture of
the target face. In order for the animation to be realistic,
however, we need dynamic per-frame textures that capture
subtle wrinkles and deformations corresponding to the animated facial expressions. This problem is highly underconstrained, as dynamic textures cannot be obtained directly
from a single image. Furthermore, if the target face has a
closed mouth, it is not possible to obtain actual images of
the mouth interior. To address this issue, we train a Deep
Generative Network that can infer realistic per-frame texture deformations, including the mouth interior, of the target
identity using the per-frame source textures and the single
target texture. By retargeting the PCA expression geometry
from the source, as well as using the newly inferred texture,
we can both animate the face and perform video face replacement on the source video using the target appearance.

1. Introduction
Many methods have been developed in recent years to
realistically render and animate faces that are then com∗ olszewski.kyle@gmail.com (equal contribution)
† zimoli@usc.edu (equal contribution)
‡ harryyang.hk@gmail.com (equal contribution)
§ zhou859@usc.edu
¶ ronaldyu@usc.edu
k zenghuan@usc.edu
∗∗ sitaoxia@usc.edu
†† shunsuke.saito16@gmail.com
‡‡ pushmeet@google.com, project conducted while at MSR
§§ hao@hao-li.com

bined with real images. Such techniques have a variety of
applications, ranging from special effects for film and television to the recent and controversial phenomenon of real
images and videos of prominent public figures being surreptitiously modified to create “fake news.” Recent efforts
towards achieving such capabilities include, but are not limited to, video rewriting [2], face replacement [6], and realtime video reenactment [35]. Though the aforementioned
works achieve many of their stated goals, they require a
video of the target subject whose face is to be modified
as input. Thus, they cannot be used for target subjects for
whom high resolution video sequences do not exist and are
unobtainable.
A naive approach would be to simply fit a 3D mesh to
the face of the target subject in the image, and animate it
using the expressions of another person (whom we call the
“driver”), using the static texture captured from the original
image for the entire animation. However, in this approach,
subtle wrinkles that do not appear in the initial image and
are too small to be represented by deformations in the 3D
mesh will not appear in the resulting animations. Realistic animation requires these wrinkles to form and disappear
corresponding to the appearance of the target subject and
the expression that is being performed.
Our goal in this paper is to generate dynamic per-frame
facial textures that can represent details such as the inner
mouth and wrinkles from a single RGB image. Needless
to say, this problem is highly underconstrained. In fact, it
is impossible to perfectly solve for fine scale geometry, let
alone temporal facial deformations, from a single image.
For example, if the target image has a closed mouth, then
there is no way that we can actually know what the teeth,
tongue, or inner mouth look like. We must therefore infer
these details. Likewise, it is impossible to directly tell the
type of wrinkles that form under different expressions from

5429

