Dual Motion GAN for Future-Flow Embedded Video Prediction
Xiaodan Liang, Lisa Lee
Carnegie Mellon University

Wei Dai, Eric P. Xing
Petuum Inc.

{xiaodan1,lslee}@cs.cmu.edu

{wei.dai,eric.xing}@petuum.com

Abstract
Future frame prediction in videos is a promising avenue for unsupervised video representation learning. Video
frames are naturally generated by the inherent pixel flows
from preceding frames based on the appearance and motion dynamics in the video. However, existing methods focus
on directly hallucinating pixel values, resulting in blurry
predictions. In this paper, we develop a dual motion Generative Adversarial Net (GAN) architecture, which learns
to explicitly enforce future-frame predictions to be consistent with the pixel-wise flows in the video through a duallearning mechanism. The primal future-frame prediction
and dual future-flow prediction form a closed loop, generating informative feedback signals to each other for better
video prediction. To make both synthesized future frames
and flows indistinguishable from reality, a dual adversarial training method is proposed to ensure that the futureflow prediction is able to help infer realistic future-frames,
while the future-frame prediction in turn leads to realistic
optical flows. Our dual motion GAN also handles natural
motion uncertainty in different pixel locations with a new
probabilistic motion encoder, which is based on variational
autoencoders. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the
proposed dual motion GAN significantly outperforms stateof-the-art approaches on synthesizing new video frames and
predicting future flows. Our model generalizes well across
diverse visual scenes and shows superiority in unsupervised
video representation learning.

Video frame prediction itself is a challenging task due
to the complex appearance and motion dynamics of natural scenes. Intuitively, in order to predict realistic pixel
values in future frames, the model must be capable of capturing pixel-wise appearance and motion changes so as to
let pixel values in previous frames flow into new frames.
However, most existing state-of-the-art approaches [20, 28,
18, 16, 26, 37] use generative neural networks to directly
synthesize RGB pixel values of future video frames and do
not explicitly model the inherent pixel-wise motion trajectories, leading to blurry predictions. Although several recent
attempts [23, 16, 26] have tried to alleviate this issue by designing a motion field layer that copies pixels from previous
frames, the predictions suffer from notable artifacts due to
imprecise intermediate flows.
In this work, we develop a dual motion Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) architecture that learns to explicitly make the synthesized pixel values in future frames coherent with pixel-wise motion trajectories using a dual adversarial learning mechanism. Specifically, it simultaneously resolves the primal future-frame prediction and dual
future-flow prediction based on a shared probabilistic motion encoder. Inspired by the success of GANs [6, 13],
we establish a dual adversarial training mechanism between two future-frame and future-flow generators, and
two frame and flow discriminators, to make the predictions indistinguishable from real data. The underlying duallearning mechanism bridges the communication between
future pixel hallucination and flow prediction by mutually
reviewing each other. Our dual motion GAN consists of
three fully-differentiable modules as follows.

1. Introduction

• A probabilistic motion encoder captures motion uncertainty that may appear in different locations, and
produces latent motion representations for preceding
frames which are then fed as inputs to two generators.

Despite the great progress of deep learning architectures
for supervised learning, unsupervised video representation
learning for general and scalable visual tasks remains a
largely unsolved yet critical research problem. Recently,
predicting future frames [22, 20, 28] in a video sequence
has surged as a promising direction for unsupervised learning of video data, since predicting the changes to a frame
requires the model to learn rich embeddings of the preceding frames.

• The future-frame generator then predicts future
frames, which are assessed from two aspects: frame
fidelity by a frame discriminator, and flow fidelity
by passing the estimated flows between the preceding
frame and the predicted frame into a flow discriminator.
11744

