Drone-based Object Counting by Spatially Regularized Regional Proposal
Network
Meng-Ru Hsieh1 , Yen-Liang Lin2 , and Winston H. Hsu1
1
2

National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
GE Global Research, Niskayuna, NY, USA

mrulafi@gmail.com,yenlianglintw@gmail.com,whsu@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Existing counting methods often adopt regression-based
approaches and cannot precisely localize the target objects,
which hinders the further analysis (e.g., high-level understanding and fine-grained classification). In addition, most
of prior work mainly focus on counting objects in static environments with fixed cameras. Motivated by the advent of
unmanned flying vehicles (i.e., drones), we are interested
in detecting and counting objects in such dynamic environments. We propose Layout Proposal Networks (LPNs) and
spatial kernels to simultaneously count and localize target
objects (e.g., cars) in videos recorded by the drone. Different from the conventional region proposal methods, we
leverage the spatial layout information (e.g., cars often park
regularly) and introduce these spatially regularized constraints into our network to improve the localization accuracy. To evaluate our counting method, we present a new
large-scale car parking lot dataset (CARPK) that contains
nearly 90,000 cars captured from different parking lots. To
the best of our knowledge, it is the first and the largest drone
view dataset that supports object counting, and provides the
bounding box annotations.

1. Introduction
With the advent of unmanned flying vehicles, new potential applications emerge for unconstrained images and
videos analysis for aerial view cameras. In this work, we
address the counting problem for evaluating the number of
objects (e.g., cars) in drone-based videos. Prior methods
[10, 2, 1] for monitoring the parking lot often assume that
the locations of the monitored objects of a scene are already
known in advance and the cameras are fixed, and cast car
counting as a classification problem, which makes conventional car counting methods not directly applicable in unconstrained drone videos.

Drone-View
Car Dataset

Layout Proposal
Networks

Object Counting
and Localization

Drone videos

Counting number : 95 cars

Figure 1. We propose a Layout Proposal Network (LPN) to localize and count objects in drone videos. We introduce the spatial
constraints for learning our network to improve the localization
accuracy. Detailed network structure is shown in Figure 4.

Current object counting methods often learn a regression
model that maps the high-dimensional image space into
non-negative counting numbers [30, 18]. However, these
methods can not generate precise object positions, which
limits the further investigation and applications (e.g., recognition).
We observe that there exists certain layout patterns for a
group of object instances, which can be utilized to improve
the object counting accuracy. For example, cars are often
parked in a row and animals are gathered in a certain layout
(e.g., fish torus and duck swirl). In this paper, we introduce a novel Layout Proposal Network (LPN) that counts
and localizes objects in drone videos (Figure 1). Different
from existing object proposal methods, we introduce a new
spatially regularized loss for learning our Layout Proposal
Network. Note that our method learns the general adjacent
relationship between object proposals and is not specific to
a certain scene.
Our spatially regularized loss is a weighting scheme that

4145

