One Network to Solve Them All — Solving Linear Inverse Problems using Deep
Projection Models
J. H. Rick Chang∗, Chun-Liang Li, Barnabás Póczos, B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar,
and Aswin C. Sankaranarayanan
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA

Abstract
While deep learning methods have achieved state-of-theart performance in many challenging inverse problems like
image inpainting and super-resolution, they invariably involve problem-specific training of the networks. Under this
approach, each inverse problem requires its own dedicated
network. In scenarios where we need to solve a wide variety
of problems, e.g., on a mobile camera, it is inefficient and
expensive to use these problem-specific networks. On the
other hand, traditional methods using analytic signal priors
can be used to solve any linear inverse problem; this often
comes with a performance that is worse than learning-based
methods. In this work, we provide a middle ground between
the two kinds of methods — we propose a general framework
to train a single deep neural network that solves arbitrary
linear inverse problems. We achieve this by training a network that acts as a quasi-projection operator for the set
of natural images and show that any linear inverse problem involving natural images can be solved using iterative
methods. We empirically show that the proposed framework
demonstrates superior performance over traditional methods
using wavelet sparsity prior while achieving performance
comparable to specially-trained networks on tasks including
compressive sensing and pixel-wise inpainting.

1. Introduction
At the heart of many image processing tasks is a linear
inverse problem, where the goal is to reconstruct an image
x ∈ Rd from a set of measurements y ∈ Rm of the form
y = Ax + n, where A ∈ Rm×d is the measurement operator and n ∈ Rm is the noise. For example, in image
inpainting, A is the linear operation of applying a pixelwise
mask to the image x. In super-resolution, A downsamples
∗ Chang, Bhagavatula and Sankaranarayanan were supported, in part, by
the ARO Grant W911NF-15-1-0126. Chang was also partially supported
by the CIT Bertucci Fellowship. Sankaranarayanan was also supported, in
part, by the INTEL ISRA on Compressive Sensing.

ground truth / input

reconstruction output

compressive
sensing (10×
compression)

pixelwise
inpainting and
denoising (80%
drops)

scattered
inpainting

2×
super-resolution

Figure 1: The same network is used to solve the following
tasks: compressive sensing problem with 10× compression,
pixelwise random inpainting with 80% dropping rate, scattered inpainting, and 2×-super-resolution. Note that even
though the nature and input dimensions of the problems are
very different, the proposed framework is able to use a single
network to solve them all without retraining.
high-resolution images. In compressive sensing, A is a shortfat matrix with fewer rows than columns and is typically a
random sub-Gaussian or a sub-sampled orthonormal matrix.
Linear inverse problems are often underdetermined, i.e., they
involve fewer measurements than unknowns. Such underdetermined systems are extremely difficult to solve since
the operator A has a non-trivial null space and there are an
infinite number of feasible solutions; however, only a few of
the feasible solutions are valid natural images.
15888

