Scene Parsing with Global Context Embedding
Wei-Chih Hung1 , Yi-Hsuan Tsai1,2 , Xiaohui Shen3 ,
Zhe Lin3 , Kalyan Sunkavalli3 , Xin Lu3 , Ming-Hsuan Yang1
1
2
3
University of California, Merced
NEC Laboratories America
Adobe Research

Abstract
We present a scene parsing method that utilizes global
context information based on both the parametric and nonparametric models. Compared to previous methods that
only exploit the local relationship between objects, we train
a context network based on scene similarities to generate
feature representations for global contexts. In addition,
these learned features are utilized to generate global and
spatial priors for explicit classes inference. We then design
modules to embed the feature representations and the priors
into the segmentation network as additional global context
cues. We show that the proposed method can eliminate false
positives that are not compatible with the global context
representations. Experiments on both the MIT ADE20K and
PASCAL Context datasets show that the proposed method
performs favorably against existing methods.

1. Introduction
Scene parsing is one of the fundamental and challenging problems in computer vision, which can be applied to a
wide range of applications such as autonomous driving [5]
and image editing [27]. The goal of this task is to assign
a semantic class to each pixel in an image. Different from
semantic segmentation where a significant amount of pixels
are labeled as the background, most pixels in the scene parsing datasets are labeled with either thing classes (e.g., person and car) or stuff classes (e.g., wall, ground, and field).
One major limitation of existing scene parsing methods is that local information only provides limited cues
for inferring the label of a single pixel or patch. For example, in Figure 1(a), when observing a patch filled with
gray pixels from the beach sand, it is difficult to infer
whether the patch belongs to the class of road, wall, or
sand, even for human eyes. Thus, most existing contextbased methods combine one or multiple models that can
perform long-range inference through pairwise relationships, e.g., Markov Random Field (MRF), Conditional Random Field (CRF), or global attributes such as scene categories and spatial locations [11, 15] Non-parametric methods [18, 25, 9, 24, 26, 30] can be seen as context models
focusing on image matching via feature descriptors. By re-

(a) input

(b) ground truth

(c) without global context

(d) with global context

Figure 1. Given an image (a), the proposed method improves
the results of FCN-8s [12] (c) by exploiting the global context information. Our result (d) shows that the algorithm can eliminate
the false positives that are not compatible with the scene category
(e.g., some sand regions in (c) are predicted as mountain in a beach
scene). (b) shows the ground truth pixel labels.

trieving a small set of similar images from the annotated
dataset, these methods construct dense correspondences between the input image and the retrieved images on the pixel
or superpixel level. A final prediction map can be obtained
through a simple voting or solving an MRF model. However, the performance of such exemplar-based approaches
highly depends on the quality of the image retrieval module
based on hand-crafted features. If the retrieved set does not
contain one or more semantic classes of the input image,
these non-parametric approaches are not expected to parse
the scenes well.
Recently, CNN based methods such as the fully convolutional neural network (FCN) [20] have achieved the stateof-the-art results in semantic segmentation. These algorithms improve the scene parsing task compared to conventional non-parametric approaches. The performance gain
12631

