Exploiting Spatial Structure for Localizing Manipulated Image Regions
Jawadul H. Bappy1 , Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury1 , Jason Bunk2 , Lakshmanan Nataraj2 , and B.S. Manjunath2,3
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Riverside, USA
2

3

Mayachitra Inc., Santa Barbara, California , USA

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Santa Barbara, USA

Abstract
The advent of high-tech journaling tools facilitates an
image to be manipulated in a way that can easily evade
state-of-the-art image tampering detection approaches. The
recent success of the deep learning approaches in different recognition tasks inspires us to develop a high confidence detection framework which can localize manipulated
regions in an image. Unlike semantic object segmentation
where all meaningful regions (objects) are segmented, the
localization of image manipulation focuses only the possible tampered region which makes the problem even more
challenging. In order to formulate the framework, we employ a hybrid CNN-LSTM model to capture discriminative features between manipulated and non-manipulated regions. One of the key properties of manipulated regions
is that they exhibit discriminative features in boundaries
shared with neighboring non-manipulated pixels. Our motivation is to learn the boundary discrepancy, i.e., the spatial structure, between manipulated and non-manipulated
regions with the combination of LSTM and convolution layers. We perform end-to-end training of the network to learn
the parameters through back-propagation given groundtruth mask information. The overall framework is capable
of detecting different types of image manipulations, including copy-move, removal and splicing. Our model shows
promising results in localizing manipulated regions, which
is demonstrated through rigorous experimentation on three
diverse datasets.

1. Introduction
With the availability of digital image editing tools, digital altering or tampering of an image has become very easy.
In contrast, the identification of tampered images is a very
challenging problem due to the strong resemblance of a
forged image to its original one. There are certain types
of manipulations such as copy-move, splicing, removal, that
can easily deceive the human perceptual system. Digital image forensics is an emerging important topic in diverse sci-

Manipulated Image

Ground-truth

CRF_RNN

Proposed Model

CRF_RNN

Proposed Model

(a)

Manipulated Image

Ground-truth

(b)
Figure 1. The figure demonstrates the challenge of segmenting manipulated regions from an image. In this figure, we consider two
types of manipulation-(a) copy-clone, and (b) removal. In (a), semantic segmentation method such as CRF-RNN [60] tries to segment two seals in the image, whereas the proposed method segments only the copied seal (manipulated) from an image. In (b),
the detection of manipulated region is even harder - some part of
the image has been removed and filled with the neighboring regions. Deep learning based segmentation method [60] is not able
to segment removed objects, whereas our model is capable of localizing removed objects.

entific and security/surveillance applications. Most of the
existing methods have focused on classifying whether an
image is manipulated or not. However, there are few methods [51, 24, 13] that localize manipulated regions from an
image. Some recent works address the localization problem by classifying patches as manipulated. In this paper,
we propose a novel detection framework which is capable
of locating manipulation at patch as well as pixel level.
In image forensics, most of the state-of-the-art image
tamper detection approaches exploit the frequency domain
characteristics and/or statistical properties of an image.
Some of the common methods are DWT [34], SVD [41],
PCA [43], DCT [56]. The analysis of artifacts by multiple JPEG compressions is also utilized in [18, 56] to de-

4970

