Trespassing the Boundaries:
Labeling Temporal Bounds for Object Interactions in Egocentric Video
Davide Moltisanti

Michael Wray

University of Bristol, United Kingdom

Abstract
Manual annotations of temporal bounds for object interactions (i.e. start and end times) are typical training input
to recognition, localization and detection algorithms. For
three publicly available egocentric datasets, we uncover inconsistencies in ground truth temporal bounds within and
across annotators and datasets. We systematically assess
the robustness of state-of-the-art approaches to changes in
labeled temporal bounds, for object interaction recognition. As boundaries are trespassed, a drop of up to 10%
is observed for both Improved Dense Trajectories and TwoStream Convolutional Neural Network.
We demonstrate that such disagreement stems from a
limited understanding of the distinct phases of an action,
and propose annotating based on the Rubicon Boundaries,
inspired by a similarly named cognitive model, for consistent temporal bounds of object interactions. Evaluated on
a public dataset, we report a 4% increase in overall accuracy, and an increase in accuracy for 55% of classes when
Rubicon Boundaries are used for temporal annotations.

1. Introduction
Egocentric videos, also referred to as first-person videos,
have been frequently advocated to provide a unique perspective into object interactions [12, 5, 19]. These capture
the viewpoint of an object close to that perceived by the user
during interactions. Consider, for example, ‘turning a door
handle’. Similar appearance and motion information will be
captured from an egocentric perspective as multiple people
turn a variety of door handles.
Several datasets have been availed to the research
community focusing on object interactions from headmounted [2, 7, 6, 1, 15] and chest-mounted [21] cameras.
These incorporate ground truth labels that mark the start
and the end of each object interaction, such as ‘open fridge’,
‘cut tomato’ and ‘push door’. These temporal bounds are
the base for automating action detection, localization and
recognition. They are thus highly influential in the ability

Walterio Mayol-Cuevas

Dima Damen

<FirstName>.<LastName>@bristol.ac.uk

of an algorithm to distinguish one interaction from another.
As temporal bounds vary, the segments may contain different portions of the untrimmed video from which the action is extracted. Humans can still recognize an action even
when the video snippet varies or contains only part of the
action. Machines are not yet as robust, given that current algorithms strongly rely on the data and the labels we feed to
them. Should these bounds be incorrectly or inconsistently
annotated, the ability to learn as well as assess models for
action recognition would be adversely affected.
In this paper, we uncover inconsistencies in defining
temporal bounds for object interactions within and across
three egocentric datasets. We show that temporal bounds
are often ill-defined, with limited insight into how they have
been annotated. We systematically show that perturbations
of temporal bounds influence the accuracy of action recognition, for both hand-crafted features and fine-tuned classifiers, even when the tested video segment significantly overlaps with the ground truth segment.
While this paper focuses on unearthing inconsistencies
in temporal bounds, and assessing their effect on object interaction recognition, we take a step further into proposing
an approach for consistently labeling temporal bounds inspired by studies in the human mindset.
Main Contributions More specifically, we:
• Inspect the consistency of temporal bounds for object interactions across and within three datasets for
egocentric object interactions. We demonstrate that
current approaches are highly subjective, with visible variability in temporal bounds when annotating instances of the same action;
• Evaluate the robustness of two state-of-the-art action recognition approaches, namely Improved Dense
Trajectories [32] and Convolutional Two-Stream Network Fusion [8], to changes in temporal bounds. We
demonstrate that the recognition rate drops by 2-10%
when temporal bounds are modified albeit within an
Intersection-over-Union of more than 0.5;
• Propose, inspired by studies in Psychology, the Rubi-

2886

