Learning Dense Facial Correspondences in Unconstrained Images
Ronald Yu * 1,3 , Shunsuke Saito †1,3 , Haoxiang Li ‡2 , Duygu Ceylan §2 , and Hao Li¶1,3,4
1

University of Southern California
2
Adobe Research
3
Pinscreen
4
USC Institute for Creative Technologies

Abstract
We present a minimalistic but effective neural network
that computes dense facial correspondences in highly unconstrained RGB images. Our network learns a perpixel flow and a matchability mask between 2D input photographs of a person and the projection of a textured 3D
face model. To train such a network, we generate a massive
dataset of synthetic faces with dense labels using renderings
of a morphable face model with variations in pose, expressions, lighting, and occlusions. We found that a training
refinement using real photographs is required to drastically
improve the ability to handle real images. When combined
with a facial detection and 3D face fitting step, we show that
our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art face alignment methods in terms of accuracy and speed. By directly
estimating dense correspondences, we do not rely on the
full visibility of sparse facial landmarks and are not limited to the model space of regression-based approaches. We
also assess our method on video frames and demonstrate
successful per-frame processing under extreme pose variations, occlusions, and lighting conditions. Compared to
existing 3D facial tracking techniques, our fitting does not
rely on previous frames or frontal facial initialization and is
robust to imperfect face detections.

1. Introduction
By introducing 3D facial alignment techniques that can
process images in the wild, it is possible to improve the
performance of facial recognition methods [8, 44, 16, 24];
compelling 3D face models of a person can be generated
for gaming and virtual reality applications [7, 26, 37, 14,
50, 43]; and an accurate tracking model can be initial* ronaldyu@usc.edu
† shunsuke.saito16@gmail.com
‡ haoxli@adobe.com
§ ceylan@adobe.com
¶ hao@hao-li.com

ized for real-time facial performance capture and animation [52, 12, 55, 49]. Most of the techniques rely on a robust
detection of sparse facial landmarks (eyes, nose, lips, etc.)
and tend to perform best when most features are visible,
front-facing, and free from occlusions or challenging lighting conditions. In many applications, such as video facial
analytics or driver attention monitoring, these assumptions
do not hold since the subjects are recorded in a fully unconstrained environment.
With the recent advancement of deep learning techniques, highly robust regression methods have emerged that
can successfully fit a 3D face model for extremely difficult
cases, such as side views of a face or occlusions by hair.
State-of-the-art methods are based on regression [68, 31]
and directly regress the shape parameters of a 3D morphable
model (3DMM) [7] and expression coefficients [13] from
an image using cascaded network structures. While achieving impressive accuracies on several challenging benchmark datasets, they still tend to perform poorly in extreme
real-case scenarios, as demonstrated in this paper. Not only
is such approach limited to variations defined by the face
model space, but its performance relies on a perfectly tight
facial bounding box detection. Despite significant progress,
even the cutting edge face detectors [25] cannot guarantee a
clean face localization and cropping for extreme images.
Instead of a regression method, we propose an alternative
deep learning approach that estimates dense pixel-wise correspondences between the input image and a 3DMM model
along with a matchability mask, which defines which pixels belong to the face and have valid correspondences. We
perform dense correspondence estimation by predicting a
per-pixel 2D flow vector between the input image and a
synthetic rendering of a 3DMM. Once the correspondences
are established, we fit a 3DMM to the input using available correspondences. Compared to sparse landmark detection techniques, dense correspondences provide more robust constraints, since any part of the face can be used for
14723

