On-Demand Learning for Deep Image Restoration
Ruohan Gao and Kristen Grauman
University of Texas at Austin
{rhgao,grauman}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
While machine learning approaches to image restoration offer great promise, current methods risk training models fixated on performing well only for image corruption of
a particular level of difficulty—such as a certain level of
noise or blur. First, we examine the weakness of conventional “fixated” models and demonstrate that training general models to handle arbitrary levels of corruption is indeed non-trivial. Then, we propose an on-demand learning
algorithm for training image restoration models with deep
convolutional neural networks. The main idea is to exploit
a feedback mechanism to self-generate training instances
where they are needed most, thereby learning models that
can generalize across difficulty levels. On four restoration tasks—image inpainting, pixel interpolation, image deblurring, and image denoising—and three diverse datasets,
our approach consistently outperforms both the status quo
training procedure and curriculum learning alternatives.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional networks [21, 36, 14] have swept the
field of computer vision and have produced stellar results on
various recognition benchmarks in the past several years.
Recently, deep learning methods are also becoming a popular choice to solve low-level vision tasks in image restoration, with exciting results [8, 27, 23, 44, 6, 17, 31, 43].
Restoration tasks such as image super-resolution, inpainting, deconvolution, matting, and colorization have a wide
range of compelling applications. For example, deblurring
techniques can mitigate motion blur in photos, and denoising methods can recover images corrupted by sensor noise.
A learning-based approach to image restoration enjoys
the convenience of being able to self-generate training instances purely based on the original real images. Whereas
training an object recognition system entails collecting images manually labeled with object categories by human annotators, an image restoration system can be trained with
arbitrary, synthetically corrupted images. The original image itself is the ground-truth the system learns to recover.
While existing methods take advantage of this conve-

Figure 1. Illustration of four image restoration tasks: image inpainting, pixel interpolation, image deblurring, and image denoising. Each task exhibits increasing difficulty based on size of inpainting area, percentage of deleted pixels, degree of blurriness,
and severity of noise. Our work aims to train all-rounder models
that perform well across the spectrum of difficulty for each task.

nience, they typically do so in a problematic way. Image
corruption exists in various degrees of severity, and so in
real-world applications the difficulty of restoring images
will also vary significantly. For example, as shown in Fig. 1,
an inpainter may face images with varying sizes of missing content, and a deblurring system may encounter varying levels of blur. Intuitively, the more missing pixels or the
more severe the blur, the more difficult the restoration task.
However, the norm in existing deep learning methods is
to train a model that succeeds at restoring images exhibiting a particular level of corruption difficulty. In particular, existing systems self-generate training instances with
a manually fixed hyper-parameter that controls the degree
of corruption—a fixed inpainting size [31, 43], a fixed percentage of corrupted pixels [43, 27], or a fixed level of white
Gaussian noise [27, 41, 16, 3]. The implicit assumption is
that at test time, either i) corruption will be limited to that
same difficulty, or ii) some other process, e.g., [26, 28, 4],
will estimate the difficulty level before passing the image to

1086

