Transformed Low-rank Model for Line Pattern Noise Removal
Yi Chang, Luxin Yan*, Sheng Zhong
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing
School of Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
{yichang, yanluxin, zhongsheng}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of line pattern noise
removal from a single image, such as rain streak, hyperspectral stripe and so on. Most of the previous methods
model the line pattern noise in original image domain,
which fail to explicitly exploit the directional characteristic,
thus resulting in a redundant subspace with poor representation ability for those line pattern noise. To achieve a compact subspace for the line pattern structure, in this work, we
incorporate a transformation into the image decomposition
model so that maps the input image to a domain where the
line pattern appearance has an extremely distinct low-rank
structure, which naturally allows us to enforce a low-rank
prior to extract the line pattern streak/stripe from the noisy
image. Moreover, the random noise is usually mixed up with
the line pattern noise, which makes the challenging problem much more difficult. While previous methods resort to
the spectral or temporal correlation of the multi-images, we
give a detailed analysis between the noisy and clean image
in both local gradient and nonlocal domain, and propose
a compositional directional total variational and low-rank
prior for the image layer, thus to simultaneously accommodate both types of noise. The proposed method has been
evaluated on two different tasks, including remote sensing
image mixed random-stripe noise removal and rain streak
removal, all of which obtain very impressive performances.

1. Introduction
The random noise removal problem has attracted much
of the attention and progressed rapidly during the past
decades [1, 26, 10, 39, 2, 15, 29, 9, 33, 38, 7]. By contrast,
the field of line pattern structural noise removal problem
has received less attention as of today despite their abundant application in the real world, such as the stripe noise
in remote sensing images [27, 5, 37, 4, 32], the rain streak
in natural images [14, 19, 8, 23, 21], the nonuniformity in
images acquired by focal plane arrays [25], ringing artifact

Figure 1. An example on the challenging issue: line pattern noise
with random noise removal via a single image. The left is the
degraded image, the right shows the proposed result with noisefree background and clear texture.

in medical images [11, 17], to name a few. Unfortunately,
these different communities have seldom exchanged ideas
with each other. In this work, we summarise them as the
line pattern noise removal problem, and make an attempt to
settle this problem as well as the random noise. Figure 1
shows one example of a georeference MODIS image contaminated with mixed stripe and random noise, where our
method is able to recover the clean background and texture
in single image.
Given a single line pattern noisy image, traditional methods solve this issue via the image denoising strategy by enforcing various prior knowledge on the image, ignoring to
model the line pattern noise in a principal manner [18, 20].
Consequently, the resulting image is either over-smooth or
containing residual line pattern noise. Another research
direction utilizes the image decomposition framework by
treating the image component and line pattern structural
noise component equally [19, 23, 21, 6]. Such a simple
improvement gives this problem a meaningful interpreta4321
1726

