PPR-FCN: Weakly Supervised Visual Relation Detection via Parallel Pairwise
R-FCN
Hanwang Zhang† , Zawlin Kyaw‡ , Jinyang Yu† , Shih-Fu Chang†
†
Columbia University, ‡ National University of Singapore
{hanwangzhang, kzl.zawlin, yjy941124}@gmail.com; shih.fu.chang@columbia.edu
Abstract
We aim to tackle a novel vision task called Weakly
Supervised Visual Relation Detection (WSVRD) to detect
“subject-predicate-object” relations in an image with object relation groundtruths available only at the image level.
This is motivated by the fact that it is extremely expensive to
label the combinatorial relations between objects at the instance level. Compared to the extensively studied problem,
Weakly Supervised Object Detection (WSOD), WSVRD is
more challenging as it needs to examine a large set of regions pairs, which is computationally prohibitive and more
likely stuck in a local optimal solution such as those involving wrong spatial context. To this end, we present a
Parallel, Pairwise Region-based, Fully Convolutional Network (PPR-FCN) for WSVRD. It uses a parallel FCN architecture that simultaneously performs pair selection and
classification of single regions and region pairs for object
and relation detection, while sharing almost all computation shared over the entire image. In particular, we propose
a novel position-role-sensitive score map with pairwise RoI
pooling to efficiently capture the crucial context associated
with a pair of objects. We demonstrate the superiority of
PPR-FCN over all baselines in solving the WSVRD challenge by using results of extensive experiments over two visual relation benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Visual relation detection (VRD) aims to detect objects
and predict their relationships in an image, especially
subject-predicate-object triplets like personhold-ball (verb), dog-on-sofa (spatial), car-withwheel (preposition), and person1-taller-person2
(comparative) [20]. As an intermediate task between lowlevel object detection [23] and high-level natural language
modeling [42], VRD has received increasing attention recently, in areas of new benchmarks [29, 20], algorithms [24,
48, 7, 49], and visual reasoning [17, 15, 44]. VRD is ex-

Ski
Under
Person

Image-level
Annotation

Region
Proposals

Person
NextTo
Person

WSOD

Input Image

WSOD
Sub./Obj.

WSPP
Predicate

WSPP

Person
Wear
Helmet

WSVRD Training

WSVRD Testing

Figure 1. The illustration of WSVRD training and testing stages. It
includes weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) and weakly
supervised predicate prediction (WSPP). Note that the key difference from WSOD is that WSVRD requires pairwise region modeling for many weakly labeled region pairs in WSPP.

pected to become an important building block for the connection between vision and language.
Like any other visual detection task, VRD is also datahungry. However, labeling high-quality relation triplets is
much more expensive than objects as it requires the tedious inspection of a combinatorial number of object interactions. On the other hand, collecting image-level relation annotation is relatively easier. For example, there are
abundant image-caption data [20, 26] and Web image-text
pairs [40], where image-level relation descriptions can be
automatically extracted from the text using state-of-the-art
text parsers [37, 1]. Therefore, to make VRD of practical
use at a large scale, it is necessary to study the novel and
challenging task: weakly supervised visual relation detection (WSVRD), with triplet annotation available only at the
image level.
Figure 1 shows the WSVRD problem studied in this paper. As there are no instance-level object annotations (e.g.,
bounding boxes), we first exploit region proposal generators [50, 41] for a set of candidate proposals (or RoIs) and
then predict their object classes. This step is also known
as Weakly Supervised Object Detection (WSOD) [3, 6].
Then, as the image-level relation does not specify which
pairs of objects are related, it exhaustively enumerates every RoI pairs as candidate subject-object pairs for
predicate prediction (e.g., relationships), which results
in that WSVRD is more challenging than WSOD. More
specifically, first, as the spatial context annotation of pairwise regions is missing, we should carefully model the spa14233

