Supervision by Fusion: Towards Unsupervised Learning of
Deep Salient Object Detector
Dingwen Zhang, Junwei Han∗, Yu Zhang
Northwestern Polytechnical University
{zhangdingwen2006yyy,junweihan2010}@gmail.com,zhangyuygss@mail.nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
In light of the powerful learning capability of deep neural networks (DNNs), deep (convolutional) models have
been built in recent years to address the task of salient object detection. Although training such deep saliency models
can significantly improve the detection performance, it requires large-scale manual supervision in the form of pixellevel human annotation, which is highly labor-intensive and
time-consuming. To address this problem, this paper makes
the earliest effort to train a deep salient object detector
without using any human annotation. The key insight is
“supervision by fusion”, i.e., generating useful supervisory signals from the fusion process of weak but fast unsupervised saliency models. Based on this insight, we combine an
intra-image fusion stream and a inter-image fusion stream
in the proposed framework to generate the learning curriculum and pseudo ground-truth for supervising the training
of the deep salient object detector. Comprehensive experiments on four benchmark datasets demonstrate that our
method can approach the same network trained with full
supervision (within 2-5% performance gap) and, more encouragingly, even outperform a number of fully supervised
state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
With the goal of discovering the object regions that can
attract human visual attention in images, salient object detection has been gaining intensive research interest in recent years. Due to its capability in automatically revealing important and informative parts in each given image, it
has been widely applied in image retrieval [7], object detection [43], event detection [3, 40], and so on.

1.1. Previous Works
The salient object detection approaches proposed in early ages mainly explored image saliency by evaluating the
∗ Corresponding author.

distinctiveness of each image region or image pixel with
respect to the corresponding local context or global image
scene [1, 13, 5, 8, 10]. For example, Achanta et al. [1]
proposed to estimate center-surround contrast based on color and luminance features in the frequency domain. Klein et al. [13] proposed to calculate the Kullback-LeiblerDivergence (KLD) between the visual feature distribution
at a center location and the surround context. In [5], Cheng
et al. calculated the global contrast on the superpixel level
where each superpixel’s contrast is measured by a weighted
integration of the differences between itself and all other superpixels in the image. These approaches can usually perform with little time cost. However, they generally suffer
from the bottleneck in detection accuracy.
More recently, in light of the cutting edge learning capability of deep neural networks (DNNs), researchers have investigated several deep (convolutional) models for addressing the task of salient object detection [17, 32, 46, 25, 4, 16].
These approaches can usually obtain more promising performance due to the informative feature representation and
hidden patterns learnt from the large-scale annotated training data. Specifically, Wang et al. [32] adopted a convolutional neural network (CNN) to predict saliency scores for
each pixel in local context firstly and then refined the saliency score for each object proposal over the global view. Similarly, Zhao et al. [46] proposed a multi-context deep learning framework for salient object detection, which jointly
modeled global context and local context in a unified framework. In [25], a coarse global prediction was generated by
learning the global structured saliency cues firstly and then
a hierarchical recurrent convolutional neural network was
adopted to progressively integrate local context details.

1.2. Motivation and Contributions
Studies in this field have demonstrated that the DNNbased salient object detectors are highly effective and can
achieve top results on modern benchmark datasets (see
Fig. 1). However, all current DNN-based salient object detectors require the large-scale manual supervision in
the form of pixel-level human annotation. Collecting such
14048

