Learning Dynamic Siamese Network for Visual Object Tracking
Qing Guo1,3 , Wei Feng1,3∗, Ce Zhou1,3 , Rui Huang1,3,5 , Liang Wan2,3 , Song Wang1,3,4
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
School of Computer Software, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
3
Key Research Center for Surface Monitoring and Analysis of Cultural Relics, SACH, China
4
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208, USA
5
School of Computer Science and Technology, Civil Aviation University of China
{tsingqguo,wfeng,zhouce,ruihuang,lwan}@tju.edu.cn, songwang@cec.sc.edu

Abstract
How to effectively learn temporal variation of target
appearance, to exclude the interference of cluttered background, while maintaining real-time response, is an essential problem of visual object tracking. Recently, Siamese
networks have shown great potentials of matching based
trackers in achieving balanced accuracy and beyond realtime speed. However, they still have a big gap to classification & updating based trackers in tolerating the temporal
changes of objects and imaging conditions. In this paper,
we propose dynamic Siamese network, via a fast transformation learning model that enables effective online learning of target appearance variation and background suppression from previous frames. We then present elementwise
multi-layer fusion to adaptively integrate the network outputs using multi-level deep features. Unlike state-of-theart trackers, our approach allows the usage of any feasible
generally- or particularly-trained features, such as SiamFC
and VGG. More importantly, the proposed dynamic Siamese
network can be jointly trained as a whole directly on the labeled video sequences, thus can take full advantage of the
rich spatial temporal information of moving objects. As a
result, our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance
on OTB-2013 and VOT-2015 benchmarks, while exhibits
superiorly balanced accuracy and real-time response over
state-of-the-art competitors.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking aims to track an arbitrary temporallychanging object, with the target being only specified at
the first frame. Since potential changes of the object and
its context are basically unknown and constantly happen,
∗ Corresponding author. Tel: (+86)-22-27406538. This work is supported by NSFC 61671325, 61572354, 61672376.

Figure 1. Two tracking examples of state-of-the-art matching
based trackers (GOTURN [15] and SiamFC [2]), deep classification & updating based trackers (MDNet [22] and DeepSRDCF [6]), and the proposed approach (DSiam). The intersection over union (IoU) between ground truth and tracking result of
each tracker on each frame is shown. Previous two matching based
methods easily miss the object when similar objects coexist (the
1st case) or target changes significantly (the 2nd case). The table
shows the average tracking speed, measured on NVIDIA TITAN
X platform, and accuracy, AUC score, on OTB-2013 dataset [30],
of all compared trackers. R-MDNet indicates the retrained MDNet
on ILSVRC dataset [23]. See text for more details.

this problem, being highly useful for many computer vision
tasks, such as surveillance, video analysis and augmented
11763

