Deep Determinantal Point Process for Large-Scale Multi-Label Classification
Pengtao Xie*† , Ruslan Salakhutdinov* , Luntian Mou§ and Eric P. Xing†
*
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
†
Petuum Inc.
§
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Engineering, Beijing University of Technology, China
{pengtaox,rsalakhu}@cs.cmu.edu, ltmou@bjut.edu.cn, eric.xing@petuum.com
Abstract
We study large-scale multi-label classification (MLC) on
two recently released datasets: Youtube-8M and Open Images that contain millions of data instances and thousands
of classes. The unprecedented problem scale poses great
challenges for MLC. First, finding out the correct label
subset out of exponentially many choices incurs substantial ambiguity and uncertainty. Second, the large data-size
and class-size entail considerable computational cost. To
address the first challenge, we investigate two strategies:
capturing label-correlations from the training data and incorporating label co-occurrence relations obtained from external knowledge, which effectively eliminate semantically
inconsistent labels and provide contextual clues to differentiate visually ambiguous labels. Specifically, we propose a Deep Determinantal Point Process (DDPP) model
which seamlessly integrates a DPP with deep neural networks (DNNs) and supports end-to-end multi-label learning and deep representation learning. The DPP is able to
capture label-correlations of any order with a polynomial
computational cost, while the DNNs learn hierarchical features of images/videos and capture the dependency between
input data and labels. To incorporate external knowledge
about label co-occurrence relations, we impose relational
regularization over the kernel matrix in DDPP. To address
the second challenge, we study an efficient low-rank kernel
learning algorithm based on inducing point methods. Experiments on the two datasets demonstrate the efficacy and
efficiency of the proposed methods.

1. Introduction
Recently two large-scale multi-label datasets have been
released: YouTube-8M [1] and Open Images [32]. The
YouTube-8M dataset contains about 8 million videos, each
associated with multiple labels coming from 4800 classes.
These videos are 0.5 million hours long and contain 1.9 billion frames. The Open Images dataset contains about 9

Selected Labels

DDPP
Label Embeddings
Sky
Tiger
Ocean

Sky Ocean Sun
Cloud People

Must/cannot Links
Sky Cloud

……

Table Sofa
Tiger Ocean

Figure 1. DDPP for multi-label classification. The inputs of DDPP include the image (or video), the embedding vectors of labels and (optional)
must/cannot-links regarding label co-occurrence, and the output is a subset
of selected labels. DDPP captures the correlation among labels using DPP,
characterizes the dependency between the image and labels using DNN,
and incorporates the must/cannot-links via relational regularization.

million images, each annotated with multiple class labels.
The total number of unique labels is 6012. The scale of
these two datasets is much larger than previous multi-label
datasets such as NUS-WIDE [12], PASCAL VOC1 , SUN
attributes [42], Mediamill2 , in terms of both the number of
data instances and the number of classes, bringing in great
challenges for multi-label classification (MLC). For each
data instance x, a subset of labels S ⊆ Y = {1, · · · , K}
are to be selected to annotate x, where S has exponentially
many (2K ) choices. The number (K) of unique labels is
4800 in Youtube-8M and 6012 in Open Images, which result in a tremendous combinatorial search space. Finding
out the correct label-subset S ∗ in this space requires not
only efficient algorithms that can tackle this NP-hard problem in polynomial time, but also modeling techniques that
can effectively resolve the ambiguity and uncertainty when
picking up S ∗ from 2K choices.
In this paper, we aim at addressing these challenges. To
correctly hit S ∗ from 2K candidates, we investigate two
strategies: (1) capturing high-order correlations among labels from the training data; (2) incorporating external prior
knowledge about label co-occurrence relations. Both strategies aim at ruling out candidate subset S where the labels
are semantically and contextually inconsistent, thus effec1 http://host.robots.ox.ac.uk/pascal/VOC/voc2012/
2 http://mulan.sourceforge.net/datasets-mlc.html

1473

