Catadioptric HyperSpectral Light Field Imaging
Yujia Xue1
1

Kang Zhu2,3

Qiang Fu 2
2

Plex-VR Inc.

yujia.xue@plex-vr.com
3

Xilin Chen3

Jingyi Yu1,2

ShanghaiTech University

{zhukang,fuqiang,yujingyi}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
xlchen@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
The complete plenoptic function records radiance of rays
from every location, at every angle, for every wavelength
and at every time. The signal is multi-dimensional and has
long relied on multi-modal sensing such as hybrid light field
camera arrays. In this paper, we present a single camera hyperspectral light field imaging solution that we call
Snapshot Plenoptic Imager (SPI). SPI uses spectral coded
catadioptric mirror arrays for simultaneously acquiring the
spatial, angular and spectral dimensions. We further apply
a learning-based approach to improve the spectral resolution from very few measurements. Specifically, we demonstrate and then employ a new spectral sparsity prior that
allows the hyperspectral profiles to be sparsely represented
under a pre-trained dictionary. Comprehensive experiments on synthetic and real data show that our technique
is effective, reliable, and accurate. In particular, we are
able to produce the first wide FoV multi-spectral light field
database.

1. Introduction
The complete plenoptic function records radiance of rays
from every location, at every angle, for every wavelength
and at every time. The function hence is 6D: 2D in position
(spatial), 2D in direction (angular), 1D in spectrum (spectral), and 1D in time (temporal). Existing techniques have
been focused on reconstructing a subset of these dimensions: a static camera for spatial, a video camera for spatial
and temporal, a light field camera for spatial and angular,
and imaging spectrometer for spatial and spectral. Simultaneously capturing multiple dimensions of the plenoptic
function is challenging and successful solutions have generally adopted a hybrid sensing approach: cameras of different modalities are integrated and tailored algorithms are
then employed for fusing different dimensions.
A notable example is the multispectral light field cam-

Figure 1. Our Snapshot Plenoptic Imager (SPI) combines a single
DSLR camera with an array of spectral coded catadioptric mirrors.

era array[13] where each camera is equipped with a specific
band-pass filter and image warping is used to combine the
spatial-angular and the spectral dimensions. Such a system
can efficiently capture high quality plenopic function but
the solution is cumbersome and expensive. Most recently,
[26] constructed a hybrid system composed of a commercial light field camera (Lytro) and a coded aperture spectral
imager (CASSI). This imaging system is much smaller than
camera array solution in size and potentially portable but it
requires complex optical configuration and extremely accurate calibration. In this paper, we present a novel snapshot
plenoptic imaging solution by using only a single camera.
Instead of constructing a hybrid sensor, we exploit using
catadioptric mirror arrays for simultaneously acquiring the
spatial, angular and spectral dimensions. We call Snapshot
Plenoptic Imager or SPI.
Existing catadioptric systems combine cameras with
curved mirrors and have shown promising results in broad
applications, ranging from panoramic imaging [2, 17], wide
FOV light field imaging and rendering[24] to robust volumetric reconstruction[9]. Our SPI modifies existing cata-

985

