Zero-order Reverse Filtering∗
Xin Tao1

Chao Zhou1 Xiaoyong Shen2 Jue Wang 3
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent 3 Megvii Inc.

Jiaya Jia1,2

Abstract
In this paper, we study an unconventional but practically
meaningful reversibility problem of commonly used image
filters. We broadly define filters as operations to smooth
images or to produce layers via global or local algorithms.
And we raise the intriguingly problem if they are reservable
to the status before filtering. To answer it, we present a
novel strategy to understand general filter via contraction
mappings on a metric space. A very simple yet effective
zero-order algorithm is proposed. It is able to practically
reverse most filters with low computational cost. We present
quite a few experiments in the paper and supplementary file
to thoroughly verify its performance. This method can also
be generalized to solve other inverse problems and enables
new applications.

1. Introduction
Image filtering is a fundamental building block of modern image processing and computer vision systems. Recent
advances in this field have led to new models to separate
image structure into different layers [18, 33] or to remove
unwanted image structure [10, 11, 13, 27, 29, 30] to satisfy
the need of various tasks. The success provides the community deep understanding of the capability of image filter.
In this paper, we broadly define “filter” as the operation,
in either global optimization or local aggregation way, to
smooth images considering edge preserving [4, 9, 10, 11,
13, 18, 20], texture removal [29, 33], or other properties
[3, 6, 22, 30]. Unlike other work, we aim to tackle an unconventional problem of
• removing part of or all filtering effect
• without needing to know the exact filter in prior.
We call our method Reverse Filtering or simply DeFilter.
The most related work to DeFilter is probably deconvolution [23, 26]. But this line of research is by nature different – deconvolution is to remove local linear convolution
effect, while our goal is to study the reversibility for even
∗ This work is in part supported by a grant from the Research Grants
Council of the Hong Kong SAR (project No. 413113).

(a) Input

(b) Processed

(c) Restored

Figure 1. (a) Original images. (b) Processed images by unknown
retouching and denoising algorithms. (c) Our restored images.

nonlinear/optimization based process. Another major discrepancy is that we do not need to know the exact filter form
in our method. Therefore, our solver is not related to that of
deconvolution at all.
Unique Property Addressing this DeFilter problem not
only is intellectually interesting, but also enables many
practical applications. Since our method treats the filtering process as a black box, we can use it to recover images
processed by unknown but accessible operations.
Two examples are shown in Fig. 1. In the first row, the
human face is retouched by the Microsoft Selfie App using its “Natural” mode. We have no idea how it is realized.
In the second row, noise removal (operation “denoise”) in
Photoshop Express is applied. Again, we do not know the
algorithm and its implementation details. Interestingly, our
method is still able to produce two results that are very close
to the original input before processed by the software, as
shown in Fig. 1(c). The lost patterns, i.e., freckles and wrinkles on the face and texture of flower, are mostly recovered.
To the best of our knowledge, this ability was not explored
or exhibited before in filter community.
Our Approach and Contribution Our new strategy is to
understand the filtering process in metric space where filters are considered as mappings. We provide detailed analysis and propose dividing the image metric space into two
sub ones Ω and Ω̄. In Ω, a filtering operation is strictly
1222

