3D Graph Neural Networks for RGBD Semantic Segmentation
Xiaojuan Qi† Renjie Liao‡,§ Jiaya Jia†,♭ Sanja Fidler‡ Raquel Urtasun§,‡
†
The Chinese University of Hong Kong ‡ University of Toronto
§
Uber Advanced Technologies Group ♭ Youtu Lab, Tencent
{xjqi, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

{rjliao, fidler, urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
RGBD semantic segmentation requires joint reasoning
about 2D appearance and 3D geometric information. In
this paper we propose a 3D graph neural network (3DGNN)
that builds a k-nearest neighbor graph on top of 3D point
cloud. Each node in the graph corresponds to a set of points
and is associated with a hidden representation vector initialized with an appearance feature extracted by a unary
CNN from 2D images. Relying on recurrent functions, every
node dynamically updates its hidden representation based
on the current status and incoming messages from its neighbors. This propagation model is unrolled for a certain number of time steps and the final per-node representation is
used for predicting the semantic class of each pixel. We
use back-propagation through time to train the model. Extensive experiments on NYUD2 and SUN-RGBD datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

Figure 1. 2D and 3D context. The solid lines indicate neighbors
in 3D while the dotted lines are for neighbors in 2D but not in 3D.
(a) Input image (b) 2D image projected into 3D point cloud. (c)
Prediction by the two-stream CNN with HHA encoding [29]. (d)
Our 3DGNN prediction.

1. Introduction
Advent of depth sensors makes it possible to perform
RGBD semantic segmentation along with many applications in virtual reality, robotics and human-computer interaction. Compared with the more common 2D image setting,
RGBD semantic segmentation can utilize the real-world geometric information by exploiting depth infromation. For
example, in Fig. 1(a), given the 2D image alone, the local neighborhood of the red point located on the table inevitably includes microwave and counter pixels. However,
in 3D, there is no such confusion because these points are
distant in the 3D point cloud, as shown in Fig. 1(b).
Several methods [11, 29, 21, 7] treat RGBD segmentation as a 2D segmentation problem where depth is taken as
another input image. Deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) are applied separately to the color and depth images to extract features. These methods need two CNNs,
which double computation and memory consumption. Possible errors stem from missing part of the geometric context
information since 2D pixels are associated with 3D ones in

the real world. For example, in Fig. 1(c), the two-network
model [29] classifies the table as part of the counter.
An alternative is to use 3D CNNs [37] in voxelized
3D space. This type of methods has the potential to extract more geometric information. However, since 3D point
clouds are quite sparse, effective representation learning
from such data is challenging. In addition, 3D CNNs are
computationally more expensive than their 2D version, thus
it is difficult to scale up these systems to deal with a large
number of classes. Anisotropic convolutional neural network [1, 30] provides a promising way to learn filters in
non-euclidean space for shape analysis. Yet it faces the
same difficulty of scaling-up to perform large-scale RGBD
dense semantic segmentation due to complex association of
points.
To tackle the challenges above, we propose an end-toend 3D graph neural network, which directly learns its representation from 3D points. We first cast the 2D pixels into
15199

