Dense Non-Rigid Structure-from-Motion and Shading with Unknown Albedos
Mathias Gallardo1 , Toby Collins2 and Adrien Bartoli1
1
EnCoV, IP, UMR 6602 CNRS, Université Clermont Auvergne, SIGMA, France
2
IRCAD, Strasbourg, France
Mathias.Gallardo@gmail.com, Toby.Collins@gmail.com, Adrien.Bartoli@gmail.com

Abstract
Significant progress has been recently made in NonRigid Structure-from-Motion (NRSfM). However, existing
methods do not handle poorly-textured surfaces that deform non-smoothly. These are nonetheless common occurrence in real-world applications. An important unanswered
question is whether shading can be used to robustly handle these cases. Shading is complementary to motion because it constrains reconstruction densely at textureless regions, and has been used in several other reconstruction
problems. The challenge we face is to simultaneously and
densely estimate non-smooth, non-rigid shape from each
image together with non-smooth, spatially-varying surface
albedo (which is required to use shading). We tackle this
using an energy-based formulation that combines a physical, discontinuity-preserving deformation prior with motion, shading and contour information. This is a largescale, highly non-convex optimization problem, and we propose a cascaded optimization that converges well without
an initial estimate. Our approach works on both unorganized and organized small-sized image sets, and has been
empirically validated on four real-world datasets for which
all state-of-the-art approaches fail.

1. Introduction
NRSfM aims to recover the 3D shapes of an object under deformation from apparant motion in a set of 2D images, and is a fundamental and open computer vision problem. NRSfM is challenging because we do not assume any
knowledge of the object’s 3D shape a priori. We also do not
assume the object is rigid in some of the images, which prevents initializing the reconstruction using rigid Structurefrom-Motion (SfM). NRSfM differs from the related and
easier problem of template-based 3D reconstruction (also
called Shape-from-Template (SfT)), where the object’s 3D
shape is known in a fixed reference pose. NRSfM is often
called template-free reconstruction to make a clear distinction, with all input data coming from 2D images.

NRSfM methods have progressed significantly [30, 32,
21, 33, 7, 26], however none of these can handle poorlytextured surfaces and non-smooth deformations such as
folds or creases. Firstly, most methods use motion from
feature correspondences, which work well only for denselytextured objects with many discriminative features. This is
not common in most real practical applications, particularly
with man-made objects that usually have very weak texture. These feature-based methods can be divided into two
types: those which reconstruct only the features (usually
called sparse reconstructions) [30, 32, 21, 33, 7, 8, 26], and
those which reconstruct the object’s surface densely (usually called dense reconstructions) [19]. In most applications a dense reconstruction is required. However it is difficult to achieve high-accuracy using feature-based matching,
because they only give sparse motion information. Typically non-smooth deformations such as creases and folds
can never be accurately reconstructed. For this reason,
most of NRSfM methods that densely reconstruct surfaces
from feature matches have only been demonstrated on very
smooth and well-textured objects such as bending sheets of
paper. A direct approach to NRSfM has been recently proposed [34], where dense reconstruction is performed using
motion information directly at the pixel level. This works
by jointly reconstructing the surface and registering it to
each image through intensity-based matching. It was only
shown to work on weakly textured surfaces that deform
very smoothly. Similarly to feature-based reconstruction,
the reason is because motion information is fundamentally
insufficient to reconstruct textureless surface regions undergoing non-smooth deformations.
Our goal is to solve NRSfM densely by combining motion, shading and a generic physical deformation model that
can accurately represent non-smooth deformations. We refer to this problem as NRSfMS (Non-Rigid Structure-fromMotion and Shading). We are specifically interested in solving this problem for objects with unknown spatially-varying
albedo, which is the situation in most practical cases. This
is because albedos cannot be inferred directly from 2D images of a deforming object. However we must know albedos
4321
3884

