Monocular Free-head 3D Gaze Tracking
with Deep Learning and Geometry Constraints
Haoping Deng∗
Nanjing University

Wangjiang Zhu†
Tsinghua University

hoping tang@outlook.com

wangjiang88119@gmail.com

Abstract

as driver monitoring [41, 4, 12, 50], advertising [2, 52] and
surveillance [28].
Some works have extended fixed-head solutions to allow
for a small range of head movements by adding compensations [18, 20], but they cannot handle large head movements. Recent works [38, 51, 13] learned gaze as a joint
function of head and eye features. However, their methods ignored the deterministic geometric constraints among
head pose, eyeball movement and gaze vector, and forced
this relationship to be learned from data, making it prone to
overfitting the head-gaze correlation in training set.
In this work, we propose to separately model head pose
and eyeball movement with two CNN networks, and then
connect them with a “gaze transform layer”. This decomposition avoids head-gaze correlation overfitting and makes
it possible to take advantage of existing data for other tasks.
For example, we can use head pose datasets to aid our head
pose estimation and use fixed-head gaze tracking datasets
for our eye model training.
For head pose estimation, we find that facial landmark
based methods are ambiguous at both the within-subject
level (as sensitive to facial expression) and the cross-subject
level (as inter-person differences). So we propose to regress
head poses directly from head image patches.
In order to apply stronger supervision to network training, we further propose a coarse-to-fine two-step training
strategy which first trains separate models with coarse head
pose and eyeball movement labels, then does joint training with accurate gaze labels. During the second step, the
head pose and eyeball movement models adjust slightly to
achieve cross-subject consistent head pose while keeping
the composed gaze vector fixed.
To achieve robust cross-subject predictions in the wild,
we need a large and diverse training set. In this work, we
build a 200-subjects dataset with full coverage of different
head poses and eyeball movements, various lighting conditions, and includes glasses occlusions and reflections.
Our contributions can by summarized as follows: 1). We
analyze head-gaze correlation overfitting and head pose ambiguity issues which are ignored in previous works [38, 51,

Free-head 3D gaze tracking outputs both the eye location
and the gaze vector in 3D space, and it has wide applications in scenarios such as driver monitoring, advertisement
analysis and surveillance. A reliable and low-cost monocular solution is critical for pervasive usage in these areas.
Noticing that a gaze vector is a composition of head pose
and eyeball movement in a geometrically deterministic way,
we propose a novel gaze transform layer to connect separate head pose and eyeball movement models. The proposed
decomposition does not suffer from head-gaze correlation
overfitting and makes it possible to use datasets existing for
other tasks. To add stronger supervision for better network
training, we propose a two-step training strategy, which first
trains sub-tasks with rough labels and then jointly trains
with accurate gaze labels. To enable good cross-subject
performance under various conditions, we collect a large
dataset which has full coverage of head poses and eyeball
movements, contains 200 subjects, and has diverse illumination conditions.
Our deep solution achieves state-of-the-art gaze tracking accuracy, reaching 5.6◦ cross-subject prediction error
using a small network running at 1000 fps on a single CPU
(excluding face alignment time) and 4.3◦ cross-subject error with a deeper network.

1. Introduction
Gaze tracking has long been used in medical diagnoses [8], psychological studies [31] and human-computer
interaction [11, 21, 27]. Recently, gaze tracking has also
been applied to VR/AR devices for controlling [29] and
foveated rendering [30]. Most existing gaze tracking systems need fixed head or head mounted devices. In fact, freehead 3D gaze tracking has wider applications in areas such
∗ This work was done when Haoping Deng was an intern at SenseTime.
† This work was done when Wangjiang Zhu worked as the gaze project
leader at SenseTime.

13143

