Efficient Algorithms for Moral Lineage Tracing
Markus Rempfler1∗, Jan-Hendrik Lange2∗, Florian Jug3 , Corinna Blasse3 , Eugene W. Myers3 ,
Bjoern H. Menze1 and Bjoern Andres2
1

Institute for Advanced Study & Department of Informatics, Technical University of Munich
2
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken
3
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden

Abstract
Lineage tracing, the joint segmentation and tracking of
living cells as they move and divide in a sequence of light
microscopy images, is a challenging task. Jug et al. [21]
have proposed a mathematical abstraction of this task, the
moral lineage tracing problem (MLTP), whose feasible solutions define both a segmentation of every image and a lineage forest of cells. Their branch-and-cut algorithm, however, is prone to many cuts and slow convergence for large
instances. To address this problem, we make three contributions: (i) we devise the first efficient primal feasible local
search algorithms for the MLTP, (ii) we improve the branchand-cut algorithm by separating tighter cutting planes and
by incorporating our primal algorithms, (iii) we show in experiments that our algorithms find accurate solutions on the
problem instances of Jug et al. and scale to larger instances,
leveraging moral lineage tracing to practical significance.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in microscopy have enabled biologists
to observe organisms on a cellular level with higher spatiotemporal resolution than before [12, 16, 44]. Analysis of
such microscopy sequences is key to several open questions
in biology, including embryonic development of complex
organisms [25, 26], tissue formation [17] or the understanding of metastatic behavior of tumor cells [50]. However,
to get from a sequence of raw microscopy images to biologically or clinically relevant quantities, such as cell motility, migration patterns and differentiation schedules, robust
methods for cell lineage tracing are required and have therefore received considerable attention [2, 3, 13, 32, 33, 34].
Cell lineage tracing is typically considered a two step
problem: In the first step, individual cells are detected and
∗ Authors contributed equally.

Figure 1. Depicted above is a lineage forest of cells from a sequence of microscopy images. The first image of the sequence
is shown on the left. The last image is shown on the right. Cell
divisions are depicted in black.

segmented in every image. Then, in the second step, individual cells are tracked over time and, in case of a cell
division, linked to their ancestor cell, to finally arrive at the
lineage forest of all cells (Fig. 1). The tracking subproblem
is complicated by cells that enter or leave the field of view,
or low temporal resolution that allows large displacements
or even multiple consecutive divisions within one time step.
In addition to this, mistakes made in the first step, leading
to over- or undersegmentation of the cells, propagate into
the resulting lineage forest and cause spurious divisions or
missing branches, respectively. The tracking subproblem is
closely related to multi-target tracking [11, 42, 47, 20, 43]
or reconstruction of tree-like structures [15, 39, 37, 45, 46].
It has been cast in the form of different optimization problems [22, 24, 36, 40, 41] that can deal with some of the
mentioned difficulties, e.g., by selecting from multiple segmentation hypotheses [40, 41].
Jug et al. [21], on the other hand, have proposed a rigorous mathematical abstraction of the joint problem which
they call the moral lineage tracing problem (MLTP). It is a
hybrid of the minimum cost multicut problem (MCMCP),
which has been studied extensively for image decompo14695

