Recurrent Color Constancy
Yanlin Qian1 , Ke Chen1,∗ , Jarno Nikkanen2 , Joni-Kristian Kämäräinen1 , Jiri Matas1,3
1
Laboratory of Signal Processing, Tampere University of Technology
2
Intel Finland
3
Center for Machine Perception, Czech Technical University in Prague

Abstract
We introduce a novel formulation of temporal color constancy which considers multiple frames preceding the frame
for which illumination is estimated. We propose an endto-end trainable recurrent color constancy network – the
RCC-Net – which exploits convolutional LSTMs and a simulated sequence to learn compositional representations in
space and time. We use a standard single frame color
constancy benchmark, the SFU Gray Ball Dataset, which
can be adapted to a temporal setting. Extensive experiments show that the proposed method consistently outperforms single-frame state-of-the-art methods and their temporal variants.

1. Introduction
The human visual system perceives colors of objects independently of the incident illumination under varying conditions. The phenomenon is known as color constancy.
A pre-processing step compensating effects of changing
illumination is necessary for consumer photos to look natural. It is also beneficial in a number of computer vision and
graphical applications requiring intrinsic color information
e.g. fine-grained classification, semantic segmentation and
scene rendering. Consequently, illumination color compensation, known as the automatic white balancing, has become
an essential component of the pipeline for processing color
images [31].
The color constancy problem on still images has been
investigated for decades [1, 7, 9, 13, 18, 39]. Assuming that
the illumination is identical for all pixels in an image, the
problem can be expressed as:
ĉ = f (I)

(1)

where function f (·) is the estimator of the groundtruth illumination vector cgt for a single image I. With estimated
∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. Color correction by temporal methods on image It using five-frame sequences with (c)(d) and without (a)(b) significant
pictorial content change, with (d) and without (a)(b)(c) significant illumination color change. RCC-Net is the proposed method.
T.GM-edge and T.GP refer to temporal extensions of the standard
Gamut-based [19] and Gray Pixel [44] methods, respectively. Illumination color is visible on the ball in the bottom right corner.
The angular error is shown in the bottom left corner of each colorcorrected image. The images are from the SFU Gray Ball linear
dataset, i.e. without gamma correction and thus appear to have
unusual color composition.

illumination ĉ, chromatic adaption [14] is then adopted to
correct color to obtain an illumination-independent image.
With the rapid development of both cameras and storage devices, taking videos becomes more and more popular

5458

