Deep Adaptive Image Clustering
Jianlong Chang1,2
Lingfeng Wang1
Gaofeng Meng1
Shiming Xiang1
Chunhong Pan1
1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Computer and Control Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{jianlong.chang, lfwang, gfmeng, smxiang, chpan}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Image clustering is a crucial but challenging task in machine learning and computer vision. Existing methods often
ignore the combination between feature learning and clustering. To tackle this problem, we propose Deep Adaptive
Clustering (DAC) that recasts the clustering problem into a
binary pairwise-classification framework to judge whether
pairs of images belong to the same clusters. In DAC, the
similarities are calculated as the cosine distance between
label features of images which are generated by a deep convolutional network (ConvNet). By introducing a constraint
into DAC, the learned label features tend to be one-hot vectors that can be utilized for clustering images. The main
challenge is that the ground-truth similarities are unknown
in image clustering. We handle this issue by presenting
an alternating iterative Adaptive Learning algorithm where
each iteration alternately selects labeled samples and trains
the ConvNet. Conclusively, images are automatically clustered based on the label features. Experimental results show
that DAC achieves state-of-the-art performance on five popular datasets, e.g., yielding 97.75% clustering accuracy on
MNIST, 52.18% on CIFAR-10 and 46.99% on STL-10.

1. Introduction
Image clustering is an essential data analysis tool in machine learning and computer vision. Many applications
such as content-based image annotation [19, 20, 22, 23] and
image retrieval [12, 24, 34] can be viewed as different instances of image clustering. Technically, image clustering
is the process of grouping images into clusters such that the
images within the same clusters are similar to each other,
while those in different clusters are dissimilar.
In the literature, much research has been dedicated to
image clustering [9, 29, 32, 37, 38]. Traditionally, various
clustering methods have been explored, including Kmeans
[32], agglomerative clustering [9], and so on. In spite of
their success in data clustering, traditional methods depend
on predefined distance metrics which are difficult to identify

Initial stage

Intermediate stage

Final stage

Figure 1. Clustering results on the MNIST [16] test set. Different colors represent different clusters, respectively. For clarity, we
map the learned label features to the regular decagon in the twodimensional space. The ten vertexes correspond to the ten one-hot
vectors in the ten-dimensional space, respectively. The details of
the mapping function can be found in the supplementary material.

on image datasets. Recently, efforts have focused on deep
unsupervised feature learning methods, such as the autoencoder [1] and the auto-encoding variational bayes [13],
for learning the representations of images which are used
for clustering images. Technically, they adopt a multi-stage
pipeline that pre-trains deep neural networks with unsupervised methods firstly and employs traditional methods for
clustering images as post processing. While the advances
are observable, these representation-based approaches also
have some intrinsic limitations. First, multi-stage image
clustering paradigms are obviously cumbersome in practice.
Second, the learned representations are fixed after the unsupervised feature learning. Consequently, in the clustering
process, the representations can not be further improved to
obtain better performance.
In this paper, we introduce Deep Adaptive Clustering, a
single-stage ConvNet-based method to cluster images. To
this end, we consider the image clustering task as a binary
pairwise-classification problem to judge whether pairs of
images belong to the same clusters. Specifically, the image
are represented by label features generated by a deep ConvNet, and similarities are measured by the cosine distance
between label features. Furthermore, the learned label features tend to be one-hot vectors by introducing a constraint
into DAC. Since the ground-truth similarities are unknown,
we also develop an Adaptive Learning algorithm, an alternating iterative method, to optimize our model. During each
iteration, pairwise images with the estimated similarities are

5879

