RPAN: An End-to-End Recurrent Pose-Attention Network for Action
Recognition in Videos

1

Wenbin Du∗ 1,2
Yali Wang∗ 2
Yu Qiao† 2,3
Shenzhen College of Advanced Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Virtual Reality Technology,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China

Abstract
Recent studies demonstrate the effectiveness of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) for action recognition in
videos. However, previous works mainly utilize video-level
category as supervision to train RNNs, which may prohibit RNNs to learn complex motion structures along time.
In this paper, we propose a recurrent pose-attention network (RPAN) to address this challenge, where we introduce a novel pose-attention mechanism to adaptively learn
pose-related features at every time-step action prediction
of RNNs. More specifically, we make three main contributions in this paper. Firstly, unlike previous works on
pose-related action recognition, our RPAN is an end-toend recurrent network which can exploit important spatialtemporal evolutions of human pose to assist action recognition in a unified framework. Secondly, instead of learning individual human-joint features separately, our poseattention mechanism learns robust human-part features by
sharing attention parameters partially on the semanticallyrelated human joints. These human-part features are then
fed into the human-part pooling layer to construct a highlydiscriminative pose-related representation for temporal action modeling. Thirdly, one important byproduct of our
RPAN is pose estimation in videos, which can be used for
coarse pose annotation in action videos. We evaluate the
proposed RPAN quantitatively and qualitatively on two popular benchmarks, i.e., Sub-JHMDB and PennAction. Experimental results show that RPAN outperforms the recent
state-of-the-art methods on these challenging datasets.

1. Introduction
Action recognition in videos has been intensely investigated in computer vision areas, due to its wide applications
∗ Equally-contributed first authors ({wb.du, yl.wang}@siat.ac.cn)
† Corresponding author (yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn)

in video retrieval, human-computer interaction, etc [27].
The challenges of classifying actions in the wild videos
mainly come from high dimension of video data, complex
motion styles, large inter-category variations, and confused
background clutters. With tremendous successes of deep
models in image classification, there is a growing interest
in developing deep neural networks for action recognition
[9, 16, 18, 24, 31, 32, 38].
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) show the power as
sequential models for action videos [9, 24, 31]. In most of
these works, the inputs to RNN are high-level features extracted from the fully-connected layer of CNNs, which may
be limited in describing fine details about action. To alleviate this issue, attention-based models have been proposed
[21, 28]. However, most existing attention approaches only
utilize video-level category as supervision to train RNNs,
which may lack a detailed and dynamical guidance (such as
human movement over time), and consequently restrict their
capacity of modeling complex motions in videos. Alternatively, human poses have proven useful for action recognition [14, 15, 17, 25, 40]. As shown in Subplots (a-c) of
Fig. 1, human poses of different actors are closely related
to the saliency regions in the average of convolutional feature maps estimated by CNN, and different joints of human
pose can also be highly activated in certain individual feature maps. More importantly, spatial-temporal evolution of
human poses in Subplot (d) of Fig. 1 yields a dynamical
attention cue, which can guide RNNs to efficiently learn
complex motions for action recognition in videos.
Inspired by this analysis, this paper proposes a novel recurrent pose-attention network (RPAN) for action recognition in videos, which can adaptively learn a highlydiscriminative pose-related feature for every-step action
prediction of LSTM. Specifically, we make three main contributions as follows. Firstly, unlike the previous works on
pose-related action recognition, our RPAN is an end-to-end
recurrent network, which allows to take advantage of dy-

3725

