Polynomial Solvers for Saturated Ideals
Viktor Larsson Kalle Åström Magnus Oskarsson
Centre for Mathematical Sciences
Lund University
{viktorl,kalle,magnuso}@maths.lth.se ∗

y

Abstract

x
In this paper we present a new method for creating polynomial solvers for problems where a (possibly infinite) subset of the solutions are undesirable or uninteresting. These
solutions typically arise from simplifications made during
modeling, but can also come from degeneracies which are
inherent to the geometry of the original problem.
The proposed approach extends the standard action matrix method to saturated ideals. This allows us to add constraints that some polynomials should be non-zero on the
solutions. This does not only offer the possibility of improved performance by removing superfluous solutions, but
makes a larger class of problems tractable. Previously,
problems with infinitely many solutions could not be solved
directly using the action matrix method as it requires a
zero-dimensional ideal. In contrast we only require that
after removing the unwanted solutions only finitely many
remain. We evaluate our method on three applications, optimal triangulation, time-of-arrival self-calibration and optimal vanishing point estimation.

1. Introduction
The success of geometric computer vision is largely built
on the ability to efficiently and reliably solve systems of
polynomial equations. Minimal solvers are used for robust model estimation using hypothesis and test frameworks
such as RANSAC.
Naturally there has been a lot of research in computer
vision devoted to constructing better polynomial solvers.
The most common approach is based on the action matrix
method, [29, 5], which reduces the problem to solving a
linear system followed by an eigendecomposition. Early
examples of applications in computer vision were based on
highly problem specific derivations including semi-manual
extraction of Gröbner bases [37, 36]. In [20], Kukelova et
al. presented a system for automatically creating polynomial solvers based on the action matrix method . This gen∗ This work has been financed by ELLIIT, MAPCI, eSSENCE and the
Swedish Research Council (grant no. 2012-4213).

z

y=0
Figure 1. Solutions to the polynomial system in (23). The solution
set consists of two points and a circle contained in the xz-plane.
Saturating the ideal with y removes any solution where y = 0.

erator has been used to solve many problem in geometric
computer vision, e.g. [21, 39, 38, 32]. Recently an improvement to the automatic generator scheme was proposed [24],
exploiting the inherent relations between the original equations. In [17] and [20, 30] the authors presented methods
optimizing the so called elimination templates, with respect
to stability and size respectively. With similar goals, Ask
et al. [2] showed how to exploit certain symmetries available in some polynomial systems. This was later extended
by both Kuang et al. [19] and Larsson et al. [23]. In [5],
Byröd et al. proposed methods to improve numerical accuracy by selecting the quotient space basis at runtime using
singular value decomposition (SVD) or by using QR factorization with column pivoting. In [3], Bujnak et al. proposed
two different methods for extracting univariate polynomials
directly from the action matrix. The roots of these polynomials can then be found efficiently using Sturm-sequences
[14], instead of computing the full eigendecomposition of
the action matrix. For an overview of other approaches to
solving systems of polynomial equations see [5] and the references therein.
In this paper we present an extension to the action matrix method which allows us to build polynomial solvers for
saturated ideals. Saturation allows us to add constraints that
some polynomials should be non-zero. The most interesting
cases are when the original ideal contains infinitely many
solutions while the saturated ideal is zero-dimensional. For
these problems it is not possible to apply the action matrix

2288

