ChromaTag: A Colored Marker and Fast Detection Algorithm
Joseph DeGol

Timothy Bretl
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Derek Hoiem

{degol2, tbretl, dhoiem}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Current fiducial marker detection algorithms rely on
marker IDs for false positive rejection. Time is wasted
on potential detections that will eventually be rejected as
false positives. We introduce ChromaTag, a fiducial marker
and detection algorithm designed to use opponent colors to
limit and quickly reject initial false detections and grayscale
for precise localization. Through experiments, we show
that ChromaTag is significantly faster than current fiducial
markers while achieving similar or better detection accuracy. We also show how tag size and viewing direction effect detection accuracy. Our contribution is significant because fiducial markers are often used in real-time applications (e.g. marker assisted robot navigation) where heavy
computation is required by other parts of the system.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we introduce ChromaTag1 , a new colored fiducial marker and detection algorithm that is significantly faster than current fiducial marker systems. Fiducial
markers are artificial objects (typically paired with a detection algorithm) designed to be easily detected in an image
from a variety of perspectives. They are widely used for
augmented reality and robotics applications because they
enable localization and landmark detection in featureless
environments. However, because fiducial markers often
complement large real-time systems (e.g. Camera Tracking [2, 9], SLAM [35] and Structure from Motion [8]), it
is important that they run much faster than 30 frames per
second. Figure 1 shows the run time of several state of the
art markers, of which only ChromaTag achieves processing times significantly faster than 30 frames per second (all
processing uses a 3.5 GHz Intel i7 Ivy Bridge processor).
ChromaTag achieves an orders-of-magnitude speedup
with good detection performance through careful design of
the tag and detection algorithm. Previous marker designs
(Figure 2) typically use highly contrasting (black to white)
1 http://degol2.web.engr.illinois.edu/pages/ChromaTag ICCV17.html

Figure 1: ChromaTag is a colored fiducial marker and detection algorithm that is significantly faster than other markers. Shown are successful detections of CCTag [8], AprilTag [33], and ChromaTag (RuneTag [4] was unsuccessful),
with the time required by each tag’s detection algorithm.
The images in this paper are best viewed in color.

borders [4, 7, 8, 10, 15, 24] for initial detection, but blackwhite edges are common in images and result in many initial false detections. IDs are decoded from the tags to verify
detections, but decoding is the last step in the pipeline, so
most of the time is spent rejecting false tags. Tags with distinctive color patterns can be used to limit initial false detections, but color consistency and the reduced spatial resolution of color channels (Bayer grid) create challenges for
ID encoding and tag localization.
ChromaTag uses each channel of the LAB opponent colorspace to best effect. Large gradients between red and
green in the A channel, which are rare in natural scenes,
are used for initial detection. This results in few initial false
detections that can be quickly rejected. The black-white
border takes advantage of high resolution of the L channel
for precise localization. The B channel is used to encode

1472

