A Microfacet-based Reflectance Model for Photometric Stereo
with Highly Specular Surfaces
Lixiong Chen ∗1 , Yinqiang Zheng1 , Boxin Shi2 , Art Subpa-Asa3 , and Imari Sato1
1

2

National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan
Artificial Intelligence Research Center, National Institute of AIST, Tokyo, Japan
3
Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
A precise, stable and invertible model for surface reflectance is the key to the success of photometric stereo
with real world materials. Recent developments in the field
have enabled shape recovery techniques for surfaces of various types, but an effective solution to directly estimating
the surface normal in the presence of highly specular reflectance remains elusive. In this paper, we derive an analytical isotropic microfacet-based reflectance model, based
on which a physically interpretable approximate is tailored
for highly specular surfaces. With this approximate, we
identify the equivalence between the surface recovery problem and the ellipsoid of revolution fitting problem, where the
latter can be described as a system of polynomials. Additionally, we devise a fast, non-iterative and globally optimal
solver for this problem. Experimental results on both synthetic and real images validate our model and demonstrate
that our solution can stably deliver superior performance
in its targeted application domain.

1. Introduction
The object appearance is a compound of illumination,
surface reflectance and surface shape. Under directional
light ~l, the appearance I of a surface point with normal ~n observed from direction ~v is described as a product of shading
signal ~n⊺ l~ and the reflectance signal specified by the Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function (BRDF) ρ(·):
I = ρ(~v , ~l, ~n)~n⊺~l.

(1)

Photometric stereo aims at inversely recovering ~n given
multiple observations with different lighting directions.
∗ Part of this work was finished when the author was a Master student of

McGill University, Montreal, Canada, and was visiting National Institute
of Informatics (NII), Japan, as an intern funded in part by the NII MOU
internship program.

(a) chrome steel

(b) metallic paint

(c) two layer gold

Figure 1: Examples of highly specular reflectance targeted
in this paper are pervasive in the real world, but effectively
estimating the shape of the specular surfaces is a challenging task.

Therefore, finding a proper tradeoff between the expressiveness and complexity of Equation 1 is critical. For example, the Lambertian model [43] allows straightforward
normal recovery, but a pure Lambertian surface rarely exists in real world objects. In recent years, the photometric stereo has seen dramatic development in shape recovery
techniques for surfaces made of a great variety of materials [9, 15, 16, 22, 37, 44]. After all, sufficient know-how
is already at hand to help extract shape cues from lowfrequency reflectance. However, how to properly handle
highly specular surfaces, like the ones illustrated in Figure 1, remains to be a hard nut. This is because when signals representing specular reflectance become predominant,
knowledge about inferring shape solely from specularities
for a typical photometric stereo setup is still limited.
On the contrary, how to render visually realistic
specular/general surfaces has been extensively studied in
the computer graphics community. For example, the microfacet reflectance model and its variants [4, 6, 10, 12, 25, 41]
offer significant insight into the formation of specularity
given the detailed knowledge of the surface geometry. Unfortunately, it is not straightforward to apply these models
for the inverse problem that seeks to recover the surface geometry, because analysis is absent to warrant model invert-

3162

