Higher-order Integration of Hierarchical Convolutional Activations for
Fine-grained Visual Categorization
Sijia Cai1 , Wangmeng Zuo2 , Lei Zhang1∗
Dept. of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
1

{csscai, cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk, cswmzuo@gmail.com

Abstract
The success of fine-grained visual categorization
(FGVC) extremely relies on the modeling of appearance
and interactions of various semantic parts. This makes
FGVC very challenging because: (i) part annotation and
detection require expert guidance and are very expensive;
(ii) parts are of different sizes; and (iii) the part interactions are complex and of higher-order. To address these issues, we propose an end-to-end framework based on higherorder integration of hierarchical convolutional activations
for FGVC. By treating the convolutional activations as local descriptors, hierarchical convolutional activations can
serve as a representation of local parts from different scales.
A polynomial kernel based predictor is proposed to capture higher-order statistics of convolutional activations for
modeling part interaction. To model inter-layer part interactions, we extend polynomial predictor to integrate hierarchical activations via kernel fusion. Our work also provides
a new perspective for combining convolutional activations
from multiple layers. While hypercolumns simply concatenate maps from different layers, and holistically-nested network uses weighted fusion to combine side-outputs, our approach exploits higher-order intra-layer and inter-layer relations for better integration of hierarchical convolutional
features. The proposed framework yields more discriminative representation and achieves competitive results on the
widely used FGVC datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
emerged as the new state-of-the-art for a wide range of visual recognition tasks. Nevertheless, it remains quite challenging to derive the effective discriminative representation for fine-grained visual categorization (FGVC), primar∗ This work is supported by HK GRC GRF grant (PolyU 152135/16E)
and China NSFC grant (no. 61672446).

ily due to subtle semantic differences between sub-ordinate
categories. Conventional CNNs usually deploy the fully
connected layers to learn global semantic representation and
may not be suitable to FGVC. Therefore, leveraging local
discriminative patterns in CNN is crucial to obtain more
powerful representation, and recently has been intensively
studied for FGVC.
Part-based representations [47, 3, 46, 34, 48] built on
CNN features have been a predominant trend in FGVC.
Such methods follow a detection module consisting of part
detection and appearance modeling to extract regional features on deeper convolutional layers in R-CNN [12] based
scenario. Then global appearance structure is incorporated
to pool these regional features. Although these methods
have yielded rich emporical returns, they still pose the following issues: (1) A considerable number of part-based
methods [47, 3, 46] heavily rely on the detailed part annotations to train accurate part detectors, which is costly
and further limits the scalability for large-scale datasets;
moreover, identifying discriminative parts for specific finegrained objects is quite challenging and often requires interaction with human or expert knowledge [4, 40]; (2) The discriminative semantic parts in images often appear at different scales. As each spatial unit in the deeper convolutional
layer corresponds to a specific receptive field, activations
from a single convolutional layer are limited in describing
various parts with different sizes; (3) Exploiting the joint
configuration of individual object parts is very important for
object appearance modeling. A few works introduce additional geometric constraints for object parts including the
popular deformable parts model [47], constellation model
[34] and order-shape constraint [41]. One key disadvantage
of these approaches is that they only characterize the firstorder occurrences and relationships of very few parts, however, cannot be readily applied to model objects with more
parts. Consequently, our focus is to capture the higher-order
statistics of those semantic parts at different scales, and thus
provide a more flexible way for global appearance modeling
without the help of part annotation.
1511

