Low-Rank Tensor Completion: A Pseudo-Bayesian Learning Approach
Wei Chen
Nan Song
State Key Laboratory of Rail Traffic Control and Safety
Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
{weich,15120129}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

or human-computer interaction is a four-order tensor. Tensor completion aims to recover missing values in a tensor
from observed elements, and has many applications such
as image/video in-painting, identigram/watermark removal,
scan completion, and appearance acquisition completion.
However, as a higher order generalization of matrices, the study on tensor completion is far from mature in comparison
to matrix completion, partly because most tensor analogues
of many efficiently computable problems in numerical linear algebra are NP-hard [7].
To handle high dimensional data that has a large amount of redundancy, one usually resorts to sparsity models,
meaning that the model is described by relatively few parameters. One popular model used to capture the parsimony
characteristics is the low multilinear rank, where a mode-i
rank of a tensor is the matrix rank via unfolding the tensor
along the ith mode. Mathematically, the tensor completion
problem with a low multilinear rank can be described as

Low rank tensor completion, which solves a linear inverse problem with the principle of parsimony, is a powerful technique used in many application domains in computer vision and pattern recognition. As a surrogate function
of the matrix rank that is non-convex and discontinuous, the
nuclear norm is often used instead to derive efficient algorithms for recovering missing information in matrices and
higher order tensors. However, the nuclear norm is a loose
approximation of the matrix rank, and what is more, the
tensor nuclear norm is not guaranteed to be the tightest
convex envelope of a multilinear rank. Alternative algorithms either require specifying/tuning several parameters
(e.g., the tensor rank), and/or have a performance far from
reaching the theoretical limit where the number of observed
elements equals the degree of freedom in the unknown lowrank tensor. In this paper, we propose a pseudo-Bayesian
approach, where a Bayesian-inspired cost function is adjusted using appropriate approximations that lead to desirable attributes including concavity and symmetry. Although
deviating from the original Bayesian model, the resulting
non-convex cost function is proved to have the ability to recover the true tensor with a low multilinear rank. A computational efficient algorithm is derived to solve the resulting
non-convex optimization problem. We demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed algorithm in comparison with state-of-the-art alternatives by conducting extensive experiments on both synthetic data and several visual
data recovery tasks.

min rank[X ]
X

(1)

s.t. X Ω = Y Ω ,
where X ∈ Rn1 ×...×nk , rank[X ] = [r1 , . . . , rk ] denotes
the multilinear rank of X , and the m observed elements of
X in the set Ω are given by Y Ω .
Unfortunately, the non-convexity and discontinuous nature of the rank function make the problem challenging to
solve. A widely used approach is to replace matrix rank
function by the nuclear norm (i.e., the sum of singular values), which is a convex surrogate of the non-convex matrix
rank function. In [13], Liu et al. define a tensor nuclear norm, which is a convex combination of the nuclear norms of
all matrices unfolded along different modes. Based on the
tensor nuclear norm, a number of methods have been derived [14, 17, 15, 19]. However, the solution of the convex
relaxed problem is usually suboptimal as the nuclear norm
is a loose approximation of the matrix rank. Furthermore,
there is no theoretical guarantee that the tensor nuclear norm is the tightest convex envelope of a tensor rank.
Low-rank tensor completion can also be solved by
factorization-based methods, where Tucker decomposition

1. Introduction
In many application domains in computer vision and pattern recognition, we often have to deal with incomplete
or noisy data. In addition, multidimensional data arrays,
i.e., tensors, are becoming more and more common. For
instance, serial image stacks in diffusion magnetic resonance imaging constitute a three-order tensor, and a color
video sequence in gait/gesture recognition for surveillance

3305

