Paying Attention to Descriptions Generated by Image Captioning Models
Hamed R. Tavakoli† Rakshith Shetty⋆ Ali Borji‡ Jorma Laaksonen†
†
Dept. of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland.
⋆
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany.
‡
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Central Florida, Orlando, USA.

Abstract
To bridge the gap between humans and machines in image understanding and describing, we need further insight
into how people describe a perceived scene. In this paper,
we study the agreement between bottom-up saliency-based
visual attention and object referrals in scene description
constructs. We investigate the properties of human-written
descriptions and machine-generated ones. We then propose
a saliency-boosted image captioning model in order to investigate benefits from low-level cues in language models.
We learn that (1) humans mention more salient objects earlier than less salient ones in their descriptions, (2) the better
a captioning model performs, the better attention agreement
it has with human descriptions, (3) the proposed saliencyboosted model, compared to its baseline form, does not improve significantly on the MS COCO database, indicating
explicit bottom-up boosting does not help when the task is
well learnt and tuned on a data, (4) a better generalization
is, however, observed for the saliency-boosted model on unseen data.

1. Introduction
The recent advancements in machine learning, together
with the increase in the available computational power, have
increased the interest in solving high-level problems such
as image-captioning [14, 61, 9, 13], scene and video understanding [51, 52, 39], and visual question answering [37, 2].
The main goal of these problems is an inference which ends
in a human-like response. The nature of such responses often necessitates interaction between several low-level cognitive tasks, e.g., perception and sentence planning in describing images. Measuring the capability of a machine in
replicating such interactions is challenging. Although the
trivial assessment techniques facilitate understanding the
average performance of the algorithms, we yet need more
detailed studies to understand specific properties of the existing methods in comparison with a human baseline. In the
domain of image description by machines, agreement with

visual attention is one such case.
There exists various theories about human sentence construction and formation. Wundt’s theory of sentence production motivates the role of object’s importance in sentence production. He proposes that, in a free word positioning scenario, not bound by any traditional rule, the
words follow each other according to the degree of emphasis on the concepts [56]. This theory implicitly motivates
the role of what is later on recognized as saliency. Griffin
and Bock [21] found some empirical supporting evidence
by showing that while describing scenes, speakers look at
an object before naming it within their description. Besides,
there exists numerous studies which have utilized attention
to analyze human sentence planning and construction in different scenarios including scene description. Most of their
findings provide supporting evidence that the sentence formation and attention correlate [6, 40, 22, 26, 64]. Encouraged enough, we lay the foundation of this study on the role
of saliency in the construct of image descriptions, where the
order of named objects is momentous in a sentence.
Contribution: In this paper, we address two intriguing
questions: (1) How well do image descriptions, by humans
or models, on a scene agree with saliency?, (2) Can saliency
benefit image captioning by machine? Answering the questions, we learn not only about the role of attention in describing images, but also about the quality of human-written
descriptions and machine-generated ones. We first study the
textual statistics of the sentences by human and machine.
Then we investigate the attention correlation in the structure of human-written and machine-generated descriptions.
To further evaluate the contribution of low-level cues, we
propose a saliency-boosted captioning model and compare
it against a set of baseline captioning models.

2. Related Work
Image description generation. There exists a wide range
of captioning methods and models. They can be categorized into retrieval-based [19, 44, 25, 33], sentence generation [34, 16], and the models which combine the two

2487

