Temporal Action Detection with Structured Segment Networks
Yue Zhao1 , Yuanjun Xiong1 , Limin Wang2 , Zhirong Wu1 , Xiaoou Tang1 , and Dahua Lin1
1

Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
Detecting actions in untrimmed videos is an important
yet challenging task. In this paper, we present the structured
segment network (SSN), a novel framework which models
the temporal structure of each action instance via a structured temporal pyramid. On top of the pyramid, we further introduce a decomposed discriminative model comprising two classifiers, respectively for classifying actions and
determining completeness. This allows the framework to
effectively distinguish positive proposals from background
or incomplete ones, thus leading to both accurate recognition and localization. These components are integrated
into a unified network that can be efficiently trained in an
end-to-end fashion. Additionally, a simple yet effective temporal action proposal scheme, dubbed temporal actionness
grouping (TAG) is devised to generate high quality action
proposals. On two challenging benchmarks, THUMOS14
and ActivityNet, our method remarkably outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods, demonstrating superior accuracy and strong adaptivity in handling actions with various
temporal structures. 1

1. Introduction
Temporal action detection has drawn increasing attention from the research community, owing to its numerous
potential applications in surveillance, video analytics, and
other areas [29, 24, 55, 37]. This task is to detect human
action instances from untrimmed, and possibly very long
videos. Compared to action recognition, it is substantially
more challenging, as it is expected to output not only the action category, but also the precise starting and ending time
points.
Over the past several years, the advances in convolutional neural networks have led to remarkable progress in video
analysis. Notably, the accuracy of action recognition has
1 Code available at http://yjxiong.me/others/ssn

Figure 1. Importance of modeling stage structures in action detection. We slide window detectors through a video clip with an
action instance of “Tumbling” (green box). Top: The detector
builds features without any stage structure of the action, e.g. average pooling throughout the window. It produces high responses
whenever it sees any discriminative snippet related to tumbling,
making it hard to localize the instance. Bottom: SSN detector utilizes stage structures (starting, course, and ending) via structured
temporal pyramid pooling. Its response is only significant when
the window is well aligned.

been significantly improved [39, 44, 9, 49, 51]. Yet, the
performances of action detection methods remain unsatisfactory [56, 55, 41]. For existing approaches, one major
challenge in precise temporal localization is the large number of incomplete action fragments in the proposed temporal regions. Traditional snippet based classifiers rely on discriminative snippets of actions, which would also exist in
these incomplete proposals. This makes them very hard to
distinguish from valid detections (see Fig. 1). We argue that
tackling this challenge requires the capability of temporal
structure analysis, or in other words, the ability to identify different stages e.g. starting, course, and ending, which
12914

