Bounding Boxes, Segmentations and Object Coordinates:
How Important is Recognition for 3D Scene Flow Estimation
in Autonomous Driving Scenarios?
Aseem Behl2,∗ Omid Hosseini Jafari1,∗ Siva Karthik Mustikovela1,∗
Hassan Abu Alhaija1 Carsten Rother1 Andreas Geiger2,3
1

2

Computer Vision Lab, TU Dresden
Autonomous Vision Group, MPI for Intelligent Systems Tübingen
3
Computer Vision and Geometry Group, ETH Zürich

Abstract
Existing methods for 3D scene flow estimation often fail
in the presence of large displacement or local ambiguities,
e.g., at texture-less or reflective surfaces. However, these
challenges are omnipresent in dynamic road scenes, which
is the focus of this work. Our main contribution is to overcome these 3D motion estimation problems by exploiting
recognition. In particular, we investigate the importance of
recognition granularity, from coarse 2D bounding box estimates over 2D instance segmentations to fine-grained 3D
object part predictions. We compute these cues using CNNs
trained on a newly annotated dataset of stereo images and
integrate them into a CRF-based model for robust 3D scene
flow estimation - an approach we term Instance Scene Flow.
We analyze the importance of each recognition cue in an ablation study and observe that the instance segmentation cue
is by far strongest, in our setting. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on the challenging KITTI 2015 scene
flow benchmark where we achieve state-of-the-art performance at the time of submission.

1. Introduction
3D motion estimation is a core problem in computer vision with numerous applications. Consider, for instance, an
autonomous car navigating through a city. Besides recognizing traffic participants and identifying their 3D locations,
it needs to precisely predict their 3D position in the future.
In this paper, we focus on 3D scene flow estimation for
autonomous driving scenarios. More specifically, given two
consecutive stereo images we want to predict the 3D motion of every pixel. With the advent of challenging realworld benchmarks, such as the KITTI 2012 [10] and KITTI
∗ Joint first authors with equal contribution.

2D Bounding Box

2D Instance Segmentation

3D Object Coordinates

Figure 1: Motivation. Top: Two consecutive frames (overlaid) from the KITTI 2015 scene flow dataset. Large displacements and specular surfaces are challenging for current scene flow estimation algorithms. Bottom: Recognition can provide powerful geometric cues to help with this
problem. In this work, we investigate: 2D bounding boxes,
2D instance segmentations and 3D object coordinates.
2015 [22], great progress has been made in this area. In particular, segmentation-based formulations which gain their
strength by reasoning over piece-wise planar patches [41]
or segmenting the scene into its rigidly moving components [22] dominate the leaderboards.
However, existing methods rely heavily on local features
for computing the data term and for initialization. As a
consequence, even state-of-the-art methods fail in the presence of very large displacements or local ambiguities from,
e.g., textureless or reflective surfaces. Consider Fig. 1 (top)
which shows an image from the KITTI 2015 scene flow
dataset [22]. Due to the large displacement between frames,
the front wheel in the first frame appears similar to the back
12574

