Smart Mining for Deep Metric Learning
Ben Harwood2 , ∗Vijay Kumar B G1 , Gustavo Carneiro1 , Ian Reid1 , Tom Drummond2
1
The University of Adelaide,2 Monash University
{vijay.kumar,gustavo.carneiro,ian.reid}@adelaide.edu.au, {ben.harwood,tom.drummond}@monash.edu
∗

Abstract
To solve deep metric learning problems and producing
feature embeddings, current methodologies will commonly
use a triplet model to minimise the relative distance between
samples from the same class and maximise the relative distance between samples from different classes. Though successful, the training convergence of this triplet model can be
compromised by the fact that the vast majority of the training samples will produce gradients with magnitudes that are
close to zero. This issue has motivated the development of
methods that explore the global structure of the embedding
and other methods that explore hard negative/positive mining. The effectiveness of such mining methods is often associated with intractable computational requirements. In this
paper, we propose a novel deep metric learning method that
combines the triplet model and the global structure of the
embedding space. We rely on a smart mining procedure that
produces effective training samples for a low computational
cost. In addition, we propose an adaptive controller that
automatically adjusts the smart mining hyper-parameters
and speeds up the convergence of the training process. We
show empirically that our proposed method allows for fast
and more accurate training of triplet ConvNets than other
competing mining methods. Additionally, we show that our
method achieves new state-of-the-art embedding results for
CUB-200-2011 and Cars196 datasets.

1. Introduction
The development of deep metric learning models for the
estimation of effective feature embedding [2, 4, 9, 11, 15,
16, 17, 13, 22, 25, 27, 26] is at the core of many recently
proposed computer vision methods [3, 14, 19, 24, 28]. The
main advantage of such models lies in their ability to automatically learn metric spaces, where samples from similar classes tend to be close together, while samples from
different classes are more likely to be far from each other.
The main scenario envisaged for such an approach involves
∗ Vijay Kumar B G and Ben Harwood contributed equally to this work

the presence of an extremely large number of classes (more
than 105 classes) and low number of samples per class (in
[101 , 102 ]), where the implementation of traditional classifiers becomes challenging [19, 13].
Arguably, the most explored deep learning model that
can estimate feature embedding is based on triplet networks [6, 24], which are an extension of the siamese network [1]. Triplet networks are composed of three identical
convolutional neural networks (ConvNets) that are trained
using triplets of samples: an anchor sample, a positive sample of the same class as the anchor, and a negative sample of a different class. The training procedure is based
on a loss function that penalises large relative distances between the anchor and positive samples and small relative
distances between the anchor and negative samples. Therefore, this training procedure relies on triplets that contain
hard positive cases (anchor and positive samples that are far
apart) and hard negative cases (anchor and negative samples that are close together). In other words, these hard
samples will form triplets that produce gradients with sufficiently large magnitude. Assuming that a training set has
N samples, then the set of triplets has complexity size
O(N 3 ), which means that its formation is infeasible even
for datasets of modest sizes (e.g., N = 105 ). This issue has
lead to the implementation of importance sampling techniques [14, 16, 24] that stochastically under-samples the set
of triplets. Here, their success relies on using enough samples to guarantee that a certain fraction of the hard positives and negatives are available for training 1 . Given the
high complexity involved in finding hard positive and negative samples, another training procedure has been developed in order to guarantee training samples with large gradient magnitudes: the incorporation of loss functions that
take into account the global structure of the embedding
space [9, 13, 22].
In this paper, we propose a novel deep metric learning
approach that combines a global [9] and a triplet loss [6, 24]
computed using training samples acquired from a smart
sampling method that has low computational complexity [5]
1 We have not found a formal study that describes the number of samples used for training versus the fraction of hard positive/negatives.

2821

