Unsupervised Creation of Parameterized Avatars
Lior Wolf1,2 , Yaniv Taigman1 , and Adam Polyak1
1

2

Facebook AI Research
The School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University

Abstract
We study the problem of mapping an input image to a
tied pair consisting of a vector of parameters and an image
that is created using a graphical engine from the vector of
parameters. The mapping’s objective is to have the output
image as similar as possible to the input image. During
training, no supervision is given in the form of matching
inputs and outputs.
This learning problem extends two literature problems:
unsupervised domain adaptation and cross domain transfer. We define a generalization bound that is based on discrepancy, and employ a GAN to implement a network solution that corresponds to this bound. Experimentally, our
method is shown to solve the problem of automatically creating avatars.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of generating computer avatars
based on the user’s appearance. In order to allow the avatars
to be easily manipulated, each avatar is represented by a
set of “switches” (parameters) that select, for example, the
shape of the nose, the color of the eyes and the style of
hair, all from a predefined set of options created by artists.
The visual appearance of the avatar adheres to a set of constraints, which are governed by a computer graphics engine
that renders an image based on the set of parameters. Moreover, once this set is set, the avatar can be rendered in many
variations (Fig. 1).
The goal of this work is to learn to map an input image to
two tied outputs: a vector in some parameter space and the
image generated by this vector. While it is sufficient to recover just the vector of parameters and then generate the image, a non-intuitive result of our work is that it is preferable
to recover the analog image first. In any case, the mapping
between the input image and either of the outputs should
be learned in an unsupervised way due to the difficulty of

Figure 1. From the
image on the top left,
our method computes the parameters
of the face caricature
below it,
which
can be rendered
at multiple views
and with varying
expressions by the
computer graphics
engine.

obtaining supervised samples that map input images to parameterized representations. In avatar creation, it is time
consuming for humans to select the parameters that represent a user, even after considerable training. The selected
parameters are also not guaranteed to be the optimal depiction of that user. Therefore, using unsupervised methods is
both more practical and holds the potential to lead to more
accurate results.
In addition, humans can learn to create parameterized
analogies without using matching samples. Understanding
possible computational processes is, therefore, an objective
of AI, and is the research question addressed. Our contributions are therefore as follows: (i) we present a highly applicable and, as far as we know, completely unexplored vision
problem; (ii) the new problem is placed in the mathematical
context of other domain shift problems; (iii) a generalization bound for the new problem is presented; (iv) an algorithm that matches the terms of the generalization bound is
introduced; (v) the qualitative and quantitative success of
the method further validates the non-intuitive path we take
and (vi) the new method is shown to solve the parameterized
avatar creation problem.

1.1. Background
Generative Adversarial Networks GAN [8] methods train
a generator network G that synthesizes samples from a
11530

