Moving Object Detection in Time-Lapse or Motion Trigger Image Sequences
Using Low-rank and Invariant Sparse Decomposition
Moein Shakeri, Hong Zhang
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, T6G2E8
{shakeri,hzhang}@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Low-rank and sparse representation based methods have
attracted wide attention in background subtraction and
moving object detection, where moving objects in the scene
are modeled as pixel-wise sparse outliers. Since in real scenarios moving objects are also structurally sparse, recently
researchers have attempted to extract moving objects using structured sparse outliers. Although existing methods
with structured sparsity-inducing norms produce promising results, they are still vulnerable to various illumination
changes that frequently occur in real environments, specifically for time-lapse image sequences where assumptions
about sparsity between images such as group sparsity are
not valid. In this paper, we first introduce a prior map obtained by illumination invariant representation of images.
Next, we propose a low-rank and invariant sparse decomposition using the prior map to detect moving objects under
significant illumination changes. Experiments on challenging benchmark datasets demonstrate the superior performance of our proposed method under complex illumination
changes.

1. Introduction
Moving object segmentation from an image sequence or
a video stream is a fundamental problem in various applications of computer vision such as visual surveillance [20],
traffic monitoring [5], object-based video encoding and social signal processing [22] where the accuracy of segmentation can significantly affect the overall performance of
the application. However, current solutions are vulnerable to various illumination changes frequently occurring in
real environments and are often not able to distinguish between changes caused by illumination and those caused by
moving objects in the scene. Currently, many surveillance
systems, specifically those that use security cameras and
wildlife monitoring cameras, capture a scene using a mo-

Figure 1. first row: selected images from an image sequence captured by a motion triggered camera for wildlife monitoring. second row: detected foreground objects of our method.

tion trigger sensor or timer-lapse photography in order to
detect moving objects of interest over time. Since captured
images by these cameras are in different time of a day with
different illumination and weather conditions, their processing is challenging. Fig. 1 shows an example of this kind of
images and illustrates the problem of object detection under significant illumination changes. The first row in Fig.1
shows selected images captured by a motion-trigger camera
for wildlife monitoring and the second row shows the results of our method described in this paper to detect moving
objects from the images.
Recent years have seen the development of a new group
of methods, based on low-rank and sparse decomposition,
under one major assumption that images in a sequence
are correlated. Methods in this group follow the basic
idea from [17] where the principal component analysis
(PCA) for background modeling was proposed. Extending
this idea, current methods exploit the fact that the background model in an image sequence can be defined as a
low-rank matrix by those pixels that are temporally correlated [4]. Many methods have been proposed based on
this idea for background subtraction and foreground detection [10, 7, 18]. But, moving object detection in a time lapse
video is different from that in a regular video due to the discontinuous object motion and significant lighting change.
While existing solutions can handle discontinuous object
motion, they are not able to distinguish between moving
objects and background changes due to illumination.
In this paper, we offer a solution to the problem within
the low-rank approximation (LRA) framework that specifi-

5123

