Sketching with Style: Visual Search with Sketches and Aesthetic Context
John Collomosse1,2
1

Tu Bui1

Michael Wilber3

CVSSP, University of Surrey

Abstract
We propose a novel measure of visual similarity for image retrieval that incorporates both structural and aesthetic (style) constraints. Our algorithm accepts a query
as sketched shape, and a set of one or more contextual images specifying the desired visual aesthetic. A triplet network is used to learn a feature embedding capable of measuring style similarity independent of structure, delivering
significant gains over previous networks for style discrimination. We incorporate this model within a hierarchical
triplet network to unify and learn a joint space from two
discriminatively trained streams for style and structure. We
demonstrate that this space enables, for the first time, styleconstrained sketch search over a diverse domain of digital
artwork comprising graphics, paintings and drawings. We
also briefly explore alternative query modalities.

1. Introduction
Determining user intent from a visual search query remains an open challenge, particularly within Sketch based
Image Retrieval (SBIR) where free-hand sketched queries
often present ambiguous or incomplete descriptions of the
desired visual content [8]. Traditionally, SBIR literature
considers images to be similar if they contain objects of
similar shape (e.g. fine-grained [35, 39, 29]) or semantics
(e.g. category retrieval [9, 13, 25]). However, such definitions do not scale well to larger datasets, where a sketched
shape can closely match a diverse range of content. Additional visual modalities have been explored within the
sketch, such as color [31, 3], explicit labeling of sketched
parts [6, 14], and motion (for video) [7, 1, 15] to better constrain the query and so improve the relevance of results.
This paper proposes a novel definition of visual similarity for SBIR, in which the sketched query is constrained
using one or more secondary (contextual) images to specify

2

Chen Fang2

Adobe Research

3

Hailin Jin2

Cornell Tech

the desired aesthetic of the results. For example, a sketch
of a dog accompanied by a contextual set of watercolor
paintings, or scary images, would yield watercolor paintings of dogs, or images of scary dogs, respectively. Importantly, we do not require the contextual images to contain
the desired subject matter (e.g. dogs). Rather, we seek to
disentangle the notions of content (structure) and aesthetics
(style) enabling independent specification of both within the
query. Visual style remains a highly challenging and understudied area of Computer Vision. Our exploration of style as
a modality for visual search complements recent advances
e.g. in style transfer [10] enabled by deep learning.
Constraining visual search to match a user’s intended
‘look and feel’ is a promising novel direction for enhancing search relevance, particularly over aesthetically diverse
imagery. Our work leverages a recent large-scale dataset of
contemporary artwork covering a breadth of styles, media
and emotions (BAM [37]) from which we learn a model of
aesthetic style. Concretely, we propose a hierarchical triplet
convolutional neural network (convnet) architecture to learn
a low-dimensional joint embedding for structure and style.
Each branch of this network unifies complementary information on scene structure and aesthetics derived from two
discriminatively trained convnet streams, which are themselves of triplet architecture.
Our technical contributions are three-fold. First, we propose a triplet convnet to learn an embedding for aesthetic
style, showing this novel model to outperform by a large
margin, previous attempts to use deep convnets for measuring visual style similarity. Second, we build upon our
model, incorporating a state of the art convnet for sketchphoto similarity [4] to develop a hierarchical triplet convnet
for learning a joint space for structural and style similarity
over a diverse domain of digital artwork (comprising not
only photos, but also paintings, 3D renderings, hand-drawn
and vector-art drawings, in a variety of media). Third, we
demonstrate and evaluate the performance of our model
12660

