HashNet: Deep Learning to Hash by Continuation∗
Zhangjie Cao† , Mingsheng Long† , Jianmin Wang† , and Philip S. Yu†‡
†
KLiss, MOE; NEL-BDS; TNList; School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
‡
University of Illinois at Chicago, IL, USA
caozhangjie14@gmail.com {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn psyu@uic.edu

Abstract
Learning to hash has been widely applied to approximate nearest neighbor search for large-scale multimedia retrieval, due to its computation efficiency and retrieval quality. Deep learning to hash, which improves retrieval quality
by end-to-end representation learning and hash encoding,
has received increasing attention recently. Subject to the illposed gradient difficulty in the optimization with sign activations, existing deep learning to hash methods need to first
learn continuous representations and then generate binary
hash codes in a separated binarization step, which suffer
from substantial loss of retrieval quality. This work presents
HashNet, a novel deep architecture for deep learning to
hash by continuation method with convergence guarantees,
which learns exactly binary hash codes from imbalanced
similarity data. The key idea is to attack the ill-posed gradient problem in optimizing deep networks with non-smooth
binary activations by continuation method, in which we begin from learning an easier network with smoothed activation function and let it evolve during the training, until it
eventually goes back to being the original, difficult to optimize, deep network with the sign activation function. Comprehensive empirical evidence shows that HashNet can generate exactly binary hash codes and yield state-of-the-art
multimedia retrieval performance on standard benchmarks.

1. Introduction
In the big data era, large-scale and high-dimensional media data has been pervasive in search engines and social networks. To guarantee retrieval quality and computation efficiency, approximate nearest neighbors (ANN) search has attracted increasing attention. Parallel to the traditional indexing methods [21], another advantageous solution is hashing methods [38], which transform high-dimensional media
data into compact binary codes and generate similar binary
codes for similar data items. In this paper, we will focus
on learning to hash methods [38] that build data-dependent
∗ Corresponding author: M. Long (mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn).

hash encoding schemes for efficient image retrieval, which
have shown better performance than data-independent hashing methods, e.g. Locality-Sensitive Hashing (LSH) [10].
Many learning to hash methods have been proposed to
enable efficient ANN search by Hamming ranking of compact binary hash codes [19, 12, 30, 9, 25, 37, 27, 11, 41, 42].
Recently, deep learning to hash methods [40, 20, 34, 8, 44,
22, 24] have shown that end-to-end learning of feature representation and hash coding can be more effective using
deep neural networks [18, 2], which can naturally encode
any nonlinear hash functions. These deep learning to hash
methods have shown state-of-the-art performance on many
benchmarks. In particular, it proves crucial to jointly learn
similarity-preserving representations and control quantization error of binarizing continuous representations to binary
codes [44, 22, 43, 24]. However, a key disadvantage of these
deep learning to hash methods is that they need to first learn
continuous deep representations, which are binarized into
hash codes in a separated post-step of sign thresholding. By
continuous relaxation, i.e. solving the discrete optimization
of hash codes with continuous optimization, all these methods essentially solve an optimization problem that deviates
significantly from the hashing objective as they cannot learn
exactly binary hash codes in their optimization procedure.
Hence, existing deep hashing methods may fail to generate
compact binary hash codes for efficient similarity retrieval.
There are two key challenges to enabling deep learning
to hash truly end-to-end. First, converting deep representations, which are continuous in nature, to exactly binary hash
codes, we need to adopt the sign function h = sgn (z) as
activation function when generating binary hash codes using similarity-preserving learning in deep neural networks.
However, the gradient of the sign function is zero for all
nonzero inputs, which will make standard back-propagation
infeasible. This is known as the ill-posed gradient problem,
which is the key difficulty in training deep neural networks
via back-propagation [14]. Second, the similarity information is usually very sparse in real retrieval systems, i.e., the
number of similar pairs is much smaller than the number
of dissimilar pairs. This will result in the data imbalance
15608

