Recurrent Multimodal Interaction for Referring Image Segmentation
Chenxi Liu1

Zhe Lin2 Xiaohui Shen2 Jimei Yang2 Xin Lu2
Johns Hopkins University1 Adobe Research2

{cxliu, alan.yuille}@jhu.edu

Alan Yuille1

{zlin, xshen, jimyang, xinl}@adobe.com

Abstract
In this paper we are interested in the problem of image
segmentation given natural language descriptions, i.e. referring expressions. Existing works tackle this problem by
first modeling images and sentences independently and then
segment images by combining these two types of representations. We argue that learning word-to-image interaction
is more native in the sense of jointly modeling two modalities for the image segmentation task, and we propose convolutional multimodal LSTM to encode the sequential interactions between individual words, visual information, and
spatial information. We show that our proposed model outperforms the baseline model on benchmark datasets. In addition, we analyze the intermediate output of the proposed
multimodal LSTM approach and empirically explain how
this approach enforces a more effective word-to-image interaction.1

1. Introduction
In this paper, we study the challenging problem of using
natural language expressions to segment an image. Given
both an image and a natural language expression, we are
interested in segmenting out the corresponding region referred by the expression. This problem was only introduced
recently, but has great value as it provides new means for interactive image segmentation. Specifically, people can segment/select image regions of their interest by typing natural language descriptions or even speaking to the computer
[20].
Given the success of convolutional neural networks in
semantic segmentation [24, 2, 3], an immediate way to
tackle this problem is to augment the convolutional semantic segmentation networks with a LSTM [11] sentence encoder [12], so that the image features and sentence representation can be combined to produce the desired mask.
In fact, this sentence-to-image interaction scheme has been
1 Code is available at https://github.com/chenxi116/
TF-phrasecut-public

. . .standing

. . .someone

. . .bat

Man in a vest and blue jeans standing watching someone swing
a bat.

Figure 1: Given the image and the referring expression,
we are interested in segmenting out the referred region.
Each column shows segmentation result until after reading the underlined word. Our model (second row) explicitly learns the progression of multimodal interaction with
convolutional LSTM, which helps long-term memorization
and correctly segments out the referred region compared
with the baseline model (first row) which uses languageonly LSTM.

also adopted by recent methods on referring object localization [38] and visual question answering tasks [1].
However, this sentence-to-image scheme does not reflect
how humans tackle this problem. In sentence-picture verification, it is found through eye tracking that when pictures
and sentences are presented together, people either follow
a image-sentence-image reading sequence, or go back-andforth between sentence and picture a number of times before
making the decision [33]. In other words, the interaction
between image and sentence should prevail from the beginning to the end of the sentence, instead of only happening
at the end of the sentence. Presumably this is because the
semantic information is more concrete and therefore more
easily remembered when grounded onto the image. For example, consider the expression “the man on the right wearing blue”. Without seeing an actual image, all information
in the sentence needs to be remembered, meaning the sentence embedding needs to encode IS MAN, ON RIGHT,
WEAR BLUE jointly. However, with the actual image avail-

1271

