Unsupervised Learning of Stereo Matching∗
Chao Zhou1 Hong Zhang1 Xiaoyong Shen2 Jiaya Jia1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent
{zhouc, zhangh}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk dylanshen@tencent.com leojia9@gmail.com

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks showed the ability in
stereo matching cost learning. Recent approaches learned
parameters from public datasets that have ground truth disparity maps. Due to the difficulty of labeling ground truth
depth, usable data for system training is rather limited,
making it difficult to apply the system to real applications.
In this paper, we present a framework for learning stereo
matching costs without human supervision. Our method updates network parameters in an iterative manner. It starts
with a randomly initialized network. Left-right check is
adopted to guide the training. Suitable matching is then
picked and used as training data in following iterations.
Our system finally converges to a stable state and performs
even comparably with other supervised methods.

1. Introduction
Stereo matching is a fundamental problem in computer
vision for estimating depth from digital images. As shown
in Figure 1, stereo matching takes two images of the same
scene after rectification and outputs the disparity map by
computing relative displacement of pixels between these
two images. Finally, relative depth can be obtained according to the disparity map.
Along the pipeline of stereo matching, computing and
aggregating the matching cost are the two key steps [10].
Several methods are developed to estimate distances varying from pixel space to feature space. Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNN) were exploited to learn
the matching cost of two image patches for stereo vision
[33, 8, 3, 18, 32]. These approaches treat the matching-cost
problem as a binary classification one. Given two patches,
the network predicts whether the two patches match or not.
The probability is directly taken as the initial matching cost.
Afterwards, cost aggregation updates local information according to image structure.
∗ This work is in part supported by a grant from the Research Grants
Council of the Hong Kong SAR (project No. 413113).

Figure 1: Stereo matching approaches take left and right
images as input as shown in (a) and (b), and output the disparity map (c).

Problems of Current CNNs Current CNN-based approaches improve performance in stereo matching in challenging public benchmark [6, 28, 23]. However, they do
not produce similarly satisfying results for real-life photos.
It is due to the limitation of currently available training data.
First, most datasets are of specific scenes. For example, the
KITTI dataset is for autonomous driving and all image pairs
are taken with street views. Networks trained on them can
hardly perform similarly well in general scenes.
Second, sizes of datasets with real photos are small.
Large-scale depth data [20, 5] are mostly synthesized from
3D models. Images in these datasets are different from realworld images in appearance and structure. On the other
hand, collecting high-accuracy depth data from stereo image pairs in various scenarios is very difficult, because of
involvement of 3D sensors such as light detection and ranging (LIDAR). In short, the insufficient-data problem largely
hinders this community from developing more advanced solutions or making better use of learning in stereo matching.
11567

