Learning to Estimate 3D Hand Pose from Single RGB Images
Christian Zimmermann, Thomas Brox
University of Freiburg
{zimmermann, brox}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
Low-cost consumer depth cameras and deep learning
have enabled reasonable 3D hand pose estimation from single depth images. In this paper, we present an approach that
estimates 3D hand pose from regular RGB images. This task
has far more ambiguities due to the missing depth information. To this end, we propose a deep network that learns
a network-implicit 3D articulation prior. Together with detected keypoints in the images, this network yields good estimates of the 3D pose. We introduce a large scale 3D hand
pose dataset based on synthetic hand models for training
the involved networks. Experiments on a variety of test sets,
including one on sign language recognition, demonstrate
the feasibility of 3D hand pose estimation on single color
images.

1. Introduction
The hand is the primary operating tool for humans.
Therefore, its location, orientation and articulation in space
is vital for many potential applications, for instance, object
handover in robotics, learning from demonstration, sign language and gesture recognition, and using the hand as an input device for man-machine interaction.
Full 3D hand pose estimation from single images is difficult because of many ambiguities, strong articulation, and
heavy self-occlusion, even more so than for the overall human body. Therefore, specific sensing equipment like data
gloves or markers are used, which restrict the application to
limited scenarios. Also the use of multiple cameras severly
limits the application domain. Most contemporary works
rely on the depth image from a depth camera. However,
depth cameras are not as commonly available as regular
color cameras, and they only work reliably in indoor environments.
In this paper, we present an approach to learn full 3D
hand pose estimation from single color images without the
need for any special equipment. We capitalize on the capability of deep networks to learn sensible priors from data
in order to resolve ambiguities. Our overall approach con-

Figure 1: Given a color image we detect keypoints in 2D
(shown overlayed) and learn a prior that allows us to estimate a normalized 3D hand pose.

sists of three deep networks that cover important subtasks
on the way to the 3D pose; see Figure 2. The first network
provides a hand segmentation to localize the hand in the image. Based on its output, the second network localizes hand
keypoints in the 2D images. The third network finally derives the 3D hand pose from the 2D keypoints, and is the
main contribution of this paper. In particular, we introduce
a canonical pose representation to make this learning task
feasible.
Another difficulty compared to 3D pose estimation at
the level of the human body is the restricted availability of
data. While human body pose estimation can leverage several motion capture databases, there is hardly any such data
for hands. To train a network, a large dataset with ground
truth 3D keypoints is needed. Since there is no such dataset
with sufficient variability, we created a synthetic dataset
with various data augmentation options.
The resulting hand pose estimation system yields very
promising results, both qualitatively and quantitatively on
existing small-scale datasets. We also demonstrate the use
of 3D hand pose for the task of sign language recognition.
The dataset and our trained networks are available online. 1

2. Related work
2D Human Pose Estimation. Spurred by the MPII Human Pose benchmark [3] and the advent of Convolutional
1 https://lmb.informatik.uni-freiburg.de/projects/hand3d/

4903

