Adaptive RNN Tree for Large-Scale Human Action Recognition
Wenbo Li1 Longyin Wen2
1
University at Albany, SUNY

Ming-Ching Chang1 Ser Nam Lim2,3 Siwei Lyu1
2
3
GE Global Research
Avitas System, a GE Venture

{wli20,mchang2,slyu}@albany.edu

{longyin.wen,limser}@ge.com

Abstract
In this work, we present the RNN Tree (RNN-T), an adaptive learning framework for skeleton based human action
recognition. Our method categorizes action classes and
uses multiple Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) in a treelike hierarchy. The RNNs in RNN-T are co-trained with the
action category hierarchy, which determines the structure of
RNN-T. Actions in skeletal representations are recognized
via a hierarchical inference process, during which individual RNNs differentiate finer-grained action classes with increasing confidence. Inference in RNN-T ends when any
RNN in the tree recognizes the action with high confidence,
or a leaf node is reached. RNN-T effectively addresses
two main challenges of large-scale action recognition: (i)
able to distinguish fine-grained action classes that are intractable using a single network, and (ii) adaptive to new
action classes by augmenting an existing model. We demonstrate the effectiveness of RNN-T/ACH method and compare
it with the state-of-the-art methods on a large-scale dataset
and several existing benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Human action recognition is an important but challenging problem. With advances in low-cost sensors and realtime joint coordinate estimation algorithms [24], reliable
3D skeleton-based action recognition (SAR) is now feasible [1]. Recent methods [5, 17, 23, 26, 37] use the RNN
models to advance the state-of-the-art performance of SAR.
Although much progress has been achieved, these methods are still facing two challenges. We term the first one
as the discriminative challenge. In SAR, a human action is
usually represented by the trajectories of approximately 20
key skeletal joints. This leads to a limited degree of freedom
of 3D joint coordinates. As more action classes are packed
into such a coordinate, the inter-class variations would be
subtler. This causes the ambiguity among action classes,
and makes decision boundaries between classes harder to
determine. We term the second challenge as adaptability, i.e., a desirable method should be able to handle new

Figure 1: Method overview. (a) Visualization of action instances
from three action classes. (b) A three-level RNN Tree (RNN-T)
associated with the learned Action Category Hierarchy (ACH) in
(c). Each circle represents an action class. Grey circles represent
ambiguous classes, and black circles represent unambiguous ones.
Action classes in the same box form one action category.
classes incrementally. Most previous methods handle new
action classes by a time-consuming re-training of the whole
model. Two methods [19, 22] use non-parametric models
to handle new classes incrementally, but it is hard to adapt
these methods to a large number of new classes.
In this paper, we propose an adaptive learning framework that aggregates multiple discriminative RNNs hierarchically for large-scale SAR. We partition action classes
into several action categories, and organize the action categories using a tree structure. We train a RNN model for
each action category and co-train all individual RNN models, which are organized as a tree model (RNN-T) with the
same structure as the action categories (see Figure 1). At
run time, RNN-T recognizes actions via a hierarchical inference process, during which individual RNNs differentiate action classes with increasing confidence. Ambiguous
decisions are deferred to sub-trees of RNNs where actions
to be recognized can be effectively differentiated by finergrained RNN classifiers. The inference is finished when the
action is recognized with a high confidence or a leaf node of
11444

