DSLR-Quality Photos on Mobile Devices with Deep Convolutional Networks
Andrey Ignatov1 , Nikolay Kobyshev1 , Radu Timofte1 , Kenneth Vanhoey1 , Luc Van Gool1,2
1
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zürich, Switzerland 2 ESAT - PSI, KU Leuven, Belgium
{ihnatova,nk,timofter,vanhoey,vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Despite a rapid rise in the quality of built-in smartphone
cameras, their physical limitations — small sensor size,
compact lenses and the lack of specific hardware, — impede
them to achieve the quality results of DSLR cameras. In this
work we present an end-to-end deep learning approach that
bridges this gap by translating ordinary photos into DSLRquality images. We propose learning the translation function using a residual convolutional neural network that improves both color rendition and image sharpness. Since the
standard mean squared loss is not well suited for measuring
perceptual image quality, we introduce a composite perceptual error function that combines content, color and texture
losses. The first two losses are defined analytically, while
the texture loss is learned in an adversarial fashion. We
also present DPED, a large-scale dataset that consists of
real photos captured from three different phones and one
high-end reflex camera. Our quantitative and qualitative
assessments reveal that the enhanced image quality is comparable to that of DSLR-taken photos, while the methodology is generalized to any type of digital camera.

1. Introduction
During the last several years there has been a significant
improvement in compact camera sensors quality, which has
brought mobile photography to a substantially new level.
Even low-end devices are now able to take reasonably good
photos in appropriate lighting conditions, thanks to their
advanced software and hardware tools for post-processing.
However, when it comes to artistic quality, mobile devices
still fall behind their DSLR counterparts. Larger sensors
and high-aperture optics yield better photo resolution, color
rendition and less noise, whereas their additional sensors
help to fine-tune shooting parameters. These physical differences result in strong obstacles, making DSLR camera
quality unattainable for compact mobile devices.
While a number of photographer tools for automatic image enhancement exist, they are usually focused on adjusting only global parameters such as contrast or brightness,

Figure 1: iPhone 3GS photo enhanced to DSLR-quality by
our method. Best zoomed on screen.
without improving texture quality or taking image semantics into account. Besides that, they are usually based on
a pre-defined set of rules that do not always consider the
specifics of a particular device. Therefore, the dominant
approach to photo post-processing is still based on manual
image correction using specialized retouching software.

1.1. Related work
The problem of automatic image quality enhancement
has not been addressed in its entirety in the area of computer
vision, though a number of sub-tasks and related problems
have been already successfully solved using deep learning
techniques. Such tasks are usually dealing with image-toimage translation problems, and their common property is
that they are targeted at removing artificially added artifacts
to the original images. Among the related problems are the
following:
Image super-resolution aims at restoring the original
image from its downscaled version. In [4] a CNN architecture and MSE loss are used for directly learning low to high
resolution mapping. It is the first CNN-based solution to
achieve top performance in single image super-resolution,
comparable with non-CNN methods [20]. The subsequent
works developed deeper and more complex CNN architectures (e.g., [10, 18, 16]). Currently, the best photo-realistic
results on this task are achieved using a VGG-based loss
function [9] and adversarial networks [12] that turned out
to be efficient at recovering plausible high-frequency components.
Image deblurring/dehazing tries to remove artificially
added haze or blur from the images. Usually, MSE is used
13277

