A Stagewise Refinement Model for Detecting Salient Objects in Images
Tiantian Wang1 , Ali Borji2 , Lihe Zhang1 , Pingping Zhang1 , Huchuan Lu1
1
Dalian University of Technology, China
2
University of Central Florida, USA
Tiantianwang.ice@gmail.com, aliborji@gmail.com,
jssxzhpp@mail.dlut.edu.cn, zhanglihe@dlut.edu.cn, lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been
successfully applied to a wide variety of problems in computer vision, including salient object detection. To detect
and segment salient objects accurately, it is necessary to
extract and combine high-level semantic features with lowlevel fine details simultaneously. This happens to be a challenge for CNNs as repeated subsampling operations such
as pooling and convolution lead to a significant decrease
in the initial image resolution, which results in loss of spatial details and finer structures. To remedy this problem,
here we propose to augment feedforward neural networks
with a novel pyramid pooling module and a multi-stage refinement mechanism for saliency detection. First, our deep
feedward net is used to generate a coarse prediction map
with much detailed structures lost. Then, refinement nets
are integrated with local context information to refine the
preceding saliency maps generated in the master branch in
a stagewise manner. Further, a pyramid pooling module
is applied for different-region-based global context aggregation. Empirical evaluations over six benchmark datasets
show that our proposed method compares favorably against
the state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Saliency detection, a fundamental topic in computer vision, aims to identify and segment objects that attract human attention in images. Early saliency models, inspired by
the human visual attention mechanisms, attempted to predict spatial locations where an observer may fixate during
free-viewing of natural scenes (e.g., [21, 20, 39, 5, 6], which
are vital in understanding scenes (e.g., describing a scenes,
navigation, etc). A strand of saliency research has focused
on object-level segmentation since the pioneering works of
Liu et al., [34] and Achanta et al., [1]. A large number
of follow up works have been reported based on different
ideas (e.g., [14, 9, 40, 24, 57, 28, 7]. Salient object detec-

tion models have gained broad interest recently due to their
applications in several fields such as tracking [19], image
understanding [54, 45], person re-identification [4], image
captioning [51, 13, 12], visual question answering [32], and
object proposal generation [2].
Saliency models can be roughly divided into two categories: unsupervised stimuli-driven and learning-based
task-driven approaches. Unsupervised methods mainly exploit low-level visual features and cues, such as color, motion and center-surround contrast to construct a saliency
map. However, purely utilizing low-level cues can hardly
capture high-level semantic knowledge between the objects and their context. In contrast, learning-based approaches incorporate high-level information to better distinguish
salient objects from the background clutter. This, however, often requires supervised learning with manually labeled
ground truth maps.
Recently, deep learning based approaches, in particular
the convolutional neural networks (CNNs), have delivered
remarkable performance in many recognition tasks. However, these approaches pose clear limitations when dealing with dense prediction tasks such as semantic segmentation [8, 36], scene parsing [35] and saliency detection.
Multiple stages of spatial pooling and convolutional layers progressively downsample the initial image which results
in losing much of the fine image structure. This general
architecture results in low-resolution feature maps that are
invariant to pixel-level variations thus useful for extracting
object-level information. This is beneficial for the classification task which does not need spatial information, but
presents challenges for densely segmenting salient objects.
To resolve the above-mentioned limitation, in this paper, we propose a novel stage-wise model based on spatial
pyramid pooling module [55] which aggregates multiscale
global context priors. The stage-wise refinement network
efficiently merges high-level semantic knowledge encoded
in the master network layers with the spatially rich information of low-level features encoded in the refinement net. The
master net helps locate salient objects, while the refinement
4321
4019

