GPLAC: Generalizing Vision-Based Robotic Skills using Weakly Labeled Images
Avi Singh, Larry Yang, Sergey Levine
University Of California, Berkeley

Abstract
We tackle the problem of learning robotic sensorimotor
control policies that can generalize to visually diverse and
unseen environments. Achieving broad generalization typically requires large datasets, which are difficult to obtain
for task-specific interactive processes such as reinforcement learning or learning from demonstration. However,
much of the visual diversity in the world can be captured
through passively collected datasets of images or videos.
In our method, which we refer to as GPLAC (Generalized
Policy Learning with Attentional Classifier), we use both
interaction data and weakly labeled image data to augment
the generalization capacity of sensorimotor policies. Our
method combines multitask learning on action selection and
an auxiliary binary classification objective, together with
a convolutional neural network architecture that uses an
attentional mechanism to avoid distractors. We show that
pairing interaction data from just a single environment with
a diverse dataset of weakly labeled data results in greatly
improved generalization to unseen environments, and show
that this generalization depends on both the auxiliary objective and the attentional architecture that we propose. We
demonstrate our results in both simulation and on a real
robotic manipulator, and demonstrate substantial improvement over standard convolutional architectures and domain
adaptation methods.

1. Introduction
We can learn about the world through interaction [45]
as well as passive perception. Interactive learning forms a
crucial part of the development process of humans and animals, famously demonstrated in an experiment on kitten
rearing that involved immobilized and freely moving cats
constrained to experience similar visual inputs [18]. However, interaction is not the only way that we can acquire
knowledge. We can combine our actively collected experiences with passive observations, such as observations of
people and events, pictures, and videos, in order to acquire
more generalizable and powerful skills.
Just as with human learning, robotic learning can also

Figure 1. Illustration of our problem setup. A robot (left) must
learn a sensorimotor skill, which in this case involves pushing a
mug. The robot receives strong supervision for a single mug in
a single environment, which here consists of example demonstrations. The robot is also provided with a set of weakly supervised
images, which are not collected from a robotic interaction scenario, where the label only signifies whether the image contains
a mug. From these two sources of data, the robot must learn
a sensorimotor policy that will push new mugs in new environments. See video at: http://people.eecs.berkeley.
edu/˜avisingh/iccv17/.

use both interactively collected and passively observed data.
If we want to learn control policies for robots or other cyberphysical systems, we must provide them with experiences that include perception and actuation, either in the
form of autonomously collected experience for reinforcement learning, or demonstration data for imitation learning.
And just as with human learning, the amount of interactive
data that the robot can practically collect is limited, while
the amount of visual observations that can be obtained, for
example, using images from the Internet, is orders of magnitude larger in both quantity and diversity. For this reason, the conventional approach to robot perception typically
makes use of computer vision systems that are trained using
standard supervised datasets, which are then manually interfaced with robotic control and planning modules to perform
tasks in the real world. However, this systems-level solution
to robotic perception does not make use of the close cou15851

