CoupleNet: Coupling Global Structure with Local Parts for Object Detection
Yousong Zhu1,2

Chaoyang Zhao1,2 Jinqiao Wang1,2 Xu Zhao1,2 Yi Wu3,4 Hanqing Lu1,2
1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Technology, Nanjing Audit University, Nanjing, China
4
Department of Medicine, Indiana University, Indianapolis, USA

{yousong.zhu, chaoyang.zhao, jqwang, xu.zhao, luhq}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, ywu.china@gmail.com

Local part confidence

Abstract

sofa:0.08

PSRoI

The region-based Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
detectors such as Faster R-CNN or R-FCN have already
shown promising results for object detection by combining the region proposal subnetwork and the classification
subnetwork together. Although R-FCN has achieved higher
detection speed while keeping the detection performance,
the global structure information is ignored by the positionsensitive score maps. To fully explore the local and global
properties, in this paper, we propose a novel fully convolutional network, named as CoupleNet, to couple the global
structure with local parts for object detection. Specifically, the object proposals obtained by the Region Proposal
Network (RPN) are fed into the the coupling module which
consists of two branches. One branch adopts the positionsensitive RoI (PSRoI) pooling to capture the local part information of the object, while the other employs the RoI
pooling to encode the global and context information. Next, we design different coupling strategies and normalization
ways to make full use of the complementary advantages between the global and local branches. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. We achieve
state-of-the-art results on all three challenging datasets, i.e.
a mAP of 82.7% on VOC07, 80.4% on VOC12, and 34.4%
on COCO. Codes will be made publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
General object detection requires to accurately locate
and classify all targets in the image or video. Compared
to specific object detection, such as face, pedestrian and vehicle detection, general object detection often faces more
challenges due to the large inter-class appearance differences. The variations arise not only from changes in a va1 https://github.com/tshizys/CoupleNet

pooling
sofa:0.78

RoI

pooling

sofa

sofa:0.45

Global confidence

Figure 1. A toy example of object detection by combing local and
global information. Only considering the local part information or
global structure leads to low confidence score. By coupling the two kinds of information together, we can detect the sofa accurately
with a confidence score of 0.78. Best viewed in color.

riety of non-rigid deformations, but also due to the truncations, occlusions and inter-class interference. However,
no matter how complicated the objects are, when humans identify a target, the recognition of object categories is
subserved by both a global process that retrieves structural
information and a local process that is sensitive to individual parts. This motivates us to build a detection model that
fused both global and local information.
With the revival of Convolutional Neural Networks [15]
(CNN), CNN-based object detection pipelines [8, 9, 16, 21]
have been proposed consecutively and made impressive improvements in generic benchmarks, e.g. PASCAL VOC [5]
and MS COCO [17]. As two representative region-based
CNN approaches, Fast/Faster R-CNN [8, 21] uses a certain
subnetwork to predict the category of each region proposal
while R-FCN [16] conducts the inference with the positionsensitive score maps. Through removing the RoI-wise subnetwork, R-FCN has achieved higher detection speed while
keeping the detection performance. However, the global
14126

