Shape Inpainting using 3D Generative Adversarial Network and Recurrent
Convolutional Networks
Weiyue Wang1
Qiangui Huang1
Suya You2
1
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California
{weiyuewa,qianguih,chaoy,uneumann}@usc.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in convolutional neural networks have
shown promising results in 3D shape completion. But due to
GPU memory limitations, these methods can only produce
low-resolution outputs. To inpaint 3D models with semantic plausibility and contextual details, we introduce a hybrid framework that combines a 3D Encoder-Decoder Generative Adversarial Network (3D-ED-GAN) and a Longterm Recurrent Convolutional Network (LRCN). The 3DED-GAN is a 3D convolutional neural network trained with
a generative adversarial paradigm to fill missing 3D data
in low-resolution. LRCN adopts a recurrent neural network architecture to minimize GPU memory usage and incorporates an Encoder-Decoder pair into a Long Shortterm Memory Network. By handling the 3D model as a sequence of 2D slices, LRCN transforms a coarse 3D shape
into a more complete and higher resolution volume. While
3D-ED-GAN captures global contextual structure of the 3D
shape, LRCN localizes the fine-grained details. Experimental results on both real-world and synthetic data show reconstructions from corrupted models result in complete and
high-resolution 3D objects.

1. Introduction
Data collected by 3D sensors (e.g. LiDAR, Kinect) are
often impacted by occlusion, sensor noise, and illumination,
leading to incomplete and noisy 3D models. For example, a
building scan occluded by a tree leads to a hole or gap in the
3D building model. However, a human can comprehend and
describe the geometry of the complete building based on the
corrupted 3D model. Our 3D inpainting method attempts to
mimic this ability to reconstruct complete 3D models from
incomplete data.
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based methods [12, 20, 18, 29] yield impressive results for 2D image
We thank Alex Tong Lin for discussions and proofreading.

2

Chao Yang1
Ulrich Neumann1
US Army Research Laboratory
Playa Vista, California
suya.you.civ@mail.mil

generation and image inpainting. Generating and inpainting 3D models is a new and more challenging problem due
to its higher dimensionality. The availability of large 3D
CAD datasets [5, 27] and CNNs for voxel (spatial occupancy) models [26, 21, 8] enabled progress in learning 3D
representation, shape generation and completion. Despite
their encouraging results, artifacts still persists in their generated shapes. Moreover, their methods are all based on 3D
CNN, which impedes their ability to handle higher resolution data due to limited GPU memory.
In this paper, a new system for 3D object inpainting
is introduced to overcome the aforementioned limitations.
Given a 3D object with holes, we aim to (1) fill the missing
or damaged portions and reconstruct a complete 3D structure, and (2) further predict high-resolution shapes with
fine-grained details. We propose a hybrid network structure
based on 3D CNN that leverages the generalization power
of a Generative Adversarial model and the memory efficiency of Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) to handle 3D
data sequentially. The framework is illustrated in Figure 1.
More specifically, a 3D Encoder-Decoder Generative
Adversarial Network (3D-ED-GAN) is firstly proposed to
generalize geometric structures and map corrupted scans
to complete shapes in low resolution. Like a variational
autoencoder (VAE) [17, 21], 3D-ED-GAN utilizes an encoder to map voxelized 3D objects into a probabilistic latent space, and a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)
to help the decoder predict the complete volumetric objects
from the latent feature representation. We train this network
by minimizing both contextual loss and an adversarial loss.
Using GAN, we can not only preserve contextual consistency of the input data, but also inherit information from
data distribution.
Secondly, a Long-term Recurrent Convolutional Network (LRCN) is further introduced to obtain local geometric details and produce much higher resolution volumes. 3D CNN requires much more GPU memory than
2D CNN, which impedes volumetric network analysis of
high-resolution 3D data. To overcome this limitation, we

2298

