Towards Diverse and Natural Image Descriptions via a Conditional GAN
Bo Dai1 Sanja Fidler23 Raquel Urtasun234 Dahua Lin1
1
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
University of Toronto 3 Vector Institute 4 Uber Advanced Technologies Group
db014@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

fidler@cs.toronto.edu

urtasun@cs.toronto.edu dhlin@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

1. Introduction
Generating descriptions of images has been an important task in computer vision. Compared to other forms of
semantic summary, e.g. object tagging, linguistic descriptions are often richer, more comprehensive, and a more
natural way to convey image content. Along with the recent surge of deep learning technologies, there has been remarkable progress in image captioning over the past few
years [11, 29–32]. Latest studies on this topic often adopt
a combination of an LSTM or its variant and a CNN. The
former is to produce the word sequences while the latter is
to capture the visual features of the images.
The advance in image captioning has been marked as a

G-MLE

G-GAN
human
G-MLE
G-GAN
human

Despite the substantial progress in recent years, the image captioning techniques are still far from being perfect.
Sentences produced by existing methods, e.g. those based
on RNNs, are often overly rigid and lacking in variability. This issue is related to a learning principle widely
used in practice, that is, to maximize the likelihood of training samples. This principle encourages high resemblance
to the “ground-truth” captions, while suppressing other
reasonable descriptions. Conventional evaluation metrics,
e.g. BLEU and METEOR, also favor such restrictive methods. In this paper, we explore an alternative approach,
with the aim to improve the naturalness and diversity – two
essential properties of human expression. Specifically, we
propose a new framework based on Conditional Generative
Adversarial Networks (CGAN), which jointly learns a generator to produce descriptions conditioned on images and
an evaluator to assess how well a description fits the visual
content. It is noteworthy that training a sequence generator
is nontrivial. We overcome the difficulty by Policy Gradient,
a strategy stemming from Reinforcement Learning, which
allows the generator to receive early feedback along the
way. We tested our method on two large datasets, where
it performed competitively against real people in our user
study and outperformed other methods on various tasks.

BLEU E-GAN

A cow standing in a field next to houses
A cow standing in a field with houses
A cow standing in a field of grass
Many cows grazing in the grass field in front of houses
Several cows grazing on grassy area in a pasture
A heard of cattle grazing on a lush green field
Grey cow walking in a large green field in front of house
A cow in a large open field with a house in the background
A cow standing in a large open grass field
A train that is pulling into a station
A train that is going into a train station
A train that is parked in a train station

A passenger train is going down the tracks
A beige blue and white train blocking a train track
A large long train is going down the tracks in a waiting area
A train pulling into a station outside during the day
A passenger train moving through a rail yard
A long passenger train pulling up to a station

Figure 1: This figure shows two images with descriptions generated by humans, an LSTM net trained with our GAN-based framework (G-GAN), and an LSTM net trained with MLE (G-MLE).
The last two columns compare the metric values of BLEU-3 and
E-GAN, the evaluator trained using our method. As we can see,
the sentences generated by G-GAN are more natural and demonstrate higher variability, as compared to those by G-MLE. Also,
the E-GAN metrics are more consistent with human’s evaluations,
while BLEU only favors those that significantly overlap with the
training samples in detailed wording.

prominent success of AI1 . It has been reported [29, 30] that
with certain metrics, like BLEU [23] or CIDEr [28], stateof-the-art techniques have already surpassed human’s performance. A natural question to ask is then: has the problem
of generating image descriptions been solved? Let us take
a step back, and look at a sample of the current results. Figure 1 shows two vivid scenes together with three sentences
produced by the Encoder-and-Decoder model [29] (marked
as “G-MLE”), a state-of-the-art caption generator. Though
faithfully describing the content of the images, these sentences feel rigid, dry, and lacking in vitality.
This is not surprising. Our brief survey (see Section 2)
1 ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LIFE IN 2030, https://
ai100.stanford.edu/2016-report

12970

