Weakly Supervised Summarization of Web Videos
Rameswar Panda1
Abir Das2
Ziyan Wu3
1
2
UC Riverside
Boston University
{rpand002@,amitrc@ece.}ucr.edu

Jan Ernst3
Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury1
Siemens Corporate Technology

3

dasabir@bu.edu

{ziyan.wu,jan.ernst}@siemens.com

Abstract
Most of the prior works summarize videos by either exploring different heuristically designed criteria in an unsupervised way or developing fully supervised algorithms by
leveraging human-crafted training data in form of videosummary pairs or importance annotations. However, unsupervised methods are blind to the video category and often
fail to produce semantically meaningful video summaries.
On the other hand, acquisition of large amount of training data in supervised approaches is non-trivial and may
lead to a biased model. Different from existing methods, we
introduce a weakly supervised approach that requires only
video-level annotation for summarizing web videos. Casting the problem as a weakly supervised learning problem,
we propose a flexible deep 3D CNN architecture to learn
the notion of importance using only video-level annotation,
and without any human-crafted training data. Specifically,
our main idea is to leverage multiple videos of a category
to automatically learn a parametric model for categorizing
videos and then adopt the model to find important segments
from a given video as the ones which have maximum influence to the model output. Furthermore, to unleash the full
potential of our 3D CNN architecture, we also explored a
series of good practices to reduce the influence of limited
training data while summarizing videos. Experiments on
two challenging and diverse datasets well demonstrate that
our approach produces superior quality video summaries
compared to several recently proposed approaches.

1. Introduction
Video summarization, which automates the process of
extracting a brief yet informative synopsis of a long video,
has attracted intense attention in the recent years. Much
progress has been made in developing a variety of ways to
summarize videos, by either limiting the scope to a specific
context (e.g., sports, news) [47, 62, 29] or exploring different design criteria (representativeness [10, 7, 6], interestingness [11, 45]) in an unsupervised manner. More recently,
we see a shift of paradigm in video summarization. Supervision in terms of labeled summary [18, 15, 48, 72, 69]

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Raw video, (b) Video summary. Given a set of videos
with only video-level annotation (e.g., surfing), our method learns
what aspects are important within a category, such as riding a wave
with a surfboard, off the lip, and cutback in surfing.

or importance annotation [69] is being used to train video
summarization models which traditionally has been treated
as an unsupervised learning problem.
Let us consider a video of surfing (see Fig. 1). An unsupervised approach, being blind to the video category, would
fail to single out the short segments corresponding to riding a wave with a surfboard, off the lip, and cutback, etc,
whereas a supervised method would require huge amount
of human-labeled video-summary pairs which are difficult
to collect especially for long and unconstrained web videos.
Moreover, it is generally feasible to have only a limited
number of users to annotate training videos, which may lead
to a biased summarization model.
On the other hand, collecting videos with video-level annotation (e.g., surfing) is much easier, since many videos
with attached tags are readily available on open video
datasets such as YouTube-8M [1] as well as on web. Motivated by this observation, we pose an important question in
this paper: Can weakly supervised learning with only videolevel annotation, be leveraged upon for summarzing web
videos? This is an extremely relevant problem to address
due to the difficulty and non-scalability of obtaining large
amount of human-annotated training data for web videos.
Recently, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have
witnessed great success in many vision tasks such as image
classification [26], object detection [14], localization [73,
63], and semantic segmentation [30]. Similarly, for videos,
3D CNNs have shown better performance in activity recognition, compared to 2D CNNs since they exploit the temporal aspects of activities typically shown in videos [60, 21].
13657

