Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Face Recognition in Unlabeled Videos
Kihyuk Sohn1 Sifei Liu2 Guangyu Zhong3 Xiang Yu1 Ming-Hsuan Yang2 Manmohan Chandraker1,4
1
NEC Labs America 2 UC Merced 3 Dalian University of Technology 4 UC San Diego

Abstract
Despite rapid advances in face recognition, there remains
a clear gap between the performance of still image-based
face recognition and video-based face recognition, due to
the vast difference in visual quality between the domains and
the difficulty of curating diverse large-scale video datasets.
This paper addresses both of those challenges, through an
image to video feature-level domain adaptation approach,
to learn discriminative video frame representations. The
framework utilizes large-scale unlabeled video data to reduce the gap between different domains while transferring
discriminative knowledge from large-scale labeled still images. Given a face recognition network that is pretrained in
the image domain, the adaptation is achieved by (i) distilling
knowledge from the network to a video adaptation network
through feature matching, (ii) performing feature restoration through synthetic data augmentation and (iii) learning
a domain-invariant feature through a domain adversarial
discriminator. We further improve performance through a
discriminator-guided feature fusion that boosts high-quality
frames while eliminating those degraded by video domainspecific factors. Experiments on the YouTube Faces and
IJB-A datasets demonstrate that each module contributes
to our feature-level domain adaptation framework and substantially improves video face recognition performance to
achieve state-of-the-art accuracy. We demonstrate qualitatively that the network learns to suppress diverse artifacts in
videos such as pose, illumination or occlusion without being
explicitly trained for them.

1. Introduction
Motion of objects or the observer in a video sequence is
a powerful cue for perceptual tasks such as shape determination or identity recognition [5, 10]. For face recognition in
computer vision, recent years have seen the success of emerging approaches in video face analysis [37, 19, 4, 38, 20]
and several image-based face recognition engines [32, 24]
on video face recognition benchmarks [37, 17]. But it is
arguably true that these efforts have been outpaced by imagebased face recognition engines that perform comparably
or even better than human perception in certain settings
[32, 29, 26, 15]. For example, a verification accuracy of

Feature
matching loss
(Sec 3.1)
source: labeled image
RFNet

Feature
restoraAon loss
(Sec 3.2)
Image
classiﬁcaAon loss
(Sec 3.2)

domain bridge: synthesized image
VDNet

Domain
adversarial loss
(Sec 3.3)

target: unlabeled video

Figure 1. We propose an unsupervised domain adaptation method
for video face recognition using large-scale unlabeled videos and
labeled still images. To help bridge the gap between two domains,
we introduce a new domain of synthesized images by applying a
set of image transformations specific to videos such as motion blur
to labeled images that simulates a video frame from still image. We
utilize images, synthesized images, and unlabeled videos for domain adversarial training. Finally, we train a video domain-adapted
network (VDNet) with domain adversarial loss (Section 3.3) as
well as by distilling knowledge from pretrained reference network
(RFNet) through feature matching (Section 3.1), feature restoration
and image classification (Section 3.2) losses.

95.12% is reported by [26] on the YouTube Faces dataset,
much lower than 99.63% on the LFW dataset.
Besides better understanding of training convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), a key ingredient to the success of
image-based face recognition is the availability of large-scale
datasets of labeled face images collected from the web [40].
Thus, one source of difficulty for video face recognition is
attributable to the lack of similar large-scale labeled datasets.
The number of images used to train the state-of-the-art face
recognition engines varies from 200K [29] to 200M [26]
collected with at least 10K different identities or as many
as 8M. In contrast, large-scale labeled video database is
publicly available to date, such as YouTube face dataset
(YTF) [37], only contains 3.4K videos in total from 1.5K
different subjects. Although more frames may be labeled,
it is difficult to collect a dataset with as many variations
without a surge in dataset size and labeling effort.
An avenue for overcoming the lack of labeled training
data in the video domain is to transform labeled still face
images so that they look like images captured from videos.

3210

