Dynamics Enhanced Multi-Camera Motion Segmentation from Unsynchronized
Videos∗
Xikang Zhang, Bengisu Ozbay, Mario Sznaier, Octavia Camps
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Northeastern University, Boston MA 02115, US
zhangxk@ece.neu.edu, ozbay.b@husky.neu.edu, {msznaier,camps}@coe.neu.edu

Abstract
This paper considers the multi-camera motion segmentation problem using unsynchronized videos: given two video
clips containing several moving objects, captured by unregistered, unsynchronized cameras with different viewpoints,
our goal is to assign features to moving objects in the scene.
This problem challenges existing methods, due to the lack of
registration information and correspondences across cameras. To solve it, we propose a method that combines shape
and dynamical information and does not require spatiotemporal registration or shared features. As shown in the
paper, this combination results in improved performance
even in the single camera case, and allows for solving the
multi-camera segmentation problem with a computational
cost similar to that of existing single-view techniques.

1. Introduction
Motion segmentation using data collected with a single
camera has been extensively studied in the past decade,
[7, 10, 15, 17, 18]. A large portion of the recent work in
the area is based on the fact, noted in [3], that trajectories
from k (rigid) motions lie in a union of subspaces (each of
dimension at most 4), embedded in R2F , where F denotes
the number of frames, allowing for reducing the motion segmentation problem to subspace clustering. While most of
the techniques for solving the later problem require solving
a regularized optimization problem, [7] has shown that a
very efficient, robust algorithm for subspace clustering can
be obtained by simply considering a Robust Shape Interaction Matrix (RSIM), obtained by row-normalization and
exponentiation of the Shape Interaction Matrix introduced
in [3]. Alternatively, affinity based methods, apply spectral
clustering to an affinity matrix directly computed from the
∗ This work was supported in part by NSF grants IIS–1318145, ECCS–
1404163, CMMI–1638234; AFOSR grant FA9550-15-1-0392; and the
Alert DHS COE under Award Number 2013-ST-061-ED0001.

Figure 1: Multi-camera motion segmentation is challenging
due to the lack of feature correspondences. We propose a
new correspondence-free method to tackle this problem.

point trajectories [1, 9, 14]. Finally, [13] proposed using
a dynamics motivated similarity matrix, where the distance
between two points was given by the order of the model
needed to jointly explain the corresponding trajectories.
The methods above work well for the single camera
case, even in the presence of outliers and missing data, On
the other hand, these techniques fail in the unsynchronized
multi-camera scenario of interest here, since in this case the
underlying assumption that points from the same motion
lie on a low order subspace no longer holds. In principle,
this scenario could be handled by performing independent
segmentations in each camera and then seeking correspondences across cameras using additional information. For
instance, [19] exploits shape information. However, this requires viewing a set of point features in both cameras. In
[5] cross-camera trajectory labeling is achieved by considering all possible assignments and selecting the one that
minimizes the cost in a non-linear least squares problem.
While this approach works well for scenes containing one
or two moving objects, the cost of solving the non-linear
least squares problem is not trivial, and overall complexity
increases combinatorially with the number of objects.
Motivated by these difficulties, in this paper we propose
a new approach that exploits both shape and dynamical information and does not require spatio-temporal registration
14668

