Monocular Dense 3D Reconstruction of a Complex Dynamic Scene
from Two Perspective Frames
Suryansh Kumar1
Yuchao Dai1,2
Hongdong Li1,3
1
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
2
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
3
Australia Centre for Robotic Vision

Input frames

Depth map

Scene normals

Dense 3D point cloud

Figure 1: Dense 3D reconstruction of a complex dynamic scene from two perspective frames using our method. Here, both the subject
and the camera are moving with respect to each other. (MPI Sintel [5] alley 1 frame 1 and 10).

Abstract
This paper proposes a new approach for monocular
dense 3D reconstruction of a complex dynamic scene from
two perspective frames. By applying superpixel oversegmentation to the image, we model a generically dynamic
(hence non-rigid) scene with a piecewise planar and rigid
approximation. In this way, we reduce the dynamic reconstruction problem to a “3D jigsaw puzzle” problem which
takes pieces from an unorganized “soup of superpixels”.
We show that our method provides an effective solution
to the inherent relative scale ambiguity in structure-frommotion. Since our method does not assume a template prior,
or per-object segmentation, or knowledge about the rigidity of the dynamic scene, it is applicable to a wide range
of scenarios. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and
real monocular sequences demonstrate the superiority of
our method compared with the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Accurate recovery of dense 3D structure of dynamic
scenes from images has many applications in motion cap-

ture [19], robot navigation[11], scene understanding [12],
computer animation [5] etc. In particular, the proliferation
of monocular camera in almost all modern mobile devices
has elevated the demand for sophisticated dense reconstruction algorithm. When a scene is rigid, its 3D reconstruction
can be estimated using conventional rigid-SfM (structurefrom-motion) techniques [13]. However, real-world scenes
are more complex containing not only rigid motions but
also non-rigid deformations, as well as their combination.
For example, a typical outdoor traffic scene consists of both
multiple rigid motions of vehicles, and non-rigid motions of
pedestrians etc. Therefore, it is highly desirable to develop
a unified monocular 3D reconstruction framework that can
handle generic (complex and dynamic) scenes.
To tackle the problem of monocular 3D reconstruction
for dynamic scenes, a straightforward idea is to first presegment the scene into different regions, each corresponding to a single rigidly moving object or a rigid part of an object, then apply rigid-SfM technique to each of the regions.
This idea of object-level motion segmentation has been used
in previous work for non-rigid reconstruction [22][23], and
for scene-flow estimation [20]. Russel et al. [24] proposed
to simultaneously segment a dynamic scene into its con14649

