Deformable Convolutional Networks
Jifeng Dai∗ Haozhi Qi∗,†

Yuwen Xiong∗,†

Yi Li∗,†

Guodong Zhang∗,†

Han Hu

Yichen Wei

Microsoft Research Asia
{jifdai,v-haoq,v-yuxio,v-yii,v-guodzh,hanhu,yichenw}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are inherently
limited to model geometric transformations due to the
fixed geometric structures in their building modules. In
this work, we introduce two new modules to enhance the
transformation modeling capability of CNNs, namely, deformable convolution and deformable RoI pooling. Both
are based on the idea of augmenting the spatial sampling
locations in the modules with additional offsets and learning the offsets from the target tasks, without additional
supervision. The new modules can readily replace their
plain counterparts in existing CNNs and can be easily
trained end-to-end by standard back-propagation, giving
rise to deformable convolutional networks. Extensive experiments validate the performance of our approach. For
the first time, we show that learning dense spatial transformation in deep CNNs is effective for sophisticated vision tasks such as object detection and semantic segmentation. The code is released at https://github.com/
msracver/Deformable-ConvNets.

1. Introduction
A key challenge in visual recognition is how to accommodate geometric variations or model geometric transformations in object scale, pose, viewpoint, and part deformation. In general, there are two ways. The first is to build the
training datasets with sufficient desired variations. This is
usually realized by augmenting the existing data samples,
e.g., by affine transformation. Robust representations can
be learned from the data, but usually at the cost of expensive training and complex model parameters. The second
is to use transformation-invariant features and algorithms.
This category subsumes many well known techniques, such
as SIFT (scale invariant feature transform) [38] and sliding
window based object detection paradigm.
There are two drawbacks in above ways. First, the geo∗ Equal contribution. †This work is done when Haozhi Qi, Yuwen
Xiong, Yi Li and Guodong Zhang are interns at Microsoft Research Asia

metric transformations are assumed fixed and known. Such
prior knowledge is used to augment the data, and design the
features and algorithms. This assumption prevents generalization to new tasks possessing unknown geometric transformations, which are not properly modeled. Second, handcrafted design of invariant features and algorithms could be
difficult or infeasible for overly complex transformations,
even when they are known.
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [31]
have achieved significant success for visual recognition
tasks, such as image classification [27], semantic segmentation [37], and object detection [14]. Nevertheless, they still
share the above two drawbacks. Their capability of modeling geometric transformations mostly comes from the extensive data augmentation, the large model capacity, and
some simple hand-crafted modules (e.g., max-pooling [1]
for small translation-invariance).
In short, CNNs are inherently limited to model large,
unknown transformations. The limitation originates from
the fixed geometric structures of CNN modules: a convolution unit samples the input feature map at fixed locations; a pooling layer reduces the spatial resolution at a
fixed ratio; a RoI (region-of-interest) pooling layer separates a RoI into fixed spatial bins, etc. There lacks internal
mechanisms to handle the geometric transformations. This
causes noticeable problems. For one example, the receptive field sizes of all activation units in the same CNN layer
are the same. This is undesirable for high level CNN layers that encode the semantics over spatial locations. Because different locations may correspond to objects with
different scales or deformation, adaptive determination of
scales or receptive field sizes is desirable for visual recognition with fine localization, e.g., semantic segmentation using fully convolutional networks [37]. For another example, while object detection has seen significant and rapid
progress [14, 47, 13, 42, 41, 36, 6] recently, all approaches
still rely on the primitive bounding box based feature extraction. This is sub-optimal, especially for non-rigid objects.
In this work, we introduce two new modules that greatly
enhance CNNs’ capability of modeling geometric transformations. The first is deformable convolution. It adds 2D
1764

