Deep Metric Learning with Angular Loss
Jian Wang, Feng Zhou, Shilei Wen, Xiao Liu and Yuanqing Lin
Baidu Research
{wangjian33,zhoufeng09,wenshilei,liuxiao12,linyuanqing}@baidu.com

Ford Edge SUV

Abstract
The modern image search system requires semantic understanding of image, and a key yet under-addressed problem is to learn a good metric for measuring the similarity
between images. While deep metric learning has yielded
impressive performance gains by extracting high level abstractions from image data, a proper objective loss function
becomes the central issue to boost the performance. In this
paper, we propose a novel angular loss, which takes angle relationship into account, for learning better similarity
metric. Whereas previous metric learning methods focus on
optimizing the similarity (contrastive loss) or relative similarity (triplet loss) of image pairs, our proposed method
aims at constraining the angle at the negative point of triplet
triangles. Several favorable properties are observed when
compared with conventional methods. First, scale invariance is introduced, improving the robustness of objective
against feature variance. Second, a third-order geometric
constraint is inherently imposed, capturing additional local
structure of triplet triangles than contrastive loss or triplet
loss. Third, better convergence has been demonstrated by
experiments on three publicly available datasets.

1. Introduction
Metric learning for computer vision aims at finding appropriate similarity measurements between pairs of images
that preserve desired distance structure. A good similarity
can improve the performance of image search, particularly
when the number of categories is very large [2] or unknown.
Classical metric learning methods studied the case of finding a better Mahalanobis distance in linear space. However,
linear transformation has a limited number of parameters
and cannot model high-order correlations between the original data dimensions. With the ability of directly learning
non-linear feature representation, deep metric learning has
achieved promising results on various tasks, such as visual
product search [1, 20, 17], face recognition [6, 30, 24], feature matching [7], fine-grained image classification [33, 38],
zero-shot learning [11, 35] and collaborative filtering [13].

Ford Ranger SuperCab

Anchor
Positive
Negative

Ford Ranger SuperCab
Volvo C30 Hatchback
Volvo C30 Hatchback

GMC Canyon Extended Cab

Figure 1. Example of feature embedding computed by t-SNE [32]
for the Stanford car dataset [18], where the images of Ford Ranger
SuperCab (right) have a more diverse distribution than Volvo C30
Hatchback (left). Conventional triplet loss has difficulty in dealing
with such unbalanced intra-class variation. The proposed angular
loss addresses this issue by minimizing the scale-invariant angle at
the negative point.

Despite the various forms, the major work of deep metric learning can be categorized as minimizing either the
contrastive loss (a.k.a., Siamese network) [6] or the triplet
loss [34, 5]. However, it has been widely noticed that directly optimizing distance-based objectives in deep learning framework is difficult, requiring many practical tricks,
such as multi-task learning [1, 38] or hard negative mining [33, 8]. Recent work including the lifted structure [26]
and the N-pair loss [25] proposed to more effectively mine
relations among samples within a mini-batch. Nevertheless, all of these works rely on certain distance measurement between pairs of similar and dis-similar images. We
hypothesize that the difficulty of training deep metric learning also comes from the limitation by defining the objective
only in distance. First, distance metric is sensitive to scale
change. Traditional triplet loss constrains the distance gap
between dis-similar clusters. However, it is inappropriate
to choose the same absolute margin for clusters in different
scales of intra-class variation. For instance, Fig. 1 shows the
t-SNE [32] feature embedding of Stanford car dataset [18],
where the sample distribution of Ford Ranger SuperCabs
4321
2593

