Modelling the Scene Dependent Imaging in Cameras
with a Deep Neural Network
Seonghyeon Nam
Yonsei University

Seon Joo Kim
Yonsei University

shnnam@yonsei.ac.kr

seonjookim@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
We present a novel deep learning framework that models
the scene dependent image processing inside cameras. Often called as the radiometric calibration, the process of recovering RAW images from processed images (JPEG format
in the sRGB color space) is essential for many computer vision tasks that rely on physically accurate radiance values.
All previous works rely on the deterministic imaging model
where the color transformation stays the same regardless of
the scene and thus they can only be applied for images taken
under the manual mode. In this paper, we propose a datadriven approach to learn the scene dependent and locally
varying image processing inside cameras under the automode. Our method incorporates both the global and the
local scene context into pixel-wise features via multi-scale
pyramid of learnable histogram layers. The results show
that we can model the imaging pipeline of different cameras
that operate under the automode accurately in both directions (from RAW to sRGB, from sRGB to RAW) and we show
how we can apply our method to improve the performance
of image deblurring.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has significantly changed the approaches
for solving computer vision problems. Instead of analytic
solutions with some combinations of hand chosen features,
probabilistic/physical models and some optimizations, most
methods now turn to deep learning which is a deeper neural
network that relies on big data. Deep learning has shown
superb performance in many computer vision problems including image recognition [11], face recognition [30], segmentation [23], etc. Image processing problems such as
super-resolution [8, 16] and colorization [20, 36] are also
solved with deep learning now, which provides effective
ways to process input images and output images that fit the
given task.
In this paper, we introduce a new application of using

(a) Manual mode

(b) Auto-mode

Figure 1. Difference of two images captured (a) under the manual
mode and (b) under the auto-mode. The RAW images of both (a)
and (b) are identical. In (b), the brightness/contrast and the colors
were enhanced automatically by the camera.

deep learning for image processing: modelling the scene
dependent image processing. We are especially interested in
modelling the in-camera imaging pipeline to recover RAW
images from camera processed images (usually in the form
of JPEG in the sRGB color space) and vice versa. Usually called as the radiometric calibration, this process is important for many computer vision tasks that require accurate measurement of the scene radiance such as photometric stereo [15], intrinsic imaging [2], high dynamic range
imaging [7], and hyperspectral imaging [27].
There are two strategies with regards to the image processing in cameras, namely, the photographic reproduction
model and the photofinishing model [12]. In the photographic reproduction model, the image rendering pipeline
is fixed meaning that a raw RGB value will always be
mapped to an RGB value in the processed image regardless of the scene. Taking photos under the manual mode
triggers this model and all previous radiometric calibration
methods work only in this mode.
11717

