RankIQA: Learning from Rankings for No-reference Image Quality Assessment
Xialei Liu
Computer Vision Center
Barcelona, Spain

Joost van de Weijer
Computer Vision Center
Barcelona, Spain

Andrew D. Bagdanov
MICC, University of Florence
Florence, Italy

xialei@cvc.uab.es

joost@cvc.uab.es

andrew.bagdanov@unifi.it

Abstract

Our approach
Large ranking dataset

We propose a no-reference image quality assessment
(NR-IQA) approach that learns from rankings (RankIQA).
To address the problem of limited IQA dataset size, we train
a Siamese Network to rank images in terms of image quality by using synthetically generated distortions for which
relative image quality is known. These ranked image sets
can be automatically generated without laborious human
labeling. We then use fine-tuning to transfer the knowledge represented in the trained Siamese Network to a traditional CNN that estimates absolute image quality from single images. We demonstrate how our approach can be made
significantly more efficient than traditional Siamese Networks by forward propagating a batch of images through
a single network and backpropagating gradients derived
from all pairs of images in the batch. Experiments on the
TID2013 benchmark show that we improve the state-of-theart by over 5%. Furthermore, on the LIVE benchmark we
show that our approach is superior to existing NR-IQA techniques and that we even outperform the state-of-the-art in
full-reference IQA (FR-IQA) methods without having to resort to high-quality reference images to infer IQA.

1. Introduction
Images are everywhere in our life. Unfortunately, they
are often distorted by the processes of acquisition, transmission, storage, and external conditions like camera motion.
Image Quality Assessment (IQA) [34] is a technique developed to automatically predict the perceptual quality of images. IQA estimates should be highly correlated with quality assessments made by a range of very many human evaluators (commonly referred to as the Mean Opinion Score
(MOS) [27, 22]). IQA has been widely applied to problems
where image quality is essential, like image restoration [13],
image super-resolution [32], and image retrieval [37].
IQA approaches are generally divided into three categories based on whether the undistorted image (called reference image) or information about it is available: full-



Gblur



Siamese Network


Shared weights



JPEG

Ranking

 
Fine-tuning

Classical approach
Small IQA dataset

Normal Network

Distorted
images

Quality

Scores: 36.9

Scores: 26.7

Scores: 60.0

Figure 1. The classical approach trains a deep CNN regressor directly on the ground-truth. Our approach trains a network from an
image ranking dataset. These ranked images can be easily generated by applying distortions of varying intensities. The network
parameters are then transferred to the regression network for finetuning. This allows for the training of deeper and wider networks.

reference IQA (FR-IQA), reduced-reference IQA (RRIQA), and no-reference IQA (NR-IQA). Research has
mostly focussed on the more realist scenario of NR-IQA
where the image quality of an image without any reference
image has to be estimated. In NR-IQA, many methods focus on a specific distortion [38, 7], which limits the applicability of these methods. Other methods consider a range
of distortions [20, 23, 18, 19].
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are having an
enormous impact on computer vision research and practice.
Though they have been around for decades [16], it wasn’t
until 2012, when Krizhevsky et al. [14] achieved spectacular results with a CNN in the ImageNet competition, that
they achieved wide attention and adoption in the broader
computer vision community. The architectures of networks
are getting deeper and deeper with respect to the original
AlexNet, with ResNet being an example of very deep network architecture [8]. The result of this trend is that stateof-the-art CNNs like AlexNet and ResNet have hundred of
11040

