Image2song: Song Retrieval via Bridging Image Content and Lyric Words
Xuelong Li∗ , Di Hu† , Xiaoqiang Lu∗
∗
Xi’an Institute of Optics and Precision Mechanics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xi’an 710119, P. R. China
†
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, P. R. China
xuelong li@opt.ac.cn, hdui831@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, luxiaoqiang@opt.ac.cn

Abstract

All I Want For Christmas Is You
-- Mariah Carey

Image is usually taken for expressing some kinds of emotions or purposes, such as love, celebrating Christmas.
There is another better way that combines the image and
relevant song to amplify the expression, which has drawn
much attention in the social network recently. Hence, the
automatic selection of songs should be expected. In this paper, we propose to retrieve semantic relevant songs just by
an image query, which is named as the image2song problem. Motivated by the requirements of establishing correlation in semantic/content, we build a semantic-based song
retrieval framework, which learns the correlation between
image content and lyric words. This model uses a convolutional neural network to generate rich tags from image
regions, a recurrent neural network to model lyric, and then
establishes correlation via a multi-layer perceptron. To reduce the content gap between image and lyric, we propose
to make the lyric modeling focus on the main image content
via a tag attention. We collect a dataset from the socialsharing multimodal data to study the proposed problem,
which consists of (image, music clip, lyric) triplets. We
demonstrate that our proposed model shows noticeable results in the image2song retrieval task and provides suitable
songs. Besides, the song2image task is also performed.

1. Introduction
Images are usually taken for the purpose of memorizing, which could contain some specific contents and convey
some kinds of emotions. For example, when celebrating
the Christmas day, the captured pictures commonly contain
dressed up people and Christmas trees covered with gifts,
which is used to remember the happiness time. However, images appear to exist in only visual modality, which
could be weak in expressing the above purpose. Inspired
by visual music and musical vision [1], we consider that

…
I don't want a lot for Christmas
There is just one thing I need
And I don't care about the presents
Underneath the Christmas tree

object: tree, flower, ball, dress, stock…
attribute: smiling, green, happy, red…

I don't need to hang my stocking
There upon the fireplace
Santa Claus won't make me happy
With a toy on Christmas Day
…

Figure 1. A Christmas-relevant image and coupled song (lyric).
There are several words (in different color) appearing in both image tags and lyric words. Best viewed in color.

the stimulates come from different senses (e.g. vision, auditory, tactile) may share similar performance. Hence, if
the captured image is combined with a relevant song that
expresses similar purpose, the expression will be obviously
enhanced, which results from the more useful merged information from multimodal data [39, 22]. For example, showing the Christmas image while playing the song Jingle Bells is easier to touch viewers than single image. Hence, this
kind of combination has attracted much attention in nowadays, which is simpler than video but richer than photo. But
existing approaches of song selection for a given image are
almost based on manual manner. Such methods often cost
users a lot of time to decide but could still suffer from the
small song library of users and lack of song comprehension. Hence, the technique of automatic image-based song
recommendation should be expected, which is named as image2song in this paper.
Music Information Retrieval (MIR) is a traditional research field, which focuses on indexing proper music according to specific criteria. In this paper, the proposed image2song retrieval task aims to find the semantic-related
songs for images, which therefore relies on the specific
image content analysis. Hence, this task belongs to the

5649

