Learning for Active 3D Mapping
Karel Zimmermann, Tomáš Petřı́ček, Vojtěch Šalanský, and Tomáš Svoboda
Czech Technical University in Prague, Faculty of Electrical Engineering
zimmerk@fel.cvut.cz

Abstract
We propose an active 3D mapping method for depth sensors, which allow individual control of depth-measuring
rays, such as the newly emerging solid-state lidars. The
method simultaneously (i) learns to reconstruct a dense 3D
occupancy map from sparse depth measurements, and (ii)
optimizes the reactive control of depth-measuring rays. To
make the first step towards the online control optimization,
we propose a fast prioritized greedy algorithm, which needs
to update its cost function in only a small fraction of possible rays. The approximation ratio of the greedy algorithm is derived. An experimental evaluation on the subset of the KITTI dataset demonstrates significant improvement in the 3D map accuracy when learning-to-reconstruct
from sparse measurements is coupled with the optimization
of depth measuring rays.

1. Introduction
Development of autonomous vehicles such as selfdriving cars or ground robots has attracted substantial attention of the robotics community in the last few years. One of
the reasons is that an accurate 3D perception, which is an essential component for many fundamental capabilities such
as emergency braking, predictive active damping or selflocalization from offline maps [12], has finally become possible. Since state-of-the-art rotating lidars are very expensive, heavy and contain moving parts prone to mechanical
wear, several manufacturers have announced the development of cheaper, lighter, smaller and motionless solid-state
lidars (SSL), which should become available soon [1].
In contrast to rotating lidars, the SSL uses an optical phased array as a transmitter of depth measuring light
pulses. Since the built-in electronics can independently
steer pulses of light by shifting its phase as it is projected
through the array, the SSL can focus its attention on the
parts of the scene important for the current task. Task-driven
reactive control steering hundreds of thousands of rays per
second using only an on-board computer is a challenging
problem, which calls for highly efficient parallelizable al-

Figure 1. Active 3D mapping with Solid State Lidar. Iteratively
learned deep convolutional network reconstructs local dense occupancy map from sparse depth measurements. The local map
is registered to a global occupancy map, which in turn serves as
an input for the optimization of depth-measuring rays along the
expected vehicle trajectory. The dense occupancy maps are visualized as isosurfaces.

gorithms. As a first step towards this goal, we propose an
active mapping method for SSL-like sensors, which simultaneously (i) learns to reconstruct a dense 3D voxel-map
from sparse depth measurements and (ii) optimize the reactive control of depth-measuring rays, see Figure 1. The
proposed method is evaluated on a subset of the KITTI
dataset [5], where sparse SSL measurements are artificially
synthesized from captured lidar scans, and compared to a
state-of-the-art 3D reconstruction approach [3].
The main contribution of this paper lies in proposing a computationally tractable approach for very highdimensional active perception task, which couples learning
of the 3D reconstruction with the optimization of depthmeasuring rays. Unlike other approaches such as active
object detection [6] or segmentation [7], SSL-like reactive control has significantly higher dimensionality of the
state-action space, which makes a direct application of unsupervised reinforcement learning [6] prohibitively expen-

1539

