Infant Footprint Recognition
Eryun Liu
ISEE, Zhejiang University
38 Zheda Rd., Hangzhou 310017, China
eryunliu@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Infant recognition has received increasing attention in
recent years in many applications, such as tracking child
vaccination and identifying missing children. Due to the
lack of efficient identification methods for infants and newborns, the current methods of infant recognition rely on
identification of parents or certificates of identity. While
biometric recognition technologies (e.g., face and fingerprint recognition) have been widely deployed in many applications for recognizing adults and teenagers, no such
recognition systems yet exist for infants or newborns. One
of the major problems is that the biometric traits of infants
and newborns are either not permanent (e.g., face) or difficult to capture (e.g., fingerprint) due to lack of appropriate
sensors. In this paper, we investigate the feasibility of infant recognition by their footprint using a 500 ppi commodity friction ridge sensor. We collected an infant footprint
dataset in three sessions, consisting of 60 subjects, with
age range from 1 to 9 months. We proposed a new minutia descriptor based on deep convolutional neural network
for measuring minutiae similarity. The descriptor is compact and highly discriminative. We conducted verification
experiments for both single enrolled template and fusion of
multiple enrolled templates, and show the impact of age and
time gap on matching performance. Comparison experiments with state of the art algorithm show the advantage of
the proposed minutia descriptor.

1. Introduction
The Global Vaccine Action Plan (GVAP1 ) is a roadmap
to prevent millions of deaths through more equitable access
to vaccines. Countries are aiming to achieve vaccination
coverage of over 90% nationally and over 80% world wide
by 2020. According to statistics from the World Health
Organization (WHO), global vaccination coverage has re1 http://www.who.int/immunization/global_
vaccine_action_plan/GVAP_doc_2011_2020/en/

mained steady for the past few years. For example, during
2014, about 115 million (86%) infants worldwide received
three doses of diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis (DTP3) vaccine,
protecting them against infectious diseases that can cause
serious illness and disability or be fatal. By 2014, 129 countries out of a total of 193 had reached at least 90% coverage
of the DTP3 vaccine. Despite improvements in global vaccine coverage during the past decade, WHO also points out
that regional and local disparities continue to exist due to
1) limited resources, 2) competing health priorities, 3) poor
management of health systems, and 4) inadequate monitoring and supervision2 . Better management of health systems requires a more accurate and efficient child recognition system. It is estimated that vaccine wastage rates are
higher than 50% in some of the most challenging geographies3 . Vaccinations are not administered to the children in
need due to the lack of an effective method to keep track
of which children have been vaccinated and which vaccines
have been administered to each child. There is an urgent
demand in immunization management system to track vaccination schedule of each child reliably and efficiently. Besides tracking child vaccination, infant recognition is also
urgently desirable in many other applications such as identifying missing children, preventing baby swaps4 and other
child welfare applications.
Biometric recognition has been actively researched for
many decades with the aim to solve the problem of person
identification. Many of the techniques have been successfully deployed in a wide range of civil and forensic applications. However, almost all of the techniques are designed
for adults or teenagers, not for infants. These techniques
may not be useful for infants directly since some of the biometric modalities, e.g. face, are not stable shortly after birth
for the purpose of automatic recognition. DNA is supposed
to be the most accurate means of child recognition (except
2 http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/
fs378/en/
3 http://vaxtrac.com
4 http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/
ahmedabad/-Civil-Hospital-tags-newborns-toprevent-baby-swapping/articleshow/6088759.cms?

11653

