Fast Multi-Image Matching via Density-Based Clustering
Roberto Tron
Boston University

Xiaowei Zhou, Carlos Esteves, Kostas Daniilidis
University of Pennsylvania

tron@bu.edu

{xiaowz,machc,kostas}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of finding consistent matches
across multiple images. Current state-of-the-art solutions
use constraints on cycles of matches together with convex
optimization, leading to computationally intensive iterative
algorithms. In this paper, we instead propose a clusteringbased formulation: we first rigorously show its equivalence
with traditional approaches, and then propose QuickMatch,
a novel algorithm that identifies multi-image matches from a
density function in feature space. Specifically, QuickMatch
uses the density estimate to order the points in a tree, and
then extracts the matches by breaking this tree using feature distances and measures of distinctiveness. Our algorithm outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods (such
as MatchALS) in accuracy, and it is significantly faster (up
to 62 times faster on some benchmarks), and can scale to
large datasets (with more than twenty thousands features).

1. Introduction
Finding correspondences between points in two or more
images is a fundamental step in many computer vision applications, such as matching of object instances [2, 30, 40],
shape matching [10, 13], Structure from Motion [9, 18]
and homography estimation [27]. Matching is typically
performed by first determining repeatable feature points
(e.g., corner-like patches), then extracting feature descriptors (such as SIFT [17], SURF [1], learned deep features [31]
or others), and finally associating them across images using
relative distances in feature space. Traditionally, the problem
has been considered only in its pairwise version, i.e., with
pairs of images. However, the applications above imply a
multi-image version, where matches need to be found across
several images, and need to map consistently to an underlying set of physical entities (e.g., 3-D points). Researchers
have started to rigorously consider the multi-image version
only recently. Early practical solutions used simple greedy
strategies to add and remove pairwise matches [10]. More
recent strategies formulate multi-image matching as a version of an optimal assignment problem [10, 23, 40]. In this

paper, we use a clustering formulation of the problem, where
each multi-image match is represented by a cluster in feature
space. We first rigorously show that this formulation is consistent with previous ones that enforce cycle consistency in
the graph of pairwise matches (§2). We then review existing
practical approaches (§3) and propose QuickMatch (§4), an
algorithm derived from QuickShift [29] that performs clustering by seeking the modes of an empirical density estimate.
This strategy deals well with the typical conditions found
in matching (large and unknown number of clusters whose
size is limited by the total number of images). QuickMatch
organizes all the datapoints (all the feature descriptors from
all the images) in a tree (based on the density estimate, as
in QuickShift) and then breaks it to find the clustering (i.e.,
matches). However, with respect to QuickShift, QuickMatch
takes into account two characteristics of the matching problem: the distinctiveness of the descriptors (that is, the fact
that it is more difficult to correctly match a point if there are
other, distinct points in the scene with similar appearance)
and the exclusion constraints given by the implicit mapping
to distinct physical entities (e.g. 3-D points) in an underlying
universe. We test QuickMatch against previous approaches
on standard benchmarks, small scale Structure from Motion
problems, and large scale object matching (§5).
Paper contributions Our first contribution is a rigorous
analysis of the relation between the multi-image matching
problem and graphs of pairwise matches. This analysis is
based on graph theory, is more general than previous results that use factorizations of permutations, and it provides
the theoretical justification for our clustering-based method,
QuickMatch, which is also our most significant contribution.
With respect to previous work, QuickMatch 1) represents a
novel application of density-based clustering; 2) directly outputs consistent multi-image matches without explicit pre-processing (e.g., initial pairwise decisions) or post-processing
(e.g., thresholding of a matrix); 3) is non-iterative, deterministic, and initialization-free; 4) produces better results in a
small fraction of the time; 5) can scale to large datasets that
previous methods cannot handle; 6) takes advantage of the
distinctiveness of the descriptor as done in traditional matching [17] to counteract the problem of repeated structures;
14057

