Unified Deep Supervised Domain Adaptation and Generalization
Saeid Motiian

Marco Piccirilli Donald A. Adjeroh
West Virginia University
Morgantown, WV 26508

Gianfranco Doretto

{samotiian, mpiccir1, daadjeroh, gidoretto}@mix.wvu.edu

Abstract
This work provides a unified framework for addressing
the problem of visual supervised domain adaptation and
generalization with deep models. The main idea is to exploit
the Siamese architecture to learn an embedding subspace
that is discriminative, and where mapped visual domains
are semantically aligned and yet maximally separated. The
supervised setting becomes attractive especially when only
few target data samples need to be labeled. In this scenario,
alignment and separation of semantic probability distributions is difficult because of the lack of data. We found that by
reverting to point-wise surrogates of distribution distances
and similarities provides an effective solution. In addition,
the approach has a high “speed” of adaptation, which requires an extremely low number of labeled target training
samples, even one per category can be effective. The approach is extended to domain generalization. For both applications the experiments show very promising results.

1. Introduction
Many computer vision applications require enough labeled data (target data) for training visual classifiers to address a specific task at hand. Whenever target data is either
not available, or it is expensive to collect and/or label it, the
typical approach is to use available datasets (source data),
representative of a closely related task. Since this practice
is known for leading to suboptimal performance, techniques
such as domain adaptation [6] and/or domain generalization [5] have been developed to address the issue. Domain
adaptation methods require target data, whereas domain
generalization methods do not. Domain adaptation can be
either supervised [60, 33], unsupervised [38, 38, 61], or
semi-supervised [26, 29, 67]. Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is attractive because it does not require target
data to be labeled. Conversely, supervised domain adaptation (SDA) requires labeled target data.
UDA expects large amounts of target data in order to
be effective, and this is emphasized even more when using
deep models. Moreover, given the same amount of target

data, SDA typically outperforms UDA, as we will later explain. Therefore, especially when target data is scarce, it is
more attractive to use SDA, also because limited amounts
of target data are likely to not be very expensive to label.
In the absence of target data, domain generalization
(DG) exploits several cheaply available datasets (sources),
representing different specific but closely related tasks. It
then attempts to learn by combining data sources in a way
that produces visual classifiers that are less sensitive to the
specific target data that will need to be processed.
In this work, we introduce a supervised approach for visual recognition that can be used for both SDA and DG.
The SDA approach requires very few labeled target samples per category in training. Indeed, even one sample can
significantly increase performance, and a few others bring
it closer to a peak, showing a remarkable “speed” of adaptation. Moreover, the approach is also robust to adapting to categories that have no target labeled samples. Although domain adaptation and generalization are closely
related, adaptation techniques are not directly applied to
DG, and viceversa. However, we show that by making simple changes to our proposed training loss function, and by
maintaining the same architecture, our SDA approach very
effectively extends to DG.
Using basic principles, we analyze how visual classification is extended to handle UDA by aligning a source domain distribution to a target domain distribution to make
the classifier domain invariant. This leads to observing that
SDA approaches improve upon UDA by making the alignment semantic, because they can ensure the alignment of semantically equivalent distributions from different domains.
However, we go one step ahead by suggesting that semantic
distribution separation should further increase performance,
and this leads to the introduction of a classification and contrastive semantic alignment (CCSA) loss.
We deal with the limited size of target domain samples
by observing that the CCSA loss relies on computing distances and similarities between distributions (as typically
done in adaptation and generalization approaches). Those
are difficult to represent with limited data. Thus, we revert

5715

