Synergy between face alignment and tracking via Discriminative Global
Consensus Optimization
Muhammad Haris Khan⋆† John McDonagh⋆ Georgios Tzimiropoulos⋆
Computer Vision Laboratory, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
†
Electrical Engineering Department, COMSATS Lahore Campus, Pakistan

⋆

{Muhammad.Khan3,yorgos.tzimiropoulos}@nottingham.ac.uk

Abstract
DGCM
Subproblem 1

An open question in facial landmark localization in
video is whether one should perform tracking or trackingby-detection (i.e. face alignment). Tracking produces fittings of high accuracy but is prone to drifting. Tracking-bydetection is drift-free but results in low accuracy fittings.
To provide a solution to this problem, we describe the
very first, to the best of our knowledge, synergistic approach between detection (face alignment) and tracking
which completely eliminates drifting from face tracking, and
does not merely perform tracking-by-detection. Our first
main contribution is to show that one can achieve this synergy between detection and tracking using a principled optimization framework based on the theory of Global Variable
Consensus Optimization using ADMM; Our second contribution is to show how the proposed analytic framework can
be integrated within state-of-the-art discriminative methods for face alignment and tracking based on cascaded regression and deeply learned features. Overall, we call our
method Discriminative Global Consensus Model (DGCM).
Our third contribution is to show that DGCM achieves large
performance improvement over the currently best performing face tracking methods on the most challenging category
of the 300-VW dataset.

1. Introduction
Face alignment is the problem of localizing a set of landmarks on human faces in still images. Face tracking is the
problem of localizing the facial landmarks for all frames
of a given video. Most face tracking methods are extensions of face alignment methods; the main difference is
that, in face alignment, initialization is performed from the
bounding box of a face detector, whereas in face tracking,
from the shape of the previously tracked frame. Because
changes in facial pose and expression from one frame to
the next one are typically small, in tracking, initialization is

Detection
Initializations
Subproblem 2

Subproblem i
Tracking
Initializations
Subproblem i+1

Figure 1. Overview of DGCM: our method performs landmark localization in video via a synergy between face alignment (i.e. detection) and tracking. This synergy is achieved by solving a Global
Consensus Optimization problem using ADMM. We assume that
different detection and tracking initializations define different optimization sub-problems. At each iteration of DGCM, the independent shape updates for each sub-problem are coupled through
the ADMM updates. Notably, both the detector and tracker used
in DGCM are trained in a discriminative manner.

much closer to the “correct” solution, allowing the tracker
to track large changes in pose and expression over the whole
video. Such changes are typically difficult to accurately detect with a face alignment method that merely uses a bounding box initialization which lacks any information regarding
pose, expression and identity. Nonetheless, tracking comes
along with an important drawback: drifting. Errors in the
tracked shapes can accumulate over time which in turn results in poorer and poorer initialization, and eventually can
make the tracker lose tracking. Note that the most common
way to deal with drifting is to perform face alignment per
each video frame separately: this is known as tracking-bydetection; however, as mentioned earlier, this is sub-optimal
because it completely discards shape information from previously tracked frame(s). In this paper, we propose the very

3791

