SBGAR: Semantics Based Group Activity Recognition
Xin Li
Mooi Choo Chuah
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Lehigh University
xil915@lehigh.edu

Abstract
Activity recognition has become an important function in
many emerging computer vision applications e.g. automatic
video surveillance system, human-computer interaction application, and video recommendation system, etc. In this
paper, we propose a novel semantics based group activity
recognition scheme, namely SBGAR, which achieves higher
accuracy and efficiency than existing group activity recognition methods. SBGAR consists of two stages: in stage I,
we use a LSTM model to generate a caption for each video
frame; in stage II, another LSTM model is trained to predict
the final activity categories based on these generated captions. We evaluate SBGAR using two well-known datasets:
the Collective Activity Dataset and the Volleyball Dataset.
Our experimental results show that SBGAR improves the
group activity recognition accuracy with shorter computation time compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Automatically recognizing human activities in videos is
one of the core tasks in the field of computer vision. It has
many potential applications. For example, Lao et al. [1]
present an automatic video surveillance system by analyzing human motion in videos, Rautaray et al. [2] design a
new human-computer interaction method based on real time
hand gesture recognition, and Davidson et al. discuss the
video recommendation system in use at YouTube in [3].
In the modern era, dramatic progress has been made in
recognizing human activities within videos. For example,
Wu et al. [4] and Li et al. [5] present models to recognize
human activities based on RGB frames (or optical flow images). In addition, Du et al. [6] and Veeriah et al. [7] recognize human activities using 3D representation (body joints).
Even though all of these approaches yield a good performance, they have limitations. For RGB-based approaches,
only a few of them were evaluated on datasets which contain complex activities, like group activities. Compared to
the single-person activity recognition task, group activity
recognition requires a more robust scheme that can differentiate higher level classes of activities, e.g. how different

chuah@cse.lehigh.edu

persons interact with one another in a group activity. For
3D-based approaches, they rely on specific hardware sensors or some time-consuming algorithms to detect and locate the body joints. In addition, the sensors and the methods cannot work well when people are far away from the
cameras/sensors or if the resolution of frames is low.
The contributions of this paper are as follows. First, we
present a novel solution, namely SBGAR, for group activity recognition. It can be used to recognize single-person
activity and group activity. Second, our proposed scheme
is semantics-based. Specifically, we analyze the videos to
generate sentences describing the video frames, and then
recognize the activities based on the semantic meaning of
these sentences. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first work that uses semantics to recognize human activities in videos. Finally, our solution yields significantly better performance compared to the state-of-the-art approaches
using two well-known datasets.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section
2, we briefly discuss related work, followed by the introduction of some important building blocks in Section 3. In
Section 4, we describe our proposed group activity recognition scheme and implementation details. We report our
experimental results in Section 5. Finally, we conclude this
paper in Section 6.

2. Related Work
In recent years, some research has been done to recognize group activities from videos. Lan et al. [8] believe
that the contextual information of what other people in the
scene are doing provides a useful clue for understanding
high-level activities. Thus, they present a solution to recognize group activities by exploring group-person interaction
and person-person interaction information.
Based on the similar intuition that a strong correlation
exists between a person’s action and the actions of other
nearby people, Choi et al. [9] exploit the spatial distribution
of pedestrians in the scene as well as their pose and motion
to achieve a robust action classification result. Next, they
present a solution in [10] for simultaneously tracking multiple people and estimating their collective activities. They

2876

