Learning to Synthesize a 4D RGBD Light Field from a Single Image
Pratul P. Srinivasan1 , Tongzhou Wang1 , Ashwin Sreelal1 , Ravi Ramamoorthi2 , Ren Ng1
1
2
University of California, Berkeley
University of California, San Diego

Abstract
We present a machine learning algorithm that takes as
input a 2D RGB image and synthesizes a 4D RGBD light
field (color and depth of the scene in each ray direction).
For training, we introduce the largest public light field
dataset, consisting of over 3300 plenoptic camera light
fields of scenes containing flowers and plants. Our synthesis pipeline consists of a convolutional neural network
(CNN) that estimates scene geometry, a stage that renders
a Lambertian light field using that geometry, and a second
CNN that predicts occluded rays and non-Lambertian effects. Our algorithm builds on recent view synthesis methods, but is unique in predicting RGBD for each light field
ray and improving unsupervised single image depth estimation by enforcing consistency of ray depths that should
intersect the same scene point.

1. Introduction
We focus on a problem that we call “local light field synthesis”, which we define as the promotion of a single photograph to a plenoptic camera light field. One can think of
this as expansion from a single view to a dense 2D patch
of views. We argue that local light field synthesis is a
core visual computing problem with high potential impact.
First, it would bring light field benefits such as synthetic
apertures and refocusing to everyday photography. Furthermore, local light field synthesis would systematically lower
the sampling rate of photographs needed to capture large
baseline light fields, by “filling the gap” between discrete
viewpoints. This is a path towards making light field capture for virtual and augmented reality (VR and AR) practical. In this work, we hope to convince the community that
local light field synthesis is actually a tractable problem.
From an alternative perspective, the light field synthesis
task can be used as an unsupervised learning framework for
estimating scene geometry from a single image. Without
any ground-truth geometry for training, we can learn to estimate the geometry that minimizes the difference between
the light field rendered with that geometry and the groundtruth light field.
Light field synthesis is a severely ill-posed problem,

since the goal is to reconstruct a 4D light field given just
a single image, which can be interpreted as a 2D slice of the
4D light field. To alleviate this, we use a machine learning
approach that is able to utilize prior knowledge of natural
light fields. In this paper, we focus on scenes of flowers and
plants, because they contain interesting and complex occlusions as well as a wide range of relative depths. Our specific
contributions are the introduction of the largest available
light field dataset, the prediction of 4D ray depths with a
novel depth consistency regularization to improve unsupervised depth estimation, and a learning framework to synthesize a light field from a single image.
Light Field Dataset We collect the largest available light
field dataset (Sec. 4), contaning 3343 light fields of flowers and plants, taken with the Lytro Illum camera. Our
dataset limits us to synthesizing light fields with camerascale baselines, but we note that our model can generalize
to light fields of any scene and baseline given the appropriate datasets.
Ray Depths and Regularization Current view synthesis
methods generate each view separately. Instead, we propose to concurrently predict the entire 4D light field by estimating a separate depth map for each viewpoint, which is
equivalent to estimating a depth for each ray in the 4D light
field (Sec. 5). We introduce a novel physically-based regularization that encourages the predicted depth maps to be
consistent across viewpoints, alleviating typical problems
that arise in depths created by view synthesis (Fig. 5). We
demonstrate that our algorithm can predict depths from a
single image that are comparable or better than depths estimated by a state-of-the-art physically-based non-learning
method that uses the entire light field [18] (Fig. 6).
CNN Framework We create and study an end-to-end
convolutional neural network (CNN) framework, visualized
in Fig. 1, that factorizes the light field synthesis problem
into the subproblems of estimating scene depths for every
ray (Fig. 6, Sec. 5) (we use depth and disparity interchangeably, since they are closely related in structured light fields),
rendering a Lambertian light field (Sec. 6.1), and predicting
occluded rays and non-Lambertian effects (Sec. 6.2). This
makes the learning process more tractable and allows us to

2243

