Unlabeled Samples Generated by GAN
Improve the Person Re-identification Baseline in vitro
Zhedong Zheng
Liang Zheng
Yi Yang ∗
Centre for Artificial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney
{zdzheng12,liangzheng06,yee.i.yang}@gmail.com

Abstract
The main contribution of this paper is a simple semisupervised pipeline that only uses the original training set
without collecting extra data. It is challenging in 1) how
to obtain more training data only from the training set and
2) how to use the newly generated data. In this work, the
generative adversarial network (GAN) is used to generate
unlabeled samples. We propose the label smoothing regularization for outliers (LSRO). This method assigns a uniform label distribution to the unlabeled images, which regularizes the supervised model and improves the baseline.
We verify the proposed method on a practical problem: person re-identification (re-ID). This task aims to retrieve a query person from other cameras. We adopt the
deep convolutional generative adversarial network (DCGAN) for sample generation, and a baseline convolutional
neural network (CNN) for representation learning. Experiments show that adding the GAN-generated data effectively improves the discriminative ability of learned
CNN embeddings. On three large-scale datasets, Market1501, CUHK03 and DukeMTMC-reID, we obtain +4.37%,
+1.6% and +2.46% improvement in rank-1 precision over
the baseline CNN, respectively. We additionally apply
the proposed method to fine-grained bird recognition and
achieve a +0.6% improvement over a strong baseline. The
code is available at https://github.com/layumi/
Person-reID_GAN .

1. Introduction
Unsupervised learning can serve as an important auxiliary task to supervised tasks [14, 29, 11, 28]. In this work,
we propose a semi-supervised pipeline that works on the
original training set without an additional data collection
process. First, the training set is expanded with unlabeled
data using a GAN. Then our model minimizes the sum of
the supervised and the unsupervised losses through a new
∗ To whom all correspondence should be addressed.

Figure 1. The pipeline of the proposed method. There are two
components: a generative adversarial model [27] for unsupervised
learning and a convolutional neural network for semi-supervised
learning. “Real Data” represents the labeled data in the given
training set; “Training data” includes both the “Real Data” and
the generated unlabeled data. We aim to learn more discriminative
embeddings with the “Training data”.

regularization method. This method is evaluated with person re-ID, which aims to spot the target person in different
cameras. This has been recently viewed as an image retrieval problem [50].
This paper addresses three challenges. First, current research in GANs typically considers the quality of the sample generation with and without semi-supervised learning
in vivo [24, 32, 27, 7, 26, 41]. Yet a scientific problem remains unknown: moving the generated samples out of the
box and using them in currently available learning frameworks. To this end, this work uses unlabeled data produced
by the DCGAN model [27] in conjunction with the labeled
training data. As shown in Fig. 1, our pipeline feeds the
newly generated samples into another learning machine (i.e.
a CNN). Therefore, we use the term “in vitro” to differentiate our method from [24, 32, 27, 7]; these methods perform
semi-supervised learning in the discriminator of the GANs
(in vivo).
Second, the challenge of performing semi-supervised
learning using labeled and unlabeled data in CNN-based
methods remains. Usually, the unsupervised data is used as
a pre-training step before supervised learning [28, 11, 14].
Our method uses all the data simultaneously. In [25, 18,
24, 32], the unlabeled/weak-labeled real data are assigned

3754

