End-to-End Learning of Geometry and Context for Deep Stereo Regression
Alex Kendall
Hayk Martirosyan
Saumitro Dasgupta
Peter Henry
Ryan Kennedy
Abraham Bachrach
Adam Bry
Skydio Research
{alex,hayk,saumitro,peter,ryan,abe,adam}@skydio.com

Abstract
We propose a novel deep learning architecture for regressing disparity from a rectified pair of stereo images.
We leverage knowledge of the problem’s geometry to form a
cost volume using deep feature representations. We learn to
incorporate contextual information using 3-D convolutions
over this volume. Disparity values are regressed from the
cost volume using a proposed differentiable soft argmin operation, which allows us to train our method end-to-end to
sub-pixel accuracy without any additional post-processing
or regularization. We evaluate our method on the Scene
Flow and KITTI datasets and on KITTI we set a new stateof-the-art benchmark, while being significantly faster than
competing approaches.

1. Introduction
Accurately estimating three dimensional geometry from
stereo imagery is a core problem for many computer vision
applications, including autonomous vehicles and UAVs [2].
In this paper we are specifically interested in computing the
disparity of each pixel between a rectified stereo pair of images. To achieve this, the core task of a stereo algorithm is
computing the correspondence of each pixel between two
images. This is very challenging to achieve robustly in realworld scenarios. Current state-of-the-art stereo algorithms
often have difficulty with textureless areas, reflective surfaces, thin structures and repetitive patterns. Many stereo
algorithms aim to mitigate these failures with pooling or
gradient based regularization [15, 23]. However, this often
requires a compromise between smoothing surfaces and detecting detailed structures.
In contrast, deep learning models have been successful
in learning powerful representations directly from the raw
data in object classification [28], detection [17] and semantic segmentation [31, 3]. These examples demonstrate that
deep convolutional networks are very effective for understanding semantics. They excel at classification tasks when

supervised with large training datasets. We observe that a
number of these challenging problems for stereo algorithms
would benefit from knowledge of global semantic context,
rather than relying solely on local geometry. For example,
given a reflective surface of a vehicle’s wind-shield, a stereo
algorithm is likely to be erroneous if it relies solely on the
local appearance of the reflective surface to compute geometry. Rather, it would be advantageous to understand the
semantic context of this surface (that it belongs to a vehicle) to infer the local geometry. In this paper we show how
to learn a stereo regression model end-to-end, with the capacity to understand wider contextual information.
Stereo algorithms which leverage deep learning representations have so far been largely focused on using them
to generate unary terms [48, 32]. Applying cost matching
on the deep unary representations performs poorly when estimating pixel disparities [32, 48]. Traditional regularization and post processing steps are still used, such as semi
global block matching and left-right consistency checks
[23]. These regularization steps are severely limited because they are hand-engineered, shallow functions, which
are still susceptible to the aforementioned problems.
This paper asks the question, can we formulate the entire stereo vision problem with deep learning using our understanding of stereo geometry? The main contribution of
this paper is an end-to-end deep learning method to estimate
per-pixel disparity from a single rectified image pair. Our
architecture is illustrated in Figure 1. It explicitly reasons
about geometry by forming a cost volume, while also reasoning about semantics using a deep convolutional network
formulation. We achieve this with two key ideas:
• We learn to incorporate context directly from the data,
employing 3-D convolutions to learn to filter the cost
volume over height × width × disparity dimensions,
• We use a soft argmin function, which is fully differentiable, and allows us to regress sub-pixel disparity
values from the disparity cost volume.
Section 3 introduces this model. In Section 4 we evaluate
our model on the synthetic Scene Flow dataset [36] and set
a new state-of-the-art benchmark on the KITTI 2012 and
1 66

