Consensus Convolutional Sparse Coding
Biswarup Choudhury∗
KAUST

Robin Swanson∗
KAUST, University of Toronto

Felix Heide ∗
Stanford University

biswarup.choudhury@kaust.edu.sa

robin@cs.toronto.edu

fheide@stanford.edu

Gordon Wetzstein
Stanford University

Wolfgang Heidrich
KAUST

gordon.wetzstein@stanford.edu

wolfgang.heidrich@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Convolutional sparse coding (CSC) is a promising direction for unsupervised learning in computer vision. In contrast to recent supervised methods, CSC allows for convolutional image representations to be learned that are equally
useful for high-level vision tasks and low-level image reconstruction and can be applied to a wide range of tasks without problem-specific retraining. Due to their extreme memory requirements, however, existing CSC solvers have so far
been limited to low-dimensional problems and datasets using a handful of low-resolution example images at a time.
In this paper, we propose a new approach to solving CSC
as a consensus optimization problem, which lifts these limitations. By learning CSC features from large-scale image
datasets for the first time, we achieve significant quality
improvements in a number of imaging tasks. Moreover,
the proposed method enables new applications in highdimensional feature learning that has been intractable using existing CSC methods. This is demonstrated for a variety of reconstruction problems across diverse problem
domains, including 3D multispectral demosaicing and 4D
light field view synthesis.

over discriminative models for low level vision and image
reconstruction tasks. The most important distinction is that
generative approaches learn models of the data that can act
as priors for a wide range of reconstruction tasks without
retraining, while discriminative methods learn specific reconstruction tasks, and cannot be easily applied to other
tasks. As a consequence patch-based sparse coding techniques [7, 23, 1] have been very popular for low-level tasks
such as denoising, inpainting, demosaicing, deconvolution
and similar problems [11, 34, 30, 24, 21, 2], Unfortunately,
patch-based dictionaries are highly redundant because they
have to capture all shifted copies of the sparsifying filters.
Introduced as a model for receptive fields in human vision [26], convolution sparse coding (CSC) [14, 17, 32, 33]
has been demonstrated to remove much of the overhead of
patch-based sparse coding by using a convolution image
formation model for a range of different applications [11,
34, 30, 24, 21, 2]. CSC techniques are fast, because many

1. Introduction
Natural image statistics lie at the core of a wide variety
of discriminative and generative computer vision tasks. In
particular, convolutional image representations have proven
essential for supervised learning using deep neural networks
– the de-facto state-of-the-art for many high-level vision
tasks [20, 29, 28, 13]. While these models are successful
for supervised discriminative problems, the same architectures do not easily transfer to generative tasks.
Generative models have some significant advantages
∗ Denotes equal contribution

Traditional CSC

Consensus CSC

Figure 1: Large-scale unsupervised feature learning. Left:
Convolutional features from [15] can only be learned from a
handful of example images since existing CSC methods are
limited by memory. Right: CCSC overcomes these limitations, and allows to learn features on ImageNet [9]. These
features contain less specialized structures, leading to significant improvements across a variety of vision tasks.

4280

