DeepRoadMapper: Extracting Road Topology from Aerial Images
Gellért Máttyus, Wenjie Luo and Raquel Urtasun
Uber Advanced Technologies Group
University of Toronto
{gmattyus, wenjie, urtasun}@uber.com

Abstract
Creating road maps is essential for applications such as
autonomous driving and city planning. Most approaches in
industry focus on leveraging expensive sensors mounted on
top of a fleet of cars. This results in very accurate estimates
when exploiting a user in the loop. However, these solutions
are very expensive and have small coverage. In contrast, in
this paper we propose an approach that directly estimates
road topology from aerial images. This provides us with an
affordable solution with large coverage. Towards this goal,
we take advantage of the latest developments in deep learning to have an initial segmentation of the aerial images.
We then propose an algorithm that reasons about missing
connections in the extracted road topology as a shortest
path problem that can be solved efficiently. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach in the challenging TorontoCity dataset [23] and show very significant improvements
over the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Creating maps of our roads is a fundamental step in many
application domains. Having accurate maps is essential to
the success of autonomous driving for routing, localization
as well as to ease perception. Building smart cities requires
understanding the road network as well as the traffic patterns that occur on it to enable faster commute times, better
public transportation systems and a healthier environment.
Most self-driving teams and mapping companies rely on
expensive sensors mounted on a fleet of vehicles which
drive around, mostly capturing LIDAR point clouds. A
semi-manual process is then utilized to create the road network. Very accurate results can be achieved, but coverage
is very limited. Furthermore, this is a very costly process.
Thus HD maps are available for only a small region of the
world.
An alternative approach is to use aerial and satellite images as data source. This is appealing as they have much
larger coverage. For example, satellites go around the world

Figure 1: Road topology from aerial images at a large scale.
Our extracted road network is shown in blue.

twice a day, providing up-to-date information. However,
extracting road networks from this imagery is very challenging, as the resolution is much lower. Further, occlusion
(e.g., trees) and large shadows cast by tall buildings are difficult to handle. Most existing approaches cast the problem as semantic segmentation. Unfortunately, this ignores
topology, which is the basic unit needed in order to perform driving. Recently, [13, 14] leveraged existing maps
to enhance them with road-width as well as information
about the number of lanes, their location, parking spaces
and sidewalks. However, these approaches cannot reason
about roads that are not present in the initial coarse map.
In contrast, in this paper we propose an approach that
directly estimates road topology from aerial images. Towards this goal, we take advantage of the latest developments in deep learning to have an initial segmentation of the
aerial images. We then propose an algorithm that reasons
about missing connections in the extracted road topology as
a shortest path problem that can be solved efficiently. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in the challenging TorontoCity dataset [23], and show very significant
improvements over the state-of-the-art.
13438

