Neural Ctrl-F: Segmentation-free Query-by-String Word Spotting in
Handwritten Manuscript Collections
Tomas Wilkinson
Department of Information Technology
Uppsala University

Jonas Lindström
Department of History
Uppsala University

tomas.wilkinson@it.uu.se

Anders Brun
Department of Information Technology
Uppsala University

Abstract
In this paper, we approach the problem of segmentationfree query-by-string word spotting for handwritten documents. In other words, we use methods inspired from computer vision and machine learning to search for words in
large collections of digitized manuscripts. In particular, we
are interested in historical handwritten texts, which are often far more challenging than modern printed documents.
This task is important, as it provides people with a way
to quickly find what they are looking for in large collections that are tedious and difficult to read manually. To
this end, we introduce an end-to-end trainable model based
on deep neural networks that we call Ctrl-F-Net. Given
a full manuscript page, the model simultaneously generates region proposals, and embeds these into a distributed
word embedding space, where searches are performed. We
evaluate the model on common benchmarks for handwritten word spotting, outperforming the previous state-of-theart segmentation-free approaches by a large margin, and in
some cases even segmentation-based approaches. One interesting real-life application of our approach is to help historians to find and count specific words in court records that
are related to women’s sustenance activities and division of
labor. We provide promising preliminary experiments that
validate our method on this task.

Figure 1. A search for the word ”the” on one page of the George
Washington letters to Congress dataset, displaying the top 20 results. The greener the bounding box, the closer it is to the search
query. Note that the true number of occurrences of the word ”the”
is 13 and the rest of the displayed results are parts of words that
are similar to the query.

1. Introduction
Word spotting is the task of searching through a collection of scanned manuscripts to locate a provided search
query, see Figure 1. Word spotting gives an important oppertunity for digital humanities researchers, whose work is
limited by the time spent on manually sifting through old

manuscripts to find what they are looking for. Researchers
working with old manuscripts can spend several months
with a single book of a few hundred pages. There exist
many digitized collections that are used for research purposes [6, 7, 1], and although there have been work automat-

4433

