Rethinking Reprojection: Closing the Loop for Pose-aware Shape
Reconstruction from a Single Image
Rui Zhu, Hamed Kiani Galoogahi, Chaoyang Wang, Simon Lucey
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
{rz1, hamedk, chaoyanw}@andrew.cmu.edu, slucey@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
An emerging problem in computer vision is the reconstruction of 3D shape and pose of an object from a single image. Hitherto, the problem has been addressed
through the application of canonical deep learning methods
to regress from the image directly to the 3D shape and pose
labels. These approaches, however, are problematic from
two perspectives. First, they are minimizing the error between 3D shapes and pose labels - with little thought about
the nature of this “label error” when reprojecting the shape
back onto the image. Second, they rely on the onerous and
ill-posed task of hand labeling natural images with respect
to 3D shape and pose. In this paper we define the new task
of pose-aware shape reconstruction from a single image,
and we advocate that cheaper 2D annotations of objects
silhouettes in natural images can be utilized. We design
architectures of pose-aware shape reconstruction which reproject the predicted shape back on to the image using the
predicted pose. Our evaluation on several object categories
demonstrates the superiority of our method for predicting
pose-aware 3D shapes from natural images.

1. Introduction
Reliably predicting the 3D shape and pose of an object
from a single image has only become feasible in computer
vision over the last few years due to advances in deep learning. A substantial barrier to success stems from the inherent lack of natural training images with labeled 3D shape
and pose information. Some efforts have been undertaken
recently to rectify this including the construction of PASCAL3D+ [27], ObjectNet3D [26] and IKEA [13] datasets.
In all these cases images of several object categories are
manually annotated with corresponding 3D CAD models
and pose information.
Such datasets, however, suffer from several limitations.
First, they are limited to very few object categories and samples. Second, the human labeler must choose a CAD model

Figure 1: Input natural images with bounding box (left),
reprojected silhouettes (middle), and reconstruction (right)
results. The yellow arrow shows the canonical camera.

from a finite dictionary of models. This is problematic and
error prone as the dictionary of CAD models made available
rarely covers the actual variation encountered in natural imagery (e.g. only 7 CAD models are used to describe all
natural images of category “aeroplane” in PASCAL3D+).
Third, the pose of the CAD model is determined by annotating coarse landmarks within the natural image that correspond to points on the CAD model - pose is then recovered
through a PnP process [15]. This is also error prone due to
the shape mismatch of the CAD model with the natural image. Given the above limitations, directly training or even
fine-tuning with such datasets is not desirable.
Recently, the vision community has shifted their attention to synthetically rendering images directly from textured CAD models [19, 2]. Notable efforts that use synthetic imagery for training deep models to estimate pose or
reconstruct 3D shape include [19, 6, 1, 4, 11, 17, 20, 18].
This trend offers two advantages. First, it alleviates the
need for using images with error prone hand labeled pose
1 57

