Rotational Subgroup Voting and Pose Clustering for
Robust 3D Object Recognition
Anders Glent Buch Lilita Kiforenko Dirk Kraft
University of Southern Denmark
{anbu,lilita,kraft}@mmmi.sdu.dk

Abstract
It is possible to associate a highly constrained subset of
relative 6 DoF poses between two 3D shapes, as long as the
local surface orientation, the normal vector, is available
at every surface point. Local shape features can be used
to find putative point correspondences between the models
due to their ability to handle noisy and incomplete data.
However, this correspondence set is usually contaminated
by outliers in practical scenarios, which has led to many
past contributions based on robust detectors such as the
Hough transform or RANSAC. The key insight of our work
is that a single correspondence between oriented points on
the two models is constrained to cast votes in a 1 DoF rotational subgroup of the full group of poses, SE(3). Kernel
density estimation allows combining the set of votes efficiently to determine a full 6 DoF candidate pose between
the models. This modal pose with the highest density is stable under challenging conditions, such as noise, clutter, and
occlusions, and provides the output estimate of our method.
We first analyze the robustness of our method in relation
to noise and show that it handles high outlier rates much
better than RANSAC for the task of 6 DoF pose estimation.
We then apply our method to four state of the art data sets
for 3D object recognition that contain occluded and cluttered scenes. Our method achieves perfect recall on two LIDAR data sets and outperforms competing methods on two
RGB-D data sets, thus setting a new standard for general
3D object recognition using point cloud data.

1. Introduction
There is an ever-increasing need for robust perception systems and automated solutions in industry, service
robotics and other applications. One of the great challenges
is for an autonomous system to navigate in unstructured environments, which for manipulation tasks crucially relies
on the ability to recognize and localize the parts or objects of interest. Although some recognition tasks naturally

lend themselves to image-based techniques—some examples are pedestrian detection, traffic sign recognition and
gesture recognition—it is vital for an autonomous agent to
acquire the pose of objects in the ambient space to be able
to perform any real manipulation tasks. This involves determining the full 3 DoF position and 3 DoF rotation of an
object, which can become a computationally expensive operation in cluttered scenes.
Many contributions have been made on this matter [14],
in recent years heavily based on range or 3D data in the
form of either RGB-D images, point clouds or meshes.
These data are acquired from Kinect sensors, industrial
grade laser scanners or the likes. Steady improvements
have been achieved, when considering overall object recognition performances in 3D data sets, where the aim usually
is to find the full 6 DoF pose of multiple objects in unstructured or semi-structured scenes. In this very general
free-form recognition and localization scenario, one needs
to deal with some nuisances, including noise in the acquired
sensor data and partial occlusions of the objects due to obscuring elements. In this work, we focus on the underlying
problem of recovering the 6 DoF pose of an object under
these conditions and adopt a feature-based approach, where
multiple local shape features are used to describe a full 3D
object model. These local features can be matched with
a scene, providing a set of point correspondences between
the object and the scene. In real applications this set of correspondences is heavily contaminated by outliers, making
the search for the pose which brings the object into correct
alignment with the scene a very challenging problem.
This paper describes a method that can be used to localize 3D objects within a scene acquired from a depth or 3D
sensor. The method is shown to be particularly robust towards high fractions of outliers, which results in very competitive recognition rates for a number of applications. To
achieve this, our method uses geometric constraints to cast
full 6 DoF votes for the pose using individual correspondences. These votes are shown to lie on a small 1 DoF
manifold, which allows for a tractable inference step based
on kernel density estimation. Our method differs from pre-

4117

