Temporal shape super-resolution by intra-frame motion encoding
using high-fps structured light
Yuki Shiba, Satoshi Ono
Kagoshima University, Japan

Ryo Furukawa, Shinsaku Hiura
Hiroshima City University, Japan

Abstract
One of the solutions of depth imaging of moving scene
is to project a static pattern on the object and use just a
single image for reconstruction. However, if the motion of
the object is too fast with respect to the exposure time of the
image sensor, patterns on the captured image are blurred
and reconstruction fails. In this paper, we impose multiple
projection patterns into each single captured image to realize temporal super resolution of the depth image sequences.
With our method, multiple patterns are projected onto the
object with higher fps than possible with a camera. In this
case, the observed pattern varies depending on the depth
and motion of the object, so we can extract temporal information of the scene from each single image. The decoding
process is realized using a learning-based approach where
no geometric calibration is needed. Experiments confirm
the effectiveness of our method where sequential shapes are
reconstructed from a single image. Both quantitative evaluations and comparisons with recent techniques were also
conducted.

1. Introduction
Active depth imaging systems for capturing dynamic
scenes have been intensively investigated in response to
strong demands from various fields. Previous work on
dynamic scene-capture mainly used light projectors which
project a static structured light pattern onto the object. Recently, time of flight (TOF) sensors have improved the capability of real-time and high resolution capturing [13]. However, from the wide variety of real-time 3D scanning systems available, including commercial products, it is still a
difficult task to realize high-speed 3D scans of fast-moving
objects. One main reason for this difficulty comes from severe limitations on the light intensity of pattern projectors
to sufficiently expose all the pixels of the image sensor in
a short period of time. This is a common problem for all
active scanning systems including both structured light and
TOF sensors. Another reason is that it is still not common
for imaging sensors to be capable of high speed capturing
due to hardware limitations.
On the other hand, based on recent progress on pre-

Hiroshi Kawasaki
Kyushu University, Japan

cision devices fundamental to Digital Light Processing
(DLP) technology, such as micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS), extremely high fps (e.g. 10,000fps) is readily available. Therefore, in general, the switching speed of
patterns on a projector is much faster than that of a camera. Based on this fact, we propose a new solution to reconstruct 3D shapes of fast moving objects by projecting
multiple patterns onto the object with a higher fps than that
of a camera. Since it is possible to alter patterns with extremely high fps, the projected pattern on a moving object
is not easily blurred out and a sharp patterns are effectively
preserved (Fig. 1(b)). By using these sharp patterns with our
reconstruction algorithm, not only a single shape, but also
sequential shapes can be recovered; we call this temporal
shape super-resolution.
The basic idea of a reconstruction algorithm is straightforward; we simultaneously search the depth as well as the
velocity of the object’s surface in order to best describe the
captured image for each pixel by synthesizing the image using an image database which is captured in advance. This is
a multi-dimensional search of all pixels and the calculation
time becomes enormous if brute-force search is applied. To
reduce the computational time, we first obtain initial depth
and velocity estimation under constant velocity assumption,
then, we refine the estimation allowing varying velocities.
Several experiments were conducted using an off-theshelf DLP projector module [24] to confirm the effectiveness of our method with quantitative and qualitative evaluation, proving that our system can recover the shape of a
fast moving object with better accuracy than previous techniques. This paper proposed the following:
1. Multiple patterns projected into a single frame to encode both depth and motion information, in order to
recover sequential shapes of fast moving objects from
a single captured image.
2. Learning-based reconstruction algorithm to avoid geometric calibration as well as efficient search algorithm
to reduce calculation time.
3. An actual system be built with an off-the-shelf DLP
projector module with an ordinary camera to realize
1,800fps reconstruction. Note that no special setup,
synchronization nor extra devices are required.
1115

