Joint Detection and Recounting of Abnormal Events
by Learning Deep Generic Knowledge∗
1

Ryota Hinami1,2 , Tao Mei3 , and Shin’ichi Satoh2,1
The University of Tokyo, 2 National Institute of Infomatics, 3 Microsoft Research Asia
hinami@nii.ac.jp, tmei@microsoft.com, satoh@nii.ac.jp

Abstract

input

detection

recounting

1. Introduction
Detecting abnormal events in videos is crucial for video
surveillance. While automatic anomaly detection can free
people from having to monitor videos, we still have to check
videos when the systems raise alerts, and this still involves
immense costs. If systems can explain what is happening and assess why events are abnormal, we can quickly
identify unimportant events without having to check videos.
Such processes that explain the evidence in detecting events
is called event recounting, which was attempted as a multi-

action
attribute

anomaly score

object

This paper addresses the problem of joint detection and
recounting of abnormal events in videos. Recounting of abnormal events, i.e., explaining why they are judged to be abnormal, is an unexplored but critical task in video surveillance, because it helps human observers quickly judge if
they are false alarms or not. To describe the events in the
human-understandable form for event recounting, learning
generic knowledge about visual concepts (e.g., object and
action) is crucial. Although convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have achieved promising results in learning such
concepts, it remains an open question as to how to effectively use CNNs for abnormal event detection, mainly due to
the environment-dependent nature of the anomaly detection.
In this paper, we tackle this problem by integrating a generic
CNN model and environment-dependent anomaly detectors.
Our approach first learns CNN with multiple visual tasks to
exploit semantic information that is useful for detecting and
recounting abnormal events. By appropriately plugging the
model into anomaly detectors, we can detect and recount
abnormal events while taking advantage of the discriminative power of CNNs. Our approach outperforms the stateof-the-art on Avenue and UCSD Ped2 benchmarks for abnormal event detection and also produces promising results
of abnormal event recounting.

Figure 1. Our approach detects abnormal events and also recounts
why they were judged to be abnormal by predicting visual concepts and anomaly scores of each concept.

media event recounting (MER) task in TRECVid 1 but has
not been explored in the field of abnormal event detection.
Recounting abnormal events is also useful in understanding
the behavior of algorithms. Analyzing the evidence of detecting abnormal events should disclose potential problems
with current algorithms and indicate possible future directions. The main goal of the research presented in this paper
was to develop a framework that could jointly detect and
recount abnormal events, as shown in Fig. 1.
Abnormal events are generally defined as irregular
events that deviate from normal ones. Since normal behavior differs according to the environment, the target of
detection in abnormal event detection depends on the environment (e.g., ‘riding a bike’ is abnormal indoors while
it is normal on cycling roads). In other words, positive in anomaly detection has the nature of environmentdependent, wherein only negative samples are given as
training data and positive in the environment is defined by
these negative samples. This is different from most other
computer vision tasks (e.g., ‘pedestrian’ is always positive on a pedestrian detection task). Since positive samples
are not given in anomaly detection, detectors of abnormal
events cannot be learned in a supervised way. Instead, the
standard approach to anomaly detection is 1) learning an
environment-dependent normal model using training samples, and 2) detecting outliers from the learned model.
However, learning knowledge about basic visual concepts is essential for event recounting. The event in the

∗ This work was conducted when the first author was a research intern
at Microsoft Research Asia.

1 http://www.nist.gov/itl/iad/mig/mer12.cfm

3619

