A simple yet effective baseline for 3d human pose estimation
Julieta Martinez1 , Rayat Hossain1 , Javier Romero2 , and James J. Little1
1

University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
2
Body Labs Inc., New York, NY

julm@cs.ubc.ca, rayat137@cs.ubc.ca, javier.romero@bodylabs.com, little@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
Following the success of deep convolutional networks,
state-of-the-art methods for 3d human pose estimation have
focused on deep end-to-end systems that predict 3d joint
locations given raw image pixels. Despite their excellent
performance, it is often not easy to understand whether
their remaining error stems from a limited 2d pose (visual)
understanding, or from a failure to map 2d poses into 3dimensional positions.
With the goal of understanding these sources of error,
we set out to build a system that given 2d joint locations
predicts 3d positions. Much to our surprise, we have found
that, with current technology, “lifting” ground truth 2d joint
locations to 3d space is a task that can be solved with a
remarkably low error rate: a relatively simple deep feedforward network outperforms the best reported result by
about 30% on Human3.6M, the largest publicly available
3d pose estimation benchmark. Furthermore, training our
system on the output of an off-the-shelf state-of-the-art 2d
detector (i.e., using images as input) yields state of the art
results – this includes an array of systems that have been
trained end-to-end specifically for this task. Our results indicate that a large portion of the error of modern deep 3d
pose estimation systems stems from their visual analysis,
and suggests directions to further advance the state of the
art in 3d human pose estimation.

1. Introduction
The vast majority of existing depictions of humans are
two dimensional, e.g. video footage, images or paintings.
These representations have traditionally played an important role in conveying facts, ideas and feelings to other people, and this way of transmitting information has only been
possible thanks to the ability of humans to understand complex spatial arrangements in the presence of depth ambiguities. For a large number of applications, including virtual and augmented reality, apparel size estimation or even

autonomous driving, giving this spatial reasoning power to
machines is crucial. In this paper, we will focus on a particular instance of this spatial reasoning problem: 3d human
pose estimation from a single image.
More formally, given an image – a 2-dimensional representation – of a human being, 3d pose estimation is the
task of producing a 3-dimensional figure that matches the
spatial position of the depicted person. In order to go from
an image to a 3d pose, an algorithm has to be invariant to
a number of factors, including background scenes, lighting,
clothing shape and texture, skin color and image imperfections, among others. Early methods achieved this invariance
through features such as silhouettes [1], shape context [28],
SIFT descriptors [6] or edge direction histograms [40].
While data-hungry deep learning systems currently outperform approaches based on human-engineered features on
tasks such as 2d pose estimation (which also require these
invariances), the lack of 3d ground truth posture data for images in the wild makes the task of inferring 3d poses directly
from colour images challenging.
Recently, some systems have explored the possibility of
directly inferring 3d poses from images with end-to-end
deep architectures [33, 45], and other systems argue that 3d
reasoning from colour images can be achieved by training
on synthetic data [38, 48]. In this paper, we explore the
power of decoupling 3d pose estimation into the well studied problems of 2d pose estimation [30, 50], and 3d pose
estimation from 2d joint detections, focusing on the latter.
Separating pose estimation into these two problems gives
us the possibility of exploiting existing 2d pose estimation
systems, which already provide invariance to the previously
mentioned factors. Moreover, we can train data-hungry algorithms for the 2d-to-3d problem with large amounts of
3d mocap data captured in controlled environments, while
working with low-dimensional representations that scale
well with large amounts of data.
Our main contribution to this problem is the design and
analysis of a neural network that performs slightly better
than state-of-the-art systems (increasing its margin when
12640

