A Lightweight Approach for On-the-Fly Reflectance Estimation
Kihwan Kim1 Jinwei Gu1 Stephen Tyree1 Pavlo Molchanov1 Matthias Nießner2
1
NVIDIA 2 Technical University of Munich

Jan Kautz1

http://research.nvidia.com/publication/reflectance-estimation-fly

Abstract
Estimating surface reflectance (BRDF) is one key component for complete 3D scene capture, with wide applications in virtual reality, augmented reality, and human
computer interaction. Prior work is either limited to controlled environments (e.g., gonioreflectometers, light stages,
or multi-camera domes), or requires the joint optimization
of shape, illumination, and reflectance, which is often computationally too expensive (e.g., hours of running time) for
real-time applications. Moreover, most prior work requires
HDR images as input which further complicates the capture process. In this paper, we propose a lightweight approach for surface reflectance estimation directly from 8bit RGB images in real-time, which can be easily plugged
into any 3D scanning-and-fusion system with a commodity RGBD sensor. Our method is learning-based, with an
inference time of less than 90ms per scene and a model
size of less than 340K bytes. We propose two novel network architectures, HemiCNN and Grouplet, to deal with
the unstructured input data from multiple viewpoints under
unknown illumination. We further design a loss function to
resolve the color-constancy and scale ambiguity. In addition, we have created a large synthetic dataset, SynBRDF,
which comprises a total of 500K RGBD images rendered
with a physically-based ray tracer under a variety of natural illumination, covering 5000 materials and 5000 shapes.
SynBRDF is the first large-scale benchmark dataset for reflectance estimation. Experiments on both synthetic data
and real data show that the proposed method effectively recovers surface reflectance, and outperforms prior work for
reflectance estimation in uncontrolled environments.

1. Introduction
Capturing scene properties in the wild, including its 3D
geometry and surface reflectance, is one of the ultimate
goals of computer vision, with wide applications in virtual reality, augmented reality, and human computer interaction. While 3D geometry recovery has achieved high accuracy, especially with recent RGBD-based scanning-andfusion approaches [7, 22, 33], surface reflectance estima-

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Overview of our method: we take RGBD image sequences as inputs (a). During a reconstruction process, each view
contributes voxels as an observation. In (b), we visualize the color
of visible voxel samples from a specific view (red circle among
red dots indicating locations of other views). These samples from
all views are evaluated through either HemiCNN (Sec. 3.3.1) or
Grouplet networks (Sec. 3.3.2) to estimate the BRDF in real time.
In (c), we show a rendered image with predicted BRDF and captured lighting and shape. More examples are shown in Sec. 4.

tion still remains challenging. At one extreme, most of
the fusion methods assume Lambertian reflectance and recover surface texture only. At the other extreme, most of the
prior work on surface BRDF (bidirectional reflectance distribution function) estimation [14, 20, 19] aims to recover
the full 4D BRDF function, but are often limited to controlled, studio-like environments (e.g., gonioreflectometers,
light stages, multi-camera domes, planar samples).
Recently, a few methods [35, 18, 27, 26, 30, 17, 1] were
proposed to recover surface reflectance in uncontrolled environments (e.g., unknown illumination or shape) by utilizing statistical priors on natural illumination and/or BRDF.
These methods formulate the inverse rendering problem as
a joint, alternative optimization among shape, reflectance,
and/or lighting. Despite their accuracy, these methods are
computationally quite expensive (e.g., hours or days of
running time and tens of gigabytes of memory consumption) and are often run in a post-process rather than a realtime setting. Moreover, these methods often require highresolution HDR images as input, which further complicates
the capturing process for real-time or interactive applications on consumer-grade mobile devices.
1 20

