Channel Pruning for Accelerating Very Deep Neural Networks
Yihui He*
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Xi’an, 710049, China

Xiangyu Zhang
Megvii Inc.
Beijing, 100190, China

Jian Sun
Megvii Inc.
Beijing, 100190, China

heyihui@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

zhangxiangyu@megvii.com

sunjian@megvii.com

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a new channel pruning
method to accelerate very deep convolutional neural networks. Given a trained CNN model, we propose an iterative two-step algorithm to effectively prune each layer,
by a LASSO regression based channel selection and least
square reconstruction. We further generalize this algorithm
to multi-layer and multi-branch cases. Our method reduces the accumulated error and enhance the compatibility
with various architectures. Our pruned VGG-16 achieves
the state-of-the-art results by 5× speed-up along with only
0.3% increase of error. More importantly, our method is
able to accelerate modern networks like ResNet, Xception
and suffers only 1.4%, 1.0% accuracy loss under 2× speedup respectively, which is significant.

1. Introduction
Recent CNN acceleration works fall into three categories: optimized implementation (e.g., FFT [47]), quantization (e.g., BinaryNet [8]), and structured simplification
that convert a CNN into compact one [22]. This work focuses on the last one.
Structured simplification mainly involves: tensor factorization [22], sparse connection [17], and channel pruning [48]. Tensor factorization factorizes a convolutional
layer into several efficient ones (Fig. 1(c)). However, feature map width (number of channels) could not be reduced,
which makes it difficult to decompose 1 × 1 convolutional
layer favored by modern networks (e.g., GoogleNet [45],
ResNet [18], Xception [7]). This type of method also introduces extra computation overhead. Sparse connection deactivates connections between neurons or channels (Fig. 1(b)).
Though it is able to achieves high theoretical speed-up ratio,
the sparse convolutional layers have an ”irregular” shape
which is not implementation friendly. In contrast, channel
pruning directly reduces feature map width, which shrinks
* This work was done when Yihui He was an intern at Megvii Inc.

W1
number of channels

nonlinear

W2
nonlinear

W3

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Structured simplification methods that accelerate CNNs:
(a) a network with 3 conv layers. (b) sparse connection deactivates some connections between channels. (c) tensor factorization
factorizes a convolutional layer into several pieces. (d) channel
pruning reduces number of channels in each layer (focus of this
paper).

a network into thinner one, as shown in Fig. 1(d). It is efficient on both CPU and GPU because no special implementation is required.
Pruning channels is simple but challenging because removing channels in one layer might dramatically change
the input of the following layer. Recently, training-based
channel pruning works [1, 48] have focused on imposing
sparse constrain on weights during training, which could
adaptively determine hyper-parameters. However, training
from scratch is very costly and results for very deep CNNs
on ImageNet have been rarely reported. Inference-time attempts [31, 3] have focused on analysis of the importance
of individual weight. The reported speed-up ratio is very
limited.
In this paper, we propose a new inference-time approach
for channel pruning, utilizing redundancy inter channels.
Inspired by tensor factorization improvement by feature
maps reconstruction [52], instead of analyzing filter weights
[22, 31], we fully exploits redundancy within feature maps.
Specifically, given a trained CNN model, pruning each layer
is achieved by minimizing reconstruction error on its output
feature maps, as showned in Fig. 2. We solve this mini-

1389

