Flip-Invariant Motion Representation
Takumi Kobayashi
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
Umezono 1-1-1, Tsukuba, Japan
takumi.kobayashi@aist.go.jp

Abstract
In action recognition, local motion descriptors contribute to effectively representing video sequences where
target actions appear in localized spatio-temporal regions.
For robust recognition, those fundamental descriptors are
required to be invariant against horizontal (mirror) flipping
in video frames which frequently occurs due to changes
of camera viewpoints and action directions, deteriorating
classification performance. In this paper, we propose methods to render flip invariance to the local motion descriptors by two approaches. One method leverages local motion flows to ensure the invariance on input patches where
the descriptors are computed. The other derives a invariant
form theoretically from the flipping transformation applied
to hand-crafted descriptors. The method is also extended
so as to deal with ConvNet descriptors through learning
the invariant form based on data. The experimental results on human action classification show that the proposed
methods favorably improve performance both of the handcrafted and the ConvNet descriptors.

1. Introduction
There is an increasing amount of multimedia data containing videos through security cameras in the real world
and web sites (such as YouTube) on the Internet. Thereby,
it creates an urgent demand for automatic action recognition in computer vision communities. The action recognition has been tackled over the last two decades [40, 28, 11].
The difficulty of the action recognition is first in extracting
effective motion features. An input video is formulated in
a spatio-temporal volume while the images are defined in a
two-dimensional space domain. Such higher dimensionality of input data makes it harder to design motion features.
Along with the advances of image classification, the motion descriptors which extract motion characteristics are developed in the framework of bag-of-features over spatiotemporal interest points and/or dense trajectories, exhibiting
successful performance in realistic videos [20, 6, 35, 36].

On the other hand, deep convolutional neural network (ConvNet) methods have been applied to various image recognition tasks with great success, and it is now being extended
to motion recognition fields together with the large-scale
video dataset [17, 16, 32]. The ConvNet methods can construct spatio-temporal features to effectively describe the
motion patterns via end-to-end learning [32]. These two
approaches are comparable from the viewpoint of classification accuracy, being different from the image classification where the ConvNet significantly outperforms the handcrafted methods, which attracts enthusiastic research effort
to improve ConvNet methods in terms of architecture [29],
training scheme [38] and local descriptors [37].
An effective descriptor is required to be robust or invariant against variations of input signal which are irrelevant
to recognition, and in action classification, it is necessary
to acquire the invariance to horizontal (mirror) flipping in
video sequences. Both video cameras and actors (humans)
are standing upright due to gravity on the Earth and thus
the rotation around the optical axis of the camera rarely occurs. On the other hand, the horizontal flipping is frequently
observed such as due to changes of the camera viewpoint
(from the front or the back) and/or the action direction (leftward or rightward); through horizontal flipping, the video
frames capturing leftward walking correspond to those of
rightward walking captured from the opposite side, and vice
versa. Robust recognition can be built on the motion descriptors that characterize motions while being invariant to
the horizontal flipping. Though some invariant descriptors
are proposed in the image domain (see a brief review in
Sec. 1.1), such flip invariance has not been well addressed
in the action recognition literature.
In this paper, we propose methods to improve performance of action classification by taking into account the
invariance against the horizontal flipping. We focus on local motion descriptors, including ConvNet ones [37], which
work well in the trajectory-based BoF framework [36] for
action classification. It is feasible to consider the invariance
on a local region of spatio-temporal volume, while global
invariance is hard to be treated in a holistic video descrip15628

