WeText: Scene Text Detection under Weak Supervision
Shangxuan Tian1 , Shijian Lu2 , and Chongshou Li3
1

Visual Computing Department, Institute for Infocomm Research
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
3
Department of Industrial Systems Engineering and Management , National University of Singapore
tianshangxuan@u.nus.edu,Shijian.Lu@ntu.edu.sg,iselc@nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract
The requiring of large amounts of annotated training
data has become a common constraint on various deep
learning systems. In this paper, we propose a weakly supervised scene text detection method (WeText) that trains
robust and accurate scene text detection models by learning from unannotated or weakly annotated data. With a
“light” supervised model trained on a small fully annotated dataset, we explore semi-supervised and weakly supervised learning on a large unannotated dataset and a
large weakly annotated dataset, respectively. For the unsupervised learning, the light supervised model is applied
to the unannotated dataset to search for more character
training samples, which are further combined with the small
annotated dataset to retrain a superior character detection
model. For the weakly supervised learning, the character
searching is guided by high-level annotations of words/text
lines that are widely available and also much easier to prepare. In addition, we design an unified scene character detector by adapting regression based deep networks, which
greatly relieves the error accumulation issue that widely
exists in most traditional approaches. Extensive experiments across different unannotated and weakly annotated
datasets show that the scene text detection performance can
be clearly boosted under both scenarios, where the weakly
supervised learning can achieve the state-of-the-art performance by using only 229 fully annotated scene text images.

1. Introduction
Automatic reading texts in scene images has attracted
growing interest in recent years due to its great advantages
in image content understanding and contextual information
inference. It has been widely used in various tasks such as
multilingual image translation (Google translate [31]), ve-

Figure 1: Text detection examples of the proposed WeText system. In the top row from left to right are one sample image and
detection outputs using the baseline model. Images in the bottom row from left to right are text detections using the proposed
semi-supervised and weakly supervised learning approaches, respectively. Blue boxes indicate correct detections while red boxes
and green boxes indicate false positives and false negatives, respectively. Detection results have been zoomed in for better visualization.

hicle auto-navigation [28], object recognition [15], and assistive smartphone applications for visually impaired people [1]. An indispensable component of an automatic scene
text reading system is scene text detection under unconstrained conditions. This is still a very open research challenge due to the tremendous complexity imposed by diverse
text fonts and styles, arbitrary text sizes, various geometric
distortions, complex image backgrounds, uncontrolled illuminations, etc.
Two approaches have been explored to address the scene
text detection challenge. The first is character based, which
first detects character candidates by particular operators
such as Stroke Width Transform (SWT) [4], Maximally Sta11492

