Learning Efficient Convolutional Networks through Network Slimming
Zhuang Liu1∗ Jianguo Li2 Zhiqiang Shen3 Gao Huang4 Shoumeng Yan2 Changshui Zhang1
1
CSAI, TNList, Tsinghua University 2 Intel Labs China 3 Fudan University 4 Cornell University
{liuzhuangthu, zhiqiangshen0214}@gmail.com, {jianguo.li, shoumeng.yan}@intel.com,
gh349@cornell.edu, zcs@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The deployment of deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) in many real world applications is largely hindered
by their high computational cost. In this paper, we propose
a novel learning scheme for CNNs to simultaneously 1) reduce the model size; 2) decrease the run-time memory footprint; and 3) lower the number of computing operations,
without compromising accuracy. This is achieved by enforcing channel-level sparsity in the network in a simple but
effective way. Different from many existing approaches, the
proposed method directly applies to modern CNN architectures, introduces minimum overhead to the training process,
and requires no special software/hardware accelerators for
the resulting models. We call our approach network slimming, which takes wide and large networks as input models, but during training insignificant channels are automatically identified and pruned afterwards, yielding thin and
compact models with comparable accuracy. We empirically
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach with several
state-of-the-art CNN models, including VGGNet, ResNet
and DenseNet, on various image classification datasets. For
VGGNet, a multi-pass version of network slimming gives a
20× reduction in model size and a 5× reduction in computing operations.

1. Introduction
In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have become the dominant approach for a variety of computer vision tasks, e.g., image classification [22], object
detection [8], semantic segmentation [26]. Large-scale
datasets, high-end modern GPUs and new network architectures allow the development of unprecedented large CNN
models. For instance, from AlexNet [22], VGGNet [31] and
GoogleNet [34] to ResNets [14], the ImageNet Classification Challenge winner models have evolved from 8 layers
to more than 100 layers.
∗ This work was done when Zhuang Liu and Zhiqiang Shen were interns
at Intel Labs China. Jianguo Li is the corresponding author.

However, larger CNNs, although with stronger representation power, are more resource-hungry. For instance, a
152-layer ResNet [14] has more than 60 million parameters and requires more than 20 Giga float-point-operations
(FLOPs) when inferencing an image with resolution 224×
224. This is unlikely to be affordable on resource constrained platforms such as mobile devices, wearables or Internet of Things (IoT) devices.
The deployment of CNNs in real world applications are
mostly constrained by 1) Model size: CNNs’ strong representation power comes from their millions of trainable parameters. Those parameters, along with network structure
information, need to be stored on disk and loaded into memory during inference time. As an example, storing a typical CNN trained on ImageNet consumes more than 300MB
space, which is a big resource burden to embedded devices.
2) Run-time memory: During inference time, the intermediate activations/responses of CNNs could even take more
memory space than storing the model parameters, even with
batch size 1. This is not a problem for high-end GPUs, but
unaffordable for many applications with low computational
power. 3) Number of computing operations: The convolution operations are computationally intensive on high resolution images. A large CNN may take several minutes to
process one single image on a mobile device, making it unrealistic to be adopted for real applications.
Many works have been proposed to compress large
CNNs or directly learn more efficient CNN models for fast
inference. These include low-rank approximation [7], network quantization [3, 12] and binarization [28, 6], weight
pruning [12], dynamic inference [16], etc. However, most
of these methods can only address one or two challenges
mentioned above. Moreover, some of the techniques require
specially designed software/hardware accelerators for execution speedup [28, 6, 12].
Another direction to reduce the resource consumption of
large CNNs is to sparsify the network. Sparsity can be imposed on different level of structures [2, 37, 35, 29, 25],
which yields considerable model-size compression and inference speedup. However, these approaches generally re-

2736

