Unsupervised Action Discovery and Localization in Videos
Khurram Soomro, Mubarak Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision (CRCV), University of Central Florida (UCF)
{ksoomro, shah}@cs.ucf.edu

Input

Abstract
This paper is the first to address the problem of unsupervised action localization in videos. Given unlabeled
data without bounding box annotations, we propose a
novel approach that: 1) Discovers action class labels
and 2) Spatio-temporally localizes actions in videos. It
begins by computing local video features to apply spectral clustering on a set of unlabeled training videos.
For each cluster of videos, an undirected graph is constructed to extract a dominant set, which are known for
high internal homogeneity and in-homogeneity between
vertices outside it. Next, a discriminative clustering approach is applied, by training a classifier for each cluster, to iteratively select videos from the non-dominant set
and obtain complete video action classes. Once classes
are discovered, training videos within each cluster are
selected to perform automatic spatio-temporal annotations, by first over-segmenting videos in each discovered
class into supervoxels and constructing a directed graph
to apply a variant of knapsack problem with temporal
constraints. Knapsack optimization jointly collects a
subset of supervoxels, by enforcing the annotated action to be spatio-temporally connected and its volume
to be the size of an actor. These annotations are used
to train SVM action classifiers. During testing, actions
are localized using a similar Knapsack approach, where
supervoxels are grouped together and SVM, learned using videos from discovered action classes, is used to
recognize these actions. We evaluate our approach on
UCF-Sports, Sub-JHMDB, JHMDB, THUMOS13 and
UCF101 datasets. Our experiments suggest that despite
using no action class labels and no bounding box annotations, we are able to get competitive results to the
state-of-the-art supervised methods.

• Multiple Video Action Classes
• No Video Labels
• No Annotations

Output

1. Video Action Clusters
2. Action Annotations
3. Action Localizations

Figure 1. We tackle the problem of Unsupervised Action Localization without any action class labels or bounding box annotations, where a given collection of unlabeled videos contain
multiple action classes. First, the proposed method discovers action classes by discriminative clustering using dominant
sets (e.g. green and purple contours show clusters for kicking
and diving actions, respectively) and then applies a variant of
knapsack problem to determine spatio-temporal annotations of
discovered actions (yellow bounding boxes). Then, these annotations and action classes are used together to train an action
classifier and perform Unsupervised Action Localization.

tated action classes, whereas in action localization the
spatio-temporal extent of an action is detected and is
also recognized. Existing action recognition and localization approaches [46, 18, 6] heavily rely on strong supervision, in the form of training videos, that have been
manually collected, labeled and annotated. These approaches learn to detect an action using manually annotated bounding boxes and recognize using action class
labels from training data. Since, supervised methods
have the spatio-temporally annotated ground truth at
their disposal, they can take advantage of learning detectors and classifiers by fine-tuning over the training data.
However, supervised algorithms have some disadvantages compared to unsupervised approaches, due to
the difficulty of video annotation. First, a video may
consist of several actions in complex cluttered background. Second, video level annotation in a supervised
setting involves manually labeling the location (bounding box), the class of each action in videos and the temporal boundaries of each action, which is quite time con-

1. Introduction
The problem of action recognition is to classify a
video by assigning a label from a given set of anno-

696

