Weakly supervised learning of deep metrics for stereo reconstruction
Stepan Tulyakov and Anton Ivanov
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland
{stepan.tulyakov, anton.ivanov}@epfl.ch

Francois Fleuret
Idiap Research Institute, Switzerland
francois.fleuret@idiap.ch

Abstract
Deep-learning metrics have recently demonstrated extremely good performance to match image patches for
stereo reconstruction. However, training such metrics requires large amount of labeled stereo images, which can be
difficult or costly to collect for certain applications (consider, for example, satellite stereo imaging).
The main contribution of our work is a new weakly supervised method for learning deep metrics from unlabeled
stereo images, given coarse information about the scenes
and the optical system. Our method alternatively optimizes
the metric with a standard stochastic gradient descent, and
applies stereo constraints to regularize its prediction.
Experiments on reference data-sets show that, for a
given network architecture, training with this new method
without ground-truth produces a metric with performance
as good as state-of-the-art baselines trained with the said
ground-truth.
This work has three practical implications. Firstly, it
helps to overcome limitations of training sets, in particular
noisy ground truth. Secondly it allows to use much more
training data during learning. Thirdly, it allows to tune
deep metric for a particular stereo system, even if ground
truth is not available.

1. Introduction
The stereo reconstruction problem consists in estimating
a depth map from two images taken from different viewpoints. The problem has many practical applications in
robotics [35], remote sensing [44], and 3D graphics [49].
It has been heavily investigated for several decades [41],
and recent developments focused on designing high-order,
region-based and object-specific priors [63, 10, 58, 18,
25, 30, 55, 54], and improving efficiency of large scale
stereo [37, 26, 17, 7]. Perhaps the most significant recent

breakthrough was to use deep metrics [12, 61]. It led to
considerable gains in processing speed and reconstruction
accuracy (see Tables 4, 5, and 6). Our work improves upon
this line of research.
Main contributions. In this work we showed that it
is possible to learn a high quality deep metric for stereo
matching without any labeled training data, using only
task-specific constraints. The method does not use the labeled training data but nevertheless relies on the information about the scenes and the optical system, hence our calling “weakly supervised”. The method allows to: (1) learn
a deep metric when the labeled training data is not available or contaminated with a noise; (2) use more data for
the training and thus learn more complex, better performing networks while avoiding overfitting.

2. Related work
Stereo reconstruction algorithms rely on epipolar geometry [19], according to which every no-occluded point in
one stereo view corresponds a point in the other view lying
on a line that does not depend on the scene, but only on the
optical system. This line is called an epipolar line, and for a
calibrated stereo system, it is known for every image point.
Furthermore, for a pinhole camera, all the points lying on a
given epipolar line in the second view correspond to points
lying on a common epipolar line in the first view. Such two
epipolar lines are called conjugate.
It is a standard procedure to warp stereo views in order to
make conjugate epipolar lines in these views horizontal and
vertically aligned. This is called stereo rectification, and in
a rectified stereo pair, every point from the first view corresponds to a point shifted horizontally in the second view.
The extension of this shift – also known as a disparity – allows to compute the distance to the corresponding 3d point,
which is the ultimate goal of the stereo reconstruction.
So at the core of the stereo reconstruction process lies
the matching of similar patches in two images along epipo-

1339

