TorontoCity: Seeing the World with a Million Eyes
Shenlong Wang1,2 , Min Bai∗,1,2 , Gellert Mattyus∗,1,2 , Hang Chu∗,1 , Wenjie Luo1,2 , Bin Yang1,2 , Justin Liang1,2 , Joel Cheverie1 , Sanja Fidler1 , Raquel Urtasun1,2
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, 2 Uber Advanced Technologies Group

{slwang, mbai, mattyusg, chuhang1122, wenjie, byang, justinliang, joel, fidler, urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
In this paper we introduce the TorontoCity benchmark,
which covers the full greater Toronto area (GTA) with
712.5km2 of land, 8439km of road and around 400, 000
buildings. Our benchmark provides different perspectives
of the world captured from airplanes, drones and cars driving around the city. Manually labeling such a large scale
dataset is infeasible. Instead, we propose to utilize different
sources of high-precision maps to create our ground truth.
Towards this goal, we develop algorithms that allow us to
align all data sources with the maps while requiring minimal human supervision. We have designed a wide variety of
tasks including building height estimation (reconstruction),
road centerline and curb extraction, building instance segmentation, building contour extraction (reorganization), semantic labeling and scene type classification (recognition).
Our pilot study shows that most of these tasks are still difficult for modern convolutional neural networks.

1. Introduction
”It is a narrow mind which cannot look at a subject
from various points of view.”
George Eliot, Middlemarch

In recent times, a great deal of effort has been devoted
to creating large scale benchmarks. These have been instrumental to the development of the field, and have enabled
many significant break-throughs. ImageNet [10] made it
possible to train large convolutional neural networks, initiating the deep learning revolution in computer vision in
2012 with SuperVision (commonly refer as AlexNet [17]).
Efforts such as PASCAL [12] and Microsoft COCO [19]
have pushed the performance of segmentation and object
detection approaches to previously inconceivable levels.
Similarly, benchmarks such as KITTI [13] and Cityscapes
[9] have shown that visual perception is going to be an important component of advanced driver assistance systems
(ADAS) and self-driving cars in the imminent future.
∗ indicates equal contribution

However, current large scale datasets suffer from two
shortcomings. First, they have been captured by a small set
of sensors with similar perspectives of the world, e.g., internet photos for ImageNet or cameras/LIDAR mounted on
top of a car in the case of KITTI. Second, they do not contain rich semantics and 3D information at a large-scale. We
refer the reader to Fig. 2 for an analysis of existing datasets.
In this paper, we argue that the field is in need of large
scale benchmarks that allow joint reasoning about geometry, grouping and semantics. This has been commonly referred to as the three R’s of computer vision. Towards this
goal, we have created the TorontoCity benchmark, covering
the full greater Toronto area (GTA) with 712.5km2 of land,
8439km of road and around 400, 000 buildings. According
to the census, 6.8million people live in the GTA, which is
around 20% of the population of Canada. We have gathered a wide range of views of the city: from the overhead
perspective, we have aerial images captured during four different years as well as LIDAR from airborne. From the
ground, we have HD panoramas as well as imagery and LIDAR data captured from a moving vehicle driving around in
the city. We are also augmenting the dataset with imagery
captured from drones.
Manually labeling such a large scale dataset is not feasible. Instead, we propose to utilize different sources of highprecision maps to create our ground truth. Compared to online map services such as OpenStreetMap [1] and Google
Maps, our maps are much more accurate and contain richer
meta-data, which we exploit to create a wide variety of
diverse benchmarks. This includes tasks such as building height estimation (reconstruction), road centerline and
curb extraction, building instance segmentation, building
contour extraction (reorganization), semantic labeling and
scene type classfication (recognition). Participants can exploit any subset of the data (e.g., aerial and ground images)
to solve these tasks.
One of the main challenges in creating TorontoCity was
aligning the maps to all data sources such that the maps can
produce accurate ground truth. To alleviate this problem,
we have created a set of tools which allow us to reduce the
labeling task to a simple verification process, speeding up
13009

