SurfaceNet: An End-to-end 3D Neural Network for Multiview Stereopsis
Mengqi Ji∗1 , Juergen Gall3 , Haitian Zheng2 , Yebin Liu2 and Lu Fang†2
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
2
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany

Abstract
This paper proposes an end-to-end learning framework
for multiview stereopsis. We term the network SurfaceNet.
It takes a set of images and their corresponding camera parameters as input and directly infers the 3D model. The key
advantage of the framework is that both photo-consistency
as well geometric relations of the surface structure can be
directly learned for the purpose of multiview stereopsis in
an end-to-end fashion. SurfaceNet is a fully 3D convolutional network which is achieved by encoding the camera
parameters together with the images in a 3D voxel representation. We evaluate SurfaceNet on the large-scale DTU
benchmark.

(a) reference model

(b) SurfaceNet

(c) camp [4]

(d) furu [8]

(e) tola [27]

(f) Gipuma [9]

Figure 1: Reconstruction of the model 13 of the DTU dataset [1]
in comparison to [4, 8, 27, 9]. Our end-to-end learning framework
provides a relatively complete reconstruction.

1. Introduction
In multiview stereopsis (MVS), a dense model of a 3D
object is reconstructed from a set of images with known
camera parameters. This classic computer vision problem
has been extensively studied and the standard pipeline involves a number of separate steps [4, 27]. In available multiview stereo pipelines, sparse features are first detected and
then propagated to a dense point cloud for covering the
whole surface [8, 11], or multiview depth maps are first
computed followed with a depth map fusion step to obtain the 3D reconstruction of the object [15, 17]. A great
variety of approaches have been proposed to improve different steps in the standard pipeline. For instance, the
works [27, 4, 9] have focused on improving the depth map
generation using MRF optimization, photo-consistency enforcement, or other depth map post-processing operations
like denoising or interpolation. Other approaches have focused on more advanced depth fusion algorithms [13].
Recent advances in deep learning have been only par∗ mji@connect.ust.hk
† luvision.net@gmail.com

tially integrated. For instance, [32] uses a CNN instead
of hand-crafted features for finding correspondences among
image pairs and [10] predicts normals for depth maps using
a CNN, which improves the depth map fusion. The full potential of deep learning for multiview stereopsis, however,
can only be explored if the entire pipeline is replaced by an
end-to-end learning framework that takes the images with
camera parameters as input and infers the surface of the 3D
object. Apparently, such end-to-end scheme has the advantage that photo-consistency and geometric context for dense
reconstruction can be directly learned from data without the
need of manually engineering separate processing steps.
Instead of improving the individual steps in the pipeline,
we therefore propose the first end-to-end learning framework for multiview stereopsis, named SurfaceNet. Specifically, SurfaceNet is a 3D convolutional neural network that
can process two or more views and the loss function is directly computed based on the predicted surface from all
available views. In order to obtain a fully convolutional
network, a novel representation for each available viewpoint, named colored voxel cube (CVC), is proposed to im-

2307

