Visual Odometry for Pixel Processor Arrays
Laurie Bose1

Jianing Chen2 Stephen J. Carey2 Piotr Dudek2 Walterio Mayol-Cuevas1
1
University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom
2
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom

Abstract
We present an approach of estimating constrained egomotion on a Pixel Processor Array (PPA). These devices
embed processing and data storage capability into the pixels of the image sensor, allowing for fast and low power
parallel computation directly on the image-plane. Rather
than the standard visual pipeline whereby whole images are
transferred to an external general processing unit, our approach performs all computation upon the PPA itself, with
the camera’s estimated motion as the only information output. Our approach estimates 3D rotation and a 1D scaleless estimate of translation. We introduce methods of image scaling, rotation and alignment which are performed
solely upon the PPA itself and form the basis for conducting motion estimation. We demonstrate the algorithms on
a SCAMP-5 vision chip, achieving frame rates >1000Hz at
∼2W power consumption.

1. Introduction
PPA sensors consist of a parallel array of neighborconnected processing elements, each of which features light
capture, processing and storage capabilities allowing for
various image processing tasks to be efficiently performed
directly on the focal plane itself [4],[15],[9],[1],[2],[19].
This is in contrast to traditional camera sensors in which
each pixel element is only capable of light capture, meaning
that whole images must be transferred to a separate external
device for processing. PPA devices need only output specific information e.g. feature point locations or even higher
level events such as ego-motion coordinates. This results in
requiring little bandwidth, energy consumption and allowing for high speed visual processing.
Low power and bandwidth consumption draw comparison between such PPA cameras and Dynamic Vision Sensors (DVS) [14]. These devices produce an asynchronous
stream of events encoding brightness changes incurred at
specific pixels, allowing very fast response times and dynamic ranges. DVS have been demonstrated in agile UAVs
maneuvers [17], orientation tracking [7], [11], visual odom-

Figure 1: The architecture of SCAMP-5. Each processing
element / pixel has own storage and processing capabilities.

etry [13], 6DOF tracking and SLAM [12],[20]. However,
DVS based systems still require the actual processing of
visual data to be conducted on a separate external device,
often via having to reconstruct a whole image. In contrast, PPA cameras are capable of carrying out all processing
within the sensor device itself.
In this work, we investigate one potential approach for
estimating camera ego-motion on PPA devices, estimating
both rotation and motion along the camera’s forward axis.
Specifically our approach involves conducting image alignment between the current image and a previously acquired
key-frame image. This involves determining the set of image transformations (in terms of image rotation, scaling and
translation) needed to align these two images. The camera orientation and translation along the camera axis relative to the key-frame is then deduced from these transformations. The estimation process is conducted entirely upon
the SCAMP-5 camera [2] at rates that can exceed 1000Hz.
Section 2 introduces the SCAMP-5 vision system. Section 3 and Section 4 present our approaches for image scaling and rotation, which form the basis for our image stabilization based approach for motion estimation presented in
Section 5. Results vs accurate groundtruth as well as outdoor explorations are then presented in Section 6.
14604

