AutoDIAL: Automatic DomaIn Alignment Layers
Fabio Maria Carlucci
Sapienza, Roma, Italy

Lorenzo Porzi
IRI CSIC-UPC, Barcelona, Spain
Mapillary, Graz, Austria

Elisa Ricci
FBK, Trento, Italy
University of Perugia, Italy

Abstract
Classifiers trained on given databases perform poorly
when tested on data acquired in different settings. This is
explained in domain adaptation through a shift among distributions of the source and target domains. Attempts to
align them have traditionally resulted in works reducing the
domain shift by introducing appropriate loss terms, measuring the discrepancies between source and target distributions, in the objective function. Here we take a different
route, proposing to align the learned representations by embedding in any given network specific Domain Alignment
Layers, designed to match the source and target feature distributions to a reference one. Opposite to previous works
which define a priori in which layers adaptation should be
performed, our method is able to automatically learn the
degree of feature alignment required at different levels of
the deep network. Thorough experiments on different public
benchmarks, in the unsupervised setting, confirm the power
of our approach.

1. Introduction
In spite of the progress brought by deep learning in visual
recognition, the ability to generalize across different visual
domains is still out of reach. The assumption that training
(source) and test (target) data are independently and identically drawn from the same distribution does not hold in
many real world applications. Indeed, it has been shown
that, even with powerful deep learning models, the domain
shift problem can be alleviated but not removed [7].
In the last few years the research community has devoted
significant efforts in addressing domain shift. In this context, the specific problem of unsupervised domain adaptation, i.e. no labeled data are available in the target domain,
deserves special attention. In fact, in many applications annotating data is a tedious operation or may not be possible at

Barbara Caputo
Sapienza, Roma, Italy

Samuel Rota Bulò
FBK, Trento, Italy
Mapillary, Graz, Austria

all. Several approaches have been proposed, both considering hand-crafted features [15, 11, 12, 20, 8] and deep models [21, 31, 9, 23, 10, 19]. In particular, recent works based
on deep learning have achieved remarkable performance.
Most of these methods attempt to reduce the discrepancy
among source and target distributions by learning features
that are invariant to the domain shift. Two main strategies
are traditionally employed. One is based on the minimization of Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) [21, 23]: the
distributions of the learned source and target representations
are optimized to be as similar as possible by minimizing the
distance between their mean embeddings. The other strategy [31, 9] relies on the domain-confusion loss, introduced
to learn an auxiliary classifier predicting if a sample comes
from the source or from the target domain. Intuitively, by
maximizing this term, i.e. by imposing the auxiliary classifier to exhibit poor performance, domain-invariant features
can be obtained.
More recently, researchers have also started to investigate alternative directions [10, 3, 19, 4], such as the use of
encoder-decoder networks to jointly learn source labels and
reconstruct unsupervised target images, or the possibility
of reducing the domain shift by designing specific distribution normalization layers. In particular, the latter idea is exploited in [19], where a simple parameter-free approach for
deep domain adaptation, called Adaptive Batch Normalization (AdaBN), is proposed. Inspired by the popular Batch
Normalization (BN) technique [16], AdaBN modifies the
Inception-BN network and aligns the learned source and target representations by using different mean/variance terms
for the source and target domain when performing BN at
test time. This leads to learning domain-invariant features
without requiring additional loss terms (e.g. MMD, domainconfusion) in the optimization function and the associated
extra-parameters.
Inspired by [19], this paper introduces novel Domain
Alignment layers (DA-layers) (Fig.1) which are embedded at different levels of the deep architecture to align the

5067

