DeepFuse: A Deep Unsupervised Approach for Exposure Fusion with Extreme
Exposure Image Pairs
K. Ram Prabhakar, V Sai Srikar, and R. Venkatesh Babu
Video Analytics Lab, Department of Computational and Data Sciences,
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India

Abstract
We present a novel deep learning architecture for fusing static multi-exposure images. Current multi-exposure
fusion (MEF) approaches use hand-crafted features to fuse
input sequence. However, the weak hand-crafted representations are not robust to varying input conditions. Moreover, they perform poorly for extreme exposure image pairs.
Thus, it is highly desirable to have a method that is robust to varying input conditions and capable of handling
extreme exposure without artifacts. Deep representations
have known to be robust to input conditions and have shown
phenomenal performance in a supervised setting. However,
the stumbling block in using deep learning for MEF was the
lack of sufficient training data and an oracle to provide the
ground-truth for supervision. To address the above issues,
we have gathered a large dataset of multi-exposure image
stacks for training and to circumvent the need for ground
truth images, we propose an unsupervised deep learning
framework for MEF utilizing a no-reference quality metric
as loss function. The proposed approach uses a novel CNN
architecture trained to learn the fusion operation without
reference ground truth image. The model fuses a set of common low level features extracted from each image to generate artifact-free perceptually pleasing results. We perform
extensive quantitative and qualitative evaluation and show
that the proposed technique outperforms existing state-ofthe-art approaches for a variety of natural images.

1. Introduction
High Dynamic Range Imaging (HDRI) is a photography
technique that helps to capture better-looking photos in difficult lighting conditions. It helps to store all range of light
(or brightness) that is perceivable by human eyes, instead of
using limited range achieved by cameras. Due to this property, all objects in the scene look better and clear in HDRI,
without being saturated (too dark or too bright) otherwise.
The popular approach for HDR image generation is
called as Multiple Exposure Fusion (MEF), in which, a set

Y1
Y2
Underexposed
image (I1)

Overexposed
image (I2)

RGB
to
YCbCr

Cb1
Cb2

Cr1
Cr2

DeepFuse
CNN

Yfused

Weighted
fusion

Cbfused

Weighted
fusion

YCbCr
to
RGB

Fused image

Crfused

Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the proposed method.

of static LDR images (further referred as exposure stack)
with varying exposure is fused into a single HDR image.
The proposed method falls under this category. Most of
MEF algorithms work better when the exposure bias difference between each LDR images in exposure stack is minimum1 . Thus they require more LDR images (typically more
than 2 images) in the exposure stack to capture whole dynamic range of the scene. It leads to more storage requirement, processing time and power. In principle, the long exposure image (image captured with high exposure time) has
better colour and structure information in dark regions and
short exposure image (image captured with less exposure
time) has better colour and structure information in bright
regions. Though fusing extreme exposure images is practically more appealing, it is quite challenging (existing approaches fail to maintain uniform luminance across image).
Additionally, it should be noted that taking more pictures
increases power, capture time and computational time requirements. Thus, we propose to work with exposure bracketed image pairs as input to our algorithm.
In this work, we present a data-driven learning method
for fusing exposure bracketed static image pairs. To our
knowledge this is the first work that uses deep CNN architecture for exposure fusion. The initial layers consists of a
set of filters to extract common low-level features from each
1 Exposure bias value indicates the amount of exposure offset from the
auto exposure setting of an camera. For example, EV 1 is equal to doubling
auto exposure time (EV 0).

4714

