Stereo DSO:
Large-Scale Direct Sparse Visual Odometry with Stereo Cameras
Rui Wang∗, Martin Schwörer∗ , Daniel Cremers
Technical University of Munich
{wangr, schwoere, cremers}@in.tum.de

Abstract
We propose Stereo Direct Sparse Odometry (Stereo
DSO) as a novel method for highly accurate real-time visual odometry estimation of large-scale environments from
stereo cameras. It jointly optimizes for all the model parameters within the active window, including the intrinsic/extrinsic camera parameters of all keyframes and the
depth values of all selected pixels. In particular, we propose
a novel approach to integrate constraints from static stereo
into the bundle adjustment pipeline of temporal multi-view
stereo. Real-time optimization is realized by sampling pixels uniformly from image regions with sufficient intensity
gradient. Fixed-baseline stereo resolves scale drift. It also
reduces the sensitivities to large optical flow and to rolling
shutter effect which are known shortcomings of direct image alignment methods. Quantitative evaluation demonstrates that the proposed Stereo DSO outperforms existing
state-of-the-art visual odometry methods both in terms of
tracking accuracy and robustness. Moreover, our method
delivers a more precise metric 3D reconstruction than previous dense/semi-dense direct approaches while providing a
higher reconstruction density than feature-based methods.

1. Introduction
1.1. Real-time Visual Odometry
While traditionally robotic systems such as self-driving
cars have been largely relying on Laser or Lidar to actively
sense their environment and perform self localization and
mapping, more recently camera-based SLAM and odometry algorithms have witnessed a drastic boost in performance. Although such passive sensors require a sufficiently
illuminated and textured scene to infer 3D structure and motion, they comprise several advantages including higher resolution, higher sensing range and sensing rate as well as
lower weight, size and hardware cost. This makes them
∗ These authors contributed equally.

Figure 1. Results of Stereo Direct Sparse Odometry on sequence
00 of the KITTI Dataset. On top is the estimated camera trajectory.
To distinguish the sparsity from previous dense or semi-dense direct methods, we show the depth maps used for tracking in the
middle. An example of a reconstructed scene is shown on the bottom.

far more versatile – the smaller size and weight, for example, enable applications such as visual-inertial autonomous
navigation of nanocopters [6]. As a result, there is a huge

3903

