Photographic Image Synthesis with Cascaded Refinement Networks
Qifeng Chen† ‡

Vladlen Koltun†

(a) Input semantic layouts

(b) Synthesized images

Figure 1. Given a pixelwise semantic layout, the presented model synthesizes an image that conforms to this layout. (a) Semantic layouts
from the Cityscapes dataset of urban scenes; semantic classes are coded by color. (b) Images synthesized by our model for these layouts.
The layouts shown here and throughout the paper are from the validation set and depict scenes from new cities that were never seen during
training. Best viewed on the screen.

Abstract
We present an approach to synthesizing photographic
images conditioned on semantic layouts. Given a semantic label map, our approach produces an image with photographic appearance that conforms to the input layout. The
approach thus functions as a rendering engine that takes
a two-dimensional semantic specification of the scene and
produces a corresponding photographic image. Unlike recent and contemporaneous work, our approach does not
rely on adversarial training. We show that photographic
images can be synthesized from semantic layouts by a single feedforward network with appropriate structure, trained
end-to-end with a direct regression objective. The presented approach scales seamlessly to high resolutions; we
† Intel Labs
‡ Stanford University

demonstrate this by synthesizing photographic images at
2-megapixel resolution, the full resolution of our training
data. Extensive perceptual experiments on datasets of outdoor and indoor scenes demonstrate that images synthesized by the presented approach are considerably more realistic than alternative approaches.

1. Introduction
Consider the semantic layouts in Figure 1. A skilled
painter could draw images that depict urban scenes that conform to these layouts. Highly trained craftsmen can even
create paintings that approach photorealism [20]. Can we
train computational models that have this ability? Given a
semantic layout of a novel scene, can an artificial system
synthesize an image that depicts this scene and looks like a
photograph?
11511

