Intrinsic 3D Dynamic Surface Tracking based on Dynamic Ricci Flow and
Teichmüller Map
Xiaokang Yu
Dept of Comp Sci
Qingdao Univ
Qingdao, PR China

Na Lei
Dept of Soft and Tech
Dalian Univ of Tech
Dalian,PR China

Yalin Wang
Comp.Sci.& Engin
Arizona State Univ
Arizona, USA

Xianfeng Gu
Dept of Comp Sci
Stony Brook Univ
Stony Brook, USA

xyu@qdu.edu.cn

nalei@dlut.edu.cn

yalin.wang@asu.edu

gu@cs.sunysb.edu

Abstract
3D dynamic surface tracking is an important research
problem and plays a vital role in many computer vision and
medical imaging applications. However, it is still challenging to efficiently register surface sequences which has large
deformations and strong noise. In this paper, we propose a
novel automatic method for non-rigid 3D dynamic surface
tracking with surface Ricci flow and Teichmüller map methods. According to quasi-conformal Teichmüller theory, the
Techmüller map minimizes the maximal dilation so that our
method is able to automatically register surfaces with large
deformations. Besides, the adoption of Delaunay triangulation and quadrilateral meshes makes our method applicable to low quality meshes. In our work, the 3D dynamic
surfaces are acquired by a high speed 3D scanner. We first
identified sparse surface features using machine learning
methods in the texture space. Then we assign landmark features with different curvature settings and the Riemannian
metric of the surface is computed by the dynamic Ricci flow
method, such that all the curvatures are concentrated on the
feature points and the surface is flat everywhere else. The
registration among frames is computed by the Teichmüller
mappings, which aligns the feature points with least angle
distortions. We apply our new method to multiple sequences
of 3D facial surfaces with large expression deformations
and compare them with two other state-of-the-art tracking
methods. The effectiveness of our method is demonstrated
by the clearly improved accuracy and efficiency.

1. Introduction
Many imaging tracking algorithms have been proposed
in the last few decades [27]. Several approaches have relied
on patterns of intensity variation to identify the trajectories
of objects (or major features) over time by locating its position in the video sequences. However, for some specific applications, e.g. expression transfer in motion capture [3, 22]
and patient setup for critical organ protection in radiation

therapy [18], 2D (image-based) tracking systems somewhat
are sensitive to image noises and cannot provide high resolution tracking solution with refined details. In contrast,
3D geometric tracking [33, 18] can capture detailed object geometric information and thus may offer better tracking
performance that is desired by these applications.
Recently, the rapid development of 3D reconstruction
techniques and the increasing need for automated 3D image data analysis has generated a great deal of interest in
3D image dynamic tracking research [6, 19, 34]. Often the
registration among surface frames is required, and a correspondence field must be computed to register one surface
frame nonlinearly onto the other. Although surface registration was well studied in computer vision and medical imaging research [23, 28], but dense and accurate registration
between dynamic noisy image frames is still challenging to
compute. One common way to achieve is to first map each
of the 3D surfaces to canonical parameter spaces via isometry [1, 17] or conformal mappings [23]. The surface correspondence problem can be addressed by computing a flow
in the parameter space of the two surfaces, which induces
a correspondence field in 3D. Furthermore, specific feature
points or landmark curves are enforced either by matching
differences [26] or boundary conditions [20].
Quasi-conformal mapping is a generalization of conformal mapping and can be used to describe general surface
mappings. By the quasiconformal Teichmüller theory, there
exists a unique Teichmüller map (T-Map) among all quasiconformal mappings between two surfaces. The obtained Tmap minimizes the maximal dilation. In this paper, we show
how to use T-map together with dynamic surface Ricci flow
method to assist in matching of 3D face geometric surface
video when there are noises, large deformations and lack of
features. Fig. 1 illustrates a tracking sequence obtained using our algorithm. We can find that the template (represented by the quadrilateral mesh) is automatically transferred
to other frames with different expressions while enforcing

15390

