Learning the Latent “Look”: Unsupervised Discovery of a
Style-Coherent Embedding from Fashion Images
Wei-Lin Hsiao
UT-Austin

Kristen Grauman
UT-Austin

kimhsiao@cs.utexas.edu

grauman@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
What defines a visual style? Fashion styles emerge organically from how people assemble outfits of clothing,
making them difficult to pin down with a computational
model. Low-level visual similarity can be too specific to
detect stylistically similar images, while manually crafted
style categories can be too abstract to capture subtle style
differences. We propose an unsupervised approach to learn
a style-coherent representation. Our method leverages
probabilistic polylingual topic models based on visual attributes to discover a set of latent style factors. Given a
collection of unlabeled fashion images, our approach mines
for the latent styles, then summarizes outfits by how they mix
those styles. Our approach can organize galleries of outfits
by style without requiring any style labels. Experiments on
over 100K images demonstrate its promise for retrieving,
mixing, and summarizing fashion images by their style.

1. Introduction
Computer vision methods that can understand fashion
could transform how individual consumers shop for their
clothing as well as how the fashion industry can analyze its
own trends at scale. The scope for impact is high: fashion is
already a $1.2 trillion USD global industry, popular social
commerce websites like Chictopia and Polyvore draw millions of users, and online subscription services like StitchFix blend algorithms and stylists to personalize shopping
selections. In sync with these growing possibilities, recent
research explores new vision methods for fashion, with exciting advances for parsing clothing [39, 38], recognizing
clothing, attributes [5, 40], and styles [20, 33], matching
clothing seen on the street to catalogs [19, 25, 18, 37, 26],
and recommending clothing [24, 28, 36, 14, 16].
Despite substantial progress on all these fronts, capturing the style-coherent similarity between outfits remains
an important challenge. In particular, a visual representation with style coherency would capture the relationship

Query

Instance match

Label-based

Latent looks

– low diversity.

– inconsistent.

– consistent, diverse.

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1: The leftmost query image relates to instances like those
in (a),(b),(c) in distinct ways. In contrast to matching nearduplicate outfits (a) or classifying broad styles (b), we propose
to discover the latent “looks”—compositions of clothing elements
that are stylistically similar (c).

between clothing outfits that share a “look”, even though
they may differ in their specific composition of garments.
A style-coherent representation would be valuable for i)
browsing, where a consumer wants to peruse diverse outfits
similar in style, ii) recommendation, where a system should
suggest new items that add novelty to a consumer’s closet
without straying from his/her personal style, and iii) style
trend tracking, where analysts would like to understand the
popularity of items over time.
Style coherency differs from traditional notions of visual similarity. The problem of style coherency sits between
the two extremes currently studied in the literature: on one
end of the spectrum are methods that seek robust instance
matching, e.g., to allow a photo of a garment seen on the
street to be matched to a catalog [19, 25, 18, 37, 26] (see
Figure 1(a)); on the other end of the spectrum are methods
that seek coarse style classification, e.g., to label an outfit
as one of a small number predefined categories like Hipster, Preppy, or Goth [20, 33] (see Figure 1(b)). In contrast
to these two extremes, style coherency refers to consistent
fine-grained trends exhibited by distinct assemblies of garments. In other words, coherent styles reflect some latent
“look”. See Figure 1(c).
14203

