Am I a Baller? Basketball Performance Assessment
from First-Person Videos

1

Gedas Bertasius1 , Hyun Soo Park2 , Stella X. Yu3 , Jianbo Shi1
University of Pennsylvania, 2 University of Minnesota, 3 UC Berkeley ICSI

{gberta,jshi}@seas.upenn.edu

hspark@umn.edu

stella.yu@berkeley.edu

Abstract

Training
A Pair of First-Person Basketball Videos
Player A
Player B

This paper presents a method to assess a basketball
player’s performance from his/her first-person video. A key
challenge lies in the fact that the evaluation metric is highly
subjective and specific to a particular evaluator. We leverage the first-person camera to address this challenge. The
spatiotemporal visual semantics provided by a first-person
view allows us to reason about the camera wearer’s actions
while he/she is participating in an unscripted basketball
game. Our method takes a player’s first-person video and
provides a player’s performance measure that is specific to
an evaluator’s preference.
To achieve this goal, we first use a convolutional LSTM
network to detect atomic basketball events from first-person
videos. Our network’s ability to zoom-in to the salient regions addresses the issue of a severe camera wearer’s head
movement in first-person videos. The detected atomic events
are then passed through the Gaussian mixtures to construct
a highly non-linear visual spatiotemporal basketball assessment feature. Finally, we use this feature to learn a basketball assessment model from pairs of labeled first-person
basketball videos, for which a basketball expert indicates,
which of the two players is better.
We demonstrate that despite not knowing the basketball
evaluator’s criterion, our model learns to accurately assess
the players in real-world games. Furthermore, our model
can also discover basketball events that contribute positively and negatively to a player’s performance.

1. Introduction
A gifted offensive college basketball player, Kris Jenkins (Villanova), made a three point buzzer beater against
UNC (2015-2016 season), and recorded one of the greatest
endings in NCAA championship history. He was arguably
one of the best players in the entire NCAA tournament. A
question is “what makes him stand out from his peer players?”. His stats, e.g., average points and rebounds per game,
can be a measure to evaluate his excellence. However, these
measures do not capture every basketball aspect that a coach

A Basketball Expert

Ground Truth Label
Player B is better
Learning
Feedback

Data-Driven Basketball
Performance Assessment Model

Prediction

Testing
First-Person Basketball Video
Player C

!

Data-Driven Basketball
Performance Assessment Model

Basketball Player
of Interest

First-Person
Camera

A Performance Measure
Customized to a Basketball Expert

Detected Positive
Events

Detected Negative
Events

Figure 1: Our goal is to assess a basketball player’s performance based on an evaluator’s criterion from an unscripted
first-person basketball video of a player. During training,
we learn such a model from the pairs of weakly labeled
first-person basketball videos. During testing, our model
predicts a performance measure customized to a particular
evaluator from a first-person basketball video. Additionally, our model can also discover basketball events that contribute positively and negatively to a player’s performance.
may want to use for assessing his potential impact in the future team, which is difficult to measure quantitatively. NBA
coaches and scouts are eager to catch every nuance of a basketball player’s abilities by watching a large number of his
basketball videos.
Now consider a college recruitment process where there
is a massive number of high school players. In such conditions, the searching task for the best players becomes much
more challenging, more expensive and also more labor intense. More importantly, the recruiters need to measure and
evaluate a sequence of atomic decision makings, e.g., when
does a player shoot, whether he makes a shot, how good is
12177

