R-C3D: Region Convolutional 3D Network for Temporal Activity Detection
Huijuan Xu

Abir Das
Boston University
Boston, MA

Kate Saenko

{hxu, dasabir, saenko}@bu.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of activity detection in continuous, untrimmed video streams. This is a difficult task that
requires extracting meaningful spatio-temporal features to
capture activities, accurately localizing the start and end
times of each activity. We introduce a new model, Region Convolutional 3D Network (R-C3D), which encodes
the video streams using a three-dimensional fully convolutional network, then generates candidate temporal regions
containing activities, and finally classifies selected regions
into specific activities. Computation is saved due to the
sharing of convolutional features between the proposal and
the classification pipelines. The entire model is trained
end-to-end with jointly optimized localization and classification losses. R-C3D is faster than existing methods (569
frames per second on a single Titan X Maxwell GPU) and
achieves state-of-the-art results on THUMOS’14. We further demonstrate that our model is a general activity detection framework that does not rely on assumptions about
particular dataset properties by evaluating our approach
on ActivityNet and Charades. Our code is available at
http://ai.bu.edu/r-c3d/

1. Introduction
Activity detection in continuous videos is a challenging
problem that requires not only recognizing, but also precisely localizing activities in time. Existing state-of-the-art
approaches address this task as detection by classification,
i.e. classifying temporal segments generated in the form of
sliding windows [13, 20, 24, 37] or via an external “proposal” generation mechanism [10, 35]. These approaches
suffer from one or more of the following major drawbacks:
they do not learn deep representations in an end-to-end fashion, but rather use hand-crafted features [33, 34], or deep
features like VGG [28], ResNet [8], C3D [32] etc., learned
separately on image/video classification tasks. Such offthe-shelf representations may not be optimal for localizing activities in diverse video domains, resulting in inferior
performance. Furthermore, current methods’ dependence

Figure 1. We propose a fast end-to-end Region Convolutional
3D Network (R-C3D) for activity detection in continuous video
streams. The network encodes the frames with fully-convolutional
3D filters, proposes activity segments, then classifies and refines
them based on pooled features within their boundaries. Our model
improves both speed and accuracy compared to existing methods.

on external proposal generation or exhaustive sliding windows leads to poor computational efficiency. Finally, the
sliding-window models cannot easily predict flexible activity boundaries.
In this paper, we propose an activity detection model
that addresses all of the above issues. Our Region Convolutional 3D Network (R-C3D) is end-to-end trainable and
learns task-dependent convolutional features by jointly optimizing proposal generation and activity classification. Inspired by the Faster R-CNN [21] object detection approach,
we compute fully-convolutional 3D ConvNet features and
propose temporal regions likely to contain activities, then
pool features within these 3D regions to predict activity
classes (Figure 1). The proposal generation stage filters out
many background segments and results in superior computational efficiency compared to sliding window models.
Furthermore, proposals are predicted with respect to predefined anchor segments and can be of arbitrary length, allowing detection of flexible activity boundaries.
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) features learned
end-to-end have been successfully used for activity recognition [14, 27], particularly in 3D ConvNets (C3D [32]),
15783

