Beyond standard benchmarks: Parameterizing performance evaluation
in visual object tracking
Luka Čehovin Zajc, Alan Lukežič, Aleš Leonardis, Matej Kristan
University of Ljubljana
Faculty of computer and information science
{luka.cehovin, alan.lukezic, ales.leonardis, matej.kristan}@fri.uni-lj.si

Abstract
Object-to-camera motion produces a variety of apparent motion patterns that significantly affect performance of
short-term visual trackers. Despite being crucial for designing robust trackers, their influence is poorly explored
in standard benchmarks due to weakly defined, biased and
overlapping attribute annotations. In this paper we propose to go beyond pre-recorded benchmarks with post-hoc
annotations by presenting an approach that utilizes omnidirectional videos to generate realistic, consistently annotated, short-term tracking scenarios with exactly parameterized motion patterns. We have created an evaluation
system, constructed a fully annotated dataset of omnidirectional videos and generators for typical motion patterns. We
provide an in-depth analysis of major tracking paradigms
which is complementary to the standard benchmarks and
confirms the expressiveness of our evaluation approach.

1. Introduction
Single-target visual object tracking has made significant progress in the last decade. To a large extent
this can be attributed to the adoption of benchmarks,
through which common evaluation protocols, datasets
and baseline algorithms have been established. Starting
with PETS initiative [28], several benchmarks on general single-target short-term tracking have been developed since, most notably OTB50 [25], VOT2013 [15],
ALOV300+ [21], VOT2014 [16, 14], VOT2015 [13]
OTB100 [26], TC128 [17] and VOT2016 [12].
The recent benchmarks [12, 18] report that, apart from
the obvious situations like full occlusions, the trackers’ performance is largely affected by the apparent motion, i.e.,
object motion with respect to the camera. The complexity of apparent motion patterns varies in realistic applications. An automated video-conferencing system largely observes translational motions, a drone circling over a tar-

Figure 1: By re-parameterizing camera trajectory, a single
360° video produces various 2D viewpoint sequences with
unique apparent motion patterns.
get induces a large off-center rotational pattern, while water movement induces periodic scale changes in underwater
robotic vessels. In some trackers, the translational motions
are addressed by motion models. But compositions of scale
changes, rotations and off-center translations are often assumed to be addressed by the visual models and localization techniques. This aspect is left largely unexplored in
standard benchmarks, which are dominated by a handful of
motion patterns and cannot fully expose the limitations of
existing trackers. Advances in short-term tracking therefore call for accurate parametrization of apparent motion
patterns in test sequences.
Dataset variation, systematic organization and low redundancy are crucial for practical evaluation, as argued
by the recent work on test-data validation in computer
vision [29]. Established benchmarks in visual tracking
approach this requirement by increasing the number of
sequences [21], applying advanced dataset construction
methodologies [12] and by annotating entire sequences or

3323

