Locally-Transferred Fisher Vectors for Texture Classification
Yang Song1 , Fan Zhang2 , Qing Li1 , Heng Huang3 , Lauren J. O’Donnell2 , Weidong Cai1
1

School of Information Technologies, University of Sydney, Australia
2

3

Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, USA

Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Pittsburgh, USA

Abstract
Texture classification has been extensively studied in
computer vision. Recent research shows that the combination of Fisher vector (FV) encoding and convolutional
neural network (CNN) provides significant improvement in
texture classification over the previous feature representation methods. However, by truncating the CNN model at
the last convolutional layer, the CNN-based FV descriptors
would not incorporate the full capability of neural networks
in feature learning. In this study, we propose that we can
further transform the CNN-based FV descriptors in a neural
network model to obtain more discriminative feature representations. In particular, we design a locally-transferred
Fisher vector (LFV) method, which involves a multi-layer
neural network model containing locally connected layers
to transform the input FV descriptors with filters of locally
shared weights. The network is optimized based on the
hinge loss of classification, and transferred FV descriptors
are then used for image classification. Our results on three
challenging texture image datasets show improved performance over the state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Texture is a fundamental component in visual recognition. The study of texture, especially feature representation
of textures, has evolved over the years from basic statistical
features, to the most recent methods based on deep learning.
Among the numerous representation methods, we are particularly interested in the feature encoding aspect. While the
earlier studies have mainly used the bag-of-words (BOW)
model and its variations [14, 11, 34, 13, 30, 19, 18], encoding via Fisher vectors (FV) has become the dominant
approach in texture classification [21, 6, 25, 7].
Similar to BOW, FV encoding aggregates the local-level
features into the image-level representation. The main
uniqueness of FV encoding is the soft assignment of Gaus-

Figure 1. With the VGG-VD model, FV-CNN descriptor is computed by FV encoding of the local features from the last convolutional layer. We design the LFV model, in a multi-layer neural
network construct, to further transform the FV-CNN descriptor to
a more discriminative LFV descriptor.

sian components and the computation of first and second
order difference vectors. In addition, while typically the
dense scale-invariant feature transform (DSIFT) features
are the local features used with FV encoding [17, 6, 25],
the recent approach has shown that the local features from a
convolutional neural network (CNN) model could produce
more discriminative FV descriptors [7]. In particular, this
study proposes a FV-CNN descriptor, which is computed
by FV encoding of the local features extracted from the
last convolutional layer of the VGG-VD model (very deep
CNN model with 19 layers) [24] pretrained on ImageNet.
This FV-CNN descriptor shows large improvement over the
more standard FV-DSIFT descriptor [7, 26].
Also, for texture classification, this FV-CNN descriptor shows higher classification performance than FC-CNN,
which is the descriptor obtained from the penultimate fully
connected layer of the CNN [7]. Moreover, we find that
even if the pretrained VGG-VD model is fine-tuned on the
texture image dataset, the fine-tuned FC-CNN descriptors
are still less discriminative than the FV-CNN descriptors.
These observations indicate that FV encoding is more ef14912

