Learning High Dynamic Range from Outdoor Panoramas
Jinsong Zhang
Jean-François Lalonde
Université Laval, Québec, Canada
jinsong.zhang.1@ulaval.ca, jflalonde@gel.ulaval.ca
http://www.jflalonde.ca/projects/learningHDR

Abstract
Outdoor lighting has extremely high dynamic range.
This makes the process of capturing outdoor environment
maps notoriously challenging since special equipment must
be used. In this work, we propose an alternative approach.
We first capture lighting with a regular, LDR omnidirectional camera, and aim to recover the HDR after the fact
via a novel, learning-based inverse tonemapping method.
We propose a deep autoencoder framework which regresses
linear, high dynamic range data from non-linear, saturated,
low dynamic range panoramas. We validate our method
through a wide set of experiments on synthetic data, as well
as on a novel dataset of real photographs with ground truth.
Our approach finds applications in a variety of settings,
ranging from outdoor light capture to image matching.

1. Introduction
Outdoor lighting has an intrinsic dynamic range that is
much higher than what conventional cameras can capture.
While professional cameras boast dynamic ranges of up
to 16 bits, we are still a long way from the full 22 bits
needed to properly model outdoor lighting [35]. Therefore, to accurately capture the full dynamic range of outdoor illumination, one must resort to acquiring multiple exposures [8], imaging a specially-designed light probe [7], or
using custom-designed photographic hardware [25, 36].
An attractive alternative is to apply inverse lighting algorithms on low dynamic range imagery, which shifts the burden from capture to processing. These algorithms attempt
to inverse the image formation process in order to recover
lighting information, either in a physics-based [23] or datadriven [22, 14] way. A main limitation of these algorithms
is that they are inherently limited to the information available within the image. An image may not always contain
sufficient information to recover the lighting reliably.
In this work, we propose to directly learn the relationship between the low dynamic range (LDR) information
available in an outdoor 360◦ panorama and the high dynamic range (HDR) of outdoor lighting. Our method takes

as input a single LDR omnidirectional panorama, and converts it to HDR automatically, filling in saturated pixels with
plausible values. Recovering HDR from LDR is known as
inverse tonemapping: this is typically achieved by inverting the camera response function [30]. While there exists a
wide variety of such techniques in the literature, these methods are not tuned for outdoor lighting as they do not expect
such extreme variations in dynamic range, and fail to recover plausible results as will be demonstrated in the paper.
Our work proposes the following three key contributions.
First, we present a full end-to-end learning approach which
directly regresses HDR from LDR information in an outdoor panorama. Surely this is a challenging task: the sun
can be 17 f-stops brighter than the rest of the sky [35]!
To learn this relationship, we rely on a large set of HDR
sky environment maps [21], which we use as light sources
to render a high quality synthetic city model to form a
large corpus of synthetic panoramas. From this dataset,
we train an LDR-to-HDR deep convolutional autoencoder,
and show, through extensive experiments on synthetic and
real data, that it succeeds in accurately predicting the extreme dynamic range of outdoor lighting. Our second key
contribution is a novel dataset of real LDR panoramas and
associated HDR ground truth. We use this novel dataset
to see how the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) can
be adapted to work on the challenging case of real data.
Our third key contribution is to show the applicability of
our approach on three novel applications: single shot light
probe, visualizing virtual objects and image matching in
large LDR panorama database. Given the availability of
large datasets of outdoor panoramas (e.g. SUN360 [37] and
Google Street View) and the recent interest in using HDR
panoramas for virtual and mixed reality applications [31],
our work is timely in enabling the use of LDR data, which
is easy to capture, in HDR applications. Code and data are
available on our project page.

2. Related work
Image-based lighting The seminal work of Debevec [6]
on image-based rendering demonstrated that capturing

4519

