Video Scene Parsing with Predictive Feature Learning
Xiaojie Jin1 Xin Li2 Huaxin Xiao2 Xiaohui Shen3 Zhe Lin3 Jimei Yang3
Yunpeng Chen2 Jian Dong5 Luoqi Liu4 Zequn Jie4 Jiashi Feng2 Shuicheng Yan5,2
1
2

NUS Graduate School for Integrative Science and Engineering (NGS), NUS

Department of ECE, NUS

3

4

Adobe Research

Abstract
Video scene parsing is challenging due to the following
two reasons: firstly, it is non-trivial to learn meaningful
video representations for producing the temporally consistent labeling map; secondly, such a learning process becomes more difficult with insufficient labeled video training
data. In this work, we propose a unified framework to address the above two problems, which is to our knowledge
the first model to employ predictive feature learning in the
video scene parsing. The predictive feature learning is carried out in two predictive tasks: frame prediction and predictive parsing. It is experimentally proved that the learned
predictive features in our model are able to significantly
enhance the video parsing performance by combining with
the standard image parsing network. Interestingly, the performance gain brought by the predictive learning is almost
costless as the features are learned from a large amount
of unlabeled video data in an unsupervised way. Extensive
experiments over two challenging datasets, Cityscapes and
Camvid, have demonstrated the effectiveness of our model
by showing remarkable improvement over well-established
baselines.

1. Introduction
Video scene parsing aims to predict per-pixel semantic
labels for every frame in scene videos recorded in unconstrained environments. It has drawn increasing attention as
it benefits many important applications like drones navigation, autonomous driving and virtual reality.
In recent years, remarkable success has been made by
deep convolutional neural network (CNN) models in image
parsing tasks [3, 5, 22, 30, 31, 36, 47, 50, 18, 48]. Some
of the frame parsing models1 are then proposed to be used
for parsing scene videos frame by frame. However, such
frame parsing models suffer from noisy and inconsistent la1 For clarity, we use frame parsing model/network to indicate conventional image parsing model/network which takes a single frame as input.

Tencent AI Lab

5

360 AI Institute

PEARL

t-4
t-3
t-2

t
Predictive Feature
Learning

t-1

t

t

Image features

Single frame parsing

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed PEARL. PEARL solves the
video scene parsing problem through predictive feature learning
that includes frame prediction (yellow arrows) and predictive parsing which learn temporal-aware features across frames to augment
image features (also learned in PEARL). PEARL produces accurate and temporally consistent parsing results (top-right) compared
with standard frame parsing results (bottom-right).

beling results across frames, since the important temporal
context cues are ignored. For example, in the second row of
Figure 2, the top-left region of building in the frame T is incorrectly classified as car, which is temporally inconsistent
with the parsing result of its preceding frames. More importantly, current CNN models are hungry for data and finely
annotated video data for training are rather labor-intensive
to collect and limited. Even in the very recent scene parsing dataset Cityscapes [4], there are only 2,975 finely annotated training samples vs. overall 180,000 video frames.
Deep CNN models are prone to over-fitting when trained
using a small training data set and thus generalize badly in
real applications.
To tackle these two problems, we propose a novel
Parsing with prEdictive feAtuRe Learning (PEARL)
model, which is both annotation-efficient and effective for
the video scene parsing task. The basic idea of PEARL is
illustrated in Figure 1. Through predictive learning with
a GAN-like architecture, PEARL learns powerful temporal
representations to capture rich video dynamics as well as
high-level video contexts which are critical for video scene
parsing. By effectively utilizing the predictive features of
both semantic and temporal information, PEARL substan15580

