Common Action Discovery and Localization in Unconstrained Videos
Jiong Yang
Junsong Yuan
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
yang0374@e.ntu.edu.sg, jsyuan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Similar to common object discovery in images or videos,
it is of great interests to discover and locate common actions
in videos, which can benefit many video analytics applications such as video summarization, search, and understanding. In this work, we tackle the problem of common action
discovery and localization in unconstrained videos, where
we do not assume to know the types, numbers or locations of
the common actions in the videos. Furthermore, each video
can contain zero, one or several common action instances.
To perform automatic discovery and localization in such
challenging scenarios, we first generate action proposals
using human prior. By building an affinity graph among all
action proposals, we formulate the common action discovery as a subgraph density maximization problem to select
the proposals containing common actions. To avoid enumerating in the exponentially large solution space, we propose an efficient polynomial time optimization algorithm. It
solves the problem up to a user specified error bound with
respect to the global optimal solution. The experimental results on several datasets show that even without any prior
knowledge of common actions, our method can robustly locate the common actions in a collection of videos.

1. Introduction
Given a collection of unlabeled videos as shown in Figure 1, can we automatically discover and locate the common actions that frequently appear in these videos? It is
worth noting that the video collection may contain multiple
types of common actions which are not known in advance,
and each video can contain zero, one or several common
action instances. Similar to common object discovery in
images [22, 33, 46] or videos [18], finding common actions
can benefit many video analytics applications such as video
summarization [23], search [43, 44] and labeling.
However, compared with previous success of common
object discovery in images and videos [16, 18, 21, 35], common action discovery is much less explored due to the fol-

Videos Containing
No Common Actions

Videos Containing Common Actions
running

golfing

skateboarding

Figure 1. Assuming that we are given a set of unlabeled videos
(each frame represents a video), we would like to automatically
discover and locate the common human actions in these videos.
The common actions to be discovered and located are denoted by
bounding boxes. Some videos contain one or multiple common
actions, while some videos contain no common actions.

lowing challenges. First, as we do not know in advance
the types or locations of the actions that are common in
the given dataset, we have to perform the discovery and localization simultaneously. Given a collection of unlabeled
videos, we need to automatically identify a set of spatiotemporal bounding boxes that capture the common actions.
Second, similar actions may also appear differently due to
view point variation, scale variation or camera motion. It is
not a trivial task to automatically associate these common
actions. Last but not the least, besides common actions,
videos may also contain dynamic backgrounds or uncommon actions, it is thus critical to differentiate such “noisy
motions” from common actions.
To address the above challenges of common action discovery and localization, we first use human prior, i.e., human detector, to generate spatio-temporal action proposals
in each video. However, it is inevitable that some proposals may contain dynamic background, uncommon actions
or only partially capture the common actions. In order to
stand out the proposals containing common actions from
the initial proposal corpus, we build an affinity graph of the
action proposals, and formulate the common action discov-

2157

