A Generic Deep Architecture for Single Image Reflection Removal
and Image Smoothing

1

Qingnan Fan∗1
Shandong University

2

Jiaolong Yang2 Gang Hua2 Baoquan Chen1,3 David Wipf2
Microsoft Research 3 Shenzhen Research Institute, Shandong University

fqnchina@gmail.com, {jiaoyan,davidwip,ganghua}@microsoft.com, baoquan@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper proposes a deep neural network structure that
exploits edge information in addressing representative lowlevel vision tasks such as layer separation and image filtering. Unlike most other deep learning strategies applied in
this context, our approach tackles these challenging problems by estimating edges and reconstructing images using
only cascaded convolutional layers arranged such that no
handcrafted or application-specific image-processing components are required. We apply the resulting transferrable
pipeline to two different problem domains that are both sensitive to edges, namely, single image reflection removal and
image smoothing. For the former, using a mild reflection
smoothness assumption and a novel synthetic data generation method that acts as a type of weak supervision, our
network is able to solve much more difficult reflection cases
that cannot be handled by previous methods. For the latter,
we also exceed the state-of-the-art quantitative and qualitative results by wide margins. In all cases, the proposed
framework is simple, fast, and easy to transfer across disparate domains.

1. Introduction
Inspired by the tremendous success of deep learning for
large-scale visual recognition tasks like ILSVRC [28, 20],
a variety of recent work has investigated deep neural networks for low-level computer vision tasks such as image denoising [27, 11], shadow removal [15], and image smoothing [38, 24]. Given that edges represent an important cue
in addressing many of these problems, networks that can
replace computationally-expensive or otherwise inflexible
edge-aware filters naturally show promise.
For example, the underlying goal of image smoothing is
to extract sparse salient structures, like perceptually important edges and contours, while minimizing the color differences in image regions with low amplitude. To approximate
∗ This work was done when Qingnan Fan was an intern at MSR.

different edge-sensitive image smoothing filters which potentially have slow runtimes [2, 6, 8, 26, 37, 39, 42, 43]
with deep networks, it has been proposed to first learn a
salient gradient/weight map and then subsequently filter images via simpler, weighted optimization procedures [38] or
iterative recursive processing techniques [24]. The above
approaches focus on solving a single/major problem using
a plain CNN model followed by more traditional, inflexible operations inspired by fixed filtering methods. Consequently, they are not fully extensible to implementing
broader image smoothing effects or other significantly different problems such as image layer separation.
In this latter regard, one typical case where gradient domain statistics are relevant is in dealing with image reflections, that are often at least partially out of focus, when provided with a single image. When taking a photo through
a glass window, the glare or reflection tends to distract the
eye from the scene behind the glass. Many attempts to mitigate these effects, such as using a polarizer [19, 31], draping a large piece of black cloth over the lens and the glass
to block ambient light from behind, or changing positions
[22, 40, 41], are simply infeasible in many practical situations. Moreover, when taking photographs in airplane, museum, aquarium, or related environments, there is no other
recourse but to shoot through the window. Consequently, it
is common for photographers to simply widen the aperture
of the camera and blur out the reflections.
To address this reflection removal problem from a computational perspective, traditional imaging models assume
that the captured image I is a linear combination of a background layer B and a reflection layer R, i.e., I = B + R.
Obviously this is an ill-posed problem as there exist infinite
feasible solutions, and hence most reflection removal algorithms require multiple input images [7, 30, 1, 19, 12, 22,
40, 41] or manual user interactions [21] to label reflectionand background-layer gradients, thus condensing the space
of candidate solutions. However, one exploitable property
in the reflection removal problem is that the gradients or
perceptual structures of the two layers exhibit different distributions, since reflections often display a greater degree
13238

