Generalized orderless pooling performs implicit salient matching
Marcel Simon1 , Yang Gao2 , Trevor Darrell2 , Joachim Denzler1 , Erik Rodner3
1
2
Computer Vision Group, University of Jena, Germany
EECS, UC Berkeley, USA
3
Corporate Research and Technology, Carl Zeiss AG
{marcel.simon, joachim.denzler}@uni-jena.de

{yg, trevor}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Most recent CNN architectures use average pooling as
a final feature encoding step. In the field of fine-grained
recognition, however, recent global representations like bilinear pooling offer improved performance. In this paper,
we generalize average and bilinear pooling to “α-pooling”,
allowing for learning the pooling strategy during training.
In addition, we present a novel way to visualize decisions
made by these approaches. We identify parts of training
images having the highest influence on the prediction of
a given test image. This allows for justifying decisions
to users and also for analyzing the influence of semantic
parts. For example, we can show that the higher capacity
VGG16 model focuses much more on the bird’s head than,
e.g., the lower-capacity VGG-M model when recognizing
fine-grained bird categories. Both contributions allow us to
analyze the difference when moving between average and
bilinear pooling. In addition, experiments show that our
generalized approach can outperform both across a variety
of standard datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep architectures are characterized by interleaved convolution layers to compute intermediate features and pooling layers to aggregate information. Inspired by recent results in fine-grained recognition [19, 10] showing that certain pooling strategies offer equivalent performance as classic models involving explicit correspondence, we investigate here a new pooling layer generalization for deep neural networks suitable for both fine-grained and more generic
recognition tasks.
Fine-grained recognition developed from a niche research field into a popular topic with numerous applications,
ranging from automated monitoring of animal species [9]
to fine-grained recognition of cloth types [8]. The defining property of fine-grained recognition is that all possible object categories share a similar object structure and
hence similar object parts. Since the objects do not sig-

Figure 1. We present the novel pooling strategy α-pooling, which
replaces the final average pooling or bilinear pooling layer in
CNNs. It allows for a smooth combination of average and bilinear
pooling techniques. The optimal pooling strategy can be learned
during training to adapt to the properties of the task. In addition,
we present a novel way to visualize predictions of α-pooling-based
classification decisions. It allows in particular for analyzing incorrect classification decisions, which is an important addition to all
widely used orderless pooling strategies.

nificantly differ in the overall shape, subtle differences in
the appearance of an object part can likely make the difference between two classes. For example, one of the most
popular fine-grained tasks is bird species recognition. All
birds have the basic body structure with beak, head, throat,
belly, wings as well as tail parts, and two species might dif14960

