Reflectance Capture using Univariate Sampling of BRDFs
Zhuo Hui,† Kalyan Sunkavalli,‡ Joon-Young Lee,‡ Sunil Hadap,‡
Jian Wang,† and Aswin C. Sankaranarayanan†
†
‡
Carnegie Mellon University
Adobe Research

Abstract
We propose the use of a light-weight setup consisting of
a collocated camera and light source — commonly found
on mobile devices — to reconstruct surface normals and
spatially-varying BRDFs of near-planar material samples.
A collocated setup provides only a 1-D “univariate” sampling of a 3-D isotropic BRDF. We show that a univariate sampling is sufﬁcient to estimate parameters of commonly used analytical BRDF models. Subsequently, we
use a dictionary-based reﬂectance prior to derive a robust
technique for per-pixel normal and BRDF estimation. We
demonstrate real-world shape and capture, and its application to material editing and classiﬁcation, using real data
acquired using a mobile phone.

1. Introduction
Reﬂectance properties play an important role in the appearance of objects in a scene. For an opaque object,
these properties are represented by the 4-D bidirectional reﬂectance distribution function (BRDF), which completely
characterizes how a material interacts with incident light.
Measuring the BRDF of a material often requires dense
sampling of the 4-D space using precisely calibrated, and
often prohibitively expensive, acquisition setups [9, 15–17].
More recently, researchers have looked at the problem
of reﬂectance capture “in the wild”, under relatively unconstrained conditions, and using commodity hardware. Because of the ill-posed nature of this problem, these methods
rely on extra information like the presence of reference materials in the scene [23] or restrict themselves to BRDFs
with stochastic, texture-like spatial variations [3].
The goal of our work is to enable the acquisition of the
shape and spatially-varying BRDF (SV-BRDFs) of a wide
range of real-world materials with using a practical, easyto-deploy setup. To this end, we would like to use a mobile device — with a camera and a controllable ﬂash — to
take reﬂectance measurements. However, the position of
the ﬂash on these devices is ﬁxed relative to the camera,
and they are often nearly collocated. As a result, capturing

images using this setup gives us only a sparse sampling of
the BRDF. Even for the restricted set of isotropic materials
(which are described by a 3-D BRDF), these measurements
constitute only the 1-D slice of the 3-D BRDF that contains
the specular lobe. We refer to this as a univariate sampling
of the BRDF. The main contribution of our work is to show
that such a univariate sampling of a material’s appearance
is, in fact, sufﬁcient to recover per-pixel surface normals
and BRDF estimates.
Real-world BRDFs can be well approximated as a linear
combination of a small set of basis BRDFs [11, 17]. Based
on this property, we show that while the sparse univariate
samples are not sufﬁcient by themselves, combining them
with a dictionary-based prior [13] can lead to high-quality
reﬂectance estimates. Further, we show that the parameters of many classical analytical BRDF models can be estimated purely from univariate sampling. This is because a
collocated setup samples the specular lobe of the BRDF,
which plays a major role in material appearance. Thus,
when constrained to take a few sparse samples of the BRDF,
instead of spreading these samples across the 4-D (or a 3-D
isotropic or a 2-D bivariate) space, concentrating these samples in this 1-D slice is a better way to identify the BRDF.
We use the camera and ﬂash unit on an iPhone 6S device
to scan numerous near-planar (wrt depth) targets and subsequently estimate their shape and reﬂectance. For each target, we capture multiple images by moving the phone. For
ease of calibration of the camera/light-source orientation,
we place small checkerboard patterns on the near-vicinity
of the target; the acquired images are aligned via a homography estimated using these checkerboard patterns. Using
the aligned images, we estimate per-pixel surface normals
and SV-BRDFs using a novel, robust method based on our
univariate sampling strategy. We demonstrate this robustness on a wide range of scenes with complex SV-BRDFs
and further, showcase the use of the proposed BRDF acquisition technique for reﬂectance rendering as well as material
clustering. Figure 1 showcases our SV-BRDF and normal
estimates for a real-world sample.
Contributions. Our speciﬁc contributions are as follows:
15362

