Query-guided Regression Network with Context Policy for Phrase Grounding
Kan Chen∗
Rama Kovvuri∗
Ram Nevatia
University of Southern California, Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Systems
Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA
{kanchen|nkovvuri|nevatia}@usc.edu

Abstract
Given a textual description of an image, phrase grounding localizes objects in the image referred by query phrases
in the description. State-of-the-art methods address the
problem by ranking a set of proposals based on the relevance to each query, which are limited by the performance
of independent proposal generation systems and ignore useful cues from context in the description. In this paper, we
adopt a spatial regression method to break the performance
limit, and introduce reinforcement learning techniques to
further leverage semantic context information. We propose
a novel Query-guided Regression network with Context policy (QRC Net) which jointly learns a Proposal Generation Network (PGN), a Query-guided Regression Network
(QRN) and a Context Policy Network (CPN). Experiments
show QRC Net provides a significant improvement in accuracy on two popular datasets: Flickr30K Entities and
Referit Game, with 14.25% and 17.14% increase over the
state-of-the-arts respectively.

1. Introduction
Given an image and a related textual description, phrase
grounding attempts to localize objects which are mentioned
by corresponding phrases in the description. It is an important building block in computer vision with natural language interaction, which can be utilized in high-level tasks,
such as image retrieval [3, 26], image captioning [1, 7] and
visual question answering [2, 4, 8].
Phrase Grounding is a challenging problem that involves
parsing language queries and relating the knowledge to localize objects in visual domain. To address this problem,
typically a proposal generation system is first applied to produce a set of proposals as grounding candidates. The main
difficulties lie in how to learn the correlation between language (query) and visual (proposals) modalities, and how
to localize objects based on multimodal correlation. Stateof-the-art methods address the first difficulty by learning a
∗ Equal contribution. Names are sorted alphabetically.

Box 2

Box 4
0.04

Box 4

Box 2
0.46

Box 3
Box 1

Box 1
0.35

A man is playing a guitar for a little girl.
Query: A man
Context: a guitar, a little girl
Step 1: PGN generates a set of proposals
as candidates for QRN

Box 3
0.15

Language input: A man
Visual input: proposals from PGN
Step 2: QRN regresses each proposal and
predicts its relevance to the query
(numbers in top-left of each box)

Step 1, Step 2: Forward
Foreground
Reward: 1.0

Context
Reward: 0.2

Context
Reward: 0.2

Background
Reward: 0.0

Step 3: CRN rewards top ranked proposals based on relationship with context mentioned objects,
and back propagates as policy gradients using reinforcement learning

Step 3: Back Propagation

Figure 1. QRC Net first regresses each proposal based on query’s
semantics and visual features, and then utilizes context information as rewards to refine grounding results.

subspace to measure the similarities between proposals and
queries. With the learned subspace, they treat the second
difficulty as a retrieval problem, where proposals are ranked
based on their relevance to the input query. Among these,
Phrase-Region CCA [25] and SCRC [14] models learn a
multimodal subspace via Canonical Correlation Analysis
(CCA) and a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) respectively. Varun et al. [22] learn multimodal correlation aided
by context objects in visual content. GroundeR [29] introduces an attention mechanism that learns to attend on related proposals given different queries through phrase reconstruction.
These approaches have two important limitations. First,
proposals generated by independent systems may not always cover all mentioned objects given various queries;
since retrieval based methods localize objects by choosing
one of these proposals, they are bounded by the performance limits from proposal generation systems. Second,
even though query phrases are often selected from image
descriptions, context from these descriptions is not utilized
to reduce semantic ambiguity. Consider example in Fig 1.
1824

