Turning Corners into Cameras: Principles and Methods
Katherine L. Bouman1

Vickie Ye1

Gregory W. Wornell1
1

Adam B. Yedidia1

Antonio Torralba1

William T. Freeman1,2

Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

B

Frédo Durand1

2

Google Research

A
(b) the hidden scene as you move in a circle around the wall’s edge

(e) Reconstructed 1D Video of Hidden Scene

(d) Color Magnified

A A+B

A A+B

(a)

angular position

(c) Original Frame

time

Figure 1: We construct a 1-D video of an obscured scene using RGB video taken with a consumer camera. The stylized diagram in (a) shows a typical
scenario: two people—one wearing red and the other blue—are hidden from the camera’s view by a wall. Only the region shaded in yellow is visible to the
camera. To an observer walking around the occluding edge (along the magenta arrow), light from different parts of the hidden scene becomes visible at
different angles (see sequence (b)). Ultimately, this scene information is captured in the intensity and color of light reflected from the corresponding patch of
ground near the corner. Although these subtle irradiance variations are invisible to the naked eye (c), they can be extracted and interpreted from a camera
position from which the entire obscured scene is hidden from view. Image (d) visualizes these subtle variations in the highlighted corner region. We use
temporal frames of these radiance variations on the ground to construct a 1-D video of motion evolution in the hidden scene. Specifically, (e) shows the
trajectories over time that specify the angular position of hidden red and blue subjects illuminated by a diffuse light.

Abstract

We show that walls, and other obstructions with edges,
can be exploited as naturally-occurring “cameras” that
reveal the hidden scenes beyond them. In particular, we
demonstrate methods for using the subtle spatio-temporal
radiance variations that arise on the ground at the base of
a wall’s edge to construct a one-dimensional video of the
hidden scene behind the wall. The resulting technique can be
used for a variety of applications in diverse physical settings.
From standard RGB video recordings, we use edge cameras
to recover 1-D videos that reveal the number and trajectories
of people moving in an occluded scene. We further show
that adjacent wall edges, such as those that arise in the case
of an open doorway, yield a stereo camera from which the
2-D location of hidden, moving objects can be recovered.
We demonstrate our technique in a number of indoor and
outdoor environments involving varied floor surfaces and
illumination conditions.

1. Introduction
The ability to see around obstructions would prove valuable in a wide range of applications. As just two examples,
remotely sensing occupants in a room would be valuable in
search and rescue operations, and the ability to detect hidden,
oncoming vehicles and/or pedestrians would be valuable in
collision avoidance systems [2]. Although often not visible
to the naked eye, in many environments, light from obscured
portions of a scene is scattered over many of the observable
surfaces. This reflected light can be used to recover information about the hidden scene (see Fig. 1). In this work, we
exploit the vertical edge at the corner of a wall to construct
a “camera” that sees beyond the wall. Since vertical wall
edges are ubiquitous, such cameras can be found in many
environments.
The radiance emanating from the ground in front of a
corner, e.g., at the base of a building, is influenced by many
factors: the albedo, shape, and BRDF of its surface, as
well as the light coming from the full hemisphere above it.
Assuming the ground has a significant diffuse component, a
majority of the reflected light comes from the surroundings
12270

