Anticipating Daily Intention using On-Wrist Motion Triggered Sensing
Tz-Ying Wu∗, Ting-An Chien∗, Cheng-Sheng Chan, Chan-Wei Hu, Min Sun
Dept. of Electrical Engineering,
National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan.
{gina9726, tingan0206, james121506, huchanwei1204, aliensunmin}@gmail.com

Human Actions

Abstract

Human Intention

(action = motion + object )
pick up + cellphone

Charge cellphone
Talk on the cellphone

Anticipating human intention by observing one’s actions
has many applications. For instance, picking up a cellphone, then a charger (actions) implies that one wants to
charge the cellphone (intention) (Fig. 1). By anticipating
the intention, an intelligent system can guide the user to
the closest power outlet. We propose an on-wrist motion
triggered sensing system for anticipating daily intentions,
where the on-wrist sensors help us to persistently observe
one’s actions. The core of the system is a novel Recurrent
Neural Network (RNN) and Policy Network (PN), where the
RNN encodes visual and motion observation to anticipate
intention, and the PN parsimoniously triggers the process
of visual observation to reduce computation requirement.
We jointly trained the whole network using policy gradient and cross-entropy loss. To evaluate, we collect the first
daily “intention” dataset consisting of 2379 videos with
34 intentions and 164 unique action sequences (paths in
Fig. 1). Our method achieves 92.68%, 90.85%, 97.56% accuracy on three users while processing only 29% of the visual observation on average.

1. Introduction
Thanks to the advance in Artificial Intelligence, many intelligent systems (e.g., Amazon Echo, Google Home.) have
become available on the markets. Despite their great ability to interact with humans through a speech interface, they
are currently not good at proactively interacting with humans. Thus, we argue that the key for proactive interaction
is to anticipate user’s intention by observing their actions.
Given the anticipated intention, the intelligent system may
provide service to facilitate the intention. More specifically,
the ability to anticipate a large number of daily intentions
will be the key to enable a proactive intelligent system.
Many researchers have tackled tasks related to intention
anticipation. [11, 28, 18] focus on early activity prediction
∗ indicates equal contribution

Go exercise
Pick up the phone-charger
Lift the cellphone

Pick up the cellphone

Go outside
accelerometer

Pick up the towel

Pick up the keys

Open the door

camera

Figure 1. Illustration of intention anticipation. An action sequence
(i.e., an ordered list of actions) is a strong cue to anticipate intention – predicting an intention before it occurs. For instance, the actions on the dark blue path (i.e., pick-up the cellphone; then, pickup cellphone charger) strongly imply “charge cellphone”. The task
is challenging since (1) the same action (pick-up the cellphone)
can lead to different intentions (talk on the cellphone vs. charge
cellphone), and (2) multiple paths can lead to the same intention
(see Fig. 5). Bottom-right panel: actions are recorded by our onwrist sensors including a camera and an accelerometer.

– predicting actions before they have completed. However,
the time-to-action-completion of this task is typically very
short. Hence, there are only a few scenarios that intelligent
systems may take advantage of the predicted activity. Kitani et al. [15] propose to forecast human’s trajectory. Forecasting trajectory is very useful, but it does not directly tell
you the “intention” behind a trajectory. [3, 12, 13] anticipate the future events on the road such as making a left turn
or involving in an accident. Although these events can be
considered as intentions, only few intentions (at most five)
are studied. Moreover, none of the work above leverages
heterogeneous sensing modalities to reduce computing requirement.
In this work, we anticipate a variety of daily intentions
(e.g., “go outside”, “charge cellphone”, in Fig. 1) by sensing motion and visual observation of actions. Our method
is unique in several ways. Firstly, we focus on On-Wrist
sensing: (1) an on-wrist camera (inspired by [24, 2]) is used
to observe object interactions reliably, and (2) an on-wrist
accelerometer is used to sense 3D hand motion efficiently.
Since both on-wrist sensors are unconventional, we collect
auxiliary object appearance and motion data to pre-train two

48

