SGN: Sequential Grouping Networks for Instance Segmentation
Shu Liu†
†
§

Jiaya Jia†,[

Sanja Fidler‡

Raquel Urtasun§,‡

The Chinese University of Hong Kong [ Youtu Lab, Tencent
Uber Advanced Technologies Group ‡ University of Toronto

{sliu, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we propose Sequential Grouping Networks (SGN) to tackle the problem of object instance segmentation. SGNs employ a sequence of neural networks,
each solving a sub-grouping problem of increasing semantic complexity in order to gradually compose objects out
of pixels. In particular, the first network aims to group
pixels along each image row and column by predicting
horizontal and vertical object breakpoints. These breakpoints are then used to create line segments. By exploiting two-directional information, the second network groups
horizontal and vertical lines into connected components.
Finally, the third network groups the connected components into object instances. Our experiments show that our
SGN significantly outperforms state-of-the-art approaches
in both, the Cityscapes dataset as well as PASCAL VOC.

1. Introduction
The community has achieved remarkable progress for
tasks such as object detection [32, 10] and semantic segmentation [27, 6] in recent years. Research along these lines
opens the door to challenging life-changing tasks, including
autonomous driving and personalized robotics.
Instance segmentation is a task that jointly considers object detection and semantic segmentation, by aiming to predict a pixel-wise mask for each object in an image. The
problem is inherently combinatorial, requiring us to group
sets of pixels into coherent components. Occlusion and
vastly varying number of objects across scenes further increase the complexity of the task. In street scenes, such as
those in the Cityscapes dataset [7], current methods merely
reach 20% accuracy in terms of average precision, which is
still far from satisfactory.
Most of the instance segmentation approaches employ a
two-step process by treating the problem as a foregroundbackground pixel labeling task within the object detection
boxes [15, 16, 1, 29, 30]. Instead of labeling pixels, [4] predicts a polygon outlining the object instance using a Recur-

{fidler, urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu

rent Neural Network (RNN). In [41, 40], large patches are
exhaustively extracted from an image and a Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) is trained to predict instance labels inside each patch. A dense Conditional Random Field
(CRF) is then used to get consistent labeling of the full image. In [33, 31], an RNN is used to produce one object mask
per time step. The latter approaches face difficulties on images of street scenes which contain many objects. More recently, [3] learned a convolutional net to predict the energy
of the watershed transform. Its complexity does not depend
on the number of objects in the scene.
In this paper, we break the task of object instance segmentation into several sub-tasks that are easier to tackle.
We propose a grouping approach that employs a sequence
of neural networks to gradually compose objects from simpler constituents. In particular, the first network aims to
group pixels along each image row and column by predicting horizontal and vertical object breakpoints. These are
then used to create horizontal and vertical line segments.
The second neural network groups these line segments into
connected components. The last network merges components into coherent object instances, thus solving the problem of object splitting due to occlusion. Due to its sequential nature, we call our approach Sequential Grouping Networks (SGN). We evaluate our method on the challenging
Cityscapes dataset. SGN significantly outperforms state-ofthe-art, achieving a 5% absolute and 25% relative boost in
accuracy. We also improve over state-of-the-art on PASCAL VOC for general object instance segmentation which
further showcases the strengths of our proposed approach.

2. Related Work
The pioneering work of instance segmentation [15, 8]
aimed at both classifying object proposals as well as labeling an object within each box. In [29, 30], highquality mask proposals were generated using CNNs. Similarly, MNC [9] designed an end-to-end trainable multi-task
network cascade to unify bounding box proposal generation, pixel-wise mask proposal generation and classifica13496

