Learning to Push the Limits of Efficient FFT-based Image Deconvolution
Jakob Kruse1
Carsten Rother1
Uwe Schmidt2
1
TU Dresden 2 MPI of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden

Abstract
This work addresses the task of non-blind image deconvolution. Motivated to keep up with the constant increase
in image size, with megapixel images becoming the norm,
we aim at pushing the limits of efficient FFT-based techniques. Based on an analysis of traditional and more recent learning-based methods, we generalize existing discriminative approaches by using more powerful regularization, based on convolutional neural networks. Additionally,
we propose a simple, yet effective, boundary adjustment
method that alleviates the problematic circular convolution
assumption, which is necessary for FFT-based deconvolution. We evaluate our approach on two common non-blind
deconvolution benchmarks and achieve state-of-the-art results even when including methods which are computationally considerably more expensive.

1. Introduction
Image deblurring is a classic image restoration problem
with a vast body of work in computer vision, signal processing and related fields (see [25] for a fairly recent survey). In
this work, we focus on the case of uniform blur, where the
observed blurred image y = k ⊗ x + η is obtained via convolution of the true image x with known blur kernel (point
spread function) k and additive Gaussian noise η. The task
of recovering x is then called (non-blind) image deconvolution. Note that although the assumption of uniform blur
is often not accurate [12, 15], such image deconvolution
techniques can in fact outperform methods which assume
a more realistic non-uniform blur model [cf. 12]. Furthermore, image deconvolution can be used as a building block
to address the removal of non-uniform blur [cf. 28].
When it comes to image deconvolution methods, it is
useful to broadly separate them into two classes: (1) those
where the most costly computational operations are a fixed
number of Fourier transforms or convolutions, and (2) those
which require more expensive computation, often due to (iterative) solvers for large linear systems of equations. While
the first class of methods can scale to large megapixel-sized
images, the latter class generally falls short in this regard.

These computationally demanding methods often exhibit
high restoration quality [e.g., 20, 31], but typically need several minutes, or more, to deconvolve images of 1 megapixel
(see current deblurring benchmarks [e.g., 12, 24]). Of
course, this runtime issue is even more severe for images
that are multiple times larger, which are common nowadays. While the power of computers increases each year,
so does the size of images taken by typical cameras. For
the reasons outlined above, in this paper we focus on a class
of deconvolution methods where the fast Fourier transform
(FFT) is the most expensive operation, with computational
complexity O(n log n) for input size, i.e. pixel count, n.
Note that, while our proposed method is very efficient, we
even slightly outperform state-of-the-art techniques which
are considerably more computationally expensive.
Since image deconvolution is mathematically ill-posed
in the presence of noise, some form of regularization has
to be used to recover a restored image. A classic fast FFTbased deconvolution method is the Wiener filter [27], which
uses quadratic regularization of the expected image spectrum to obtain the restored image in closed form. However, it is well-known that quadratic regularization is not
ideal for natural images, which we assume here. Hence,
better methods [e.g., 13, 26] employ sparse regularization
and iterative optimization, where each iteration is similar to
a Wiener filter. More recently, the advent of discriminative
deblurring [22] has generalized these methods to yield even
higher quality results without increasing the computational
demands [9, 21, 28]. In Section 2, we study these traditional FFT-based deconvolution methods and their more recent learning-based extensions. Based on this analysis, we
propose a new, generalized learning-based approach utilizing the power of convolutional neural networks in Section 3.
In order to improve the quality of the restored image
even further, we address the often neglected topic of image
boundary handling. FFT-based deconvolution hinges on a
blur model which assumes a convolution with periodic (circular) boundary conditions. Unfortunately, this assumption
is almost never satisfied for blurred natural images, such
as typical photographs degraded by camera shake or motion blur. To alleviate this problem, an observed blurred
image is typically padded and pre-processed by an “edgeta-

4586

