Training Deep Networks to be Spatially Sensitive
Nicholas Kolkin

Gregory Shakhnarovich

Eli Shechtman

nick.kolkin@ttic.edu

gregory@ttic.edu

elishe@adobe.com

Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
Chicago, IL, USA

Adobe Research
Seattle, WA, USA

Abstract
In many computer vision tasks, for example saliency prediction or semantic segmentation, the desired output is a
foreground map that predicts pixels where some criteria
is satisfied. Despite the inherently spatial nature of this
task commonly used learning objectives do not incorporate
the spatial relationships between misclassified pixels and
the underlying ground truth. The Weighted F-measure, a
recently proposed evaluation metric, does reweight errors
spatially, and has been shown to closely correlate with human evaluation of quality, and stably rank predictions with
respect to noisy ground truths (such as a sloppy human annotator might generate). However it suffers from computational complexity which makes it intractable as an optimization objective for gradient descent, which must be
evaluated thousands or millions of times while learning a
model’s parameters. We propose a differentiable and efficient approximation of this metric. By incorporating spatial information into the objective we can use a simpler
model than competing methods without sacrificing accuracy, resulting in faster inference speeds and alleviating the
need for pre/post-processing. We match (or improve) performance on several tasks compared to prior state of the
art by traditional metrics, and in many cases significantly
improve performance by the weighted F-measure.

1. Introduction
When optimizing a predictive model it is important that
the objective function not only encode the ideal solution
(zero mistakes), but also quantify the relative severity of
mistakes. A common dimension of preference is the desired
tradeoff between precision and recall. One can capture this
tradeoff with a Fβ metric, where β reflects the relative importance of recall compared to precision. While this metric
can quantify the relative importance of false positives and
false negatives, it cannot capture differing severity between
two false positives, or two false negatives. One domain
where differentiating between such errors becomes impor-

[17]

SZNCE
(ours)

SZNF1w
(ours)

GT

Input

Figure 1: A comparison of the previous saliency prediction
state of the art with our SZN model predictions with the
traditional log-loss (SZNCE ) and our proposed AFβw loss
(SZNF1w ). The top row demonstrates that our loss heavily penalizes for large spatially co-occurring false negatives.
The bottom row demonstrates that the proposed loss heavily
penalizes false positives far from the true object boundary.

tant is the prediction of foreground maps, where the output has many desired properties not captured by notions of
precision or recall, such as smoothness, accuracy of boundaries, contiguity of the predicted mask, etc. As a result, two
predictions with the same number of mistakes, or with the
same score on a measure which treats false positives and
false negatives equally (e.g. intersection over union, IoU),
may differ substantially in their perceived spatial quality.
Loss functions derived from per-pixel classification-based
surrogates, such as log-loss are almost universally used in
existing work, but fail to capture both the precision-recall
tradeoff and the spatial sensibilities of this kind.
Margolin et al. [23] proposed a method to quantify these
distinctions when predicting foreground maps. Their Fβw
measure formalizes two notions. First, false detections are
less severe when close to the object’s true boundary; Second, missing an entire section of an object is worse than
missing the same number of pixels scattered across the entire object. These alterations closely match human intuition

5668

