Playing for Benchmarks
Stephan R. Richter
TU Darmstadt

Zeeshan Hayder
ANU

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

Figure 1. Data for several tasks in our benchmark suite. Clockwise from top left: input video frame, semantic segmentation, semantic
instance segmentation, 3D scene layout, visual odometry, optical flow. Each task is presented on a different image.

Abstract
We present a benchmark suite for visual perception. The
benchmark is based on more than 250K high-resolution
video frames, all annotated with ground-truth data for both
low-level and high-level vision tasks, including optical flow,
semantic instance segmentation, object detection and tracking, object-level 3D scene layout, and visual odometry.
Ground-truth data for all tasks is available for every frame.
The data was collected while driving, riding, and walking a total of 184 kilometers in diverse ambient conditions
in a realistic virtual world. To create the benchmark, we
have developed a new approach to collecting ground-truth
data from simulated worlds without access to their source
code or content. We conduct statistical analyses that show
that the composition of the scenes in the benchmark closely
matches the composition of corresponding physical environments. The realism of the collected data is further validated via perceptual experiments. We analyze the performance of state-of-the-art methods for multiple tasks, providing reference baselines and highlighting challenges for
future research.

1. Introduction
Visual perception is believed to be a compound process
that involves recognizing objects, estimating their threedimensional layout in the environment, tracking their motion and the observer’s own motion through time, and integrating this information into a predictive model that supports planning and action [48]. Advanced biological vision systems have a number of salient characteristics. The
component processes of visual perception (including motion perception, shape perception, and recognition) operate
in tandem and support each other. Visual perception integrates information over time. And it is robust to transformations of visual appearance due to environmental conditions,
such as time of day and weather.
These characteristics are recognized by the computer
vision and robotics communities. Researchers have argued that diverse computer vision tasks should be tackled
in concert [39] and developed models that could support
this [6, 33, 43]. The importance of video and motion cues
is widely recognized [1, 18, 30, 49]. And robustness to environmental conditions is a long-standing challenge in the
field [38, 46].
We present a benchmark suite that is guided by these

2213

