Learning from Noisy Labels with Distillation
Yuncheng Li, Jianchao Yang
Snap Inc.

Yale Song
Yahoo Research

{yuncheng.li,jianchao.yang}@snap.com

yalesong@yahoo-inc.com

Liangliang Cao
hellovera.ai

Jiebo Luo
University of Rochester

Li-Jia Li
Google Inc.

liangliang.cao@gmail.com

jiebo.luo@gmail.com

lijiali@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
The ability of learning from noisy labels is very useful
in many visual recognition tasks, as a vast amount of data
with noisy labels are relatively easy to obtain. Traditionally,
label noise has been treated as statistical outliers, and techniques such as importance re-weighting and bootstrapping
have been proposed to alleviate the problem. According to
our observation, the real-world noisy labels exhibit multimode characteristics as the true labels, rather than behaving
like independent random outliers. In this work, we propose
a unified distillation framework to use “side” information,
including a small clean dataset and label relations in knowledge graph, to “hedge the risk” of learning from noisy labels.
Unlike the traditional approaches evaluated based on simulated label noises, we propose a suite of new benchmark
datasets, in Sports, Species and Artifacts domains, to evaluate the task of learning from noisy labels in the practical
setting. The empirical study demonstrates the effectiveness
of our proposed method in all the domains.

1. Introduction
With the recent advancements in deep convolutional
neural networks (CNN) [13], learning from a clean largescale dataset, e.g., ImageNet [19], has been very successful
in various visual recognition tasks. However, collecting
such datasets is time consuming and expensive. Recent
efforts, therefore, have been focused on building and learning from an Internet-scale dataset with noisy labels such
as YFCC100M [22] and YouTube8M [1]. These datasets
have the potential of leveraging seemingly infinite amount
of images and videos on the Internet. But labels in those
datasets are noisy in terms of visual correlation and hence
challenging for the learning process.
Previous approaches tried to circumvent the problem of
learning from noisy samples by treating them as statistical

Large Noisy Dataset

Knowledge Graph
Vertebrate
phylum

Bird
Fish

Mammal
Impala

class

Lagomorph
Arthropod

order

Leporidae
family

phylum

Beetle

Rabbit

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed system to learn from
noisy labels by leveraging a knowledge graph. The left
panel shows the large scale noisy dataset, out of which we
collect a small set of images with clean labels to guide the
learning process. On the right panel, we demonstrate the
knowledge graph on the species domain constructed from
DBpedia-Wikipedia.

outliers and discarding them using some variants of outlier
detection methods [18, 14, 20]. However, in practice, it
is typical that noisy samples are not statistical outliers but
rather some form of significant mass. Existing approaches
have shown to produce inferior results on these cases. For example, images collected by searching polysemy words, such
as apple, will show a multi-modal distribution of visual concepts, in which case statistical outlier detection techniques
will fail to figure out which concept to be associated with.
Another example, images labeled with basketball on Flickr
may contain a significant amount of group shots, selfies,
and photos taken before or after the game – these are less
visually relevant to the event itself but regardless forming a
significant mass; statistically, they are not outliers.
Recently, Hinton et al. [11] introduced the concept of
“distillation” to transfer the knowledge learned from one
11910

