Aligned Image-Word Representations Improve Inductive Transfer Across
Vision-Language Tasks
Tanmay Gupta1
Kevin Shih1
Saurabh Singh2
Derek Hoiem1
1
2
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
Google Inc.
{tgupta6, kjshih2, dhoiem}@illinois.edu

saurabhsingh@google.com

Shared Vision-Language Representation Space

Consider designing a vision system that solves many
tasks. Ideally, any such system should be able to reuse
representations for different applications. As the system
is trained to solve more problems, its core representations
should become more complete and accurate, facilitating the
learning of additional tasks. Vision research often focuses
on designing good representations for a given task, but what
are good core representations to facilitate learning the next?
The application of knowledge learned while solving one
task to solve another task is known as transfer learning or
inductive transfer. Inductive transfer has been demonstrated
in recent vision-language tasks in [34, 37, 26, 16, 49, 24],
where the hidden or output layers of deep networks learned
from pre-training (e.g. on ImageNet [14]) or multitask
learning serve as the foundation for learning new tasks.
However, the relations of features to each new task needs
to be re-learned using the new task’s data. The goal of our
work is to transfer knowledge between related tasks without
the need to re-learn this mapping. Further, as we are working with vision-language tasks, we aim to transfer knowledge of both vision and language across tasks.

Inference

Visual Recognition Task

Mountain

Rock
Snow
White

Snow
White

Person Shadow
Jacket
Red
White

Word representations

Mountain
Person
Snow
Jacket
Red
White
Rock
Shadow
Learning

1. Introduction

Learning

An important goal of computer vision is to build systems
that learn visual representations over time that can be applied to many tasks. In this paper, we investigate a visionlanguage embedding as a core representation and show that
it leads to better cross-task transfer than standard multitask learning. In particular, the task of visual recognition
is aligned to the task of visual question answering by forcing each to use the same word-region embeddings. We show
this leads to greater inductive transfer from recognition to
VQA than standard multitask learning. Visual recognition
also improves, especially for categories that have relatively
few recognition training labels but appear often in the VQA
setting. Thus, our paper takes a small step towards creating more general vision systems by showing the benefit of
interpretable, flexible, and trainable core representations.

Image region
representations

Inference

Abstract

Visual Question Answering Task
Q: What color is the person’s jacket?
A: Red
Q: Why is the ground white?
A: Snow

Figure 1: Sharing image-region and word representations
across multiple vision-language domains: The SVLR module
projects images and words into a shared representation space. The
resulting visual and textual embeddings are then used for tasks like
Visual Recognition and VQA. The models for individual tasks are
formulated in terms of inner products of region and word representations enforcing an alignment between them in the shared space.

In this work we propose a Shared Vision-Language Representation (SVLR) module that improves inductive transfer
between related vision-language tasks (see Fig. 1). We apply our approach to visual recognition (VR) and attentionbased visual question answering (VQA). We formulate VR
in terms of a joint embedding of textual and visual representations computed by the SVLR module. Each region is
mapped closest to its correct (textual) class label. For example, the embedding of “dog” should be closer to an embedded region showing a dog than any other object label.
We formulate VQA as predicting an answer from a relevant
region, where relevance and answer scores are computed
from embedded word-region similarities. For example, a
region will be considered relevant to “Is the elephant wearing a pink blanket?” if the embedded “pink” and either
“elephant” or “blanket” are close to the embedded region.
Similarly, the answer score considers embedded similarities, but in a more comprehensive manner. We emphasize
that the same word-region embedding is learned for both
VR and VQA. Our experiments show that formulating both
tasks in terms of the SVLR module leads to better cross-task
transfer than if features are shared through multitask learn14213

