Large-Scale Image Retrieval with Attentive Deep Local Features
Hyeonwoo Noh†
†

Andre Araujo∗

Jack Sim∗

∗

POSTECH, Korea

{shgusdngogo,bhhan}@postech.ac.kr

1. Introduction
Large-scale image retrieval is a fundamental task in computer vision, since it is directly related to various practical
applications, e.g., object detection, visual place recognition,
and product recognition. The last decades have witnessed
tremendous advances in image retrieval systems—from handcrafted features and indexing algorithms [22, 33, 27, 16] to,
more recently, methods based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for global descriptor learning [2, 29, 11].
Despite the recent advances in CNN-based global descriptors for image retrieval in small or medium-size datasets [27,
28], their performance may be hindered by a wide variety
of challenging conditions observed in large-scale datasets,
such as clutter, occlusion, and variations in viewpoint and
illumination. Global descriptors lack the ability to find patch-

Bohyung Han†

Google Inc.

{andrearaujo,jacksim,weyand}@google.com

Abstract
We propose an attentive local feature descriptor suitable
for large-scale image retrieval, referred to as DELF (DEep
Local Feature). The new feature is based on convolutional
neural networks, which are trained only with image-level
annotations on a landmark image dataset. To identify semantically useful local features for image retrieval, we also propose an attention mechanism for keypoint selection, which
shares most network layers with the descriptor. This framework can be used for image retrieval as a drop-in replacement for other keypoint detectors and descriptors, enabling
more accurate feature matching and geometric verification.
Our system produces reliable confidence scores to reject false
positives—in particular, it is robust against queries that have
no correct match in the database. To evaluate the proposed
descriptor, we introduce a new large-scale dataset, referred
to as Google-Landmarks dataset, which involves challenges
in both database and query such as background clutter, partial occlusion, multiple landmarks, objects in variable scales,
etc. We show that DELF outperforms the state-of-the-art
global and local descriptors in the large-scale setting by
significant margins.

Tobias Weyand∗

DELF
Features

Large-Scale
Index
Index

NN Features

Query

Geometric
Verification

Attention Scores

Features

DELF Pipeline

Retrieved Images

DELF Pipeline

Database Images

Query Image

Figure 1: Overall architecture of our image retrieval system, using DEep Local Features (DELF) and attention-based keypoint
selection. On the left, we illustrate the pipeline for extraction and
selection of DELF. The portion highlighted in yellow represents an
attention mechanism that is trained to assign high scores to relevant
features and select the features with the highest scores. Feature
extraction and selection can be performed with a single forward
pass using our model. On the right, we illustrate our large-scale
feature-based retrieval pipeline. DELF for database images are
indexed offline. The index supports querying by retrieving nearest
neighbor (NN) features, which can be used to rank database images
based on geometrically verified matches.

level matches between images. As a result, it is difficult to
retrieve images based on partial matching in the presence of
occlusion and background clutter. In a recent trend, CNNbased local features are proposed for patch-level matching
[12, 42, 40]. However, these techniques are not optimized
specifically for image retrieval since they lack the ability to
detect semantically meaningful features, and show limited
accuracy in practice.
Most existing image retrieval algorithms have been evaluated in small to medium-size datasets with few query images,
i.e., only 55 in [27, 28] and 500 in [16], and the images in
the datasets have limited diversity in terms of landmark locations and types. Therefore, we believe that the image
retrieval community can benefit from a large-scale dataset,
comprising more comprehensive and challenging examples,
to improve algorithm performance and evaluation methodol-

3456

