Wavelet-SRNet: A Wavelet-based CNN for Multi-scale Face Super Resolution
Huaibo Huang1,2,3 , Ran He1,2,3 , Zhenan Sun1,2,3 and Tieniu Tan1,2,3
1
School of Engineering Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, CASIA
3
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
huaibo.huang@cripac.ia.ac.cn, {rhe, znsun, tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Most modern face super-resolution methods resort
to convolutional neural networks (CNN) to infer highresolution (HR) face images. When dealing with very low
resolution (LR) images, the performance of these CNN
based methods greatly degrades. Meanwhile, these methods
tend to produce over-smoothed outputs and miss some textural details. To address these challenges, this paper presents
a wavelet-based CNN approach that can ultra-resolve a
very low resolution face image of 16 × 16 or smaller pixelsize to its larger version of multiple scaling factors (2×, 4×,
8× and even 16×) in a unified framework. Different from
conventional CNN methods directly inferring HR images,
our approach firstly learns to predict the LR’s corresponding series of HR’s wavelet coefficients before reconstructing HR images from them. To capture both global topology
information and local texture details of human faces, we
present a flexible and extensible convolutional neural network with three types of loss: wavelet prediction loss, texture loss and full-image loss. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed approach achieves more appealing
results both quantitatively and qualitatively than state-ofthe-art super-resolution methods.

1. Introduction
Face super-resolution (SR), also known as face hallucination, refers to reconstructing high resolution (HR) face
images from their corresponding low resolution (LR) inputs. It is significant for most face-related applications, e.g.
face recognition, where captured faces are of low resolution
and lack in essential facial details. It is a special case of
single image super resolution and many methods have been
proposed to address it. It is a widely known undetermined
inverse problem, i.e., there are various corresponding highresolution answers to explain a given low-resolution input.
Most current single image super-resolution methods [2,
6, 14, 15, 23] depend on a pixel-wise mean squared er-

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)

(j)

(k)

(l)

Figure 1. Illustration of wavelet decomposition and our waveletbased SR. Top row: (a) The original 128 × 128 high-resolution
face image and its (b) 1 level, (c) 2 level, (d) 3 level, full wavelet
packet decomposition image. Middle row: (h) The 16 × 16 lowresolution face image and its (g) 2×, (f) 4×, (e) 8×, upscaling
versions inferred by our network. Bottom row: similar with the
middle row except the low-resolution input (l) is 8 × 8 pixel-size.

ror (MSE) loss in image space to push the outputs pixelwise closer to the ground-truth HR images in training phase.
However, such approaches tend to produce blurry and oversmoothed outputs, lacking some textural details. Besides,
they seem to only work well on limited up-scaling factors
(2× or 4×) and degrades greatly when ultra-resolving a
very small input (like 16 × 16 or smaller). Several recent efforts [5, 33, 35] have been developed to deal with this issue
based on convolutional neural networks. Dahl et al. [5] use
PixelCNN [27] to synthesize realistic details. Yu et al. [33]
investigate GAN [8] to create perceptually realistic results.
Zhu et al. [35] combine dense correspondence field estimation with face super-resolution. However, the application
of these methods in super-resolution in image space faces

1689

