Distributed Very Large Scale Bundle Adjustment by Global Camera Consensus
Runze Zhang

Siyu Zhu1

Tian Fang2

rzhangaj@cse.ust.hk

szhu@cse.ust.hk

fangtian@altizure.com

Long Quan
quan@cse.ust.hk

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
The increasing scale of Structure-from-Motion is fundamentally limited by the conventional optimization framework for the all-in-one global bundle adjustment. In this
paper, we propose a distributed approach to coping with
this global bundle adjustment for very large scale Structurefrom-Motion computation. First, we derive the distributed
formulation from the classical optimization algorithm ADMM, Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers, based
on the global camera consensus. Then, we analyze the
conditions under which the convergence of this distributed
optimization would be guaranteed. In particular, we adopt
over-relaxation and self-adaption schemes to improve the
convergence rate. After that, we propose to split the large
scale camera-point visibility graph in order to reduce the
communication overheads of the distributed computing.
The experiments on both public large scale SfM data-sets
and our very large scale aerial photo sets demonstrate that
the proposed distributed method clearly outperforms the
state-of-the-art method in efficiency and accuracy.

1. Introduction
With the popularization of smartphones and unmanned
aerial vehicles, larger collection of images with high quality
and resolution are available, which give rise to dramatic
increment of the scale of Structure-from-Motion. Some
works try to tackle city level and even world level SfM, such
as works in [21, 13, 1, 19, 16, 25, 26, 24]. But, these works
do not globally optimize the results in the end, since the
global optimization called bundle adjustment has too large
scale cost to be completed by limited memory and time.
The bundle adjustment is the non-linear optimization to
refine the camera parameters and 3D points in the end of
1 Siyu Zhu is the corresponding author.
2 Tian Fang is with Shenzhen Zhuke Innovation Technology since 2017.

Structure-from-Motion. The Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm [31] with Schur complement is the most common
method to optimize the bundle adjustment formulation,
which takes advantages of the sparsity in the multipleview geometry problem. The work [3] tries to improve the
efficiency of the large scale bundle adjustment problem by
factorization and precondition method, and [7] proposes a
method to group factors for the bundle adjustment problem.
The preconditioner based on the camera visibility graph is
also adopted in work [17, 20] to improve the efficiency of
LM algorithm. The work [33] implements the optimization
algorithm of bundle adjustment in parallel for acceleration
by improving the CPU utilization. However, those methods
are still single-core methods which cannot solve the problem with too large scale to be loaded into memory.
Some works try to tackle the large scale bundle adjustment problem by out-of-core algorithms [23, 22] and
the distributed system [12] to break through the memory
limitation of the single-core algorithm. The out-of-core
method [23] splits the large scale bundle adjustment problem into several small problems, solves the small problems
in parallel and merges them iteratively by the optimization
of overlapping region of those small problems. However,
for densely captured data-sets, the splitting will yield too
large overlapping regions to be loaded into memory to
do optimization. Besides, the I/O overhead induced by
overlapping regions is also too high. In the following
work [22], the author utilizes a hierarchical framework
to split the large problem and merge small problems in
each level by the smooth method [8]. Nevertheless, the
hierarchical framework sacrifices the degree of parallelism
and is difficult to implement in a distributed system. The
smooth method to merge small problems cannot guarantee
the bundle adjustment result is optimized.
The work in [12] proposes a consensus framework to
deal with large scale bundle adjustment in distributed system. Instead of merging small problems by the optimization

29

