Region-based Correspondence Between 3D Shapes
via Spatially Smooth Biclustering
Simone Melzi1

Matteo Denitto1

Manuele Bicego1

Umberto Castellani1

matteo.denitto@univr.it

Alessandro Farinelli1

Mário A. T. Figueiredo2

University of Verona1
Verona, Italy

Yanir Kleiman3

Universidade de Lisboa2
Lisboa, Portugal

Abstract
Region-based correspondence (RBC) is a highly relevant
and non-trivial computer vision problem. Given two 3D
shapes, RBC seeks segments/regions on these shapes that
can be reliably put in correspondence. The problem thus
consists both in finding the regions and determining the correspondences between them. This problem statement is similar to that of “biclustering”, implying that RBC can be cast
as a biclustering problem. Here, we exploit this implication
by tackling RBC via a novel biclustering approach, called
S 4B (spatially smooth spike and slab biclustering), which:
(i) casts the problem in a probabilistic low-rank matrix factorization perspective; (ii) uses a spike and slab prior to
induce sparsity; (iii) is enriched with a spatial smoothness
prior, based on geodesic distances, encouraging nearby
vertices to belong to the same bicluster. This type of spatial
prior cannot be used in classical biclustering techniques.
We test the proposed approach on the FAUST dataset, outperforming both state-of-the-art RBC techniques and classical biclustering methods.

1. Introduction
Computing correspondences between 3D shapes is a fundamental problems in computer vision, with applications in
computer graphics, geometry processing, statistical shape
analysis, and many others [44]. The goal of most shape
matching techniques is to find correspondences between
points or regions in a given pair of shapes, which can differ by a variety of deformations. This includes both nearrigid correspondences, if the shapes are related by a rotation and a translation, and the more general and challenging non-rigid shape matching problem [43], in which shapes
can undergo other transformations, such as articulated motion of humans. Although several methods have been pro-

Maks Ovsjanikov3

Ecole Polytechnique3
Palaiseau Cedex, France

posed to address the latter problem, most techniques either
use a prescribed deformation model (e.g., near-isometries or
conformal deformations [3, 17]), or rely on user-provided
landmark correspondences [1]. Thus, despite a significant
amount of effort, the problem of finding non-rigid matches
between general shapes remains challengingly open.
Another set of techniques, recently introduced in a variety of settings, relaxes the correspondence problem into
that of looking for matches between probability distributions (as done in soft maps [39], or general real-valued
functions (e.g., using the functional maps framework [29]).
These techniques are better suited to the general shape correspondence problem, as they do not seek precise (e.g., bijective) maps between points, easily accommodating significant sampling, geometric, or even topological changes
[36]. Furthermore, those soft maps can also be used as input to more refined point-based correspondence methods, to
help improve the robustness and accuracy thereof [10].
One category of such generalized matching formulations
is region-based correspondence (RBC), where the problem
is formulated as that of finding regions on the shapes that
behave similarly and can thus be easily put in correspondence. This problem is different from another well-studied
task, called shape co-segmentation, since in RBC the goal is
not to find meaningful semantic segments in various shapes
(e.g., limbs in animal shapes), but rather to determine regions in the two shapes that are in correspondence. As recently mentioned in [10], RBC is closely related to biclustering [21], in particular if the points on the shapes can be
endowed with a similarity measure (e.g., based on on some
descriptor). Given such a measure, a similarity matrix may
be built and the goal of biclustering is to simultaneously
cluster both the rows and columns of this matrix [21].
Given a data matrix, biclustering aims at retrieving submatrices (i.e., biclusters), in each of which a certain subset
14260

