ThiNet: A Filter Level Pruning Method for Deep Neural Network Compression
Jian-Hao Luo1 , Jianxin Wu1 , and Weiyao Lin2
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
luojh@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wujx2001@nju.edu.cn, wylin@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose an efficient and unified framework, namely
ThiNet, to simultaneously accelerate and compress CNN
models in both training and inference stages. We focus on
the filter level pruning, i.e., the whole filter would be discarded if it is less important. Our method does not change
the original network structure, thus it can be perfectly supported by any off-the-shelf deep learning libraries. We formally establish filter pruning as an optimization problem,
and reveal that we need to prune filters based on statistics information computed from its next layer, not the current layer,
which differentiates ThiNet from existing methods. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of this strategy,
which has advanced the state-of-the-art. We also show the
performance of ThiNet on ILSVRC-12 benchmark. ThiNet
achieves 3.31× FLOPs reduction and 16.63× compression
on VGG-16, with only 0.52% top-5 accuracy drop. Similar
experiments with ResNet-50 reveal that even for a compact
network, ThiNet can also reduce more than half of the parameters and FLOPs, at the cost of roughly 1% top-5 accuracy
drop. Moreover, the original VGG-16 model can be further
pruned into a very small model with only 5.05MB model
size, preserving AlexNet level accuracy but showing much
stronger generalization ability.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, we have witnessed a rapid development of deep neural networks in the field of computer vision,
from basic image classification tasks such as the ImageNet
recognition challenge [18, 28, 11], to some more advanced
applications, e.g., object detection [7], semantic segmentation [24], image captioning [16] and many others. Deep
neural networks have achieved state-of-the-art performance
in these fields compared with traditional methods based on
manually designed visual features.
In spite of its great success, a typical deep model is hard
to be deployed on resource constrained devices, e.g., mobile
phones or embedded gadgets. A resource constrained sce-

nario means a computing task must be accomplished with
limited resource supply, such as computing time, storage
space, battery power, etc. One of the main issues of deep
neural networks is its huge computational cost and storage
overhead, which constitute a serious challenge for a mobile
device. For instance, the VGG-16 model [28] has 138.34 million parameters, taking up more than 500MB storage space,1
and needs 30.94 billion float point operations (FLOPs) to
classify a single image. Such a cumbersome model can easily
exceed the computing limit of small devices. Thus, network
compression has drawn a significant amount of interest from
both academia and industry.
Pruning is one of the most popular methods to reduce
network complexity, which has been widely studied in the
model compression community. In the 1990s, LeCun et
al. [20] had observed that several unimportant weights can
be removed from a trained network with negligible loss in
accuracy. A similar strategy was also explored in [2]. This
process resembles the biological phenomena in mammalian
brain, where the number of neuron synapses has reached the
peak in early childhood, followed by gradual pruning during
its development. However, these methods are mainly based
on the second derivative, thus are not applicable for today’s
deep model due to expensive memory and computation costs.
Recently, Han et al. [10] introduced a simple pruning
strategy: all connections with weights below a threshold are
removed, followed by fine-tuning to recover its accuracy.
This iterative procedure is performed several times, generating a very sparse model. However, such a non-structured
sparse model can not be supported by off-the-shelf libraries,
thus specialized hardwares and softwares are needed for efficient inference, which is difficult and expensive in real-world
applications. On the other hand, the non-structured random
connectivity ignores cache and memory access issues. As
indicated in [32], due to the poor cache locality and jumping
memory access caused by random connectivity, the practical
acceleration is very limited (sometimes even slows down),
even though the actual sparsity is relatively high.
To avoid the limitations of non-structured pruning men1 1 MB = 220 ≈ 1.048 million bytes, and 1 million is 106 .

5058

