Generative Adversarial Networks Conditioned by Brain Signals
S. Palazzo, C. Spampinato, I.Kavasidis, D. Giordano
PeRCeiVe Lab - Department Electrical Electronics and Computer Engineering
University of Catania - Italy
{palazzosim, kavasidis, dgiordan, cspampin}@dieei.unict.it

M. Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision
University of Central Florida - USA
shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
Recent advancements in generative adversarial networks (GANs), using deep convolutional models, have supported the development of image generation techniques able
to reach satisfactory levels of realism. Further improvements have been proposed to condition GANs to generate
images matching a specific object category or a short text
description. In this work, we build on the latter class of
approaches and investigate the possibility of driving and
conditioning the image generation process by means of
brain signals recorded, through an electroencephalograph
(EEG), while users look at images from a set of 40 ImageNet object categories with the objective of generating the
seen images. To accomplish this task, we first demonstrate
that brain activity EEG signals encode visually-related information that allows us to accurately discriminate between
visual object categories and, accordingly, we extract a more
compact class-dependent representation of EEG data using recurrent neural networks. Afterwards, we use the
learned EEG manifold to condition image generation employing GANs, which, during inference, will read EEG signals and convert them into images. We tested our generative approach using EEG signals recorded from six subjects while looking at images of the aforementioned 40
visual classes. The results show that for classes represented by well-defined visual patterns (e.g., pandas, airplane, etc.), the generated images are realistic and highly
resemble those evoking the EEG signals used for conditioning GANs, resulting in an actual reading-the-mind process.

1. Introduction
Reading the mind is such an ambitious and dreamedupon capability that is widely — and reasonably — re-

garded as closer to science fiction than real science. However, little steps are constantly being made by the scientific community to push the limits of our understanding of
the brain’s workings and of our probing technology. For
example, research on brain-computer interfaces for directactuated control of machines for disabled people is a very
active and relatively successful field, which can make an
actual impact on users’ lives [14, 26, 8].
But what if, instead of being able to detect a limited set
of simple executive commands from the brain, we could
generate something more inspiring, more meaningful, more
complex — like images?
While cognitive neuroscience studies [11, 19, 21] have
attempted — with yet uncertain results — to identify which
parts of the human visual cortex and brain are responsible
for visual cognitive processes, it has been acknowledged
that brain activity recordings contain information about visual object categories [4, 31, 27, 2, 1]. This consideration
makes one wonder whether patterns of such brain activity
may be identified in order to extract useful information on
the content of an observed scene.
This kind of information could, then, be used in conjunction with conditional generative models to reconstruct
a meaningful and realistic image from the informative content decoded from brain activity. Luckily, such generative
frameworks already exist, and one of them in particular —
generative adversarial networks (GANs) [6] — is currently
very popular thanks to its simplicity in concept and effectiveness in practice (although some aspects related to reliable training approach are still unclear). Hence, assuming that a GAN approach intrinsically contains the complexity required to model the image generation process, the
main problem to solve is how to extract visually-content–
representative information.
Recently, EEG has been increasingly used to capture

3410

