Be Your Own Prada: Fashion Synthesis with Structural Coherence
Shizhan Zhu1 Sanja Fidler2,3 Raquel Urtasun2,3,4
Dahua Lin1 Chen Change Loy1
1
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
University of Toronto, 3 Vector Institute, 4 Uber Advanced Technologies Group
{szzhu, dhlin, ccloy}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, {fidler, urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
We present a novel and effective approach for generating
new clothing on a wearer through generative adversarial
learning. Given an input image of a person and a sentence
describing a different outfit, our model “redresses” the person as desired, while at the same time keeping the wearer
and her/his pose unchanged. Generating new outfits with
precise regions conforming to a language description while
retaining wearer’s body structure is a new challenging task.
Existing generative adversarial networks are not ideal in
ensuring global coherence of structure given both the input
photograph and language description as conditions. We address this challenge by decomposing the complex generative
process into two conditional stages. In the first stage, we
generate a plausible semantic segmentation map that obeys
the wearer’s pose as a latent spatial arrangement. An effective spatial constraint is formulated to guide the generation
of this semantic segmentation map. In the second stage,
a generative model with a newly proposed compositional
mapping layer is used to render the final image with precise
regions and textures conditioned on this map. We extended
the DeepFashion dataset [8] by collecting sentence descriptions for 79K images. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach through both quantitative and qualitative
evaluations. A user study is also conducted.

1. Introduction
Imagine that you could be your own fashion designer,
and be able to seamlessly transform your current outfit in
the photo into a completely new one, by simply describing
it in words (Figure 1). In just minutes you could design and
“try on” hundreds of different shirts, dresses, or even styles,
allowing you to easily discover what you look good in. The
goal of this paper is to develop a method that can generate
new outfits onto existing photos, in a way that preserves
structural coherence from multiple perspectives:
1. Retaining the body shape and pose of the wearer,

Figure 1. Given an original wearer’s input photo (left) and different
textual descriptions (second column), our model generates new
outfits onto the photograph (right three columns) while preserving
the pose and body shape of the wearer.

2. Producing regions and the associated textures that conform to the language description, and
3. Enforcing coherent visibility of body parts.
Meeting all these requirements at the same time is a very
challenging task. First, the input image is the only source
from which we can mine for the body shape information.
With only a single view of the wearer, it is nontrivial to
recover the body shape accurately. Moreover, we do not
want the shape of the generated outfit to be limited by the
original garments of the wearer. For example, replacing the
original long-sleeve shirt with a short-sleeve garment would
require the model to hallucinate the person’s arms and skin.
Conventional 2D non-parametric methods or 3D graphics approaches meet the first requirement through structural
constraints derived from human priors. They can be in
the form of accurate physical measurements (e.g. height,
waist, hip, arm length) to create 3D virtual bodies [10];
manual manipulations of sliders such as height, weight and
waist girth [19]; or indication of joint positions and a rough
sketch outlining the human body silhouette [16]. All these
methods require explicit human interventions at test time,

1680

