StackGAN: Text to Photo-realistic Image Synthesis
with Stacked Generative Adversarial Networks
Han Zhang1 , Tao Xu2 , Hongsheng Li3 ,
Shaoting Zhang4 , Xiaogang Wang3 , Xiaolei Huang2 , Dimitris Metaxas1
1

Rutgers University

2

Lehigh University

3

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

4

Baidu Research

{han.zhang, dnm}@cs.rutgers.edu, {tax313, xih206}@lehigh.edu
{hsli, xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, zhangshaoting@baidu.com

Abstract
Synthesizing high-quality images from text descriptions
is a challenging problem in computer vision and has many
practical applications. Samples generated by existing textto-image approaches can roughly reflect the meaning of the
given descriptions, but they fail to contain necessary details
and vivid object parts. In this paper, we propose Stacked
Generative Adversarial Networks (StackGAN) to generate
256⇥256 photo-realistic images conditioned on text descriptions. We decompose the hard problem into more manageable sub-problems through a sketch-refinement process.
The Stage-I GAN sketches the primitive shape and colors
of the object based on the given text description, yielding Stage-I low-resolution images. The Stage-II GAN takes
Stage-I results and text descriptions as inputs, and generates high-resolution images with photo-realistic details. It
is able to rectify defects in Stage-I results and add compelling details with the refinement process. To improve the
diversity of the synthesized images and stabilize the training
of the conditional-GAN, we introduce a novel Conditioning
Augmentation technique that encourages smoothness in the
latent conditioning manifold. Extensive experiments and
comparisons with state-of-the-arts on benchmark datasets
demonstrate that the proposed method achieves significant
improvements on generating photo-realistic images conditioned on text descriptions.

1. Introduction
Generating photo-realistic images from text is an important problem and has tremendous applications, including photo-editing, computer-aided design, etc. Recently,
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [8, 5, 23] have
shown promising results in synthesizing real-world images. Conditioned on given text descriptions, conditional-

This bird is white
with some black on
its head and wings,
and has a long
orange beak

This bird has a
yellow belly and
tarsus, grey back,
wings, and brown
throat, nape with
a black face

This flower has
overlapping pink
pointed petals
surrounding a ring
of short yellow
filaments

(a) StackGAN
Stage-I
64x64
images

(b) StackGAN
Stage-II
256x256
images

(c) Vanilla GAN
256x256
images

Figure 1. Comparison of the proposed StackGAN and a vanilla
one-stage GAN for generating 256×256 images. (a) Given text
descriptions, Stage-I of StackGAN sketches rough shapes and basic colors of objects, yielding low-resolution images. (b) Stage-II
of StackGAN takes Stage-I results and text descriptions as inputs,
and generates high-resolution images with photo-realistic details.
(c) Results by a vanilla 256×256 GAN which simply adds more
upsampling layers to state-of-the-art GAN-INT-CLS [26]. It is unable to generate any plausible images of 256×256 resolution.

GANs [26, 24] are able to generate images that are highly
related to the text meanings.
However, it is very difficult to train GAN to generate
high-resolution photo-realistic images from text descriptions. Simply adding more upsampling layers in state-ofthe-art GAN models for generating high-resolution (e.g.,
256⇥256) images generally results in training instability
15907

