Large Pose 3D Face Reconstruction from a Single Image via Direct Volumetric
CNN Regression
Aaron S. Jackson1
1

1

Adrian Bulat1

Vasileios Argyriou2

The University of Nottingham, UK

2

Georgios Tzimiropoulos1

Kingston University, UK

{aaron.jackson, adrian.bulat, yorgos.tzimiropoulos}@nottingham.ac.uk
2
vasileios.argyriou@kingston.ac.uk

Figure 1: A few results from our VRN - Guided method, on a full range of pose, including large expressions.

Abstract
3D face reconstruction is a fundamental Computer Vision problem of extraordinary difficulty. Current systems often assume the availability of multiple facial images (sometimes from the same subject) as input, and must address
a number of methodological challenges such as establishing dense correspondences across large facial poses, expressions, and non-uniform illumination. In general these
methods require complex and inefficient pipelines for model
building and fitting. In this work, we propose to address
many of these limitations by training a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) on an appropriate dataset consisting of
2D images and 3D facial models or scans. Our CNN works
with just a single 2D facial image, does not require accurate
alignment nor establishes dense correspondence between
images, works for arbitrary facial poses and expressions,
and can be used to reconstruct the whole 3D facial geometry (including the non-visible parts of the face) bypassing
the construction (during training) and fitting (during testing) of a 3D Morphable Model. We achieve this via a simple CNN architecture that performs direct regression of a
volumetric representation of the 3D facial geometry from a

single 2D image. We also demonstrate how the related task
of facial landmark localization can be incorporated into
the proposed framework and help improve reconstruction
quality, especially for the cases of large poses and facial
expressions. Code and models will be made available at
http://aaronsplace.co.uk

1. Introduction
3D face reconstruction is the problem of recovering the
3D facial geometry from 2D images. Despite many years
of research, it is still an open problem in Vision and Graphics research. Depending on the setting and the assumptions
made, there are many variations of it as well as a multitude
of approaches to solve it. This work is on 3D face reconstruction using only a single image. Under this setting, the
problem is considered far from being solved. In this paper,
we propose to approach it, for the first time to the best of
our knowledge, by directly learning a mapping from pixels
to 3D coordinates using a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN). Besides its simplicity, our approach works with totally unconstrained images downloaded from the web, including facial images of arbitrary poses, facial expressions
and occlusions, as shown in Fig. 1.
11031

