Learning Deep Neural Networks for Vehicle Re-ID with
Visual-spatio-temporal Path Proposals
Yantao Shen1 Tong Xiao1 Hongsheng Li1,∗ Shuai Yi2 Xiaogang Wang1,∗
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SenseTime Group Limited
1

{ytshen, xiaotong, hsli, xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
2
yishuai@sensetime.com

Abstract
Vehicle re-identification is an important problem and
has many applications in video surveillance and intelligent
transportation. It gains increasing attention because of
the recent advances of person re-identification techniques.
However, unlike person re-identification, the visual differences between pairs of vehicle images are usually subtle and even challenging for humans to distinguish. Incorporating additional spatio-temporal information is vital for solving the challenging re-identification task. Existing vehicle re-identification methods ignored or used oversimplified models for the spatio-temporal relations between
vehicle images. In this paper, we propose a two-stage
framework that incorporates complex spatio-temporal information for effectively regularizing the re-identification
results. Given a pair of vehicle images with their spatiotemporal information, a candidate visual-spatio-temporal
path is first generated by a chain MRF model with a
deeply learned potential function, where each visual-spatiotemporal state corresponds to an actual vehicle image with
its spatio-temporal information. A Siamese-CNN+PathLSTM model takes the candidate path as well as the pairwise queries to generate their similarity score. Extensive
experiments and analysis show the effectiveness of our proposed method and individual components.

1. Introduction
Vehicle recognition is an active research field in computer vision, which includes applications such as vehicle
classification [42, 35, 26], vehicle detection [31], and vehicle segmentation [30]. Vehicle re-identification (re-ID),
which aims at determining whether two images are taken
from the same vehicle, has recently drawn increasing attention from the research community [10, 45, 27]. It has important applications in video surveillance, public security,
and intelligent transportation.
Derived from person re-identification algorithms[1, 3,
∗ Corresponding authors

A

B

C
…

Vehicle ID: 41
Time: 15:37

Vehicle ID: 41
Time: 15:42

Vehicle ID: 41
Time: 15:54

(a) Similar vehicle observed at B

A

B

C
…

Vehicle ID:03
Time: 15:27

Vehicle ID:07
Time: 15:35

(b) No similar vehicle observed at B
Figure 1: Illustration of spatio-temporal path information
as important prior information for vehicle re-identification.
(a) For vehicles with the same ID at A and C, it has to be
observed at B. (b) If a vehicle with similar appearance and
proper time is not observed at B, vehicles at A and C are
unlikely to be the same vehicle.

12], most existing vehicle re-identification approaches [10,
45, 27] rely only on appearance information. Such a problem setting is particularly challenging, since different cars
could have very similar colors and shapes, especially for
those belonging to the same manufacturer. Subtle cues for
identification, such as license plates and special decorations, might be unavailable due to non-frontal camera viewpoints, low resolution, or poor illumination of the vehicle
images. Therefore, it is not practical to use only appearance
information for accurate vehicle re-identification.
To cope with such limitations, there are preliminary attempts on incorporating spatio-temporal information of the
input images for more accurate vehicle re-identification. In
[28], Liu et al. utilized the time and geo-location information for each vehicle image. A spatio-temporal affinity is
calculated between every pair of images. However, it favors
11900

