See the Glass Half Full: Reasoning about Liquid Containers,
their Volume and Content
Roozbeh Mottaghi†
Connor Schenck‡
Dieter Fox‡
†
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence (AI2)
‡
University of Washington

Abstract

Volume Estimation

Ali Farhadi†‡

Pouring Prediction

1000 mL

Humans have rich understanding of liquid containers
and their contents; for example, we can effortlessly pour
water from a pitcher to a cup. Doing so requires estimating
the volume of the cup, approximating the amount of water
in the pitcher, and predicting the behavior of water when we
tilt the pitcher. Very little attention in computer vision has
been made to liquids and their containers. In this paper,
we study liquid containers and their contents, and propose
methods to estimate the volume of containers, approximate
the amount of liquid in them, and perform comparative volume estimations all from a single RGB image. Furthermore,
we show the results of the proposed model for predicting
the behavior of liquids inside containers when one tilts the
containers. We also introduce a new dataset of Containers
Of liQuid contEnt (COQE) that contains more than 5,000
images of 10,000 liquid containers in context labelled with
volume, amount of content, bounding box annotation, and
corresponding similar 3D CAD models.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in visual recognition have enabled
researchers to start exploring tasks that go beyond categorization and entail high-level reasoning in visual domains.
Visual reasoning, an essential component for a visually intelligent agent, has recently attracted computer vision researchers [46, 31, 32, 23, 34, 52, 51, 6, 1, 24]. Almost all
the efforts in visual recognition and reasoning have been
devoted to solid objects: how to detect [14, 36] and segment [30, 8] them, how to reason about physics of a solid
world [31, 46], and how forces would affect their behavior [32, 23]. Very little attention, however, has been made
to liquid containers and the behavior of their content.
Humans, on the other hand, deal with liquids and their
containers on a daily basis. We can comfortably pour water from a pitcher to a cup knowing how much water is already in the cup and having an estimate of the volume of the

Content Estimation
t
33%

Comparative Volume Estimation
Can we pour the content of
the container in the yellow
box into the green one?

Figure 1. Our goal is to estimate the volume of the container (Volume Estimation), approximate what fraction of the volume is filled
(Content Estimation), infer whether we can pour the content of one
container into another (Comparative Volume Estimation), and predict how much liquid will remain in a container over time if it
is tilted to a certain angle (Pouring Prediction). Our inference is
based on a single RGB image.

cup and the amount of water in the pitcher. We effortlessly
estimate the angle by which to tilt the pitcher to pour the
right amount of water into the cup. In fact, five month old
infants develop rich understanding of liquids and their containers and can predict whether water will pour or tumble
from a cup if the cup is upended [17]. Other species such as
orangutans can also estimate the volume of liquids inside a
container and can predict if the liquid in one container can
fit into the other one [7].
In this paper, we study liquid containers (Figure 1) and
propose methods to estimate the volume of containers and
their content in absolute and relative senses. We also show,
for the first time, that we can predict the amount of liquid
that remains in a container if it is tilted for a certain tilt angle, all from a single image. We introduce Containers Of
liQuid contEnt (COQE), a dataset of images with containers annotated for their volume, the volume of their content,
bounding box, and corresponding similar 3D models. Estimating the volume of containers is extremely challenging
and requires reasoning about the size of the container, its

1871

