A Generative Model of People in Clothing
Christoph Lassner1, 2

Gerard Pons-Moll2

Peter V. Gehler3,*

classner@tue.mpg.de

gpons@tue.mpg.de

peter.gehler@uni-wuerzburg.de

1

BCCN, Tübingen

2

MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

3

University of Würzburg

Figure 1: Random examples of people generated with our model. For each row, sampling is conditioned on the silhouette
displayed on the left. Our proposed framework also supports unconditioned sampling as well as conditioning on local
appearance cues, such as color.

Abstract
We present the first image-based generative model of
people in clothing for the full body. We sidestep the commonly used complex graphics rendering pipeline and the
need for high-quality 3D scans of dressed people. Instead,
we learn generative models from a large image database.
The main challenge is to cope with the high variance in human pose, shape and appearance. For this reason, pure
image-based approaches have not been considered so far.
We show that this challenge can be overcome by splitting the
generating process in two parts. First, we learn to generate
a semantic segmentation of the body and clothing. Second,
we learn a conditional model on the resulting segments that
creates realistic images. The full model is differentiable and
can be conditioned on pose, shape or color. The result are
samples of people in different clothing items and styles. The
proposed model can generate entirely new people with realistic clothing. In several experiments we present encouraging results that suggest an entirely data-driven approach
to people generation is possible.
* This work was performed while P. V. Gehler was with the BCCN1
and MPI-IS2 .

1. Introduction
Perceiving people in images is a long standing goal in
computer vision. Most work focuses on detection, pose and
shape estimation of people from images. In this paper, we
address the inverse problem of automatically generating images of people in clothing. A traditional approach to this
task is to use computer graphics. A pipeline including 3D
avatar generation, 2D pattern design, physical simulation to
drape the cloth, and texture mapping is necessary to render
an image from a 3D scene.
Graphics pipelines provide precise control of the outcome. Unfortunately, the rendering process poses various challenges, all of which are active research topics and
mostly require human input. Especially clothing models require expert knowledge and are laborious to construct: the
physical parameters of the cloth must be known in order to
achieve a realistic result. In addition, modeling the complex
interactions between the body and clothing and between different layers of clothing presents challenges for many current systems. The overall cost and complexity limits the
applications of realistic cloth simulation. Data driven models of cloth can make the problem easier, but available data
of clothed people in 3D is scarce.

853

