Learning Proximal Operators:
Using Denoising Networks for Regularizing Inverse Imaging Problems
Tim Meinhardt1

Michael Moeller2

Caner Hazirbas1

Daniel Cremers1

tim.meinhardt@in.tum.de

michael.moeller@uni-siegen.de

hazirbas@cs.tum.edu

cremers@tum.de

Technical University of Munich1

University of Siegen2

Abstract
While variational methods have been among the most
powerful tools for solving linear inverse problems in imaging, deep (convolutional) neural networks have recently
taken the lead in many challenging benchmarks. A remaining drawback of deep learning approaches is their requirement for an expensive retraining whenever the specific
problem, the noise level, noise type, or desired measure of
fidelity changes. On the contrary, variational methods have
a plug-and-play nature as they usually consist of separate
data fidelity and regularization terms.
In this paper we study the possibility of replacing the
proximal operator of the regularization used in many convex energy minimization algorithms by a denoising neural
network. The latter therefore serves as an implicit natural
image prior, while the data term can still be chosen independently. Using a fixed denoising neural network in exemplary
problems of image deconvolution with different blur kernels
and image demosaicking, we obtain state-of-the-art reconstruction results. These indicate the high generalizability
of our approach and a reduction of the need for problemspecific training. Additionally, we discuss novel results on
the analysis of possible optimization algorithms to incorporate the network into, as well as the choices of algorithm
parameters and their relation to the noise level the neural
network is trained on.

1. Introduction
Many important problems in image processing and computer vision can be phrased as linear inverse problems
where the desired quantity u cannot be observed directly but
needs to be determined from measurements f that relate to
u via a linear operator A, i.e. f = Au + n for some noise n.
In almost all practically relevant applications the solution is
very sensitive to the input data, and the underlying continuous problem is ill-posed. A classical but powerful general

CNN

Figure 1: We propose to exploit the recent advances in convolutional neural networks for image denoising for general
inverse imaging problems by replacing the proximal operator in optimization algorithms with such a network. Changing the image reconstruction task, e.g. from deblurring to
demosaicking, merely changes the data fidelity term such
that the same network can be used over a wide range of applications without requiring any retraining.
approach to obtain stable and faithful reconstructions is to
use a regularization and determine the estimated solution û
via an energy minimization problem of the form
û = argminu Hf (Au) + R(u).

(1)

In the above, Hf is a fidelity measure that relates the data f
to the estimated true solution u, e.g. Hf (Au) = kAu − f k2
and R is a regularization function that introduces a-priori
information on the expected solution.
Recently, the computer vision research community has
had great success in replacing the explicit modeling of energy functions in Equation (1) by parameterized functions
G that directly map the input data f to a solution û = G(f ).
Powerful architectures are so-called deep networks that parameterize G by several layers of linear operations followed
by certain nonlinearities, e.g. rectified linear units. The free
parameters of G are learned by using large amounts of training data and fitting the parameters to the ground truth data
via a large-scale optimization problem.

1781

