Dynamic Label Graph Matching for Unsupervised Video Re-Identification
Mang Ye1 , Andy J Ma1 , Liang Zheng2 , Jiawei Li1 , Pong C Yuen1
1
2
Hong Kong Baptist University
University of Technology Sydney
{mangye,andyjhma,jwli,pcyuen}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, liangzheng06@gmail.com

Re-weighting

Abstract
Label estimation is an important component in an unsupervised person re-identification (re-ID) system. This paper focuses on cross-camera label estimation, which can be
subsequently used in feature learning to learn robust re-ID
models. Specifically, we propose to construct a graph for
samples in each camera, and then graph matching scheme
is introduced for cross-camera labeling association. While
labels directly output from existing graph matching methods may be noisy and inaccurate due to significant crosscamera variations, this paper propose a dynamic graph
matching (DGM) method. DGM iteratively updates the
image graph and the label estimation process by learning
a better feature space with intermediate estimated labels.
DGM is advantageous in two aspects: 1) the accuracy of estimated labels is improved significantly with the iterations;
2) DGM is robust to noisy initial training data. Extensive
experiments conducted on three benchmarks including the
large-scale MARS dataset show that DGM yields competitive performance to fully supervised baselines, and outperforms competing unsupervised learning methods.1

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID), a retrieval problem in its essence [39, 33, 38], aims to search for the queried person from a gallery of disjoint cameras. In recent years, impressive progress has been reported in video based re-ID
[34, 20, 37], because video sequences provide rich visual
and temporal information and can be trivially obtained by
tracking algorithms [11, 12] in practical video surveillance
applications. Nevertheless, the annotation difficulty limits
the scalability of supervised methods in large-scale camera
networks, which motivates us to investigate an unsupervised
solution for video re-ID.
The difference between unsupervised learning and supervised learning consists in the availability of labels. Considering the good performance of supervised methods, an
1 Code is available at www.comp.hkbu.edu.hk/

˜mangye/

Data
Graphs

Matching

Update

f

Labels

Metric

Learn
Re-ID

Learn

Figure 1. Pipeline Illustration. Graph matching is conducted after constructing a graph for samples in each camera to obtain the
intermediate labels. Instead of using the labels directly, label reweighting is introduced to handle the noisy intermediate labels.
Iteratively, the graph is updated, labels are estimated, and distance
metrics are learnt.

intuitive idea for unsupervised learning is to estimate re-ID
labels as accurately as possible. In previous works, part
from directly using hand-crafted descriptors [30, 14, 19,
16], some other unsupervised re-ID methods focus on finding shared invariant information (saliency [36] or dictionary
[9, 22]) among cameras. Deviating from the idea of estimating labels, these methods [36, 9, 22] might be less competitive compared with the supervised counterparts. Meanwhile, these methods also suffer from large cross-camera
variations. For example, salient features are not stable due
to occlusions or viewpoint variations. Different from the
existing unsupervised person re-ID methods, this paper is
based on a more customized solution, i.e., cross-camera
label estimation. In other words, we aim to mine the labels (matched or unmatched video pairs) across cameras.
With the estimated labels, the remaining steps are exactly
the same with supervised learning.
To mine labels across cameras, we leverage the graph
matching technique (e.g., [28]) by constructing a graph for
samples in each camera for label estimation. Instead of estimating labels independently, the graph matching approach
has shown good property in finding correspondences by
minimize the globally matching cost with intra-graph relationship. Meanwhile, label estimation problem for re-ID
task is to link the same person across different cameras,
which perfectly matches the graph matching problem by
treating each person as a graph node. However, labels directly estimated by existing graph matching are very likely

5142

