Egocentric Gesture Recognition Using Recurrent 3D Convolutional Neural
Networks with Spatiotemporal Transformer Modules

1

Congqi Cao1,2 , Yifan Zhang1,2 ∗, Yi Wu3,4 , Hanqing Lu1,2 and Jian Cheng1,2,5
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Technology, Nanjing Audit University
4
Department of Medicine, Indiana University, USA
5
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
{congqi.cao, yfzhang, luhq, jcheng}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, ywu.china@gmail.com
Abstract

Gesture is a natural interface in interacting with wearable devices such as VR/AR helmet and glasses. The main
challenge of gesture recognition in egocentric vision arises from the global camera motion caused by the spontaneous head movement of the device wearer. In this paper,
we address the problem by a novel recurrent 3D convolutional neural network for end-to-end learning. We specially design a spatiotemporal transformer module with recurrent connections between neighboring time slices which
can actively transform a 3D feature map into a canonical
view in both spatial and temporal dimensions. To validate our method, we introduce a new dataset with sufficient
size, variation and reality, which contains 83 gestures designed for interaction with wearable devices, and more than
24,000 RGB-D gesture samples from 50 subjects captured
in 6 scenes. On this dataset, we show that the proposed
network outperforms competing state-of-the-art algorithms.
Moreover, our method can achieve state-of-the-art performance on the challenging GTEA egocentric action dataset.

1. Introduction
With the development and popularity of the wearable devices such as VR/AR helmet and glasses, there is a demand
to manipulate these devices intelligently. Since gesture is a
common form for human communication and hands can be
conveniently captured by cameras mounted on the devices
from the first person view, hand gesture is a natural way to
interact with wearable devices. It motivates the demand to
recognize meaningful gestures from egocentric videos au∗ Corresponding author

tomatically.
In the traditional gesture recognition implementations,
hand-crafted features are commonly adopted [16, 30, 20].
With the development of deep neural networks, end-toend learning frameworks based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are
applied to gesture recognition achieving state-of-the-art performance [18, 14, 19]. First-person vision provides a new
perspective of the visual world that is inherently humancentric, and thus brings its unique characteristics to gesture
recognition: 1) Egocentric motion: since the camera is worn
on the user’s head, camera motion can be significant due to
the head movement, in particular when the user interacts
while walking. 2) Hands in close range: due to the short
distance from the camera to the hands and the narrow fieldof-view of the egocentric camera, hands are prominent in
the frame but meanwhile could be partly or even totally out
of the field-of-view. The frameworks proposed for the second and third person view gesture recognition can not deal
with these challenges very well.
Another notable issue in the field of egocentric gesture
recognition is a lack of large scale training data for developing models especially the deep networks. With limited
available datasets such as American sign language dataset
[27] (which defines 40 American sign language gestures for
deaf captured with only 1 subject) and Interactive museum
database [2] (which contains 7 gesture classes performed
by 5 subjects), a few methods have been developed. Starner et al. [27] use Hidden Markov model to recognize the
sentence-level sign language with hand-crafted features extracted from hand blobs. Baraldi et al. [2] extract dense trajectory features inside and around hand regions which need
to perform hand detection in advance and remove the camera motion by estimating the homography between two consecutive frames. However, hand detection brings addition4321
3763

