Structured Attentions for Visual Question Answering
Chen Zhu, Yanpeng Zhao, Shuaiyi Huang, Kewei Tu, Yi Ma
ShanghaiTech University
{zhuchen, zhaoyp1, huangsy, tukw, mayi}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual attention, which assigns weights to image regions
according to their relevance to a question, is considered as
an indispensable part by most Visual Question Answering
models. Although the questions may involve complex relations among multiple regions, few attention models can effectively encode such cross-region relations. In this paper,
we demonstrate the importance of encoding such relations
by showing the limited effective receptive field of ResNet
on two datasets, and propose to model the visual attention
as a multivariate distribution over a grid-structured Conditional Random Field on image regions. We demonstrate
how to convert the iterative inference algorithms, Mean
Field and Loopy Belief Propagation, as recurrent layers
of an end-to-end neural network. We empirically evaluated our model on 3 datasets, in which it surpasses the
best baseline model of the newly released CLEVR dataset
[13] by 9.5%, and the best published model on the VQA
dataset [3] by 1.25%. Source code is available at https:
//github.com/zhuchen03/vqa-sva.

1. Introduction
Visual Question Answering (VQA) is a comprehensive
task inspecting intelligent systems’ ability to recognize images and natural languages together. Advances in this area
not only benefit real-world applications which require the
synergistic reasoning of vision and language, such as querying events in surveillance videos [34] and searching specific
goods in images [41], but also call for finer-grained understanding on the semantic structures of images.
Adoption of the visual attention mechanism like [38, 40,
24, 27] is a major source to boost performance of VQA. Visual attentions impose regularization on the models to find
the most relevant image regions to the question. Still, experiments [6] point out that state-of-the-art models often fail to
identify the related regions like humans do. We argue this
problem comes from the fact that such attention models do
not take into account the spatial relations between regions
when predicting the attention. This is important because the

Input

Unstructured Attention

ERF at target

Structured attention

Figure 1: An example of the proposed model on CLEVR, demonstrating it is capable of inferring spatial relations despite the limited effective receptive field of the CNN. Question: What is the
color of the sphere on the right of the metal sphere? Our model
overcomes the unstructured attention’s tendency to attend to isolated key words in the questions, attending to the right region and
giving the correct answer purple.

effective receptive field (ERF) of deep CNNs only covers a
small fraction of the image [25]. Even with memory mechanism [37, 27, 40, 38], it is difficult to infer the right attention
corresponding to questions that involve the spatial relations
between regions without overlapping ERFs.
In this paper, we propose a novel neural network to
model the attention with a multivariate distribution which
considers the arrangements of image regions. We adopt the
most straightforward graph structure to model image region
arrangements - a grid-structured Conditional Random Field
(CRF) [29]. The framework of the proposed method is illustrated in Fig. 2. We show that attention can be formulated
as the marginal distribution of each hidden variable in the
CRF. Then, we implement the iterative approximate inference algorithms, Mean Field and Loopy Belief Propagation,
as recurrent layers of neural networks, which iteratively refines the attention. An example of this process is shown in
Fig. 1. We evaluate the proposed model on three repre-

1291

