Deep Direct Regression for Multi-Oriented Scene Text Detection
Wenhao He1,2 Xu-Yao Zhang1 Fei Yin1 Cheng-Lin Liu1,2
1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
Email:

{wenhao.he, xyz, fyin, liucl}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we first provide a new perspective to divide existing high performance object detection methods
into direct and indirect regressions. Direct regression performs boundary regression by predicting the offsets from
a given point, while indirect regression predicts the offsets
from some bounding box proposals. In the context of multioriented scene text detection, we analyze the drawbacks of
indirect regression, which covers the state-of-the-art detection structures Faster-RCNN and SSD as instances, and
point out the potential superiority of direct regression. To
verify this point of view, we propose a deep direct regression based method for multi-oriented scene text detection.
Our detection framework is simple and effective with a fully
convolutional network and one-step post processing. The
fully convolutional network is optimized in an end-to-end
way and has bi-task outputs where one is pixel-wise classification between text and non-text, and the other is direct
regression to determine the vertex coordinates of quadrilateral text boundaries. The proposed method is particularly beneficial to localize incidental scene texts. On the
ICDAR2015 Incidental Scene Text benchmark, our method
achieves the F-measure of 81%, which is a new state-ofthe-art and significantly outperforms previous approaches.
On other standard datasets with focused scene texts, our
method also reaches the state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Scene text detection has drawn great interests from both
computer vision and machine learning communities because of its great value in practical uses and the technical
challenges. Owing to the significant achievements of deep
convolutional neural network (CNN) based generic object
detection in recent years, scene text detection also has been
greatly improved by regarding text words or lines as objects.
High performance methods for object detection like FasterRCNN [19], SSD [14] and YOLO [18] have been modi-

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Visualized explanation of indirect and direct regression.
The solid green lines are boundaries of text “Gallery”, the dash
blue lines are boundaries of text proposal, and the dashed yellow
vectors are the ground truths of regression task. (a) The indirect
regression predicts the offsets from a proposal. (b) The direct regression predicts the offsets from a point.

fied to detect horizontal scene texts [27] [5] [21] [13] and
gained great improvements. However, for multi-oriented
text detection, methods like Faster-RCNN and SSD which
work well for object and horizontal text detection may not
be good choices. To illustrate the reasons, first we explain
the definitions of indirect and direct regression in detection
task.
Indirect Regression. For most CNN based detection methods like Fast-RCNN [3], Faster-RCNN, SSD, Multi-Box
[2], the regression task is trained to regress the offset values from a proposal to the corresponding ground truth (See
Fig.1.a). We call these kinds of approaches indirect regression.
Direct Regression. For direct regression based methods,
the regression task directly outputs values for the position
and size of an object from a given point (See Fig.1.b). Take
DenseBox [7] as an instance, this model learns to directly
predict offsets from bounding box vertexes to points in region of interest.
Indirect regression based detection methods may not be
effective for multi-oriented text detection, even methods
like Faster-RCNN and SSD have reached state-of-the-art
performance for object detection and are also implemented
for horizontal scene text detection. The reasons are mainly

745

