Ray Space Features for Plenoptic Structure-from-Motion
Yingliang Zhang1
1

Peihong Yu1

Wei Yang2,3
2

ShanghaiTech University

{zhangyl,yuph,mayx}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
3

Yuanxi Ma1

Jingyi Yu1,3

University of Delaware
wyangcs@udel.edu

Plex-VR Inc.

jingyi.yu@plex-vr.com

Abstract
Traditional Structure-from-Motion (SfM) uses images
captured by cameras as inputs. In this paper, we explore using light fields captured by plenoptic cameras or camera arrays as inputs. We call this solution plenoptic SfM or P-SfM
solution. We first present a comprehensive theory on ray
geometry transforms under light field pose variations. We
derive the transforms of three typical ray manifolds: rays
passing through a point or point-ray manifold, rays passing
through a 3D line or ray-line manifold, and rays lying on a
common 3D plane or ray-plane manifold. We show that by
matching these manifolds across LFs, we can recover light
field poses and conduct bundle adjustment in ray space. We
validate our theory and framework on synthetic and real
data on light fields of different scales: small scale LFs acquired using a LF camera and large scale LFs by a camera
array. We show that our P-SfM technique can significantly
improve the accuracy and reliability over regular SfM and
PnP especially on traditionally challenging scenes where
reliable feature point correspondences are difficult to obtain
but line or plane correspondences are readily accessible.

1. Introduction
Structure from motion (SfM) estimates threedimensional structures from two-dimensional image
sequences by simultaneously recovering camera parameters (intrinsics, extrinsics, and poses) and 3D geometry of
feature points. The problem is critical for computer vision
and brings important insights on human visual perception.
Tradition SfM is composed of three steps: extracting
features and matching them across images, using the inlier
features for camera intrinsic/extrinsic estimation, and
bundle adjustment. Tremendous efforts have been made in
the past decade [9, 16, 29, 38] on recovering indoor and
outdoor scenes [2, 8, 15] with stunning performance in
speed and quality [7] [30] etc.

In this paper, we investigate changing the input of the
SfM problem: instead of using images captured by cameras,
we use light fields captured by plenoptic cameras. Commodity plenoptic systems such as the Lytro light field camera and portable camera arrays can now record in a snapshot
the radiance of nearly all rays emitting from every location
and along every direction from the scene. We show that the
4D light fields provide a number of extremely useful ray geometric attributes that are not accessible in 2D images. Further we show that the use of these ray geometry attributes
enable feature matching beyond 3D points as well as improve pose estimation and bundle adjustment. We call this
technique plenoptic SfM or P-SfM.
A brute-force approach to P-SfM is to modify the regular
SfM to handle the light field input data.
P-SfM vs. SfM. The most straightforward approach is to
treat the recorded light fields as a set of (perspective) camera views or subaperture images1 and directly apply regular SfM on subaperture views as shown in Fig.6. Such an
approach, however, fails to use rich geometric constraints
embedded in the ray space. For example, the subaperture
cameras are confined to a plane and are regularly sampled
on the grid. However, traditional SfM treats the relatively
poses of subaperture images as unknown and hence does not
effectively utilize this important constraint. Second, light
fields provide some unique geometry properties over a 2D
image, e.g., rays passing through a 3D line lie on a bilinear subspace (Fig.2) and one can derive pose variations by
analyzing how this subspace transforms.
P-SfM vs. PnP. Another alternative is to first estimate the
3D position of feature points using, for example, one light
field, and then apply the perspective-n-point algorithm [19]
by matching them to feature pixels in the second light field.
1 We adopt the subaperture image notation to be consistent with the light
field camera terminologies.

4321
4631

