CREST: Convolutional Residual Learning for Visual Tracking
Yibing Song1 , Chao Ma2 , Lijun Gong3 , Jiawei Zhang1 , Rynson W.H. Lau1 , and Ming-Hsuan Yang4
1

2

City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
3
SenseNets Technology Ltd, China

4

Abstract
Discriminative correlation filters (DCFs) have been
shown to perform superiorly in visual tracking. They only
need a small set of training samples from the initial frame
to generate an appearance model. However, existing DCFs
learn the filters separately from feature extraction, and update these filters using a moving average operation with
an empirical weight. These DCF trackers hardly benefit
from the end-to-end training. In this paper, we propose the
CREST algorithm to reformulate DCFs as a one-layer convolutional neural network. Our method integrates feature
extraction, response map generation as well as model update into the neural networks for an end-to-end training. To
reduce model degradation during online update, we apply
residual learning to take appearance changes into account.
Extensive experiments on the benchmark datasets demonstrate that our CREST tracker performs favorably against
state-of-the-art trackers. 1

1. Introduction
Visual tracking has various applications ranging from
video surveillance, human computer interaction to autonomous driving. The main difficulty is how to utilize the
extremely limited training data (usually a bounding box in
the first frame) to develop an appearance model robust to
a variety of challenges including background clutter, scale
variation, motion blur and partial occlusions. Discriminative correlation filters (DCFs) have attracted an increasing attention in the tracking community [4, 8, 30], due to
the following two important properties. First, since spatial correlation is often computed in the Fourier domain as
an element-wise product, DCFs are suitable for fast tracking. Second, DCFs regress the circularly shifted versions
of input features to soft labels, i.e., generated by a Gaussian function ranging from zero to one. In contrast to most
existing tracking-by-detection approaches [22, 1, 14, 34]
1 More results and code are provided on the authors’ webpages.

The University of Adelaide, Australia
University of California, Merced, U.S.A.

#0011

#0036

#0023

#0065

#0049

#0365

DeepSRDCF

CCOT

HCFT

CREST

Figure 1: Convolutional features improve DCFs (DeepSRDCF [8], CCOT [11], HCFT [30]). We propose the
CREST algorithm by formulating DCFs as a shallow convolutional layer with residual learning. It performs favorably
against existing DCFs with convolutional features.

that generate sparse response scores over sampled locations, DCFs always generate dense response scores over
all searching locations. With the use of deep convolutional
features [25], DCFs based tracking algorithms [30, 8, 11]
have achieved state-of-the-art performance on recent tracking benchmark datasets [45, 46, 24].
However, existing DCFs based tracking algorithms are
limited by two aspects. First, learning DCFs is independent of feature extraction. Although it is straightforward to
learn DCFs directly over deep convolutional features as in
[30, 8, 11], DCFs trackers benefit little from the end-to-end
training. Second, most DCFs trackers use a linear interpolation operation to update the learned filters over time. Such
an empirical interpolation weight is unlikely to strike a good
balance between model adaptivity and stability. It leads to
drifting of the DCFs trackers due to noisy updates. These
12555

