Unsupervised learning of object landmarks by factorized spatial embeddings
James Thewlis
University of Oxford
jdt@robots.ox.ac.uk

Hakan Bilen
University of Oxford
University of Edinburgh

Andrea Vedaldi
University of Oxford
vedaldi@robots.ox.ac.uk

hbilen@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Learning automatically the structure of object categories
remains an important open problem in computer vision. In
this paper, we propose a novel unsupervised approach that
can discover and learn landmarks in object categories, thus
characterizing their structure. Our approach is based on
factorizing image deformations, as induced by a viewpoint
change or an object deformation, by learning a deep neural network that detects landmarks consistently with such
visual effects. Furthermore, we show that the learned landmarks establish meaningful correspondences between different object instances in a category without having to impose this requirement explicitly. We assess the method qualitatively on a variety of object types, natural and man-made.
We also show that our unsupervised landmarks are highly
predictive of manually-annotated landmarks in face benchmark datasets, and can be used to regress these with a high
degree of accuracy.

Unlabelled images

Viewpoint factorization
Learned landmarks

1. Introduction

Figure 1. We present a novel method that can learn viewpoint invariant landmarks without any supervision. The method uses
a process of viewpoint factorization which learns a deep landmark
detector compatible with image deformations. It can be applied to
rigid and deformable objects and object categories.

The appearance of objects in images depends strongly
not only on their intrinsic properties such as shape and material, but also on accidental factors such as viewpoint and
illumination. Thus, learning from images about objects as
intrinsic physical entities is extremely difficult, particularly
if no supervision is provided.
Despite these difficulties, the performance of object detection algorithms has been rising steadily, and deep neural
networks now achieve excellent results on benchmarks such
as PASCAL VOC [17] and Microsoft COCO [39]. Still,
it is unclear whether these models conceptualise objects as
intrinsic entities. Early object detectors such as HOG [13]
and DPMs [18] were based on 2D templates applied in a
translation and scale invariant manner to images. Recent
detectors such as SSD [42] make this even more extreme
and learn different templates (filters) for different scales and
even different aspect ratios of objects. Hence, these models are likely to capture objects as image-based phenomena,
representing them as a collection of weakly-related 2D pat-

terns.
Achieving a deeper understanding of objects requires
modeling their intrinsic viewpoint-independent structure.
Often this structure is defined manually by specifying entities such as landmarks, parts, and skeletons. Given sufficient manual annotations, it is possible to teach deep neural
networks and other models to recognize such structures in
images. However, the problem of learning such structures
without manual supervision remains largely open.
In this paper, we contribute a new approach to learn
viewpoint-independent representations of objects from images without manual supervision (fig. 1). We formulate this
task as a factorization problem, where the effects of image
deformations, for example arising from a viewpoint change,
are explained by the motion of a reference frame attached
to the object and independent of the viewpoint.
After describing the general principle (sec. 3.1), we in15916

