CAD Priors for Accurate and Flexible Instance Reconstruction
Tolga Birdal1,2
Slobodan Ilic1,2
1
Technische Universität München, Germany
2
Siemens AG, Munich, Germany

Close up: CAD Model

Close up: Reconstruction

(a) CAD Model

(b) Image of Object in Scene (c) Object Detection in Laser Scans

(d) 3D Reconstruction

Figure 1: Our 3D reconstruction method. (a) Input 3D CAD model. (b) Image of the instance to reconstruct. (c) Detection of 3D model
in point clouds. (c) Final reconstruction we obtain, with close-up comparisons to the nominal CAD prior.

Abstract
We present an efficient and automatic approach for accurate instance reconstruction of big 3D objects from multiple, unorganized and unstructured point clouds, in presence of dynamic clutter and occlusions. In contrast to conventional scanning, where the background is assumed to
be rather static, we aim at handling dynamic clutter where
the background drastically changes during object scanning.
Currently, it is tedious to solve this problem with available
methods unless the object of interest is first segmented out
from the rest of the scene. We address the problem by assuming the availability of a prior CAD model, roughly resembling the object to be reconstructed. This assumption
almost always holds in applications such as industrial inspection or reverse engineering. With aid of this prior acting as a proxy, we propose a fully enhanced pipeline, capable of automatically detecting and segmenting the object of
interest from scenes and creating a pose graph, online, with
linear complexity. This allows initial scan alignment to the
CAD model space, which is then refined without the CAD
constraint to fully recover a high fidelity 3D reconstruction,
accurate up to the sensor noise level. We also contribute
a novel object detection method, local implicit shape models (LISM) and give a fast verification scheme. We evaluate
our method on multiple datasets, demonstrating the ability to accurately reconstruct objects from small sizes up to
125m3 .

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction involves the recovery of digitized object or scene using a 2D/3D sensor, typically through multiple acquisition steps. From reverse engineering to industrial
inspection, its applications are plentiful. Due to such wide
use, from the early days of vision, it attracted significant
attention of both research community and industry [24, 7].
Despite the huge demand, many marker-free approaches
based solely on 3D data either involve acquisition of ordered scans[31, 21], or follow the de-facto standard pipeline
[19] in case of unordered scans. The former suffers from the
requirements of redundant depth capture with large overlap
and scenes with very little clutter or occlusions. Due to the
volumetric nature of scan fusion, such techniques also do
not scale well to large objects while retaining high precision. The latter exploits 3D keypoint matching of all scans
to one another, alleviating the order constraint. Thanks to
3D descriptors, it could well operate in full 3D. Yet, matching of scans to each other is an O(N 2 ) problem and prevents the methods from scaling to an arbitrary number of
scans. In addition, neither of those can handle scenes with
extensive dynamic clutter or occlusions.
Nowadays, with the capability of collecting high quality,
large scale and big data, it is critical to offer automated solutions for providing highly accurate reconstructions regardless of the acquisition scenarios. In this paper, we tackle
the problem of 3D instance reconstruction from a handful
of unorganized point clouds, where the object of interest

1133

