DeepCD: Learning Deep Complementary Descriptors for Patch Representations
Tsun-Yi Yang1,2
Jo-Han Hsu1,2
1
Academia Sinica, Taiwan
shamangary@citi.sinica.edu.tw

r04922012@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
This paper presents the DeepCD framework which
learns a pair of complementary descriptors jointly for image patch representation by employing deep learning techniques. It can be achieved by taking any descriptor learning architecture for learning a leading descriptor and augmenting the architecture with an additional network stream
for learning a complementary descriptor. To enforce the
complementary property, a new network layer, called datadependent modulation (DDM) layer, is introduced for adaptively learning the augmented network stream with the emphasis on the training data that are not well handled by
the leading stream. By optimizing the proposed joint loss
function with late fusion, the obtained descriptors are complementary to each other and their fusion improves performance. Experiments on several problems and datasets show
that the proposed method1 is simple yet effective, outperforming state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Representing a local image patch by a descriptor is a
fundamental computer vision task with a variety of applications such as image matching [7, 15], alignment [14],
structure from motion and object recognition. Many descriptor methods have been proposed and early descriptors
are mostly hand-crafted [22, 36, 27, 6, 19, 4, 33, 30]. Although with decent performance in many applications, manually designed rules can not be thorough and often lead to
sub-optimal results. Recent advances on deep learning have
inspired several descriptor methods to further improve descriptor performance by exploring convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
Deep learning has been used for learning both descriptor embeddings and similarity metrics. Metric learning has
been achieved by decision network [40] or pairwise similarity learning [17]. Significant improvement can be obtained
but at the cost of very expensive computation during testing.
1 Source code avaliable at https://github.com/shamangary/DeepCD

Yen-Yu Lin1
Yung-Yu Chuang2
2
National Taiwan University, Taiwan
yylin@citi.sinica.edu.tw

cyy@csie.ntu.edu.tw

As an example, one of such metric learning methods could
take 104 times of computation than using the L2 norm as the
distance metric between patches. Such a high testing cost
prevents them from being employed in many applications
despite their excellent performance. Thus, in this paper, we
focus on descriptor embedding and simply use L2 norm or
the Hamming distance as the dissimilarity metrics.
This paper proposes to learn two complementary descriptors jointly. The approach is inspired by feature fusion.
The fusion of multiple features has been shown effective in
vision and multimedia applications. It has been shown that,
as long as the features are complementary, even simple late
fusion schemes by adding or multiplying scores can significantly improve results. However, for manually crafted features, it is impossible to know in advance whether they are
complementary. Thus, the main challenge of feature fusion
is to select complementary features. By employing deep
learning for descriptor embedding, we could learn descriptors that are guaranteed complementary to each other by formulating the complementary property into the loss function.
By complementary, we mean that using these descriptors
jointly outperforms using them individually.
This paper proposes the DeepCD framework for learning complementary descriptors and formulates a joint loss
function for enforcing the complementary property. The
proposed DeepCD framework learns a complementary descriptor along with a leading descriptor. It can be done by
taking any descriptor learning architecture and augmenting
it with a network stream for learning the complementary
descriptor. By optimizing the proposed joint loss function,
we obtain a leading descriptor which performs well by itself
and its complementary descriptor which focuses on helping
the leading one. Note that the complementary descriptor
could perform poorly by itself. It is important that the descriptors are asymmetric. By requiring that one is primary,
the other can focus on learning residual information to help
the primary one. It would be easier for the complementary
one to focus on the failure cases that the primary one can not
perform well. We further propose a novel network layer
termed data-dependent modulation (DDM) layer for adaptively modulating the learning rate of the complementary
13314

