Domain-adaptive deep network compression
Marc Masana, Joost van de Weijer, Luis Herranz
CVC, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona
Barcelona, Spain

Andrew D. Bagdanov
MICC, University of Florence
Florence, Italy

{mmasana,joost,lherranz}@cvc.uab.es

andrew.bagdanov@unifi.it

Jose M Álvarez
Toyota Research Institute
jose.alvarez@tri.global

Abstract

output fc7 (size 4096)

output fc7 (size 4096)

+

Deep Neural Networks trained on large datasets can be
easily transferred to new domains with far fewer labeled
examples by a process called fine-tuning. This has the advantage that representations learned in the large source domain can be exploited on smaller target domains. However,
networks designed to be optimal for the source task are often prohibitively large for the target task. In this work we
address the compression of networks after domain transfer.
We focus on compression algorithms based on low-rank
matrix decomposition. Existing methods base compression
solely on learned network weights and ignore the statistics of network activations. We show that domain transfer leads to large shifts in network activations and that it
is desirable to take this into account when compressing.
We demonstrate that considering activation statistics when
compressing weights leads to a rank-constrained regression
problem with a closed-form solution. Because our method
takes into account the target domain, it can more optimally
remove the redundancy in the weights. Experiments show
that our Domain Adaptive Low Rank (DALR) method significantly outperforms existing low-rank compression techniques. With our approach, the fc6 layer of VGG19 can be
compressed more than 4x more than using truncated SVD
alone – with only a minor or no loss in accuracy. When
applied to domain-transferred networks it allows for compression down to only 5-20% of the original number of parameters with only a minor drop in performance.

1. Introduction
One of the important factors in the success of deep learning for computer vision is the ease with which features,
pre-trained on large datasets such as Imagenet [6, 31] and
Places2 [37], can be transferred to other computer vision

+

A7

W7 X 7  A7 B7T X 7

B7T
X 7 :input fc7 (size 4096)

X 7 :input fc7 (size 4096)

+

W6 X 6  A6 B6T X 6
X 6 : input fc6 (size 25088)

A6

+

B6T
X 6 : input fc6 (size 25088)

Figure 1. Example of compressing last two layers of the VGG-16
network (fc6, fc7). The original weight matrix is approximated by
two matrices. The main novelty in this paper is that we consider
the input X of each layer when compressing the corresponding
weight matrix W . This is especially relevant when doing domain
transfer from pre-trained networks where activation statistics can
be significantly skewed in the target domain.

domains. These new domains often have far fewer labeled
samples available but which, due to the high correlation
which exists between visual data in general, can exploit an
already learned representation trained on large datasets. The
most popular method to transfer the representations is by
means of fine-tuning, where the network is initialized with
the pre-trained network weights, after which they are further adjusted on the smaller target domain [26]. These finetuned networks, which have the same size as the originally
trained network, can then be applied to the task of the target domain. However, one must question whether a target
domain task requires such a large network and whether the
resulting network is not highly redundant.
14289

