Local-to-Global Point Cloud Registration using a Dictionary of Viewpoint
Descriptors
David Avidar, David Malah, and Meir Barzohar
Department of Electrical Engineering, Technion
Haifa 32000, Israel
davidar@campus.technion.ac.il, malah@ee.technion.ac.il, barzoharmeir@gmail.com

Abstract
Local-to global point cloud registration is a challenging
task due to the substantial differences between these two
types of data, and the different techniques used to acquire
them. Global clouds cover large-scale environments and
are usually acquired aerially, e.g., 3D modeling of a city
using Airborne Laser Scanning (ALS). In contrast, local
clouds are often acquired from ground level and at a much
smaller range, for example, using Terrestrial Laser Scanning (TLS). The differences are often manifested in point
density distribution, occlusions nature, and measurement
noise. As a result of these differences, existing point cloud
registration approaches, such as keypoint-based registration, tend to fail. We improve upon a different approach, recently proposed, based on converting the global cloud into
a viewpoint-based cloud dictionary. We propose a local-toglobal registration method where we replace the dictionary
clouds with viewpoint descriptors, consisting of panoramic
range-images. We then use an efficient dictionary search in
the Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) domain, using phase
correlation, to rapidly find plausible transformations from
the local to the global reference frame. We demonstrate
our method’s significant advantages over the previous cloud
dictionary approach, in terms of computational efficiency
and memory requirements. In addition, We show its superior registration performance in comparison to a state-ofthe-art, keypoint-based method (FPFH). For the evaluation,
we use a challenging dataset of TLS local clouds and an
ALS large-scale global cloud, in an urban environment.

1. Introduction
Local-to-global 3D point cloud registration involves
finding the rigid transformation between the reference
frame of a local point cloud and that of a large-scale, global
point cloud. A global point cloud is a representation of a
large-scale scene (e.g., neighborhood, town, or city), ac-

quired from multiple viewpoints, and united into a comprehensive 3D model. On the other hand, a local point cloud is
a representation of a smaller environment, contained within
the large-scale scene, and is acquired from a single viewpoint, or possibly a small set of nearby viewpoints.
The distinction between these two types of point cloud
data is a result of employing different acquisition techniques. For example, typical means of 3D data acquisition of outdoor large-scale environments are Airborne Laser
Scanning (ALS), also known as airborne LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging), or photogrammetry based on aerial
imagery. Examples of outdoor local cloud acquisition techniques are Terrestrial Laser Scanning (TLS) and stereo reconstruction. Due to the differences between the local and
global clouds acquisition methods, the two types of point
cloud data tend to have significantly different properties.
For example, airborne and terrestrial scans suffer from inherently different kinds of occlusion, due to the difference
in typical scanning angles. In addition, while airborne
scans typically better capture horizontal surfaces (such as
rooftops) over vertical ones, the opposite is true for terrestrial scans. This often leads to substantially different point
density distribution between global and local clouds. See
examples of an ALS global cloud and a TLS local cloud in
Fig. 1 and Fig. 2, respectively.
Because of these local-vs-global dissimilarities, standard
point cloud registration methods, such as keypoint-based
registration, tend to fail or require impractical computational resources. Keypoint-based methods rely on detecting locally unique points, in both clouds, and characterizing
them, using local 3D descriptors. Then, initial registration
is carried out based on finding correspondences between descriptors, often followed by an iterative registration refinement step. However, due to the differences between local
and global clouds, the tasks of finding repeatable keypoints
in both clouds, and establishing correct correspondences between their descriptors, become much more challenging.
In this work, we propose an approach to solving the
local-to-global point cloud registration problem, which

891

