Deep TextSpotter: An End-to-End Trainable Scene Text Localization and
Recognition Framework
Michal Bušta, Lukáš Neumann and Jiřı́ Matas
Centre for Machine Perception, Department of Cybernetics
Czech Technical University, Prague, Czech Republic
bustam@fel.cvut.cz, neumalu1@cmp.felk.cvut.cz, matas@cmp.felk.cvut.cz

Abstract
A method for scene text localization and recognition is
proposed. The novelties include: training of both text detection and recognition in a single end-to-end pass, the structure of the recognition CNN and the geometry of its input
layer that preserves the aspect of the text and adapts its resolution to the data.
The proposed method achieves state-of-the-art accuracy
in the end-to-end text recognition on two standard datasets
– ICDAR 2013 and ICDAR 2015, whilst being an order
of magnitude faster than competing methods - the whole
pipeline runs at 10 frames per second on an NVidia K80
GPU.

1. Introduction
Scene text localization and recognition, a.k.a. text spotting, text-in-the-wild problem or photo OCR, in an open
problem with many practical applications, ranging from
tools for helping visually impaired or text translation, to use
as a part of a larger integrated system, e.g. in robotics, indoor navigation or autonomous driving.
Like many areas of computer vision, the scene text field
has greatly benefited from deep learning techniques and
accuracy of methods has significantly improved [12, 6].
Most work however focuses either solely on text localization (detection) [18, 26, 6, 15] or on recognition of manually cropped-out words [7, 24]. The problem of scene text
recognition has been so far always approached ad-hoc, by
connecting the detection module to an existing independent
recognition method [6, 15, 8].
In this paper, we propose a novel end-to-end framework
which simultaneously detects and recognizes text in scene
images. As the first contribution, we present a model which
is trained for both text detection and recognition in a single learning framework, and we show that such joint model
outperforms the combination of state-of-the-art localization

Figure 1. The proposed method detects and recognizes text in
scene images at 10fps on an NVidia K80 GPU. Ground truth in
green, model output in red. The image is taken from the ICDAR
2013 dataset [13]

and state-of-the-art recognition methods [6, 4].
As the second contribution, we show how the stateof-the-art object detection methods [22, 23] can be extended for text detection and recognition, taking into account specifics of text such as the exponential number of
classes (given an alphabet A, there are up to AL possible classes, where L denotes maximum text length) and the
sensitivity to hidden parameters such as text aspect and rotation.
The method achieves state-of-the-art results on the standard ICDAR 2013 [13] and ICDAR 2015 [12] datasets and
the pipeline runs end-to-end at 10 frames per second on a
NVidia K80 GPU, which is more than 10 times faster than
the fastest methods.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, previous work is reviewed. In Section 3, the proposed method is described and in Section 4 evaluated. The
paper is concluded in Section 5.

2. Previous Work
2.1. Scene Text Localization
Jaderberg et al. [10] train a character-centric CNN [14],
which takes a 24 × 24 image patch and predicts a text/notext score, a character and a bigram class. The input image
12204

