RMPE: Regional Multi-Person Pose Estimation
Hao-Shu Fang1∗, Shuqin Xie1 , Yu-Wing Tai2 , Cewu Lu1§
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China 2 Tencent YouTu
fhaoshu@gmail.com qweasdshu@sjtu.edu.cn yuwingtai@tencent.com lucewu@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-person pose estimation in the wild is challenging.
Although state-of-the-art human detectors have demonstrated good performance, small errors in localization and
recognition are inevitable. These errors can cause failures
for a single-person pose estimator (SPPE), especially for
methods that solely depend on human detection results. In
this paper, we propose a novel regional multi-person pose
estimation (RMPE) framework to facilitate pose estimation
in the presence of inaccurate human bounding boxes. Our
framework consists of three components: Symmetric Spatial Transformer Network (SSTN), Parametric Pose NonMaximum-Suppression (NMS), and Pose-Guided Proposals
Generator (PGPG). Our method is able to handle inaccurate bounding boxes and redundant detections, allowing it
to achieve 76.7 mAP on the MPII (multi person) dataset[3].
Our model and source codes are made publicly available.† .

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation is a fundamental challenge for
computer vision. In practice, recognizing the pose of
multiple persons in the wild is a lot more challenging
than recognizing the pose of a single person in an image [30, 31, 21, 23, 38]. Recent attempts approach this
problem by using either a two-step framework [28, 12] or a
part-based framework [7, 27, 17]. The two-step framework
first detects human bounding boxes and then estimates the
pose within each box independently. The part-based framework first detects body parts independently and then assembles the detected body parts to form multiple human poses.
Both frameworks have their advantages and disadvantages.
In the two-step framework, the accuracy of pose estimation
highly depends on the quality of the detected bounding box∗ part of this work was done when Hao-Shu Fang was an student intern
in Tencent
§ corresponding author is Cewu Lu
† https://cvsjtu.wordpress.com/rmpe-regional-multi-person-poseestimation/

Figure 2. Problem of redundant human detections. The left image
shows the detected bounding boxes; the right image shows the estimated human poses. Because each bounding box is operated on
independently, multiple poses are detected for a single person.

es. In the part-based framework, the assembled human poses are ambiguous when two or more persons are too close
together. Also, part-based framework loses the capability
to recognize body parts from a global pose view due to the
mere utilization of second-order body parts dependence.
Our approach follows the two-step framework. We aim
to detect accurate human poses even when given inaccurate bounding boxes. To illustrate the problems of previous
approaches, we applied the state-of-the-art object detector
Faster-RCNN [29] and the SPPE Stacked Hourglass model [23]. Figure 1 and Figure 2 show two major problems:
the localization error problem and the redundant detection
problem. In fact, SPPE is rather vulnerable to bounding
box errors. Even for the cases when the bounding boxes
are considered as correct with IoU > 0.5, the detected human poses can still be wrong. Since SPPE produces a pose
for each given bounding box, redundant detections result in
redundant poses.
To address the above problems, a regional multi-person
pose estimation (RMPE) framework is proposed. Our
framework improves the performance of SPPE-based human pose estimation algorithms. We have designed a new
symmetric spatial transformer network (SSTN) which is attached to the SPPE to extract a high-quality single person
region from an inaccurate bounding box. A novel parallel SPPE branch is introduced to optimize this network. To
address the problem of redundant detection, a parametric
4321
2334

