Making Minimal Solvers for Absolute Pose Estimation Compact and Robust
Viktor Larsson
Lund University
Lund, Sweden

Zuzana Kukelova
Czech Technical University
Prague, Czech Republic

Yinqiang Zheng
National Institute of Informatics
Tokyo, Japan

viktorl@maths.lth.se

kukelzuz@fel.cvut.cz

yqzheng@nii.ac.jp

Abstract
In this paper we present new techniques for constructing
compact and robust minimal solvers for absolute pose estimation. We focus on the P4Pfr problem, but the methods we
propose are applicable to a more general setting.
Previous approaches to P4Pfr suffer from artificial degeneracies which come from their formulation and not the
geometry of the original problem. In this paper we show
how to avoid these false degeneracies to create more robust
solvers. Combined with recently published techniques for
Gröbner basis solvers we are also able to construct solvers
which are significantly smaller. We evaluate our solvers on
both real and synthetic data, and show improved performance compared to competing solvers.
Finally we show that our techniques can be directly applied to the P3.5Pf problem to get a non-degenerate solver,
which is competitive with the current state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Estimating the pose of a camera from minimal 2D-3D
point correspondences is an important problem in geometric computer vision, as the minimal solvers often form the
building blocks for 3D reconstruction frameworks. For
estimating a calibrated camera only three points are required [11, 15]. If the intrinsic parameters are only partially known, more point correspondences are necessary.
The most common situation in practice is that all intrinsic parameters except the focal length are known and the
camera has some radial distortion. For the setting with
unknown focal length and known or zero radial distortion,
there have been many proposed minimal solvers using four
points [23, 4, 25] and recently Wu [24] presented the first
truly minimal solver using 3.5 points (by ignoring one image coordinate).
The absolute pose problem with unknown radial distortion and unknown focal length becomes minimal with four
points and is usually called P4Pfr. It was first solved by
Josephson and Byröd [14], however the elimination tem-

Figure 1. The camera pose, focal length and radial distortion are
estimated from four 2D-3D correspondences. The examples above
are from the Rotunda dataset (Section 4.4).

plate for this solver was quite large (1134 × 720), which
limits its practical use. In [5] Bujnak et al. presented polynomial solvers with much smaller elimination templates by
considering the planar and non-planar problems separately.
In [17] Kukelova et al. presented a non-minimal solver
which uses five point correspondences. The solver is very
fast but has the drawbacks of requiring more data and solving an overconstrained problem.
The P4Pfr problem becomes degenerate when the 3D
points lie in a plane parallel to the image plane. In this case
there exist infinitely many solutions by translating the camera towards the plane and changing the focal length. This
degeneracy is inherent to the problem itself and cannot be
avoided. However the previous solvers from [14] and [5]
both suffer from additional degeneracies which are artificial
in the sense that they come from the specific formulation
used, instead of the geometry of the original problem.
In this paper we show how to avoid these unnecessary
degeneracies and construct minimal solvers which are both
more robust and have better performance. We focus on
the problem of pose estimation in the case of unknown focal length and radial distortion. However the methods we
present are not specific to this case and they are applicable
to a more general setting.
The main contributions of this paper are
• We present new polynomial solvers for P4Pfr which

2316

