A Unified Model for Near and Remote Sensing
Scott Workman1

Menghua Zhai1

David J. Crandall2

Nathan Jacobs1

scott@cs.uky.edu

ted@cs.uky.edu

djcran@indiana.edu

jacobs@cs.uky.edu

1

University of Kentucky

2

Indiana University Bloomington

Abstract
We propose a novel convolutional neural network architecture for estimating geospatial functions such as population density, land cover, or land use. In our approach, we
combine overhead and ground-level images in an end-toend trainable neural network, which uses kernel regression
and density estimation to convert features extracted from the
ground-level images into a dense feature map. The output of
this network is a dense estimate of the geospatial function in
the form of a pixel-level labeling of the overhead image. To
evaluate our approach, we created a large dataset of overhead and ground-level images from a major urban area with
three sets of labels: land use, building function, and building age. We find that our approach is more accurate for all
tasks, in some cases dramatically so.

1. Introduction
From predicting the weather to planning the future of our
cities to recovering from natural disasters, accurately monitoring widespread areas of the Earth’s surface is essential to
many scientific fields and to society in general. These observations have traditionally been collected through remote
sensing from satellites, aerial imaging, and distributed observing stations and sensors. These approaches can observe
certain properties like land cover and land use accurately
and at a high resolution, but unfortunately, not everything
can be seen from overhead imagery. For example, Wang et
al. [28] evaluate approaches for urban zoning and building
height estimation from overhead imagery, and conclude that
urban zoning segmentation “is an extremely hard task from
aerial views,” that building height estimation is “either too
hard, or more sophisticated methods are needed,” and that
“utilizing ground imagery seems a logical first step.”
More recently, the explosive popularity of geotagged social media has raised the possibility of using online usergenerated content as a source of geospatial information,
sometimes called image-driven mapping or proximate sensing. For example, online images from social network

Figure 1: We use overhead imagery and geotagged groundlevel imagery as input to an end-to-end deep network that
estimates the values of a geospatial function by performing
fine-grained pixel-level labeling on the overhead image.

and photo sharing websites have been used to estimate
land cover for large geographic regions [15, 38], to observe the state of the natural world by recreating maps of
snowfall [27], and to quantify perception of urban environments [4]. Despite differing applications, these papers
all wish to estimate some unobservable geospatial function,
and view each social media artifact (e.g., geotagged groundlevel image) as an observation of this function at a particular
geographic location.
The typical approach [2,33] is to (1) collect a large number of samples, (2) use an automated approach to estimate
12688

