Should We Encode Rain Streaks in Video as Deterministic or Stochastic?
Wei Wei1 , Lixuan Yi1 , Qi Xie1 , Qian Zhao1,2 , Deyu Meng1,2,∗, Zongben Xu1,2
1
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Ministry of Education Key Lab of Intelligent Networks and Network Security, Xi’an Jiaotong University
{weiweiwe,yilixuan,xq.liwu}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {timmy.zhaoqian,dymeng,zbxu}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Videos taken in the wild sometimes contain unexpected
rain streaks, which brings difficulty in subsequent video processing tasks. Rain streak removal in a video (RSRV) is
thus an important issue and has been attracting much attention in computer vision. Different from previous RSRV
methods formulating rain streaks as a deterministic message, this work first encodes the rains in a stochastic manner, i.e., a patch-based mixture of Gaussians. Such modification makes the proposed model capable of finely adapting
a wider range of rain variations instead of certain types of
rain configurations as traditional. By integrating with the
spatiotemporal smoothness configuration of moving objects
and low-rank structure of background scene, we propose a
concise model for RSRV, containing one likelihood term imposed on the rain streak layer and two prior terms on the
moving object and background scene layers of the video.
Experiments implemented on videos with synthetic and real
rains verify the superiority of the proposed method, as compared with the state-of-the-art methods, both visually and
quantitatively in various performance metrics.

1. Introduction
Videos captured by outdoor surveillance equipments or
cameras sometimes contain rain streaks. Such unexpected
corruption may degrade performance of subsequent video
processing tasks, like feature detection, stereo correspondence [14], object tracking, segmentation and recognition
[25]. Rain streak removal from a video (RSRV) has thus become an important task in recent computer vision research.
Since firstly raised by Garg et al. [12], multiple methods
have been proposed for this task and attained good rain removing performance in videos with different rain circumstances. Most of these methods need to specify certain
physical characteristics of rain streaks, e.g., photometric appearance [13], chromatic consistency [20], spatiotemporal
∗ Deyu Meng is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. An input video (left) is separated into three layers of
background scene, rain streaks and moving object (middle) by the
P-MoG method. The rain streak layer contains three 4 × 4 patchbased Gaussian components (right), whose covariance matrices
(16 × 16) are shown correspondingly in the righthand. Alongside
each covariance matrix, we show 16 4 × 4 patches wrapped by all
columns of it. Each patch visualizes the correlation map between
one patch position to all others. One can see evident correlations
among patch pixels in the lower component, complying with rain
drops with block shapes, less while evident oriented correlations
in the middle component, corresponding to rain streaks with thinner line shapes, and very weak correlations among patch pixels in
the upper component, representing scattered light rain grains and
random camera noise.

configurations [29] and local structure correlations [8], and
design certain techniques for quantitatively encoding these
prior rain knowledge to facilitate a proper separation of rain
streaks from the video background. Some latest method
along this line achieved state-of-the-art performance, by
pre-training a classifier with some auxiliary annotated samples with/without rains and extracting discriminative structures for differentiating rain parts from no-rain ones [17].
However, there are still limitations existing in current
RSRV methods. Firstly, most current methods assume rain
streaks as deterministic information with specific structures
or discriminative features. In practice, however, the rain
streaks are always with a large variation across different
videos taken under diverse scenarios and circumstances,

2516

