Binarized Convolutional Landmark Localizers for Human Pose Estimation and
Face Alignment with Limited Resources
Adrian Bulat and Georgios Tzimiropoulos
Computer Vision Laboratory, The University of Nottingham
Nottingham, United Kingdom
{adrian.bulat, yorgos.tzimiropoulos}@nottingham.ac.uk

Abstract
BN, Binary

Our goal is to design architectures that retain the
groundbreaking performance of CNNs for landmark localization and at the same time are lightweight, compact
and suitable for applications with limited computational
resources. To this end, we make the following contributions: (a) we are the first to study the effect of neural network binarization on localization tasks, namely human pose
estimation and face alignment. We exhaustively evaluate
various design choices, identify performance bottlenecks,
and more importantly propose multiple orthogonal ways to
boost performance. (b) Based on our analysis, we propose
a novel hierarchical, parallel and multi-scale residual architecture that yields large performance improvement over
the standard bottleneck block while having the same number of parameters, thus bridging the gap between the original network and its binarized counterpart. (c) We perform a large number of ablation studies that shed light
on the properties and the performance of the proposed
block. (d) We present results for experiments on the most
challenging datasets for human pose estimation and face
alignment, reporting in many cases state-of-the-art performance. Code can be downloaded from https://www.
adrianbulat.com/binary-cnn-landmarks

1. Introduction
This work is on localizing a predefined set of fiducial
points on objects of interest which can typically undergo
non-rigid deformations like the human body or face. Very
recently, work based on Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) has revolutionized landmark localization, demonstrating results of remarkable accuracy even on the most
challenging datasets for human pose estimation [2, 20, 32]
and face alignment [3]. However, deploying (and training)
such methods is computationally expensive, requiring one
or more high-end GPUs, while the learned models typically

BN, ReLU

3x3, 192 -> 96

1x1, 256 -> 128
BN, Binary

BN, ReLU

3x3, 96 -> 48

3x3, 128 -> 128
BN, Binary

BN, ReLU

3x3, 48 -> 48

1x1, 128 -> 256
C

+
(a) original

+
(b) proposed

Figure 1: (a) The original bottleneck layer of [9]. (b) The
proposed hierarchical parallel & multi-scale structure: our
block increases the receptive field size, improves gradient
flow, is specifically designed to have (almost) the same
number of parameters as the original bottleneck, does not
contain 1 × 1 convolutions, and in general is derived from
the perspective of improving the performance and efficiency
for binary networks. Note: a layer is depicted as a rectangular block containing: its filter size, the number of input
and output channels; ”C” - denotes concatenation and ”+”
an element-wise sum.
require hundreds of MBs, thus rendering them completely
unsuitable for real-time or mobile applications. This work
is on highly accurate and robust yet efficient and lightweight
landmark localization using binarized CNNs.
Our work is inspired by very recent results of binarized
CNN architectures on image classification [24, 7]. Contrary
to these works, we are the first to study the effect of neural
network binarization on fine-grained tasks like landmark localization. Similarly to [24, 7], we find that binarization results in performance drop, however to address this we opted
to investigate and propose several architectural innovations
which led to the introduction of a completely novel hierar13706

