Linear Differential Constraints for Photo-polarimetric Height Estimation
Silvia Tozza
Sapienza - Università di Roma

William A. P. Smith
University of York

Dizhong Zhu
University of York

tozza@mat.uniroma1.it

william.smith@york.ac.uk

dz761@york.ac.uk

Ravi Ramamoorthi
UC San Diego

Edwin R. Hancock
University of York

ravir@cs.ucsd.edu

edwin.hancock@york.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper we present a differential approach to photopolarimetric shape estimation. We propose several alternative differential constraints based on polarisation and photometric shading information and show how to express them
in a unified partial differential system. Our method uses the
image ratios technique to combine shading and polarisation
information in order to directly reconstruct surface height,
without first computing surface normal vectors. Moreover,
we are able to remove the non-linearities so that the problem reduces to solving a linear differential problem. We also
introduce a new method for estimating a polarisation image
from multichannel data and, finally, we show it is possible
to estimate the illumination directions in a two source setup,
extending the method into an uncalibrated scenario. From
a numerical point of view, we use a least-squares formulation of the discrete version of the problem. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first work to consider a unified
differential approach to solve photo-polarimetric shape estimation directly for height. Numerical results on synthetic
and real-world data confirm the effectiveness of our proposed method.

1. Introduction
A recent trend in photometric [7, 13, 12, 26, 23, 20]
and physics-based [24] shape recovery has been to develop
methods that solve directly for surface height, rather than
first estimating surface normals and then integrating them
into a height map. Such methods are attractive since: 1.
they only need solve for a single height value at each pixel
(as opposed to the two components of surface orientation),
2. integrability is guaranteed, 3. errors do not accumulate
through a two step pipeline of shape estimation and integration and 4. it enables combination with cues that provide
depth information directly [10]. In both photometric stereo

[13, 12, 23] and recently in shape-from-polarisation (SfP)
[24], such a direct solution was made possible by deriving
equations that are linear in the unknown surface gradient.
In this paper, we explore the combination of SfP
constraints with photometric constraints (i.e.
photopolarimetric shape estimation) provided by one or two light
sources. Photometric stereo with three or more light sources
is a very well studied problem with robust solutions available under a range of different assumptions. Two source
photometric stereo is still considered a difficult problem
[21] even when the illumination is calibrated and albedo is
known. We show that various formulations of one and two
source photo-polarimetric stereo lead to the same general
problem (in terms of surface height), that illumination can
be estimated and that certain combinations of constraints
lead to an albedo invariant formulation. Hence, with only
modest additional data capture requirements (a polarisation
image rather than an intensity image), we arrive at an approach for uncalibrated two source photometric stereo. We
make the following novel contributions:
• We show how to estimate a polarisation image from
multichannel data such as from colour images, multiple light source data or both (Sec. 2.2).
• We show how polarisation and photometric constraints
(Sec. 3) can be expressed in a unified formulation (of
which previous work [24] is a special case) and that
various combinations of these constraints provide different practical advantages (Sec. 4).
• We show how to estimate the illumination directions in
two source photo-polarimetric data leading to an uncalibrated solution (Sec. 6).

1.1. Related Work
The polarisation state of light reflected by a surface provides a cue to the material properties of the surface and,
via a relationship with surface orientation, the shape. Polarisation has been used for a number of applications, in12279

