This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-view Topology Based Consistent and Complementary Information for
Deep Multi-view Clustering

1

Zhibin Dong1 , Siwei Wang2 , Jiaqi Jin1 , Xinwang Liu1, * , En Zhu1,∗
School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
2
Intelligent Game and Decision Lab, Beijing, China
{dzb20, wangsiwei13, jinjiaqi}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-view clustering aims to extract valuable information from different sources or perspectives. Over the years,
the deep neural network has demonstrated its superior representation learning capability in multi-view clustering and
achieved impressive performance. However, most existing
deep clustering approaches are dedicated to merging and
exploring the consistent latent representation across multiple views while overlooking the abundant complementary
information in each view. Furthermore, finding correlations
between multiple views in an unsupervised setting is a significant challenge. To tackle these issues, we present a novel
Cross-view Topology based Consistent and Complementary
information extraction framework, termed CTCC. In detail,
deep embedding can be obtained from the bipartite graph
learning module for each view individually. CTCC then
constructs the cross-view topological graph based on the
OT distance between the bipartite graph of each view. Utilizing the above graph, we maximize the mutual information
across views to learn consistent information and enhance
the complementarity of each view by selectively isolating
distributions from each other. Extensive experiments on five
challenging datasets verify that CTCC outperforms existing
methods significantly.

1. Introduction
With the proliferation and diversity of unlabeled data,
multi-view clustering[26, 21, 13, 44, 7] has become an increasingly popular unsupervised paradigm. Its goal is to
group data with similar features together by leveraging information from multiple views. Conventional multi-view
clustering[41, 19, 42, 31, 55] methods commonly rely on
shared information after multi-view fusion for clustering.
Due to the limited ability of shallow methods to extract
high-level information from data, their clustering perfor* Corresponding author

濖瀂瀀瀃濿濸瀀濸瀁瀇濴瀅濼瀇瀌
‫( ܈‬ଵ)

‫( ܈‬ଶ)

‫( ܈‬ଵ) ‫( ܈‬ଶ)

6[YN

6[YN

‫( ܈‬ଷ)

‫( ܈‬ଷ)

ܹଵଶ ܹଶଷ
‫( ܈‬ଵ)

‫( ܈‬ଶ) ‫( ܈‬ଷ)
ܹଵଷ

濖瀂瀁瀆濼瀆瀇濸瀁濶瀌
6[RR

‫( ܈‬ଵ)

‫( ܈‬ଶ)

6[RR

6[RR

‫( ܈‬ଵ) ‫( ܈‬ଶ) ‫( ܈‬ଷ)

‫( ܈‬ଷ)

‫ܴ א ܅‬௏×௏

Figure 1: W represents the topology graph between views.
We selectively combine consistent and complementary information between views using a cross-view topology graph
W. Specifically, we utilize the mutual information maximization module to obtain consistent information between
different views. To selectively further the views incorporating view-specific information, we use the view topology
graph to identify views with rich view-specific information.
We pull them apart from other views to allow Z to obtain
more complementary information.

mance is highly contingent upon the quality of the raw data.
With the rapid development of deep learning[6, 25, 22],
deep multi-view clustering(DMVC) approaches[49, 8, 15,
29, 10, 12] employ the powerful learning ability of neural networks to learn a high-level common representation
from multiple views that is beneficial for clustering, thus
overcoming the drawback of traditional methods. As a result, DMVC has made remarkable progress and attracted
widespread attention in real-world applications.
Existing DMVC methods can be categorized into three
types: graph-based methods[4, 45, 52, 20], subspace-based
methods[37, 39, 53], and reconstruction-based methods[26,
51, 3, 40, 46]. These methods often utilize autoencoders or
convolutional neural networks to learn the structural information by exploring the common representation or structure in the latent space[49, 8, 15]. Their fundamental con-

19440

