This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ENTL: Embodied Navigation Trajectory Learner
Klemen Kotar 1
Stanford University

Aaron Walsman
University of Washington

Roozbeh Mottaghi
Meta AI

Abstract
We propose Embodied Navigation Trajectory Learner
(ENTL), a method for extracting long sequence representations for embodied navigation. Our approach unifies world
modeling, localization and imitation learning into a single
sequence prediction task. We train our model using vectorquantized predictions of future states conditioned on current states and actions. ENTL’s generic architecture enables the sharing of the the spatio-temporal sequence encoder for multiple challenging embodied tasks. We achieve
competitive performance on navigation tasks using significantly less data than strong baselines while performing
auxiliary tasks such as localization and future frame prediction (a proxy for world modeling). A key property of our
approach is that the model is pre-trained without any explicit reward signal, which makes the resulting model generalizable to multiple tasks and environments. We release
the code at https://github.com/klemenkotar/
ENTL

1. Introduction
Representation learning has shown great success in many
AI domains. The approach, common in the NLP field
for quite some time, has seen an explosion of popularity
through the adaptation of the transformer architecture by
work such as BERT [12] and GPT [8]. This initial success has triggered the creation of models with ever more
parameters trained on ever larger datasets. Surprisingly, the
growing models not only kept improving with the increased
parameter counts and datasets, but even started exhibiting
emergent behaviors [6]. Furthermore, the general recipe of
converting data into sequences of tokens and predicting the
next token has proven surprisingly universal. Subsequent
work such as ViT [13] and MAE [21] have adapted this approach to the computer vision domain with great success,
and transformer models trained on large scale data have become the de facto computer vision backbone.
1 Work mainly done while author was at Allen Institute for AI

Figure 1. We introduce a method for extracting long sequence
representations for embodied navigation. The proposed architecture enables sharing a spatio-temporal transformer-based backbone across multiple tasks: navigation, localization, and future
frame prediction.

Many Embodied AI (EAI) tasks have long horizons and
sparse reward signals. This means that EAI models must aggregate information across many time steps, and learn how
to attribute the successful or unsuccessful outcomes of entire sequences to individual actions. Since the space and
time complexity of transformers grows quadratically with
sequence length it has been difficult to apply them to these
long sequence tasks. Furthermore, it can be difficult to learn
which part of a frame will be significant to a decision the
model will have to make many steps down the line, making
it hard to decide which information to preserve.
Modeling the environment of the embodied agent is a
natural self supervised pre-training task. Various abstractions of this problem, such as the prediction of top down
maps [48] or graph-based representations [17] have been
studied, but none have yielded a strong universal abstraction. More recently, methods such as [36] have explored
frame prediction in the RGB space conditioned on camera
pose using a buffer of a few frames. These produce visually

10863

