This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multimodal Optimal Transport-based Co-Attention Transformer with Global
Structure Consistency for Survival Prediction
Yingxue Xu
Hao Chen*
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{yxueb, jhc}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract

1. Introduction
Survival prediction is a complex ordinal regression task
that aims to estimate the relative risk of death in cancer prognosis, which generally integrates the manual as* Corresponding author
1 https://github.com/Innse/MOTCat

Dense
Attention Weights

Genomics
Tumor suppression
Cytokines
Cellular differentiation
Protein kinases
Transcription
Oncogenesis

(a)
Interactions

Optimal
Matching Flow

Tumor suppression
Cytokines
Cellular differentiation
Protein kinases
Transcription

(b)

Oncogenesis

Co-expression

Survival prediction is a complicated ordinal regression
task that aims to predict the ranking risk of death, which
generally benefits from the integration of histology and genomic data. Despite the progress in joint learning from
pathology and genomics, existing methods still suffer from
challenging issues: 1) Due to the large size of pathological images, it is difficult to effectively represent the gigapixel whole slide images (WSIs). 2) Interactions within
tumor microenvironment (TME) in histology are essential
for survival analysis. Although current approaches attempt
to model these interactions via co-attention between histology and genomic data, they focus on only dense local similarity across modalities, which fails to capture global consistency between potential structures, i.e. TME-related interactions of histology and co-expression of genomic data.
To address these challenges, we propose a Multimodal Optimal Transport-based Co-Attention Transformer framework
with global structure consistency, in which optimal transport (OT) is applied to match patches of a WSI and genes
embeddings for selecting informative patches to represent
the gigapixel WSI. More importantly, OT-based co-attention
provides a global awareness to effectively capture structural interactions within TME for survival prediction. To
overcome high computational complexity of OT, we propose
a robust and efficient implementation over micro-batch of
WSI patches by approximating the original OT with unbalanced mini-batch OT. Extensive experiments show the superiority of our method on five benchmark datasets compared
to the state-of-the-art methods. The code is released1 .

Figure 1. Comparison between (a) Co-Attention and (b) OT-based
Co-Attention, where (a) learns weights of instances by dense attention, and (b) identifies informative instances by optimal transport matching flow from a global perspective, which enforces considering potential structures of each modality, i.e. interactions
within WSIs and co-expression within genomics.

sessment of qualitative morphological information from
pathology data and quantitative molecular profiles from
genomic data in clinical settngs [6, 55, 4]. Despite recent advances in multimodal learning for histology and genomics [5, 55, 27, 34], there still exists several open issues.
Among others, one daunting challenge is to capture key information from heterogeneous modalities for effective fusion. Particularly, due to the large size of about 500,000 ×
500,000 pixels, it is challenging to effectively represent gigapixel whole slide images without losing key information.
Furthermore, visual concepts of tumor microenvironment
(TME) within pathological images are verified to have significant associations with survival analysis in various cancer
types [42, 1, 25], e.g. cellular components including fibroblast cells and various immune cells that can alter cancer cell
behaviors [33]. However, the TME-related patches occupy
only a tiny proportion of the entire WSI, leading to a finegrained visual recognition problem [54] that is indiscernible

21241

