This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FBP

Ours

DOLCE: A Model-Based Probabilistic Diffusion Framework
for Limited-Angle CT Reconstruction
Rushil Anirudh2
Jayaraman J. Thiagarajan2
Stewart He2
Jiaming Liu1 *
2
1†
K. Aditya Mohan
Ulugbek S. Kamilov
Hyojin Kim2†
1
GroundLivermore
truth
FBP
DPS
Ours
Washington University in St. Louis 2 Lawrence
National Laboratory

Abstract
Limited-Angle Computed Tomography (LACT) is a nondestructive 3D imaging technique used in a variety of applications ranging from security to medicine. The limited angle
coverage in LACT is often a dominant source of severe artifacts in the reconstructed images, making it a challenging
imaging inverse problem. Diffusion models are a recent class
of deep generative models for synthesizing realistic images
using image denoisers. In this work, we present DOLCE
as the first framework for integrating conditionally-trained
diffusion models and explicit physical measurement models for solving imaging inverse problems. DOLCE achieves
the SOTA performance in highly ill-posed LACT by alternating between the data-fidelity and sampling updates of a
diffusion model conditioned on the transformed sinogram.
We show through extensive experimentation that unlike existing methods, DOLCE can synthesize high-quality and
structurally coherent 3D volumes by using only 2D conditionally pre-trained diffusion models. We further show on
several challenging real LACT datasets that the same pretrained DOLCE model achieves the SOTA performance on
drastically different types of images.

1. Introduction
Computed Tomography (CT) is one of the most widelyused imaging modalities with applications in medical diagnosis, industrial non-destructive testing, and security [76,
17, 77, 80]. In a typical parallel-beam CT imaging system,
the x-ray measurements obtained from all viewing angles
are combined to reconstruct a cross-sectional image of a 3D
object [39]. Conventional reconstruction methods such as
Filtered Back Projection (FBP) can produce high-quality CT
images given a complete set of projection data, but completely fail under more ill-posed scenarios such as LimitedAngle CT (LACT), where projections from only a limited
* Work done during an internship at LLNL.
† Corresponding authors.

FBP

Ground truth

Ours

FBP

DPS

Ours

Figure 1. We show that the same pre-trained DOLCE model can
reconstruct distinct CT images such as checked-in luggage [55]
and human body [50]. Top: 3D rendering of a luggage from its 2D
slices reconstructed using DOLCE on the limited-angle data containing just one-third of the views (0-60◦ ). Note how our method
preserves the 3D edges, enabling a successful recovery of the object
geometries. Bottom: Comparison of DOLCE on a medical dataset
with DPS, which is a SOTA method for solving imaging inverse
problems using unconditional diffusion models [13]. See Section 5
for the complete set of experimental results.

range of angles can be acquired (i.e., 0 ≤ θ ≤ θmax with
θmax < π) [3, 56, 37, 11, 52]. A typical solution to this inverse problem is model-based optimization that integrates a
forward model characterizing the imaging system and a regularizer imposing priors on the unknown image. While there
has been significant progress in algorithms that leverage sophisticated image priors (e.g., transform-domain sparsity,
self-similarity, and learned dictionaries) [20, 19, 43, 16], the
focus in the area has recently shifted to deep learning (DL).
Deep Learning for CT: A traditional DL reconstruction
involves training a convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture, such as U-Net [58], to directly perform a regularized inversion of the forward model by exploiting redundancies in the training data [38, 35, 25, 27, 88, 2, 92, 91].
Model-based DL (MBDL) is another popular reconstruction strategy that seeks to explicitly use the knowledge
of the forward model by integrating a CNN into a model-

10498

