This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-supervised Monocular Underwater Depth Recovery, Image Restoration, and
a Real-sea Video Dataset
Nisha Varghese

Ashish Kumar
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India

nishavarghese15@gmail.com

askjovial005@gmail.com

A. N. Rajagopalan
raju@ee.iitm.ac.in

Abstract
Underwater (UW) depth estimation and image restoration is a challenging task due to its fundamental illposedness and the unavailability of real large-scale UWpaired datasets. UW depth estimation has been attempted
before by utilizing either the haze information present or the
geometry cue from stereo images or the adjacent frames in a
video. To obtain improved estimates of depth from a single
UW image, we propose a deep learning (DL) method that
utilizes both haze and geometry during training. By harnessing the physical model for UW image formation in conjunction with the view-synthesis constraint on neighboring
frames in monocular videos, we perform disentanglement
of the input image to also get an estimate of the scene radiance. The proposed method is completely self-supervised
and simultaneously outputs the depth map and the restored
image in real-time (55 fps). We call this first-ever Underwater Self-supervised deep learning network for simultaneous Recovery of Depth and Image as USe-ReDI-Net. To facilitate monocular self-supervision, we collected a Dataset
of Real-world Underwater Videos of Artifacts (DRUVA) in
shallow sea waters. DRUVA is the first UW video dataset
that contains video sequences of 20 different submerged
artifacts with almost full azimuthal coverage of each artifact. Extensive experiments on our DRUVA dataset and
other UW datasets establish the superiority of our proposed
USe-ReDI-Net over prior art for both UW depth and image recovery. The dataset DRUVA is available at https:
//github.com/nishavarghese15/DRUVA.

1. Introduction
Underwater (UW) depth recovery and image restoration
is very important in ocean exploration applications such as
marine biology [40], marine archaeology [38], UW robotics
[54], etc. 3D reconstruction of UW structures warrants
depth as a fundamental requirement. Current UW depth
estimation methods can be divided into active and passive
[54]. Active methods, which include different kinds of
sonar [42, 23, 8], UW laser line-scanning [45, 16], range-

(a) Input from DRUVA

(b) Depth map

(c) Enhanced image

Figure 1: (a) An example image from our DRUVA dataset. (b) Depth map, and (c)
enhanced image obtained using our USe-ReDI-Net.

gated imaging systems [39], and LiDAR [46] are usually
bulky. Also, their performance is limited by the scattering of light in water [51]. On the other hand, passive
methods use images captured from a camera. These include traditional [5, 44, 11, 4] as well as deep-learning
(DL) based approaches [25, 53, 26]. Traditional UW depth
estimation methods find depth from haze by utilizing the
UW image formation model. These methods return erroneous estimates when there is a mismatch between the
adopted prior and actual scene conditions, and are timeconsuming too. Supervised deep networks for UW depth
estimation are cumbersome to design due to the unavailability of paired large-scale UW depth datasets. Unpairedlearning based [25] and Generative Adversarial Network
(GAN)-based [26] methods exist for depth. But they use
either terrestrial RGBD datasets or synthetically generated
datasets for training. As a result, there is a domain gap with
real UW images.
Self-supervised depth estimation networks for terrestrial
images [21, 19, 22, 57, 59] utilize geometry cues between
adjacent frames of a monocular video or stereo pairs where
a target view is synthesized from a source view using the
relative pose and the estimated depth. These methods cannot be directly applied to UW images due to the presence of
haze. A recent method [53] estimates depth from UW images using the geometry cue. Because [53] performs selfsupervision based on the depth and pose derived directly
from hazy UW images, the depth map lacks details.
Since light is absorbed/scattered in water, UW images
suffer from color distortions and poor contrast. Restoration of UW images has attracted a lot of attention. [44,
43, 1, 35, 56] estimate the parameters of the UW imaging model using image priors. Due to the inconsistency

12248

