This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MapPrior: Bird’s-Eye View Map Layout Estimation with Generative Models
Xiyue Zhu1
Vlas Zyrianov1
Zhijian Liu2
Shenlong Wang1
1
2
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
MIT
https://mapprior.github.io
(a) Qualitative Comparison with State of the Art

Abstract
Despite tremendous advancements in bird’s-eye view
(BEV) perception, existing models fall short in generating
realistic and coherent semantic map layouts, and they fail to
account for uncertainties arising from partial sensor information (such as occlusion or limited coverage). In this work,
we introduce MapPrior, a novel BEV perception framework
that combines a traditional discriminative BEV perception
model with a learned generative model for semantic map
layouts. Our MapPrior delivers predictions with better accuracy, realism and uncertainty awareness. We evaluate our
model on the large-scale nuScenes benchmark. At the time of
submission, MapPrior outperforms the strongest competing
method, with significantly improved MMD and ECE scores
in camera- and LiDAR-based BEV perception. Furthermore,
our method can be used to perpetually generate layouts with
unconditional sampling.

LiDAR

BEVFusion-L

MapPrior (Ours)

Ground Truth

(b) Quantitative Comparison with State of the Art
PointPillars

BEVFusion-L

Accuracy
51.1
48.6

MapPrior (Ours)

Realism

Uncertainty Awareness

153.0

0.111
115.2

43.8

0.097

0.038

35.8

Mean IoU (↑)

MMD (↓)

ECE (↓)

1. Introduction

Figure 1: Existing predictive BEV perception models do not
provide realistic scene structures (e.g., the lane and sidewalks
have gaps and are not straight). In contrast, our MapPrior
is able to accurately recover the layout with a learned prior.
These results are validated with a quantitative comparison,
showing our method’s superior accuracy, realism and uncertainty awareness.

Accurately understanding the surrounding environment
of autonomous vehicles is crucial to guarantee the safety
of riders and other traffic participants. Among various perception approaches, Bird’s-Eye View (BEV) perception has
drawn significant attention in recent years thanks to its capacity to densely model scene layouts and its tight coupling
with downstream planning [80, 56, 49].
Existing perception models encounter two challenges.
The first challenge pertains to the limitations of observations, particularly in distant or occluded regions, resulting in
inaccurate predictions. This may manifest in choppy, out-ofdistribution, or missing map elements. The second challenge
is that most existing models do not consider uncertainty and
diversity in possible road layouts. Taking Fig. 1 as an example, the state-of-the-art LiDAR perception model [80] generates incoherent lane markings and sidewalks with massive
gaps and cannot quantify the uncertainty and multi-modality
as it only produces a single prediction per input.
This paper presents MapPrior, a novel BEV perception

method that is accurate, realistic, and uncertainty-aware. At
the heart of our method is a novel combination of the standard discriminative BEV perception model with a learned
deep generative traffic layout prior. Incorporating generative modeling in this predictive task attempts to address the
two aforementioned challenges – modeling the data distribution improves realism, and using a sampling process allows
generating multiple realistic predictions. Combining our
generative model with a discriminative perception model
ensures that our method retains a strong predictive ability.
Our approach comprises two steps, namely the prediction and generative steps. In the prediction step, we use an
off-the-shelf BEV perception model [49] to make an initial
layout estimate of the traffic scene from sensory input. In the
generative step, we use our MapPrior model and initial estimate to sample one or multiple refined layouts. We perform
sampling in a learned discrete latent space using a condi-

8228

