This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

4D Panoptic Segmentation as Invariant and Equivariant Field Prediction
Minghan Zhu1, *
1

Shizhong Han2
Maani Ghaffari1,∗

Hong Cai2
Shubhankar Borse2
Fatih Porikli2

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

2

Qualcomm AI Research†

Abstract
In this paper, we develop rotation-equivariant neural
networks for 4D panoptic segmentation. 4D panoptic segmentation is a benchmark task for autonomous driving that
requires recognizing semantic classes and object instances
on the road based on LiDAR scans, as well as assigning
temporally consistent IDs to instances across time. We observe that the driving scenario is symmetric to rotations on
the ground plane. Therefore, rotation-equivariance could
provide better generalization and more robust feature learning. Specifically, we review the object instance clustering strategies and restate the centerness-based approach
and the offset-based approach as the prediction of invariant scalar fields and equivariant vector fields. Other subtasks are also unified from this perspective, and different
invariant and equivariant layers are designed to facilitate
their predictions. Through evaluation on the standard 4D
panoptic segmentation benchmark of SemanticKITTI, we
show that our equivariant models achieve higher accuracy with lower computational costs compared to their nonequivariant counterparts. Moreover, our method sets the
new state-of-the-art performance and achieves 1st place on
the SemanticKITTI 4D Panoptic Segmentation leaderboard.

1. Introduction
Perception with LiDAR point clouds is an important part
of building real-world autonomous systems, for example,
self-driving cars [38, 32, 50, 36]. As the computer vision
community gradually builds more capable neural networks,
the tasks also become more complex. 4D panoptic segmentation [1] is an emerging task that combines several previously independent tasks: semantic segmentation, instance
segmentation, and object tracking, in a unified framework,
given sequential LiDAR scans. As the output provides
abundant useful information for understanding the dynamic
* Work done at Qualcomm AI Research during an internship.
† Qualcomm AI Research, an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

Figure 1. Predicting centerness or offset is a critical step in estimating object centers as part of the overall panoptic segmentation.
A centerness heatmap can be viewed as an invariant field, while
the offset can be viewed as an equivariant vector field. In our proposed approach, we devise different, corresponding methods to
predict invariant and equivariant fields, respectively.

driving environment, solving this task has significant practical value.
While there are a few existing methods to solve 4D
panoptic segmentation [1, 24], they ignore the rich, inherent symmetries present in this task. For example, for the
point cloud of an object instance, its center is invariant to
rotations, and the offset vector from any point on the object
to the center is attached to and thus rotates along with the
body frame. See Fig. 1 for a visual illustration.
As such, in this paper, we propose to develop equivariant
neural networks to solve 4D panoptic segmentation. Equivariant networks [11] are deep learning models that are guaranteed to render outputs that respect the symmetries in data.
For the 4D panoptic segmentation task, rotational equivariance can help the model perform consistently and generalize over rotations in the input data.
While equivariance is a nice property, equivariant models can be complex and incur high computational costs [52,
49, 45]. As a result, most existing equivariant models are
only applied to small-scale problems, such as molecular
analysis and single-object perception [17]. Recent works
have looked into more efficient equivariant networks [52]

22488

