This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Improved Input Masking for Convolutional Neural Networks
Sriram Balasubramanian
University of Maryland, College Park

Soheil Feizi
University of Maryland, College Park

sriramb@umd.edu

sfeizi@umd.edu

Abstract
The ability to remove features from the input of machine
learning models is very important to understand and interpret model predictions. However, this is non-trivial for vision models since masking out parts of the input image typically causes large distribution shifts. This is because the
baseline color used for masking (typically grey or black)
is out of distribution. Furthermore, the shape of the mask
itself can contain unwanted signals which can be used by
the model for its predictions. Recently, there has been some
progress in mitigating this issue (called missingness bias)
in image masking for vision transformers. In this work,
we propose a new masking method for CNNs we call layer
masking in which the missingness bias caused by masking
is reduced to a large extent. Intuitively, layer masking applies a mask to intermediate activation maps so that the
model only processes the unmasked input. We show that
our method (i) is able to eliminate or minimize the influence of the mask shape or color on the output of the model,
and (ii) is much better than replacing the masked region
by black or grey for input perturbation based interpretability techniques like LIME. Thus, layer masking is much less
affected by missingness bias than other masking strategies.
We also demonstrate how the shape of the mask may leak information about the class, thus affecting estimates of model
reliance on class-relevant features derived from input masking. Furthermore, we discuss the role of data augmentation
techniques for tackling this problem, and argue that they are
not sufficient for preventing model reliance on mask shape.

1. Introduction
While deep learning methods have become extremely
successful in solving many computer vision tasks, they are
generally opaque, and they do not admit easy debugging
of errors. Many novel interpretability methods have been
developed in recent years which attempt to analyze the rationale behind a model’s predictions. In particular, it is
natural to analyze the dependence of the model prediction

on its input by perturbing parts of its input and observing
corresponding changes in the output [22, 16, 38]. Common perturbations include adding Gaussian noise, Gaussian blurring, replacing with a baseline color, etc. However, many of these perturbation methods come with certain downsides. Partial perturbations, like Gaussian noise
or blurring, attempt to slightly corrupt parts of the image,
while still preserving much of the information present in
those parts. While this has the advantage of not changing
the input distribution drastically, we can only measure the
local sensitivity of the model - if the model were to be robust to these perturbations, it would be locally insensitive
to perturbations on certain parts of the image but it might
still rely heavily on them for its prediction [27, 31]. Full
perturbation methods remove the parts completely, and replace it with a baseline color like black or grey. In discrete
domains like natural language, this is often the most popular method, as it is easy to remove words from the input
[17]. In images, however, this creates a large shift in input
distribution, leading the model to perform poorly on such
inputs [29, 30]. For example, if we randomly mask out 16
× 16 sized patches from the image, ResNets are more likely
to predict that the image is a maze or crossword [12]
In recent work [21, 25, 8], it has been observed that vision transformers [6] are highly robust to many kinds of
large magnitude input perturbations like occlusions and domain shifts, maintaining upto 60% accuracy on ImageNet
even if 80% of the input is randomly blacked out. Jain et
al [12] argue that this property can make interpretability
methods based on full perturbation especially effective for
transformers. They further propose to simply drop tokens
corresponding to masked out input parts instead of blacking out or greying out image portions, just like dropping
BPE tokens in a transformer-based language model. This
would make the transformer model completely insensitive
to choice of baseline color and the shape of the mask.
Motivated by the same intuition, we devise a new masking technique for CNNs which mitigates the drawbacks
of full perturbation to a large extent, which we call layer
masking. Layer masking (as depicted in Fig. 1) works by
running the CNN only on the unmasked portion of the im-

1855

