This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GAFlow: Incorporating Gaussian Attention into Optical Flow
Ao Luo1 , Fan Yang2 , Xin Li2 , Lang Nie3 , Chunyu Lin3 , Haoqiang Fan1 , and Shuaicheng Liu4,1 *
1
2
3
Megvii Technology
Group 42
Beijing Jiaotong University
4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

Abstract
Optical flow, or the estimation of motion fields from
image sequences, is one of the fundamental problems in
computer vision. Unlike most pixel-wise tasks that aim at
achieving consistent representations of the same category,
optical flow raises extra demands for obtaining local discrimination and smoothness, which yet is not fully explored
by existing approaches. In this paper, we push Gaussian
Attention (GA) into the optical flow models to accentuate
local properties during representation learning and enforce
the motion affinity during matching. Specifically, we introduce a novel Gaussian-Constrained Layer (GCL) which
can be easily plugged into existing Transformer blocks to
highlight the local neighborhood that contains fine-grained
structural information. Moreover, for reliable motion analysis, we provide a new Gaussian-Guided Attention Module (GGAM) which not only inherits properties from Gaussian distribution to instinctively revolve around the neighbor fields of each point but also is empowered to put the
emphasis on contextually related regions during matching. Our fully-equipped model, namely Gaussian Attention
Flow network (GAFlow), naturally incorporates a series of
novel Gaussian-based modules into the conventional optical flow framework for reliable motion analysis. Extensive
experiments on standard optical flow datasets consistently
demonstrate the exceptional performance of the proposed
approach in terms of both generalization ability evaluation and online benchmark testing. Code is available at
https://github.com/LA30/GAFlow.

1. Introduction
Optical flow aims to establish pixel-wise correspondences across images, playing a crucial role in video understanding. It unifies representation learning and feature matching as a problem of pixel-wise motion inference.
Modern optical flow models typically focus on either improving representation learning techniques (e.g., alternative
* Corresponding author

Frame T

𝑷

Frame T+1

Baseline

GMA

GCL

GGAM

Discrimination

𝑷′

Smoothness

Figure 1: Visualization of feature discrimination (left) and
smoothness constraint (right). For a random point P in
frame t, our GCL enhances feature discrimination by emphasizing fine-grained structural details. Concurrently, our
GGAM effectively captures smoothness constraints, centering on pertinent local regions.

learning [40, 20, 54] and reinforcement learning [1]) or refining feature similarity measurement methodologies (e.g.,
4D correlation volumes [42] or 4D Transformer [16]). Despite these significant advancements, a glaring limitation
persists: these models largely neglect the exploration of
local structural information. This oversight hinders their
performance, particularly in challenging scenarios involving large motions, occlusions, blurring effects, and shifts in
appearance. Such situations demand an elevated focus on
local discrimination and flow consistency. This brings us
to an intriguing inquiry: Is it feasible to architect optical
flow models that intrinsically focus on local structural information during both representation learning and feature
matching?
In response to the aforementioned challenge, we present
the Gaussian Attention Flow network (GAFlow), a pioneering framework that leverages Gaussian Attention (GA) to
inform both the feature encoder and the matching mod-

9642

