This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Robustness of Normalizing Flows for Inverse Problems in Imaging
Seongmin Hong1 , Inbum Park1 , Se Young Chun1,2, *
1
Dept. of ECE, 2 INMC & IPAI, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea
{smhongok, inbum0215, sychun}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Conditional normalizing flows can generate diverse image samples for solving inverse problems. Most normalizing flows for inverse problems in imaging employ the conditional affine coupling layer that can generate diverse images quickly. However, unintended severe artifacts are occasionally observed in the output of them. In this work,
we address this critical issue by investigating the origins
of these artifacts and proposing the conditions to avoid
them. First of all, we empirically and theoretically reveal that these problems are caused by “exploding inverse”
in the conditional affine coupling layer for certain out-ofdistribution (OOD) conditional inputs. Then, we further
validated that the probability of causing erroneous artifacts
in pixels is highly correlated with a Mahalanobis distancebased OOD score for inverse problems in imaging. Lastly,
based on our investigations, we propose a remark to avoid
exploding inverse and then based on it, we suggest a simple
remedy that substitutes the affine coupling layers with the
modified rational quadratic spline coupling layers in normalizing flows, to encourage the robustness of generated
image samples. Our experimental results demonstrated that
our suggested methods effectively suppressed critical artifacts occurring in normalizing flows for super-resolution
space generation and low-light image enhancement.

1. Introduction
Deep learning techniques have demonstrated great potential for solving ill-posed inverse problems in imaging [25, 31]. Among them, conditional normalizing flow
(NF)-based methods have a unique advantage over other
deep learning methods, which is the capability of generating diverse solutions for a given input. Conditional NFs [6]
have been explored for various inverse problems in imaging such as super-resolution space generation [26, 14, 38,
13, 22, 29, 27, 28], low-light image enhancement [42, 41],
guided image generation [3, 35], image dehazing [45], de* Corresponding author

Conditional input with
the highest OOD score

Normalizing
flow model

Output with
severe artifacts

FS-NCSR
[38]

LLFlow
[42]

Figure 1: Demonstration of the occasional errors in normalizing flows solving inverse problems in imaging. The
left images are the conditional inputs of normalizing
flows (DIV2K 828 and LOL 179) with the highest OOD
scores (11) and the right images are the outputs of them for
super-resolution space generation and low-light image enhancement, displaying severe artifacts.

noising [1, 24] and inpainting [24]. Most of these prior
works with conditional NFs for image processing and lowlevel computer vision have focused on excellent performance with diverse solutions.
Existing conditional NFs for inverse problems in imaging occasionally generate unintended erroneous image samples. In super-resolution space generation, similar artifacts
were observed in multiple independent works [27, 28]. For
example, Song et al. reported that those artifacts occurred
for more than 2% of all test images [38] and we confirmed
that these artifacts occasionally appear as illustrated in the
top row of Figure 1. Unintended artifacts were also observed in another computer vision task with conditional
NFs. In low-light image enhancement [42], we also revealed that black regions with Inf values sometimes occur
for certain conditional inputs as we sample diverse images
as in the bottom row of Figure 1. In unconditional NFs,

10745

