This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DDColor: Towards Photo-Realistic Image Colorization via Dual Decoders
Xiaoyang Kang

Tao Yang

Wenqi Ouyang
Peiran Ren
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group

Lingzhi Li

Xuansong Xie

{kangxiaoyang.kxy,baiguan.yt,wenqi.oywq,peiran.rpr,llz273714,xingtong.xxs}@alibaba-inc.com

CNN-based

Input

CIC

GAN priors

InstColor

DeOldify

Wu et al.

Transformer-based
DDColor (Ours)

Real

ColTran

CT2

ColorFormer

BigColor

Figure 1: Visual comparison. We present a novel colorization method DDColor, which is capable of producing more natural
and vivid colorization in complex scenes containing multiple objects with diverse contexts, compared to existing methods.

Abstract
Image colorization is a challenging problem due to
multi-modal uncertainty and high ill-posedness. Directly
training a deep neural network usually leads to incorrect
semantic colors and low color richness. While transformerbased methods can deliver better results, they often rely
on manually designed priors, suffer from poor generalization ability, and introduce color bleeding effects. To address these issues, we propose DDColor, an end-to-end
method with dual decoders for image colorization. Our approach includes a pixel decoder and a query-based color
decoder. The former restores the spatial resolution of the
image, while the latter utilizes rich visual features to refine
color queries, thus avoiding hand-crafted priors. Our two
decoders work together to establish correlations between
color and multi-scale semantic representations via crossattention, significantly alleviating the color bleeding effect.
Additionally, a simple yet effective colorfulness loss is introduced to enhance the color richness. Extensive experiments demonstrate that DDColor achieves superior performance to existing state-of-the-art works both quantitatively

and qualitatively. The codes and models are publicly available at https://github.com/piddnad/DDColor.

1. Introduction
Image colorization is a classic computer vision task and
has great potential in many real-world applications, such as
legacy photo restoration [41], video remastering [21] and
art creation [35], etc. Given a grayscale image, colorization
aims to recover its two missing color channels, which is
highly ill-posed and usually suffers from multi-modal uncertainty, e.g., an object may have multiple plausible colors. Traditional colorization methods address this problem
mainly based on user guidance such as reference images
[44, 22, 14, 27, 9] and color graffiti [25, 48, 35, 32]. Although great progress has been made, it remains a challenging research problem.
With the rise of deep learning, automatic colorization has
drawn a lot of attention, targeting at producing appropriate
colors from complex image semantics (e.g., shape, texture,

328

