This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

All-to-key Attention for Arbitrary Style Transfer
Mingrui Zhu∗
Xidian University
Xi’an, China

Xiao He∗
Xidian University
Xi’an, China

Nannan Wang†
Xidian University
Xi’an, China

mrzhu@xidian.edu.cn

xiaohe@stu.xidian.edu.cn

nnwang@xidian.edu.cn

Xiaoyu Wang
The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology (Guangzhou)
Guangzhou, China

Xinbo Gao
Chongqing University of Post and
Telecommunications
Chongqing, China

fanghuaxue@gmail.com

gaoxb@cqupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Attention-based arbitrary style transfer studies have
shown promising performance in synthesizing vivid local style details. They typically use the all-to-all attention mechanism—each position of content features is fully
matched to all positions of style features. However, all-toall attention tends to generate distorted style patterns and
has quadratic complexity, limiting the effectiveness and efficiency of arbitrary style transfer. In this paper, we propose a novel all-to-key attention mechanism—each position of content features is matched to stable key positions
of style features—that is more in line with the characteristics of style transfer. Specifically, it integrates two newly
proposed attention forms: distributed and progressive attention. Distributed attention assigns attention to key style
representations that depict the style distribution of local
regions; Progressive attention pays attention from coarsegrained regions to fine-grained key positions. The resultant
module, dubbed StyA2K, shows extraordinary performance
in preserving the semantic structure and rendering consistent style patterns. Qualitative and quantitative comparisons with state-of-the-art methods demonstrate the superior performance of our approach. Codes and models are
available on https://github.com/LearningHx/StyA2K.

1. Introduction
Arbitrary style transfer (AST) is an important computer
vision task. It aims to render a natural image (i.e., content
image) with the artistic style of an arbitrary painting (i.e.,
* Both authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author: Nannan Wang.

Input

AdaAttN

StyA2K (Ours)

Figure 1. Image/Video style transfer results of AdaAttN [27] (second column) and our StyA2K (third column). The videos in the
first row can be found in the supplementary material.

style image), enabling the generated image to imitate any
artistic style. There have been notable improvements in feature transformation modules [13, 33, 12, 30, 49, 7, 27, 17,
50], novel architectures [24, 32, 1, 42, 6], and practical objectives [19, 5, 51]. The core of AST is the matching of content features and style features in the feed-forward procedure. Holistic feature distribution matching [13, 24, 17, 50]
and locality-aware feature matching [33, 12, 30, 49, 27] are
two categories of existing approaches.
The attention-based method is the research focus of the
locality-aware feature matching category for its capability
to capture long-range dependencies. Typically, it establishes a dense correspondence between point-wise tokens
of the content and style features via an all-to-all attention
mechanism [52]. The transferred feature of each local posi-

23109

