This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EP2P-Loc: End-to-End 3D Point to 2D Pixel Localization
for Large-Scale Visual Localization
Minjung Kim Junseo Koo Gunhee Kim
Seoul National University
{minjung.kim, junseo.koo}@vision.snu.ac.kr, gunhee@snu.ac.kr
https://github.com/minnjung/EP2P-Loc

Abstract

Query image

Top-4 retrieved
point cloud submaps

Point cloud map

𝑿𝟐 = 𝒙𝟐 , 𝒚𝟐 , 𝒛𝟐

Visual localization is the task of estimating a 6-DoF
camera pose of a query image within a provided 3D reference map. Thanks to recent advances in various 3D sensors, 3D point clouds are becoming a more accurate and affordable option for building the reference map, but research
to match the points of 3D point clouds with pixels in 2D
images for visual localization remains challenging. Existing approaches that jointly learn 2D-3D feature matching
suffer from low inliers due to representational differences
between the two modalities, and the methods that bypass
this problem into classification have an issue of poor refinement. In this work, we propose EP2P-Loc, a novel largescale visual localization method that mitigates such appearance discrepancy and enables end-to-end training for pose
estimation. To increase the number of inliers, we propose a
simple algorithm to remove invisible 3D points in the image,
and find all 2D-3D correspondences without keypoint detection. To reduce memory usage and search complexity, we
take a coarse-to-fine approach where we extract patch-level
features from 2D images, then perform 2D patch classification on each 3D point, and obtain the exact corresponding
2D pixel coordinates through positional encoding. Finally,
for the first time in this task, we employ a differentiable PnP
for end-to-end training. In the experiments on newly curated large-scale indoor and outdoor benchmarks based on
2D-3D-S and KITTI, we show that our method achieves the
state-of-the-art performance compared to existing visual localization and image-to-point cloud registration methods.

1. Introduction
Visual localization [2, 5, 15, 22, 23, 42, 51] aims at estimating the precise 6-degree-of-freedom (DoF) camera pose
(i.e. position and orientation) of a given 2D image within
a 3D reference map. Since it can position the pose of a
photo-taker in an environment without localization infor-

𝑿𝟏 = 𝒙𝟏 , 𝒚𝟏 , 𝒛𝟏

Where is the
query image
in the
point cloud map?

𝑿𝟑 = 𝒙𝟑 , 𝒚𝟑 , 𝒛𝟑

𝒚 ∗ = 𝑹∗ , 𝒕 ∗

1. Point cloud submap
retrieval from database

: inside the image
: outside the image
x𝟏 = 𝒖𝟏 , 𝒗𝟏

𝑷𝒂𝒕𝒄𝒉#𝟓

Where are the
3D points
in the
query image?

x𝟐 = 𝒖𝟐 , 𝒗𝟐
x 𝟐 − 𝑿𝟐

𝑷𝒂𝒕𝒄𝒉#𝟕

𝑷𝒂𝒕𝒄𝒉#𝟏𝟗

2. 2D patch classification
of 3D points

x𝟑 = 𝒖𝟑 , 𝒗𝟑

3. Find 2D pixel coords
using positional encoding

x 𝟏 − 𝑿𝟏

x 𝟑 − 𝑿𝟑

4. Pose estimation using
a learnable PnP solver

Figure 1: Visual localization of EP2P-Loc. For a query image, we (1) retrieve top-4 point cloud submaps from the
database, (2) perform 2D patch classification for each 3D
point in the retrieved submaps, (3) find precise 2D pixel coordinates using a positional encoding, and (4) estimate the
camera pose of the image using a learnable PnP solver [11].

mation such as GPS, it has a variety of applications including autonomous driving, robot navigation, and augmented
reality. Previous works use the Perspective-n-Point (PnP)
algorithm [17] to compute the camera pose of a query image based on the coordinates in the 3D reference map. The
3D reference map is typically built from a collection of
images using Structure-from-Motion (SfM) reconstruction
[1, 24, 36, 44, 47], and the associated keypoints and descriptors are stored with the map in the form of point clouds to
establish 2D-3D correspondences. Therefore, the accuracy
of visual localization is highly dependent on the quality of
the 3D reference map, and there are multiple challenges, including varying lighting, weather and seasonal conditions
in outdoor environments, and repetitive patterns and insufficient textures in indoor environments.

21527

