This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

2D-3D Interlaced Transformer for
Point Cloud Segmentation with Scene-Level Supervision
Cheng-Kun Yang1,2 Min-Hung Chen3 Yung-Yu Chuang1 Yen-Yu Lin4,5
1
National Taiwan University 2 MediaTek 3 NVIDIA
4
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University 5 Academia Sinica
Abstract

door:‫ ݱ‬chair:‫ …ݱ‬bathtub:

3D

encoders

We present a Multimodal Interlaced Transformer (MIT)
that jointly considers 2D and 3D data for weakly supervised
point cloud segmentation. Research studies have shown that
2D and 3D features are complementary for point cloud segmentation. However, existing methods require extra 2D annotations to achieve 2D-3D information fusion. Considering the high annotation cost of point clouds, effective 2D
and 3D feature fusion based on weakly supervised learning
is in great demand. To this end, we propose a transformer
model with two encoders and one decoder for weakly supervised point cloud segmentation using only scene-level
class tags. Speciﬁcally, the two encoders compute the selfattended features for 3D point clouds and 2D multi-view
images, respectively. The decoder implements interlaced
2D-3D cross-attention and carries out implicit 2D and 3D
feature fusion. We alternately switch the roles of queries
and key-value pairs in the decoder layers. It turns out
that the 2D and 3D features are iteratively enriched by
each other. Experiments show that it performs favorably
against existing weakly supervised point cloud segmentation methods by a large margin on the S3DIS and ScanNet benchmarks. The project page will be available at

2D

data token

class token

decoder
odd even
layers layers





3D point cloud
[table, chair]

multi-view 2D images



ǥ

ǥ

[chair, door]

Figure 1: Overview of the Multimodal Interlaced
Transformer (MIT). The input includes a 3D point cloud,
multi-view 2D images, and class-level tags of a scene. Our
method is a transformer model with two encoders and one
decoder. The two encoders compute features for 3D voxel
tokens and 2D view tokens, respectively. The decoder conducts interlaced 2D-3D attention and carries out 2D and 3D
feature fusion. In its odd layers, 3D voxels serve as queries
and are enriched by the semantic features of 2D views, acting as key-value pairs. In the even layers, the roles of 3D
voxels and 2D views switch: 2D views are described by additional 3D geometric features.

https://jimmy15923.github.io/mit_web/.

bounding box labels [9], subcloud-level annotations [54],
and scene-level tags [40, 61]. These weak annotations are
cost-efﬁcient and can signiﬁcantly reduce the annotation
burden. On the other hand, recent studies [19, 20, 23, 32,
41, 52, 53, 62] witness the remarkable success of 2D vision,
and utilize 2D image features to enhance the 3D recognition
task. They show promising results because 2D detailed texture clues are well complementary to 3D geometry features.
Although 2D-3D fusion is effective, current methods require extra annotation costs for 2D images. To the best
of our knowledge, no prior work has explored fusing 2D3D features under extremely weak supervision, where only
scene-level class tags of the 3D scene are given. It is challenging to derive a segmentation model that leverages both
2D and 3D data under scene-level supervision, as no perpoint/pixel annotations or per-image class tags are avail-

1. Introduction
Point cloud segmentation offers rich geometric and semantic information of a 3D scene, thereby being essential to many 3D applications, such as scene understanding [5, 10, 16, 26, 36], augmented reality [2, 35], and autonomous driving [7, 8, 13]. However, developing reliable
models is time-consuming and challenging due to the need
for vast per-point annotations and the difﬁculty in capturing
detailed semantic clues from textureless point clouds.
Research efforts have been made to address the aforementioned issues. Several methods are proposed to derive
point cloud segmentation models using various weak supervisions, such as sparsely labeled points [24, 33, 58, 65],
977

