This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Identity-Seeking Self-Supervised Representation Learning for
Generalizable Person Re-identification
Zhaopeng Dou1,2 , Zhongdao Wang1,2 , Yali Li1,2 , and Shengjin Wang1,2∗
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, China
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist), China
dcp19@mails.tsinhua.edu.cn

zhongdwang@gmail.com

liyali13@tsinghua.edu.cn

wgsgj@tsinghua.edu.cn∗

Abstract
This paper aims to learn a domain-generalizable (DG)
person re-identification (ReID) representation from largescale videos without any annotation. Prior DG ReID
methods employ limited labeled data for training due to
the high cost of annotation, which restricts further advances. To overcome the barriers of data and annotation, we propose to utilize large-scale unsupervised data
for training. The key issue lies in how to mine identity
information. To this end, we propose an Identity-seeking
Self-supervised Representation learning (ISR) method. ISR
constructs positive pairs from inter-frame images by modeling the instance association as a maximum-weight bipartite matching problem. A reliability-guided contrastive
loss is further presented to suppress the adverse impact
of noisy positive pairs, ensuring that reliable positive
pairs dominate the learning process. The training cost
of ISR scales approximately linearly with the data size,
making it feasible to utilize large-scale data for training.
The learned representation exhibits superior generalization
ability. Without human annotation and fine-tuning, ISR
achieves 87.0% Rank-1 on Market-1501 and 56.4% Rank1 on MSMT17, outperforming the best supervised domaingeneralizable method by 5.0% and 19.5%, respectively. In
the pre-training→fine-tuning scenario, ISR achieves stateof-the-art performance, with 88.4% Rank-1 on MSMT17.
The code is at https://github.com/dcp15/ISR_
ICCV2023_Oral.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims to retrieve a person
across non-overlapping camera views [60, 6, 86, 39, 14].
Although current full-supervised ReID methods [28, 31,
34, 42, 65, 22] have shown encouraging results on public
∗ Corresponding author

view 1

Frame

𝑡𝑡

view 2

Frame

(a) MoCo

𝑡𝑡+𝛿𝛿

(b) ISR (ours)

Figure 1. The core idea. (a) MoCo [25] learns instance discrimination, which aims to learn a unique representation for each image.
(b) ISR learns identity discrimination, which aims to learn similar
representations for inter-frame images with the same identity.

benchmarks, their performance significantly declines when
applied to unseen domains. To enhance the generalization
ability, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [15, 84, 19,
1, 53] and domain generalizable (DG) ReID [57, 33, 12]
techniques are extensively studied. However, both methods have limitations that prevent their scaling in real-world
applications. UDA ReID necessitates well-organized data
from the target domain for adaptation. DG ReID, on the
other hand, typically employs small-scale labeled training
data due to the high cost of annotation, which hinders further progress. To this end, we propose to break through the
constraints of human annotation and target domain adaptation on the generalization of person ReID.
This paper aims to learn domain-generalizable representations without any annotation. The representation can be
applied directly in arbitrary domains without fine-tuning.
Unlike prior DG ReID methods [57, 33, 12] that require
labeled training data, we employ vast amounts of unlabeled
internet videos for training. Specifically, our training set
comprises 47.8 million unlabeled person images extracted
from 74,000 video clips. The feasibility comes from two
key factors: the low cost of acquiring videos from the internet and the diverse domains present in large-scale videos.
We learn a domain-generalizable ReID representation from

15847

