This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Prompt Tuning for Text-Driven Object Detection
Weizhen He1 *†, Weijie Chen1,2,3†‡, Binbin Chen2 , Shicai Yang2 ,
Di Xie2,3‡, Luojun Lin4 , Donglian Qi1 , Yueting Zhuang1‡
1

Zhejiang University, 2 Hikvision Research Institute,
3
Key Laboratory of Peace-building Big Data of Zhejiang Province, 4 Fuzhou University
{hewz, chenweijie, qidl, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn
{chenbinbin8, yangshicai, xiedi}@hikvision.com, linluojun2009@126.com

Abstract
Grounded language-image pre-trained models have
shown strong zero-shot generalization to various downstream object detection tasks. Despite their promising performance, the models rely heavily on the laborious prompt
engineering. Existing works typically address this problem by tuning text prompts using downstream training data
in a few-shot or fully supervised manner. However, a
rarely studied problem is to optimize text prompts without using any annotations. In this paper, we delve into
this problem and propose an Unsupervised Prompt Tuning
framework for text-driven object detection, which is composed of two novel mean teaching mechanisms. In conventional mean teaching, the quality of pseudo boxes is
expected to optimize better as the training goes on, but
there is still a risk of overfitting noisy pseudo boxes. To
mitigate this problem, 1) we propose Nested Mean Teaching, which adopts nested-annotation to supervise teacherstudent mutual learning in a bi-level optimization manner;
2) we propose Dual Complementary Teaching, which employs an offline pre-trained teacher and an online mean
teacher via data-augmentation-based complementary labeling so as to ensure learning without accumulating confirmation bias. By integrating these two mechanisms, the proposed unsupervised prompt tuning framework achieves significant performance improvement on extensive object detection datasets.

1. Introduction
Object detection, which aims to locate and classify objects in an image, is a very fundamental task in computer vision. Recently, with the development of vision* Internship in Hikvision Research Institute.
† Equal contributions
‡ Corresponding authors

(a) Zero-Shot Inference

(b) Supervised Model Tuning

(c) Supervised Prompt Tuning

(d) Unsupervised Prompt Tuning

Figure 1: Illustration of GLIP and three optimization manners to adapt downstream object detection tasks. (a) Zeroshot inference, which locates the target objects with the
pre-defined prompts using category name. (b) and (c) are
two supervised tuning manners using the labeled downstream data. (d) is the proposed unsupervised prompt tuning
method, which exploits the zero-shot results as the prior supervision cues of the unlabeled downstream data.
language foundation models, object detection tends to be
an open-vocabulary by learning knowledge from largescale heterogeneous image-text data. Grounded LanguageImage Pre-training (GLIP) [23] is one of the leading models, which detects target objects directly with the predefined prompts using task-specific category name (such
as “[CLS],[CLS],...,[CLS]” in Fig. 1a) without being optimized by task-specific training data. Although those pretrained models are endowed with a promising zero-shot
generalization ability, it is crucial and necessary to transfer
the knowledge to various downstream tasks [47, 42, 35].
An emerging trend to solve this problem is Prompt Tuning [51, 50, 21, 39, 25], which freezes the main body of the

2651

