This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Overwriting Pretrained Bias with Finetuning Data
Angelina Wang
Princeton University

Olga Russakovsky
Princeton University

angelina.wang@princeton.edu

olgarus@princeton.edu

Abstract
Transfer learning is beneficial by allowing the expressive features of models pretrained on large-scale datasets
to be finetuned for the target task of smaller, more domainspecific datasets. However, there is a concern that these
pretrained models may come with their own biases which
would propagate into the finetuned model. In this work, we
investigate bias when conceptualized as both spurious correlations between the target task and a sensitive attribute
as well as underrepresentation of a particular group in the
dataset. Under both notions of bias, we find that (1) models finetuned on top of pretrained models can indeed inherit
their biases, but (2) this bias can be corrected for through
relatively minor interventions to the finetuning dataset, and
often with a negligible impact to performance. Our findings imply that careful curation of the finetuning dataset is
important for reducing biases on a downstream task, and
doing so can even compensate for bias in the pretrained
model.

1. Introduction
The current paradigm in machine learning typically involves using an off-the-shelf pretrained model that has been
trained on a large-scale dataset, and then finetuning it on a
smaller, application-specific dataset. This transfer learning
is especially common for high-dimensional data like images
and language [14, 11, 62]. However, large-scale datasets
have been criticized for their biases [38, 59, 4, 9], which
leaves open the concern that models pretrained on such
datasets may carry biases over into the finetuned model. On
the other hand, pretraining has been shown to confer benefits in model robustness and uncertainty estimation [24], so
there is also the potential that pretrained models can reduce
downstream biases by being more regularized or resistant
to spurious correlations [5]. In our work, we investigate
the implications of bias in pretrained models for the downstream finetuning task, and provide actionable insights on
how to counteract this.
We have been deliberately vague thus far on what we

Figure 1. We explore bias transference from pretrained to finetuned models in two forms in this work: spurious correlations and
underrepresentation. We find that intervening on the finetuning
data allows us to overcome bias from pretraining, often without
compromising on performance.

mean by “bias.” In this work, we operationalize bias in two
ways based on what has been found thus far to be problematic in image features: spurious correlations between a sensitive attribute and target task [65, 60, 51, 61] and reduced
performance from underrepresentation [6, 10, 50].
The topic of whether pretrained biases matter in finetuning is often assumed to be obvious, with contradictory
arguments containing intuitively plausible explanations on
both sides of the debate: that it does matter because the
pretrained model brings biased features [44], or it does not
because finetuning data will overwrite any pretrained biases [7, 15, 56]. Due to this uncertainty, it is not clear how
to react to biases found in the features of pretrained models [55, 52, 17]. Of course, there is not a singular binary
answer, as much is dependent upon the particulars of the
training task. However, we bring much-needed clarity to
the space for computer vision tasks, and give advice about
bias transference from using pretrained models.
In this work we study the two notions of bias, spurious
correlations and underrepresentation, by finetuning a variety of different pretrained models (Fig. 1). For each notion
of bias, we first show our results on the CelebA dataset [32].
Then for spurious correlations we investigate the more complex COCO dataset [31] using real-world popular pretrained
models (e.g., MoCo [21], SimCLR [8]). For underrepresentation, we look to the Dollar Street dataset [41] using
pretrained models of our own design to test for specific hypotheses. On both forms of bias we find the following: 1)
models finetuned on top of pretrained models can inherit

3957

