This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lip2Vec: Efficient and Robust Visual Speech Recognition via Latent-to-Latent
Visual to Audio Representation Mapping
Yasser Abdelaziz Dahou Djilali1,2 Sanath Narayan1 Haithem Boussaid1
Ebtessam Almazrouei1 Merouane Debbah1
1
Technology Innovation Institute, UAE 2 Dublin City University, Ireland

Abstract
Visual Speech Recognition (VSR) differs from the common perception tasks as it requires deeper reasoning over
the video sequence, even by human experts. Despite the recent advances in VSR, current approaches rely on labeled
data to fully train or finetune their models predicting the
target speech. This hinders their ability to generalize well
beyond the training set and leads to performance degeneration under out-of-distribution challenging scenarios. Unlike previous works that involve auxiliary losses or complex training procedures and architectures, we propose a
simple approach, named Lip2Vec that is based on learning a prior model. Given a robust visual speech encoder,
this network maps the encoded latent representations of the
lip sequence to their corresponding latents from the audio
pair, which are sufficiently invariant for effective text decoding. The generated audio representation is then decoded to
text using an off-the-shelf Audio Speech Recognition (ASR)
model. The proposed model compares favorably with fullysupervised learning methods on the LRS3 dataset achieving
26 WER. Unlike SoTA approaches, our model keeps a reasonable performance on the VoxCeleb2-en test set. We believe that reprogramming the VSR as an ASR task narrows
the performance gap between the two and paves the way for
more flexible formulations of lip reading.

1. Introduction
The process of inferring visual cues from a speaker’s facial expressions and lip movements to interpret speech in a
silent setting is refereed to as lip-reading or visual speech
recognition (VSR). VSR is mostly useful in environments
where the speech is unclear or difficult to hear due to some
Code: https://github.com/YasserdahouML/Lip2Vec
Correspondence: yasser.djilali@tii.ae

confounding factors [8, 7]. Hearing and speech-impaired
individuals also greatly benefit from VSR [57]. Albeit the
small variations around the mouth area, the space of spoken
words can be large due to the phonemes composition mechanism. This makes the task highly ambiguous as several
phonemes incur similar visual characteristics. Moreover,
VSR needs to be robust to variations w.r.t. multiple speakers, head pose movements, non-verbal facial expressions
and imaging conditions. Furthermore, lip-reading requires
the integration of visual features and contextual information
(i.e., topic, key words search, environment and place, etc.)
[53, 33, 6]. Over the last few years, computational methods
for VSR has seen a surge with the recent proposed datasets,
and can be grouped into (i) word-level prediction that classifies a silent video segment into a pre-defined vocabulary
of words; (ii) continuous visual speech recognition, which
predicts sentences for varying length video sequences.
Most existing VSR approaches employ a common
pipeline, where lip sequences are spatially encoded using a convolution-based backbone and passed to a contextual encoder (i.e., transformer [59] or conformer [19])
to model temporal dependencies. Finally, auto-regressive
transformer decoder cross-attends to these representations
for predicting the text. Previous works focused on enhancing the video representations for better decoding, while
early approaches pretrained the backbone on word-level
LRW dataset [14] for better convergence on continuous
VSR [1, 28]. In contrast, [30, 3] exploit audio information as an extra supervision for an auxiliary task. Recently,
cross-modal self-supervised pretraining has been a dominant paradigm for a smoother supervised finetuning afterwards [50, 51, 20].
Alternatively, the audio latent space exhibits the properties of local smoothness between input and its representation, is temporally coherent over a sequence of observations, has simple dependencies among its factors and is
sparsely activated for a specific input, leading to robust and
performing models [5, 4, 42, 45]. Whereas the lip sequence

13790

