This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing NeRF akin to Enhancing LLMs: Generalizable NeRF Transformer
with Mixture-of-View-Experts
Wenyan Cong1∗ , Hanxue Liang2,1∗ , Peihao Wang1 , Zhiwen Fan1 , Tianlong Chen1 ,
Mukund Varma3,1 , Yi Wang1 , Zhangyang Wang1
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 University of Cambridge, 3 Indian Institute of Technology Madras
{wycong, peihaowang, zhiwenfan, tianlong.chen, panzer.wy, atlaswang}@utexas.edu,
hl589@cam.ac.uk, mukundvarmat@gmail.com

Abstract
Cross-scene generalizable NeRF models, which can directly synthesize novel views of unseen scenes, have become a new spotlight of the NeRF field. Several existing
attempts rely on increasingly end-to-end “neuralized” architectures, i.e., replacing scene representation and/or rendering modules with performant neural networks such as
transformers, and turning novel view synthesis into a feedforward inference pipeline. While those feedforward “neuralized” architectures still do not fit diverse scenes well out
of the box, we propose to bridge them with the powerful
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) idea from large language models
(LLMs), which has demonstrated superior generalization
ability by balancing between larger overall model capacity
and flexible per-instance specialization. Starting from a recent generalizable NeRF architecture called GNT [52], we
first demonstrate that MoE can be neatly plugged in to enhance the model. We further customize a shared permanent
expert and a geometry-aware consistency loss to enforce
cross-scene consistency and spatial smoothness respectively, which are essential for generalizable view synthesis.
Our proposed model, dubbed GNT with Mixture-of-ViewExperts (GNT-MOVE), has experimentally shown state-ofthe-art results when transferring to unseen scenes, indicating remarkably better cross-scene generalization in both
zero-shot and few-shot settings. Our codes are available at
https://github.com/VITA-Group/GNT-MOVE.

1. Introduction
Given several images from different viewpoints, Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) has achieved remarkable success on synthesizing novel views. Most existing methods
[34, 31, 40, 60, 14, 50, 3, 63, 64, 22] focus on overfitting one single scene by reconstructing its 3D radiance field
* Equal contribution.

in a “backward” manner. Though capable of generating
realistic and consistent novel views, the need for retraining on each new scene limits their practical applications.
Recently, generalizable NeRF has settled a new trend: in
place of the costly per-scene fitting, several pioneer works
[69, 57, 68, 52, 48] attempt to synthesize novel views of unseen scenes in a “feedforward” fashion on the fly. Those
models are first pre-trained by learning how to represent
scenes and render novel views from captured images across
different scenes, achieving high-quality “zero-shot” inference results on new scenes. Among them, Generalizable
NeRF Transformer (GNT) [52] stands out by replacing the
explicit scene modeling and rendering function via unified,
data-driven, and scalable transformers, and automatically
inducing multi-view consistent geometries and renderings
via large-scale novel view synthesis pre-training.
However, those cross-scene NeRF models face the fundamental dilemma between “generality” and “specialization”. On the one hand, they need to broadly cover both
diverse scene representations and/or rendering mechanisms
due to different scene properties (e.g., color, materials) –
hence larger overall model size is needed to guarantee sufficient expressiveness. On the other hand, since a single scene
usually consists of specialized self-similar appearance patterns, those models must also be capable of per-scene specialization to model the scene closely. Existing generalizable models still do not achieve a satisfactory balance between both “generality” and “specialization”, as most of
them [52, 48] do not fit diverse scenes well out of box, and
some [57, 68] will need extra per-scene optimization step.
To fill the aforementioned gap, we propose to introduce
and customize the powerful Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) idea
[46] into GNT framework, which is composed of a view
transformer that aggregates multi-view image features and
a ray transformer that decodes the point feature to synthesize novel views. The inspiration is drawn from Large Language Models (LLMs) [27, 12], where MoE has become

3193

