This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Speech4Mesh: Speech-Assisted Monocular 3D Facial Reconstruction for
Speech-Driven 3D Facial Animation
Shan He1,2 , Haonan He2 , Shuo Yang2 , Xiaoyan Wu2 , Pengcheng Xia2 ,
Bing Yin2 , Cong Liu2 , Lirong Dai1 , Chang Xu3
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 iFLYTEK Research, 3 University of Sydney
{shanhe2, hnhe, shuoyang7, xywu10, pcxia, bingyin, congliu2}@iflytek.com
lrdai@ustc.edu.cn, c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Recent audio2mesh-based methods have shown promising prospects for speech-driven 3D facial animation tasks.
However, some intractable challenges are urgent to be settled. For example, the data-scarcity problem is intrinsically
inevitable due to the difficulty of 4D data collection. Besides, current methods generally lack controllability on the
animated face. To this end, we propose a novel framework named Speech4Mesh to consecutively generate 4D
talking head data and train the audio2mesh network with
the reconstructed meshes. In our framework, we first reconstruct the 4D talking head sequence based on the monocular videos. For precise capture of the talking-related variation on the face, we exploit the audio-visual alignment information from the video by employing a contrastive learning
scheme. We next can train the audio2mesh network (e.g.,
FaceFormer) based on the generated 4D data. To get control of the animated talking face, we encode the speakingunrelated factors (e.g., emotion, etc.) into an emotion embedding for manipulation. Finally, a differentiable renderer
guarantees more accurate photometric details of the reconstruction and animation results. Empirical experiments
demonstrate that the Speech4Mesh framework can not only
outperform state-of-the-art reconstruction methods, especially on the lower-face part but also achieve better animation performance both perceptually and objectively after
pre-trained on the synthesized data. Besides, we also verify
that the proposed framework is able to explicitly control the
emotion of the animated talking face.

1. Introduction
Speech-driven facial animation is aimed at guiding the
face model (either 2D image or 3D mesh) to have perceptually rational motion (especially for lip sync) only according
to the input audio signal. It is drawing increasingly more

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed Speech4Mesh framework. In this framework, the speech signal is leveraged for
both the reconstruction module and the audio2mesh module. An emotion code is embedded into the audio2mesh
module for emotional manipulation. Differentiable rendering is employed for recovering the details of the face.
attention with the development of virtual reality, game and
film production, etc. There are currently two mainstreams
to deal with this task, either from 2D or 3D perspectives.
By learning from video data [9, 41, 55, 71], 2D solutions
try to generate the talking head images frame by frame.
Although sufficient data is available to be used, the synthesized images cannot directly be applied to 3D scenes.
Thus, in this paper, we mainly focus on 3D facial animation
driven by speech. In recent years, a handful of 3D speechdriven facial animation methods [20, 47, 39, 13, 7, 34] have
shown promising performance by directly learning a mapping from audio to 3D avatar mesh deformation with deep
neural networks (hereinafter called audio2mesh methods).
In this way, some subtle variations on the face mesh can
be captured. Generally speaking, for the audio2mesh methods, data quality is one of the most important factors to be
considered [20] since they generally demand high-precision

14192

