This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Indoor Depth Recovery Based on Deep Unfolding with Non-Local Prior
Yuhui Dai1,2† , Junkang Zhang1,2† , Faming Fang1,2* , Guixu Zhang1,2
1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing, East China Normal University
{51215901067, 52215901001}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn

{fmfang, gxzhang}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
In recent years, depth recovery based on deep networks has achieved great success. However, the existing
state-of-the-art network designs perform like black boxes
in depth recovery tasks, lacking a clear mechanism. Utilizing the property that there is a large amount of nonlocal common characteristics in depth images, we propose
a novel model-guided depth recovery method, namely the
DC-NLAR model. A non-local auto-regressive regular term
is also embedded into our model to capture more non-local
depth information. To fully use the excellent performance
of neural networks, we develop a deep image prior to better
describe the characteristic of depth images. We also introduce an implicit data consistency term to tackle the degenerate operator with high heterogeneity. We then unfold the
proposed model into networks by using the half-quadratic
splitting algorithm. This proposed method is experimented
on the NYU-Depth V2 and SUN RGB-D datasets, and the
experimental results achieve comparable performance to
that of deep learning methods.

1. Introduction
Dense depth recovery from sparse depth maps is crucial
for various applications, including human-computer interaction [23], scene reconstruction [24], augmented realities
[14] and autonomous driving. Therefore, depth recovery is
currently a significant research area in the field of computer
vision. Accurate depth maps have been shown to provide
necessary 3D information for many computer vision tasks,
including semantic labeling [19, 32], robot navigation [9],
3D reconstruction [27, 21], and so on. While high-quality
texture information is easily captured by modern color cameras, the acquisition of depth information remains a chal† These authors contributed equally to this work.
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Examples of indoor depth maps. (a) the sampled points
of the original depth map collected by the NYU dataset; (b) the
complete depth map by our model; (c) the pseudo depth map from
the SUN RGB-D dataset [31]; (d) the corresponding depth recovery result of our model.

lenging task under realistic conditions. Although some
sensors can directly acquire depth information for indoor
scenes, they often suffer from reflection and missing pixels
on transparent surfaces, leading to inaccurate depth maps.
Therefore, the estimation of the missing depth information
for sparse depth maps has been extensively studied. In contrast to depth images, rgb images provide rich color and texture information. As a result, rgb images corresponding to
depth maps are often utilized to guide depth recovery.
By the different starting points, they can be divided into
two major categories: traditional model-based methods and
data-driven methods. Among the early model-based depth
recovery methods, Dong et al. [7] proposed a unified variational method that incorporates joint local and non-local
regularization. Xue et al. [39] proposed a low gradient regularization to improve the excessive and spurious details in
the restored region, which commonly arise from the lowrank method. This approach enables better characterization
of depth images with sparse gradients. Yuan et al. [25] used
non-local low rank to model the global similarity structure
between depth blocks and combined it with Total variation
(TV) [2] to capture the correlation between local depth pixels. These methods transform the depth recovery problem
into a mathematical optimization problem that can make
full use of the essential information of the image.
The advancements in deep learning, as evidenced by recent studies [4, 15, 18, 29, 41], have showcased the effec-

12355

