This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Iterative Soft Shrinkage Learning for Efficient Image Super-Resolution
Jiamian Wang1 , Huan Wang2 , Yulun Zhang3 ,* Yun Fu2 , and Zhiqiang Tao1 *
1
Rochester Institute of Technology, 2 Northeastern University, 3 ETH Zürich

Abstract
Image super-resolution (SR) has witnessed extensive
neural network designs from CNN to transformer architectures. However, prevailing SR models suffer from
prohibitive memory footprint and intensive computations,
which limits further deployment on edge devices. This
work investigates the potential of network pruning for
super-resolution to take advantage of off-the-shelf network
designs and reduce the underlying computational overhead.
Two main challenges remain in applying pruning methods
for SR. First, the widely-used filter pruning technique
reflects limited granularity and restricted adaptability
to diverse network structures. Second, existing pruning
methods generally operate upon a pre-trained network for
the sparse structure determination, hard to get rid of dense
model training in the traditional SR paradigm. To address
these challenges, we adopt unstructured pruning with
sparse models directly trained from scratch. Specifically,
we propose a novel Iterative Soft Shrinkage-Percentage
(ISS-P) method by optimizing the sparse structure of a
randomly initialized network at each iteration and tweaking
unimportant weights with a small amount proportional
to the magnitude scale on-the-fly. We observe that the
proposed ISS-P can dynamically learn sparse structures
adapting to the optimization process and preserve the
sparse model’s trainability by yielding a more regularized gradient throughput. Experiments on benchmark
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
ISS-P over diverse network architectures. Code is available at https://github.com/Jiamian-Wang/
Iterative-Soft-Shrinkage-SR

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution [18, 20] aims to reconstruct the high-resolution (HR) image from a low-resolution
(LR) input. Towards a high-fidelity reconstruction, research
efforts have been made by relying on the strong modeling
capacity of convolutional neural networks [7, 19, 26, 47].
* Corresponding authors: Yulun Zhang (yulun100@gmail.com) and
Zhiqiang Tao (zxtics@rit.edu)

More recently, advanced Transformer architectures [25, 45,
50] are elaborated, enabling photorealistic restoration. Despite the impressive performance, the excessive memory
footprint of existing models has been de facto in the field,
which inevitably prohibits the deployment of advanced SR
models on computational-constrained devices.
To alleviate the computational complexity, we study network pruning, which takes advantage of off-the-shelf advanced network architectures to realize efficient yet accurate SR models. Network pruning has been long developed in two mainstream directions. On the one hand, filter
pruning (structured pruning) [23] cuts off the specific filter
of convolutional layers, among which representative practices in SR is to prune cross-layer filters governed by residual connections [48, 49]. However, these methods need to
consider the layer-wise topology by posing structural constraints, requiring a heuristic design and thus making them
inflexible. Plus, filter pruning inhibits a more fine-grained
manipulation to the network. On the other hand, weight
pruning (unstructured pruning) directly removes weight
scalars across the network, endowed with more flexibility
by accommodating weight discrepancy. Also, the weight
pruning method allows a very high pruning ratio, e.g., a ratio of 99% with competitive performance [10, 11]. To this
end, this work focuses on delivering a highly-adaptive unstructured pruning solution for diverse SR architectures.
Generally, pruning algorithms are widely recognized to
have three steps: (1) pre-training, (2) sparse structure acquisition, and (3) fine-tuning the sparse network. Among these
steps, the dense network pre-training usually introduces
heavy costs beyond the sparse network optimization. For
example, before obtaining a sparse network, the CAT [50]
network architecture takes 2 days to train its dense counterpart on 4 A100 GPUs. Thus, a natural question arises
to save training time further – can we directly explore the
sparsity of network structures from random initialization?
We start from the baseline method by performing random pruning on weights at initialization, whose limitation is
the irrelevance between the sparse structure and the weight
distribution varying to the optimization. Following this line,
we apply the widely-used L1 norm [23, 11] pruning on randomly initialized weights. However, the immutable sparsity

12590

