This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bayesian Optimization Meets Self-Distillation
HyunJae Lee* Heon Song∗

Hyeonsoo Lee∗ Gi-hyeon Lee
Lunit Inc.

Suyeong Park

Donggeun Yoo

{hjlee, hslee, dgyoo}@lunit.io, {songheony, lghsigma597, suyeong.park0}@gmail.com

Abstract

mance for training CNNs [8, 15] and has contributed to improving various applications such as AlphaGo [10].

Bayesian optimization (BO) has contributed greatly to
improving model performance by suggesting promising hyperparameter configurations iteratively based on observations from multiple training trials. However, only partial
knowledge (i.e., the measured performances of trained models and their hyperparameter configurations) from previous
trials is transferred. On the other hand, Self-Distillation
(SD) only transfers partial knowledge learned by the task
model itself. To fully leverage the various knowledge gained
from all training trials, we propose the BOSS framework,
which combines BO and SD. BOSS suggests promising hyperparameter configurations through BO and carefully selects pre-trained models from previous trials for SD, which
are otherwise abandoned in the conventional BO process.
BOSS achieves significantly better performance than both
BO and SD in a wide range of tasks including general image
classification, learning with noisy labels, semi-supervised
learning, and medical image analysis tasks. Our code is
available at https://github.com/sooperset/boss.

BO is inherently an iterative process in which a probabilistic prior model is fitted using observations of hyperparameter configurations and their corresponding performances [6, 24]. At each iteration, BO suggests the next
configuration to evaluate that is most likely to improve performance. After training the network with the suggested
configuration, a new observation is retrieved and used to update the probabilistic model. However, only partial knowledge (i.e., the measured performances of trained models and
their hyperparameter configurations) from previous trials is
transferred, and the knowledge learned by the network is
discarded.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have achieved
remarkable success in a wide range of computer vision applications [9, 31, 34]. However, their performance is greatly
dependent on the choice of hyperparameters [11]. As the
optimal hyperparameter configuration is not known a priori, practitioners often explore the hyperparameter space
manually to obtain a better configuration. Despite its timeconsuming process, it typically results in sub-optimal performance [7]. Recently, Bayesian optimization (BO) has
emerged as a successful approach to hyperparameter optimization, automating the manual tuning effort and pushing
the boundaries of performance [6, 24, 45]. BO allows for
the effective exploration of multi-dimensional search spaces
by suggesting promising configurations based on observations. This technique has achieved state-of-the-art perfor* Authors contributed equally.

Self-distillation (SD) can also be viewed as a knowledge transfer method. A recent line of research in SD has
demonstrated that transferring knowledge from a previously
trained model with the identical capacity can improve the
performance of the model [2, 16, 36]. If a student network
is trained to mimic the feature distribution of a teacher network, then the student could beat the teacher. Allen-Zhu
and Li [2] have both theoretically and empirically interpreted this as a similar effect to ensembling various models.
Inspired by this property of SD and the iterative nature of
BO, we ended up asking if the knowledge inside the network from the previous trials could be used for the next
trials during the BO process.
In this paper, we propose a new framework, Bayesian
Optimization meets Self-diStillation (BOSS), which combines BO and SD to fully leverage the knowledge obtained
from previous trials. The overall process of BOSS is illustrated in Figure 1. Following the BO process, BOSS suggests a hyperparameter configuration based on observations
that are most likely to improve the performance. After that,
it carefully selects pre-trained networks from previous trials
for the next round of training with SD, which are otherwise
abandoned in the conventional BO process. This process is
performed in an iterative manner, allowing the network to
persistently improve upon previous trials. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first work that leverages the knowledge of the network learned during the BO process. This

1696

