This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EgoHumans: An Egocentric 3D Multi-Human Benchmark
Rawal Khirodkar, Aayush Bansal, Lingni Ma, Richard Newcombe, Minh Vo, Kris Kitani
https://rawalkhirodkar.github.io/egohumans

Secondary Camera

Ego Camera

Ego-Humans - Capture Setup

Ego-Views

Secondary-Views

Figure 1: Left: Our proposed capture setup consists of multiple egocentric cameras from wearable glasses and stationary
secondary cameras. This flexible and mobile setup allows us to generate high-quality multi-human 3D annotations for diverse
in-the-wild settings. Center: Multiple synchronized egocentric views while playing tag. Right: Synchronized secondary views
(cropped) from the stationary cameras. All cameras are spatiotemporally localized in the world coordinate.

Abstract
We present EgoHumans, a new multi-view multi-human
video benchmark to advance the state-of-the-art of egocentric human 3D pose estimation and tracking. Existing egocentric benchmarks either capture single subject or indooronly scenarios, which limit the generalization of computer
vision algorithms for real-world applications. We propose
a novel 3D capture setup to construct a comprehensive egocentric multi-human benchmark in the wild with annotations
to support diverse tasks such as human detection, tracking,
2D/3D pose estimation, and mesh recovery. We leverage
consumer-grade wearable camera-equipped glasses for the
egocentric view, which enables us to capture dynamic activities like playing tennis, fencing, volleyball, etc. Furthermore,
our multi-view setup generates accurate 3D ground truth
even under severe or complete occlusion. The dataset consists of more than 125k egocentric images, spanning diverse
scenes with a particular focus on challenging and unchoreographed multi-human activities and fast-moving egocentric
views. We rigorously evaluate existing state-of-the-art methods and highlight their limitations in the egocentric scenario,
specifically on multi-human tracking. To address such limitations, we propose EgoFormer, a novel approach with a
multi-stream transformer architecture and explicit 3D spatial
reasoning to estimate and track the human pose. EgoFormer
significantly outperforms prior art by 13.6% IDF1 on the
EgoHumans dataset.

1. Introduction
Understanding humans in 3D from the egocentric view is
key to building immersive social telepresence [4, 62, 73, 77],
assistive humanoid robots [28, 31, 91], and augmented reality systems [1, 10, 13]. A crucial step in this direction is to
obtain 3D supervision at scale for deep learning models to
generalize to the real world. However, unlike the large-scale
2D benchmarks [18, 23, 46, 64, 72], the diversity of the 3D
benchmarks [48] is severely limited - primarily because manual annotation in the 3D space is impractical. As a result,
existing popular 3D benchmarks [37, 43, 48, 66, 82, 110]
are constrained to indoor environments or, at most, two human subjects if outdoors, stationary/slow camera motion,
with limited occlusion. Furthermore, the majority of these
benchmarks only portray the third-person view. Recent
progress has been made in constructing egocentric benchmarks [35, 86, 115, 123]. However, they suffer from the
same diversity pitfalls, making it difficult to evaluate how
close the field is to fully robust and general solutions. To
drive advances in the field, we propose a benchmark, EgoHumans, that includes challenging scenarios ignored in previous studies and a novel method, EgoFormer, that outperforms prior art as a starting point for the evaluations.
EgoHumans is a new egocentric benchmark consisting
of high-resolution videos and comprehensive ground truth
annotations such as camera parameters, 2D bounding boxes,

19807

