This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffFacto: Controllable Part-Based 3D Point Cloud Generation
with Cross Diffusion
George Kiyohiro Nakayama1 Mikaela Angelina Uy1 Jiahui Huang2
Shi-Min Hu2 Ke Li3 Leonidas Guibas1
1

Stanford University

Part-level Sampling

2

Tsinghua University

Configuration Sampling

3

Simon Fraser University

Part Mixing

Part-level Interpolation

Figure 1: DiffFacto: Our approach tackles the task of controllable part-based point cloud generation, where we are able
to generate novel shapes - novel configurations of novel parts. Our probabilistic generative model learns a factorized
representation of shapes with a cross diffusion network allowing for control. We demonstrate that DiffFacto not only enables
controllable generation but also various shape editing tasks.

Abstract
While the community of 3D point cloud generation has
witnessed a big growth in recent years, there still lacks an
effective way to enable intuitive user control in the generation process, hence limiting the general utility of such
methods. Since an intuitive way of decomposing a shape
is through its parts, we propose to tackle the task of controllable part-based point cloud generation. We introduce
DiffFacto, a novel probabilistic generative model that learns
the distribution of shapes with part-level control. We propose a factorization that models independent part style and
part configuration distributions, and present a novel cross
diffusion network that enables us to generate coherent and
plausible shapes under our proposed factorization. Experiments show that our method is able to generate novel shapes
with multiple axes of control. It achieves state-of-the-art
part-level generation quality and generates plausible and
coherent shape while enabling various downstream editing applications such as shape interpolation, mixing, and
transformation editing. Please visit our project webpage at
https://difffacto.github.io/

1. Introduction
3D shape generation [45] is an important and popular
task , where point clouds are one popular representation [46,
5, 52, 28] – due to their simple yet powerful expressivity
as well as data availability, i.e. just a set of points and can
directly be acquired by sensors. However, the generation of

arbitrary plausible shapes is often of limited utility, as users
often have a conceptual design idea and of what they want
to generate.
A prerequisite of shape generation is to be able to learn
a space of all possible shapes. To represent this space, one
parsimonious way is to represent them as a combination of
simpler atoms, known as parts. In this flavor, we propose the
task of controllable part-based generation, which aims to
generate plausible novel shapes with user control over individual parts. As mentioned before, a shape is a combination
of parts, thus a ‘novel shape’ can be defined in three different
ways: (1) novel configurations of existing parts, (2) existing
configurations of novel parts, and (3) novel configurations of
novel parts.
The first is explored in existing graphics literature such as
part retrieval [41] and shape assembly [50], while the second
can be tackled by existing generation methods [46, 5, 52]
trained on parts. In contrast, we tackle the third, which is
the more challenging case subsuming the first and second. A
challenge arises because a shape is a combination of novel
parts, leading to an exponential explosion of plausible shapes
while having only limited training data. A further challenge
stems from enabling control as this requires an approach
that can vary individual parts and configurations while still
generating plausible shapes.
To this end, we introduce a new method that tackles this
task in a principled way by building a probabilistic generative model that learns the distribution of shapes while
enabling control on parts and configurations. Specifically,
14257

