This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continual Learning for Personalized Co-Speech Gesture Generation
Chaitanya Ahuja1 , Pratik Joshi1 , Ryo Ishii2 & Louis-Philippe Morency1
1
Language Technologies Institute, CMU & 2 NTT Human Informatics Laboratories
ahujachaitanya@gmail.com, pratikmjoshi123@gmail.com, ryoct.ishii@ntt.com, morency@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Co-speech gestures are a key channel of human communication, making them important for personalized chat agents
to generate. In the past, gesture generation models assumed
that data for each speaker is available all at once, and in
large amounts. However in practical scenarios, speaker data
comes sequentially and in small amounts as the agent personalizes with more speakers, akin to a continual learning
paradigm. While more recent works have shown progress
in adapting to low-resource data, they catastrophically forget the gesture styles of initial speakers they were trained
on. Also, prior generative continual learning works are not
multimodal, making this space less studied. In this paper,
we explore this new paradigm and propose C-DiffGAN: an
approach that continually learns new speaker gesture styles
with only a few minutes of per-speaker data, while retaining
previously learnt styles. Inspired by prior continual learning
works, C-DiffGAN encourages knowledge retention by 1)
generating reminiscences of previous low-resource speaker
data, then 2) crossmodally aligning to them to mitigate catastrophic forgetting. We quantitatively demonstrate improved
performance and reduced forgetting over strong baselines
through standard continual learning measures, reinforced by
a qualitative user study that shows that our method produces
more natural, style-preserving gestures. Code and videos
can be found at https://chahuja.com/cdiffgan

1. Introduction
Human communication technologies for both verbal (e.g.
spoken language) and nonverbal (e.g. co-speech gestures)
have seen significant improvements which have made generative models for human communication more natural and
semantically relevant [32]. Advancements in speech-based
personal assistants such as Cortana, Alexa, Siri, and more recently in text based conversational agents such as chatGPT1
[34], Meena [1], and Xiaoice [48] have paved the way for
embodied personal assistants. As embodied agents have both
1 https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt

Figure 1: Overview of the continual learning paradigm of cospeech gesture personalization task. We start with a source
model G1 pre-trained on a source speaker. We personalize
G1 to target models G2 , G3 and so on in a sequential manner
using low-resource data (∼10 minutes) for each of the target
speaker.

verbal and nonverbal communicative channels, one technical challenge is to be able to generate personalized visual
co-speech gestures (i.e. nonverbal) using spoken language
(i.e. verbal) [46, 2]. Previous works in co-speech gesture
generation learn unique speaker styles in a static paradigm,
where training is done on a fixed dataset consisting of data
for all speakers available all at once. However, in practical
scenarios of embodied agents learning in the wild, the agent
would receive small amounts of training data sequentially also known as a continual learning paradigm. The main goal
of the paper is to learn a unified co-speech gesture generation model with the ability to generate gestures in multiple
different styles (see Figure 1). This goal is achieved in a
challenging and practical continual learning setting where
the model only has access to limited training data.
This problem setting brings a unique technical challenge,
typically not studied in generative continual learning settings:
crossmodal catastrophic forgetting. Due to the crossmodal

20893

