This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MonoDETR: Depth-guided Transformer for Monocular 3D Object Detection
Renrui Zhang1,2 , Han Qiu2 , Tai Wang1,2 , Ziyu Guo2 , Ziteng Cui2
Yu Qiao2 , Hongsheng Li†1,2,3 , Peng Gao†2
1

CUHK MMLab 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence (CPII)

{zhangrenrui, wangtai, gaopeng}@pjlab.org.cn,

hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Monocular 3D object detection has long been a challenging
task in autonomous driving. Most existing methods follow
conventional 2D detectors to first localize object centers,
and then predict 3D attributes by neighboring features.
However, only using local visual features is insufficient
to understand the scene-level 3D spatial structures and
ignores the long-range inter-object depth relations. In
this paper, we introduce the first DETR framework for
Monocular DEtection with a depth-guided TRansformer,
named MonoDETR. We modify the vanilla transformer
to be depth-aware and guide the whole detection process
by contextual depth cues. Specifically, concurrent to
the visual encoder that captures object appearances,
we introduce to predict a foreground depth map, and
specialize a depth encoder to extract non-local depth
embeddings. Then, we formulate 3D object candidates as
learnable queries and propose a depth-guided decoder to
conduct object-scene depth interactions. In this way, each
object query estimates its 3D attributes adaptively from
the depth-guided regions on the image and is no longer
constrained to local visual features. On KITTI benchmark
with monocular images as input, MonoDETR achieves
state-of-the-art performance and requires no extra dense
depth annotations. Besides, our depth-guided modules can
also be plug-and-play to enhance multi-view 3D object
detectors on nuScenes dataset, demonstrating our superior
generalization capacity. Code is available at https:
//github.com/ZrrSkywalker/MonoDETR.

1. Introduction
With a wide range of applications in autonomous driving, 3D object detection is more challenging than its 2D
counterparts, due to the complex spatial circumstances.
† Corresponding author

Center Localization

𝑪𝒆𝒏𝒕𝒆𝒓-𝒈𝒖𝒊𝒅𝐞𝒅 Detection,
Limited by Local Visual Features

m near to
Depth fro

far

Foreground Depth Map

s
ided region
Depth-gu

Target Query

𝑫𝒆𝒑𝒕𝒉-𝒈𝒖𝒊𝒅𝒆𝒅 Detection,
Capture Adaptive Geometric Cues

Figure 1. Center-guided (Top) and Depth-guided Paradigms
(Bottom) for monocular 3D object detection. Existing centerguided methods predict 3D attributes from local visual features
around the centers, while our MonoDETR guides the detection by
a predicted foreground depth map and adaptively aggregates features in global context. The lower right figure visualizes the attention map of the target query in the depth cross-attention layer.

Compared to methods based on LiDAR [57, 20, 41, 50]
and multi-view images [49, 22, 26, 17], 3D object detection
from monocular (single-view) images [9, 1, 46] is of most
difficulty, which generally does not rely on depth measurements or multi-view geometry. The detection accuracy thus
severely suffers from the ill-posed depth estimation, leading
to inferior performance.
Except for leveraging pseudo 3D representations [48, 51,
32, 38], standard monocular 3D detection methods [33, 52,
53, 31] follow the pipeline of traditional 2D object detection [40, 24, 43, 56]. They first localize objects by detecting
the projected centers on the image, and then aggregate the
neighboring visual features for 3D property prediction, as
illustrated in Figure 1 (Top). Although it is conceptually
straightforward, such center-guided methods are limited by
the local appearances without long-range context, and fail to
capture implicit geometric cues from 2D images, e.g., depth
guidance, which are critical to detect objects in 3D space.
To tackle this issue, we propose MonoDETR, which

9155

