This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DISeR: Designing Imaging Systems with Reinforcement Learning
Tzofi Klinghoffer*

Kushagra Tiwary* Nikhil Behari Bhavya Agrawalla Ramesh Raskar
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Abstract
Imaging systems consist of cameras to encode visual information about the world and perception models to interpret this encoding. Cameras contain (1) illumination
sources, (2) optical elements, and (3) sensors, while perception models use (4) algorithms. Directly searching over
all combinations of these four building blocks to design an
imaging system is challenging due to the size of the search
space. Moreover, cameras and perception models are often
designed independently, leading to sub-optimal task performance. In this paper, we formulate these four building blocks of imaging systems as a context-free grammar
(CFG), which can be automatically searched over with a
learned camera designer to jointly optimize the imaging
system with task-specific perception models. By transforming the CFG to a state-action space, we then show how
the camera designer can be implemented with reinforcement learning to intelligently search over the combinatorial space of possible imaging system configurations. We
demonstrate our approach on two tasks, depth estimation
and camera rig design for autonomous vehicles, showing
that our method yields rigs that outperform industry-wide
standards. We believe that our proposed approach is an
important step towards automating imaging system design.
Our project page is https://tzofi.github.io/diser.

1. Introduction
Cameras are ubiquitous across industries.
In autonomous vehicles, camera rigs provide information on the
ego-vehicle’s surroundings so it can navigate; in biology,
microscopy allows new viruses to be studied and vaccines
to be developed; and in AR/VR systems, advanced headsets
provide immersive reconstructions of the user’s surroundings. In each of these applications, camera configurations
must be carefully designed to capture relevant information
for downstream tasks, often done with perception models
(PMs). PMs are typically implemented as neural networks
and use the output of cameras to predict information such as
where other vehicles are on the road, what type of molecule
* Equal contribution.

Figure 1: Overview: The camera designer selects imaging hardware candidates, which are used to capture observations in simulation. The perception model is then updated and computes the
reward for the camera designer using the captured observations. In
our paper, we implement the camera designer with reinforcement
learning and the perception model with a neural network.

is present in a biological sample, or where the user is located
within a virtual environment. Yet, despite their interdependence, cameras and PMs are often designed independently.
Designing camera systems is non-trivial due to the vast
number of engineering decisions to be made. For example,
consider designing a camera rig on an autonomous vehicle.
Suppose the ego-vehicle is limited to up to 5 lidar sensors,
5 radars, and 5 RGB sensors, with 1,000 possible spatiotemporal resolutions. If there are 1,000 discrete candidate
camera positions on the ego-vehicle, the search space expands to 108 different configurations. In practice, the search
space can become many orders larger with more possibilities for each imaging system building block. Furthermore,
because the search space is non-differentiable, there exists a
need to develop efficient methods to effectively traverse the
search space for an optimal imaging configuration.
In our paper, we propose using reinforcement learning
(RL) to automate search over imaging systems. We first
define a language for imaging system design using contextfree grammar (CFG), which allows imaging systems to be
represented as strings. The CFG serves as a search space for
which search algorithms can then be used to automate imaging system design. We refer to such an algorithm as a camera designer (CD) and implement it with RL. RL allows us
to search over imaging systems without relying on differentiable simulators and can scale to the combinatorially large
search space of the CFG. Inspired by how animal eyes and
brains are tightly integrated [28], our approach jointly trains

23632

