This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spatio-Temporal Crop Aggregation for Video Representation Learning
Sepehr Sameni
University of Bern

Simon Jenni
Adobe Research

Paolo Favaro
University of Bern

sepehr.sameni@unibe.ch

jenni@adobe.com

paolo.favaro@unibe.ch

Abstract
We propose Spatio-temporal Crop Aggregation for video
representation LEarning (SCALE), a novel method that enjoys high scalability at both training and inference time.
Our model builds long-range video features by learning
from sets of video clip-level features extracted with a pretrained backbone. To train the model, we propose a selfsupervised objective consisting of masked clip feature predictions. We apply sparsity to both the input, by extracting
a random set of video clips, and to the loss function, by
only reconstructing the sparse inputs. Moreover, we use dimensionality reduction by working in the latent space of a
pre-trained backbone applied to single video clips. These
techniques make our method not only extremely efficient
to train but also highly effective in transfer learning. We
demonstrate that our video representation yields state-ofthe-art performance with linear, nonlinear, and k-NN probing on common action classification and video understanding datasets.

1. Introduction
Videos provide rich and detailed information about objects and their activities. Their analysis is, however, made
challenging not only by the difference in the information
provided across space and time but also by the high dimensionality of the data [45, 29, 70]. While computational resources are expected to scale over time, so is the demand
for higher data resolution (both in space and time) and also
the need for processing data with even more dimensions,
such as videos of volumetric data [10]. Therefore, it is of
paramount importance to explore methods that drastically
reduce the computational requirements to process videos.
Moreover, the annotation of videos is an extremely costly
and time-consuming burden that makes the use of models
pre-trained in a self-supervised manner essential [44].
Self-supervised learning (SSL) is a very popular technique to reduce the need for annotation because it can build
useful representations from unlabeled data through an artificial goal, also called pseudo- or pretext-task. These repre-

sentations can either be evaluated through K-nearest neighbor or linear probing [71, 72] or through fine-tuning (i.e.,
as the initialization parameters of the trained model) [25,
54, 35] on a downstream task, where only a small labeled
dataset is available. More remarkably, SSL pre-trained
models can outperform models that were pre-trained on an
annotated dataset [53, 4].
SSL methods for video representation learning present
fundamental scalability challenges [54, 45, 29, 65]. A first
major challenge is that training models from scratch for any
new pseudo-task is not sustainable. A more viable setting
is one where the processing of videos is broken down into
multiple steps. First, one pre-processes video clips (spatiotemporal crops) only once via some pre-trained generalpurpose model (e.g., trained via self-supervised learning
[18, 23, 26, 44, 7, 37, 41]). In general, the idea is that this
(compressed) local representation is stored and used later
for other training purposes or retrieval. Then, one can train
more efficiently other super-features that aggregate information from these local representations. Within this setting, we address two questions: 1) Can one further improve
the performance of pre-computed video features by training a model on top of them? 2) Can such training be made
computationally scalable? In this paper, we show that both
questions have a positive answer. The answer exploits four
fronts:
1. Input Sparsity: Sparsity in the input to the model [54,
25, 3, 19, 1] drastically reduces computational load and
memory requirements, leveraging information redundancy in images and videos [16]. Inspired by prior
work, we extract a sparse set of clips from a video
(these are spatio-temporal video crops and not image
patches or video tubelets); each clip is fed separately
to a neural network so that we obtain a set of video clip
representations.
2. Output Sparsity: Another way to reduce the computational cost is to use a sparse reconstruction output
instead of a dense one [71, 51, 59, 5]. This is not
just a reduction of the number of terms in the loss
function, but also in the number of actual outputs of

5664

