This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Shape Primitives via Implicit Convexity Regularization
Xiaoyang Huang1 Yi Zhang1 Kai Chen1 Teng Li2 Wenjun Zhang1 Bingbing Ni1,3 *
1
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
Anhui University
3
USC-SJTU Institute of Cultural and Creative Industry
{huangxiaoyang, nibingbing}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Shape primitives decomposition has been an important
and long-standing task in 3D shape analysis. Prior arts
heavily rely on 3D point clouds or voxel data for shape
primitives extraction, which are less practical in real-world
scenarios. This paper proposes to learn shape primitives
from multi-view images by introducing implicit surface rendering. It is challenging since implicit shapes have a high
degree of freedom, which violates the simplicity property
of shape primitives. In this work, a novel regularization
term named Implicit Convexity Regularization (ICR) imposed on implicit primitive learning is proposed to tackle
this problem. We start with the convexity definition of general 3D shapes, and then derive the equivalent expression
for implicit shapes represented by signed distance functions
(SDFs). Further, instead of directly constraining the output SDF values which cause unstable optimization, we alternatively impose constraint on second order directional
derivatives on line segments inside the shapes, which proves
to be a tighter condition for 3D convexity. Implicit primitives constrained by the proposed ICR are combined into a
whole object via softmax-weighted-sum operation over all
primitive SDFs. Experiments on synthetic and real-world
datasets show that our method is able to decompose objects into simple and reasonable shape primitives without
the need of segmentation labels or 3D data. Code and
data is publicly available in https://github.com/
seanywang0408/ICR.

1. Introduction
Shape primitives extraction aims at decomposing a complex object into simple geometry. It has been a fundamental task in 3D shape representation [7] which imitates
human visual perception, abstraction and understanding of
real-world objects, and also facilitates industrial manufacturing which fabricates complex objects via component as* Corresponding Author.

Figure 1. We propose a shape primitive decomposition method
from multi-view images with a novel Implicit Convexity Regularization scheme (ICR), which theoretically guarantees the convexity of implicit primitives. Our method generates shape primitives
that satisfy simplicity, semantics preserving and fidelity.

sembling. There are several fundamental properties for
shape primitives: i) simplicity, which means that each primitive should be composed of simple geometry; ii) semantics, which means that the decomposition should reveal the
semantic parts of an object; iii) fidelity, which means that
the primitives should fit the original object as close as possible. Prior methods using parameterized shapes as primitive basis, such as cuboids [11] and superquadrics [13],
could guarantee the simplicity property. However, parameterized primitives are less expressive due to their limited
pre-defined geometry, which generally cause low fidelity.
Though leveraging the flexibility of implicit functions to
represent primitives could achieve higher fidelity, it also
comes with a drawback that the semantic information generally diminishes during decomposition [5, 9]. Most importantly, all prior works require 3D data either for singleobject fitting or multi-object learning. These data are not
accessible in many cases, which makes them unpractical in
real-world applications. In this work, we address this problem by learning implicit primitives from multi-view images.
Learning implicit primitives from multi-view images is
an even more challenging task. It is non-trivial to introduce prior implicit primitives [9, 19] into a neural rendering pipeline due to their specific modeling. Besides, implicit shapes without explicit regularization has a high degree of freedom, which could hardly meet the requirements
of primitives. To this end, we propose a convex regulariza-

3642

