This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mesh2Tex: Generating Mesh Textures from Image Queries
Alexey Bokhovkin
Technical University of Munich

Shubham Tulsiani
Carnegie Mellon University

aleksei.bokhovkin@tum.de

shubhtuls@cmu.edu

Angela Dai
Technical University of Munich
angela.dai@tum.de

Figure 1: Mesh2Tex learns realistic object texturing on a shape geometry through a hybrid mesh-field texture representation
supporting high-resolution texture generation on various shape meshes. Furthermore, our learned texture manifold supports
texture transfer optimization from image queries without requiring any matching geometry or pose alignment to the image,
producing perceptually consistent texturing in this challenging content creation scenario.

Abstract
Remarkable advances have been achieved recently in
learning neural representations that characterize object geometry, while generating textured objects suitable for downstream applications and 3D rendering remains at an early
stage. In particular, reconstructing textured geometry from
images of real objects is a significant challenge – reconstructed geometry is often inexact, making realistic texturing
a significant challenge. We present Mesh2Tex, which learns
a realistic object texture manifold from uncorrelated collections of 3D object geometry and photorealistic RGB images,
by leveraging a hybrid mesh-neural-field texture representation. Our texture representation enables compact encoding

of high-resolution textures as a neural field in the barycentric coordinate system of the mesh faces. The learned texture
manifold enables effective navigation to generate an object
texture for a given 3D object geometry that matches to an
input RGB image, which maintains robustness even under
challenging real-world scenarios where the mesh geometry
approximates an inexact match to the underlying geometry in the RGB image. Mesh2Tex can effectively generate
realistic object textures for an object mesh to match real images observations towards digitization of real environments,
significantly improving over previous state of the art.
Project page: alexeybokhovkin.github.io/
mesh2tex/

8918

