This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Instance Segmentation via Enhanced Spatial and Semantic Supervision
Salwa Al Khatib1
Mohamed El Amine Boudjoghra1
Jean Lahoud1
Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,2
1
Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI), UAE
2
Linköping University, Sweden
{salwa.khatib,mohamed.boudjoghra,jean.lahoud,fahad.khan}@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
3D instance segmentation has recently garnered increased attention. Typical deep learning methods adopt
point grouping schemes followed by hand-designed geometric clustering. Inspired by the success of transformers for various 3D tasks, newer hybrid approaches have
utilized transformer decoders coupled with convolutional
backbones that operate on voxelized scenes. However, due
to the nature of sparse feature backbones, the extracted features provided to the transformer decoder are lacking in
spatial understanding. Thus, such approaches often predict spatially separate objects as single instances. To this
end, we introduce a novel approach for 3D point clouds instance segmentation that addresses the challenge of generating distinct instance masks for objects that share similar
appearances but are spatially separated. Our method leverages spatial and semantic supervision with query refinement to improve the performance of hybrid 3D instance segmentation models. Specifically, we provide the transformer
block with spatial features to facilitate differentiation between similar object queries and incorporate semantic supervision to enhance prediction accuracy based on object
class. Our proposed approach outperforms existing methods on the validation sets of ScanNet V2 and ScanNet200
datasets, establishing a new state-of-the-art for this task.

1. Introduction
In recent years, remarkable advances have been made in
3D scene understanding, owing to the rapid development
of 3D sensors (Kinect, RealSense, Velodyne laser scanner,
among others) and the increase in the number of large-scale
datasets. Data-driven deep learning models with a focus on
either point or sparse voxel approaches have been widely
explored. 3D instance segmentation on point clouds is the
task of simultaneously localizing and recognizing 3D objects from a set of 3D points. The desired output is a set
of binary masks representing the objects with their corresponding semantic categories. This perception task serves

Input scene

Prediction w/ our method

Semantic instance ground truth

Prediction w/ Mask3D

Figure 1. Samples predictions of our approach on scenes from the
ScanNet200 [35] dataset. Our proposed approach utilizes both semantic and spatial supervision to generate distinct instance labels
for objects in a given scene, by processing a 3D point cloud as input. This enables the model to generate instance masks for objects
that are similar in appearance but located in different positions,
resulting in highly accurate and comprehensive labeling.

as the basis for a wide variety of applications, including autonomous driving, mixed and virtual reality, and robot navigation.
2D instance segmentation is a critical computer vision
task that involves identifying and distinguishing individual
objects or instances within an image and assigning semantic
classes to them. Unlike semantic segmentation, which assigns a label to each pixel in an image, instance segmentation aims to accurately identify each object in an image and
provide a unique mask or bounding box for each one. Thus,
instance segmentation lies at the intersection of object detection and semantic segmentation. Numerous studies have
been conducted in this area, with many works focusing on
top-down approaches [4, 9, 6, 15], in which instance-level
proposals are generated initially to predict instance masks
that are later classified into one of the recognized classes.
One popular example of these approaches is BMask R-CNN
[9], which is an extension of Mask R-CNN. It was developed to address the challenges associated with segmenting

541

