This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Can Language Models Learn to Listen?
Evonne Ng* Sanjay Subramanian* Dan Klein

Angjoo Kanazawa

Trevor Darrell

Shiry Ginosar

University of California Berkeley

Input: Speaker’s Transcribed Speech
Speaker

“Working

with

John

…and

it’s

just

so

amazing

to

watch

him

work.”

Finetuned Large Language Model

Output: Listener Motion

Figure 1: Large language models transfer to listener motion prediction. Given a video of a listener and speaker pair, we extract text
corresponding to the spoken words of the speaker. We fine-tune a pretrained large language model to autoregressively generate realistic 3D
listener motion in response to the input transcript. Our method generates semantically meaningful gestures (e.g. an appropriately timed
smile inferred from “amazing”) that synchronously flow with the conversation. We can optionally render the output of our approach as
photorealistic video. Video: https://youtu.be/djpSOhdIU8M

Abstract
We present a framework for generating appropriate facial
responses from a listener in dyadic social interactions based
on the speaker’s words. Given an input transcription of the
speaker’s words with their timestamps, our approach autoregressively predicts a response of a listener: a sequence of
listener facial gestures, quantized using a VQ-VAE. Since
gesture is a language component, we propose treating the
quantized atomic motion elements as additional language
token inputs to a transformer-based large language model.
Initializing our transformer with the weights of a language
model pre-trained only on text results in significantly higher
quality listener responses than training a transformer from
scratch. We show that our generated listener motion is fluent
and reflective of language semantics through quantitative
metrics and a qualitative user study. In our evaluation, we
analyze the model’s ability to utilize temporal and semantic
aspects of spoken text.

* denotes equal contribution

1. Introduction
Human face-to-face communication is multifaceted and
multimodal [13, 28]. In particular, the flow and effectiveness
of face-to-face dyadic interactions critically depend on nonverbal motions and responses from both participants in the
conversation [28, 30, 10]. This paper focuses on the nonverbal facial feedback listeners provide to speakers during a
dyadic conversation [34, 49, 18].
When listening to a speaker, we produce gestures in
response to several multimodal communication channels,
including speech, non-verbal gestures, and lexical semantics (the meaning of words) [28]. Previous studies have
shown that speech and gesture are informative of listener
responses [34, 49]. Here we ask how far we can get with
lexical semantics alone. This question is significant given
the abundant availability of textual dialogue data, in contrast
to the limited availability of conversational motion datasets.
To study the transferability of large language models to the
dyadic conversational motion domain, we propose the task
depicted in Figure 1 of predicting listener motion from the
raw text transcribed from the speaker’s words.
Since gesture is a conversational communication chan-

10083

