This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Troubleshooting Ethnic Quality Bias with Curriculum Domain Adaptation for
Face Image Quality Assessment
Fu-Zhao Ou1 Baoliang Chen1 Chongyi Li2 Shiqi Wang1 Sam Kwong1, 3
1
City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
3
Nankai University, Tianjin, China
Lingnan University, Hong Kong SAR, China
{fuzhao.ou, blchen6-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk lichongyi@nankai.edu.cn {shiqwang, cssamk}@cityu.edu.hk
https://github.com/oufuzhao/EQBM

Abstract
Face Image Quality Assessment (FIQA) lays the foundation for ensuring the stability and accuracy of face recognition systems. However, existing FIQA methods mainly formulate quality relationships within the training set to yield
quality scores, ignoring the generalization problem caused
by ethnic quality bias between the training and test sets.
Domain adaptation presents a potential solution to mitigate
the bias, but if FIQA is treated essentially as a regression
task, it will be limited by the challenge of feature scaling
in transfer learning. Additionally, how to guarantee source
risk is also an issue due to the lack of ground-truth labels of
the source domain for FIQA. This paper presents the first attempt in the field of FIQA to address these challenges with a
novel Ethnic-Quality-Bias Mitigating (EQBM) framework.
Specifically, to eliminate the restriction of scalar regression, we first compute the Likert-scale quality probability
distributions as source domain annotations. Furthermore,
we design an easy-to-hard training scheduler based on the
inter-domain uncertainty and intra-domain quality margin
as well as the ranking-based domain adversarial network
to enhance the effectiveness of transfer learning and further reduce the source risk in domain adaptation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the EQBM significantly
mitigates the quality bias and improves the generalization
capability of FIQA across races on different datasets.

1. Introduction
To maintain stable accuracy for face recognition systems
in the wild deployment circumstance, numerous Face Image Quality Assessment (FIQA) techniques have been developed [38]. The existing FIQA schemes build their approaches on the assumption that the training and test data
share similar distributions, and have shown promising outcomes on popular evaluation benchmarks [2, 21, 25, 33, 31,

Proposed Method

Previous FIQA Schemes

Intra-domain
Margin
Inter-domain
Uncertainty

Source Domain
Mitigate

FIQA
Model
Target Domain

Bias
Quality
Bias

Figure 1. Illustration of the two different FIQA schemes. Previous FIQA schemes focus on formulating new quality relationships within the source domain, which may lead to ethnic quality
bias due to the gap between the source and target domains. In
contrast, in our proposed technique, the intra-domain margin and
inter-domain uncertainty are involved in amending quality predictions of the target domain, which mitigates the ethnic quality bias.

41, 46, 52]. However, recently Babnik et al. [4] and Terhörst
et al. [45] emphasize the potential problem of ethnic quality bias that leads to generalization challenges when FIQA
models are deployed in real-world scenarios with different
demographic distributions.
On the one hand, the challenge stems from the unbalanced demographic attributes in datasets. For instance, mainstream FIQA training datasets, such as CASIAWebface [53], MS-Celeb-1M [20], and VGGFace2 [34], are
gathered from the Internet and contain people with unbalanced ethnic distributions. These datasets are overwhelmingly composed of people with Caucasian attributes, with
over 74% of the samples with this demographic. Such a
dramatic difference between the Caucasian (i.e. source domain) and other races (i.e., target domain) may lead to domain shifts in the deployment of FIQA models. Collecting and labeling more data along the underrepresented attributes for these million-scale training sets may be a solution but it is impractical. Moreover, the collection of face
images would be involved in private legal issues across different districts. On the other hand, existing FIQA methods [2, 21, 25, 31, 46] focus on exploring new quality consistency relationships between quality scores and the per-

20718

