This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Accurate and Fast Compressed Video Captioning
Yaojie Shen1,2∗ , Xin Gu1,2∗ , Kai Xu3 , Heng Fan4 , Longyin Wen3 , Libo Zhang1,2†
1
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
ByteDance Inc., San Jose, USA
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of North Texas, Denton TX, USA

Abstract
Existing video captioning approaches typically require
to first sample video frames from a decoded video and
then conduct a subsequent process (e.g., feature extraction
and/or captioning model learning). In this pipeline, manual
frame sampling may ignore key information in videos and
thus degrade performance. Additionally, redundant information in the sampled frames may result in low efficiency in
the inference of video captioning. Addressing this, we study
video captioning from a different perspective in compressed
domain, which brings multi-fold advantages over the existing pipeline: 1) Compared to raw images from the decoded
video, the compressed video, consisting of I-frames, motion vectors and residuals, is highly distinguishable, which
allows us to leverage the entire video for learning without manual sampling through a specialized model design;
2) The captioning model is more efficient in inference as
smaller and less redundant information is processed. We
propose a simple yet effective end-to-end transformer in the
compressed domain for video captioning that enables learning from the compressed video for captioning. We show that
even with a simple design, our method can achieve state-ofthe-art performance on different benchmarks while running
almost 2× faster than existing approaches. Code is available at https://github.com/acherstyx/CoCap.

1. Introduction
Video captioning is a representative example of applying
deep learning to the fields of computer vision and natural
language processing with a long list of applications, such
as blind navigation, video event commentary, and humancomputer interaction. To generate captions for a video, the
model needs to not only identify objects and actions in the
video, but also be able to express them accurately in natural
* The two authors make equal contributions and are co-first authors.
† Corresponding author: Libo Zhang (libo@iscas.ac.cn).

Video

Feature

Caption

Decoding

Extractor

Model

RGB Frames

2D/3D Features

a piece of garlic
is being chopped

Caption Words

(a) Three-step approach
Video

End-to-End Caption Model

Decoding

Compressed
Video

RGB Frames

a piece of garlic
is being chopped

Caption Words

(b) Two-step approach
End-to-End Caption Model in Compressed Domain

a piece of garlic
is being chopped

Caption Words
(c) Our one-step approach

Figure 1. Comparing our method with prior methods for video captioning. Prior works are all based on decoding video frames. The
difference between them is that some methods use offline extracted
multiple features as input and generate captions, while others directly take dense video frames as input. By avoiding heavy redundant information and offline multiple feature extraction, our
method speedup the caption generation process while maintaining
high quality results.

language. Despite significant progress, accurate and fast
video captioning remains a challenge.
Video captioning requires both 2D appearance information, which reflects the objects in the video, and 3D action
information, which reflects the actions. The interaction between these two types of information is crucial for accurately captioning the actions of objects in the video. Most
of the existing methods [36, 38, 22] are shown in Fig. 1
(the upper branch), mainly including the three-steps: (1)
Decoding the video and densely sampling frames. (2) Extracting the 2D/3D features of the video frames offline. (3)
Training the model based on these 2D/3D features. In these
methods, densely sampled video frames result in significant redundancy, which in turn increases the computation
and inference time of the model. This is because the model
needs to extract features from each video frame and use all

15558

