This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TextPSG: Panoptic Scene Graph Generation from Textual Descriptions
Chengyang Zhao 1 Yikang Shen 2 Zhenfang Chen 2
Mingyu Ding 3 Chuang Gan 2,4
1
Peking University 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
3
UC Berkley 4 UMass Amherst
“A girl is sitting on a wall next to a backpack.”

Abstract
Panoptic Scene Graph has recently been proposed for
comprehensive scene understanding. However, previous
works adopt a fully-supervised learning manner, requiring
large amounts of pixel-wise densely-annotated data, which
is always tedious and expensive to obtain. To address this
limitation, we study a new problem of Panoptic Scene Graph
Generation from Purely Textual Descriptions (Caption-toPSG). The key idea is to leverage the large collection of free
image-caption data on the Web alone to generate panoptic scene graphs. The problem is very challenging for three
constraints: 1) no location priors; 2) no explicit links between visual regions and textual entities; and 3) no predefined concept sets. To tackle this problem, we propose
a new framework TextPSG consisting of four modules, i.e.,
a region grouper, an entity grounder, a segment merger,
and a label generator, with several novel techniques. The
region grouper first groups image pixels into different segments and the entity grounder then aligns visual segments
with language entities based on the textual description of
the segment being referred to. The grounding results can
thus serve as pseudo labels enabling the segment merger to
learn the segment similarity as well as guiding the label
generator to learn object semantics and relation predicates,
resulting in a fine-grained structured scene understanding.
Our framework is effective, significantly outperforming the
baselines and achieving strong out-of-distribution robustness. We perform comprehensive ablation studies to corroborate the effectiveness of our design choices and provide an in-depth analysis to highlight future directions. Our
code, data, and results are available on our project page:
https://vis-www.cs.umass.edu/TextPSG.

1. Introduction
A scene graph is a directed-graph-based abstract representation of the objects and their relations within a scene.
It has been widely utilized to develop a structured scene
understanding of object semantics, locations, and relations,

next to

next to
sit on

previous bbox-based

(a)

our mask-based scene graph generation from captions

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Problem Overview. Different from the traditional
bbox-based form of the scene graph as shown in (a), Caption-toPrevious works using bbox.
PSG aims to generate the mask-based panoptic scene graph. In
Caption-to-PSG, the model has no access to any location priors,
explicit region-entity links, or pre-defined concept sets. Consequently, the model is required to learn partitioning and grounding
as illustrated in (b), as well as object semantics and relation predicates as illustrated in (c), all purely from textual descriptions.

which facilitates a variety of downstream applications, such
as image generation [14, 8], visual reasoning [42, 1, 39],
and robotics [2, 10].
Typically, in a scene graph, each node denotes an object in the scene located by a bounding box (bbox) with a
semantic label, and each directed edge denotes the relation
between a pair of objects with a predicate label. Nonetheless, a recent work [49] points out that such a bbox-based
form of scene graph is not ideal enough. Firstly, compared with pixel-wise segmentation masks, bboxes are less
fine-grained and may contain some noisy pixels belonging
to other objects, limiting the applications for some downstream tasks. For example, as shown in Fig. 1 (a), about
half of the pixels in the yellow bbox for girl belong to wall.
Secondly, it is challenging for bboxes to cover the entire
scene without ambiguities caused by overlaps, which prevents a scene graph from including every object in the scene
for a complete description. To this end, the work [49] proposes the concept of Panoptic Scene Graph (PSG), in which
each object is grounded by a panoptic segmentation mask,
to reach a comprehensive structured scene representation.

2839

