This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Occ2 Net: Robust Image Matching Based on 3D Occupancy Estimation for
Occluded Regions
Miao Fan

Mingrui Chen
Chen Hu
MEGVII Technology

Shuchang Zhou

{fanmiao02, chenmingrui, huchen, zsc}@megvii.com

Abstract
Image matching is a fundamental and critical task in various visual applications, such as Simultaneous Localization
and Mapping (SLAM) and image retrieval, which require
accurate pose estimation. However, most existing methods
ignore the occlusion relations between objects caused by
camera motion and scene structure. In this paper, we propose Occ2 Net, a novel image matching method that models
occlusion relations using 3D occupancy and infers matching points in occluded regions. Thanks to the inductive
bias encoded in the Occupancy Estimation (OE) module,
it greatly simpliﬁes bootstrapping of a multi-view consistent 3D representation that can then integrate information
from multiple views. Together with an Occlusion-Aware
(OA) module, it incorporates attention layers and rotation
alignment to enable matching between occluded and visible
points. We evaluate our method on both real-world and simulated datasets and demonstrate its superior performance
over state-of-the-art methods on several metrics, especially
in occlusion scenarios.

1. Introduction
Image matching is a fundamental and critical task in
various visual applications, such as SLAM and image retrieval. It aims to identify and correspond to the same or
similar structure/contents from two or more images. Image matching can be divided into two categories: featurebased methods [36, 22, 11, 37] and dense methods [40, 16].
Feature-based methods extract sparse keypoints and descriptors from images and match them based on similarity metrics, while dense methods estimate dense correspondences between pixels or patches of images.
However, both types of methods struggle with occlusion
scenarios, which are frequent in real-world environments.
Fig. 1 shows an example of these challenges. The two
images have a large disparity due to camera motion. Although there are considerable overlapping regions, the large

Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the Occ2 Net. (a) and (b) are images taken from different viewpoints, while (c) shows the matching process for occluded regions. In (c), two monitors are shown
with green and red masks indicating areas that are visible in (b) but
occluded in (a). By using Occ2 Net to extract consistent occupancy
features and match them between (a) and (b), the monitors that are
occluded in (a) can still be matched in (b), thus enabling Occ2 Net
to have the ability to perform matching under occlusion.

disparity causes occlusion, which signiﬁcantly reduces the
number of visible matching pairs. Moreover, in this example, both the ground and wall in the scene have low texture,
and large areas are visible in image (b) but occluded in image (a), such as the two distinguishable monitors marked
as green and red. These factors make it difﬁcult for existing algorithms to extract enough matching pairs for camera
pose estimation. Scenarios like these are common in indoor
navigation or autonomous driving. To tackle these problems, we propose a novel image matching method called
Occ2 Net, which matches not only the visible point pairs but
also the occluded points and the visible points.
Based on this observation, we design Occ2 Net to match
3D points. Following NeRF [26], we treat each pixel as
a ray emitted from the corresponding camera. NeRF [26]
obtains 3D points along the ray by sampling at equal intervals and learns their information by differentiable render-

9652

