This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Holistic Geometric Feature Learning for Structured Reconstruction
Ziqiong Lu∗
Linxi Huan∗
Qiyuan Ma
Xianwei Zheng†
The State Key Lab. LIESMARS, Wuhan University
{zql2018, whu hlx, qiyuanma, zhengxw}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
The inference of topological principles is a key problem in structured reconstruction. We observe that wrongly
predicted topological relationships are often incurred by
the lack of holistic geometry clues in low-level features.
Inspired by the fact that massive signals can be compactly described with frequency analysis, we experimentally explore the efficiency and tendency of learning structure geometry in the frequency domain. Accordingly, we
propose a frequency-domain feature learning strategy (FLearn) to fuse scattered geometric fragments holistically
for topology-intact structure reasoning. Benefiting from
the parsimonious design, the F-Learn strategy can be easily deployed into a deep reconstructor with a lightweight
model modification. Experiments demonstrate that the FLearn strategy can effectively introduce structure awareness into geometric primitive detection and topology inference, bringing significant performance improvement to final
structured reconstruction. Code and pre-trained models are
available at https://github.com/Geo-Tell/F-Learn.

1. Introduction
The structured reconstruction models the shape grammar/topology that depicts procedural shape generation [24],
which can facilitate various downstream vision tasks, such
as feature matching [19, 44], 3D modeling [23, 32] and
3D scene understanding [47, 42]. The recovery of a shape
topology is generally realized via two steps: (i) geometric primitive detection and (ii) graph inference based on
extracted geometric primitives (e.g., corners and edges).
Following this primitive-to-structure principle, previous researchers usually resort to heatmaps of corners and edges
for subsequent structure reasoning [18, 47, 42, 2]. With
low-level parsing tasks promoted by deep learning techniques, many works have greatly improved the performance
of high-level structure recovery in recent years [42, 24, 2].
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Researchers commonly dedicate to graph inference with
geometric features generated by proven hierarchical backbones (e.g., ResNet [10]) for structured reconstruction.
However, incorrect topology inference remains a significant
problem due to the lack of holistic geometric clues in the
low-level features. Specifically, the geometric fragments
extracted by shallow layers can hardly be fused into structurally informative features, leading to wrongly reasoned
topological principles (as shown in Fig. 1 (a)). Different
from the prior arts that focus on graph inference, this paper turns to study an efficient strategy for holistically learning structure-related features with low-level geometric fragments.
Low-level geometric features fundamentally support
high-level feature extraction and structure recovery. Specifically, the low-level shallow-layer feature maps provide information for precise geometry localization, which is essential for high-level primitive detection and topology inference. Restricted by the limited receptive field, it is hard
to holistically capture structure geometries in the shallow
layers. We consider that the low efficiency of processing
low-level geometric fragments in the space domain is the
root cause.
Inspired by the fact that low-level features can be compactly encoded in the frequency domain, we are interested
in achieving efficient geometry feature learning with frequency analysis. In the frequency map of a given feature
map, every value encodes the global information of the feature map regarding the corresponding frequency. Therefore,
performing convolution operations in the frequency domain
actually means directly combining the spatial information
in a holistic manner.
To be concrete, given a set of low-level feature
maps {fn (x, y)} and the corresponding frequency map
{Fn (u, v)}, the information encoded at (ui , vj ) describes
a certain changing pattern of signals in the space domain.
When applying a convolution operation to a frequency position (ui , vj ), the feature components of related frequencies
in every map of {fn (x, y)} will be merged across the channel dimension in the space domain. As the low-level geometric information generally belongs to high-frequency sig-

21807

