This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

With a Little Help from your own Past:
Prototypical Memory Networks for Image Captioning
Manuele Barraco1 Sara Sarto1 Marcella Cornia1 Lorenzo Baraldi1 Rita Cucchiara1,2
1
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy 2 IIT-CNR, Pisa, Italy
{name.surname}@unimore.it

Abstract

Transformer-based Captioner

A person on a
snowboard on
a snowcovered
ground.

Captioner with Learnable Keys/Values

A boy on a
snowboard
standing in
the snow.

a)

1. Introduction
Connecting vision and natural language via descriptive
expressions is a fundamental human capability and its replication represents a crucial step towards machine intelligence, with applications that range from better humanmachine interfaces [25] to accessibility [15]. The task of
image captioning [21, 55, 60], which defines such capability, requires an algorithm to describe a visual input with a
natural language sentence. As such, it features unique challenges that span from a grounded and detailed understanding of the visual input [8, 46], to the selection of visual objects and semantics that are worth mentioning [27] and their

b)

Decoder

learnable vectors

Encoder

Image captioning, like many tasks involving vision and
language, currently relies on Transformer-based architectures for extracting the semantics in an image and translating it into linguistically coherent descriptions. Although
successful, the attention operator only considers a weighted
summation of projections of the current input sample, therefore ignoring the relevant semantic information which can
come from the joint observation of other samples. In this
paper, we devise a network which can perform attention
over activations obtained while processing other training
samples, through a prototypical memory model. Our memory models the distribution of past keys and values through
the definition of prototype vectors which are both discriminative and compact. Experimentally, we assess the performance of the proposed model on the COCO dataset, in comparison with carefully designed baselines and state-of-theart approaches, and by investigating the role of each of the
proposed components. We demonstrate that our proposal
can increase the performance of an encoder-decoder Transformer by 3.7 CIDEr points both when training in crossentropy only and when fine-tuning with self-critical sequence training. Source code and trained models are available at: https://github.com/aimagelab/PMA-Net.

A boy standing
on a snowboard
in front of snowcovered
mountains.

Prototypical
Memory Attention

c)
…

prototype keys
prototype values

past iterations

Figure 1. Comparison between (a) a standard Transformer-based
captioner; (b) a captioner with learnable memory vectors [10] and
(c) our prototypical memory network.

translation into a fluent and coherent sentence.
Image captioning architectures comprise an image encoding part and a language generation approach [49] and
focus on developing appropriate connections between the
visual and textual modality. Examples of such innovations
include the usage of attentive-like structures [4, 36], the incorporation of attributes [26, 66], objects [4, 64] or scene
graphs [62, 65]. Regardless of the specific approach used to
connect the two modalities, though, almost all of the works
developed in the last years share the usage of the Transformer architecture [53]. Such architecture, indeed, is a
natural choice for the task, as it can connect two modalities
thanks to its encoder-decoder design and the cross-attention
operator, and provides unprecedented performance in sequence and set modeling and generation [10, 11, 40].
One of the key properties of attention layers is that the
output is computed as a weighted combination of linear projections of the inputs. While this provides an ideal context
for both visual understanding and sequence generation, it
also leaves the door open for injecting relevant informa-

3021

