This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Incubation: Training Large Models by Divide-and-Conquering
Zanlin Ni1 * Yulin Wang1∗ Jiangwei Yu1 Haojun Jiang1 Yue Cao2 Gao Huang1,2†
1
Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China
{nzl22, wang-yl19, yu-jw19, jhj20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
caoyue10@gmail.com, gaohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed a remarkable success of
large deep learning models. However, training these models is challenging due to high computational costs, painfully
slow convergence, and overfitting issues. In this paper,
we present Deep Incubation, a novel approach that enables the efficient and effective training of large models
by dividing them into smaller sub-modules which can be
trained separately and assembled seamlessly. A key challenge for implementing this idea is to ensure the compatibility of the independently trained sub-modules. To address this issue, we first introduce a global, shared meta
model, which is leveraged to implicitly link all the modules together, and can be designed as an extremely small
network with negligible computational overhead. Then
we propose a module incubation algorithm, which trains
each sub-module to replace the corresponding component
of the meta model and accomplish a given learning task.
Despite the simplicity, our approach effectively encourages each sub-module to be aware of its role in the target large model, such that the finally-learned sub-modules
can collaborate with each other smoothly after being assembled. Empirically, our method can outperform endto-end (E2E) training in well-established training setting
and shows transferable performance gain for downstream
tasks (e.g., object detection and image segmentation on
COCO and ADE20K). Our code is available at https:
//github.com/LeapLabTHU/Deep-Incubation.

1. Introduction
Large neural networks have achieved remarkable success across various domains such as natural language understanding [37, 8], computer vision [9, 57] and reinforcement
learning [41, 6]. In particular, the foundation models [7, 56]
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

🔥 Training

Forward

Modular Training
Machine I

Machine II

Machine III

Module
I 🔥

Module
II 🔥

Module
III 🔥

Assemble
Target Model
Module
I

Module
II

Module
III

Figure 1: An illustration of our idea. We first train the
sub-modules of a large model fully independently, and then
assemble the trained modules to obtain the target model.
heavily rely on large deep learning models to achieve stateof-the-art performance. The research field has developed
a diverse set of strategies for efficient and adaptive inference of deep models [50, 48, 21, 18, 20, 36]. However, the
training of large models still remains challenging in several
aspects. On infrastructure side, centralized resources with
strong computational and memory capacities are often required [27, 12, 57, 13]. On optimization side, the training
process tends to be unstable, difficult to converge, and vulnerable to overfitting [27, 15].
In this paper, we propose a divide-and-conquer strategy
to improve the effectiveness (better generalization performance) and the efficiency (lower training cost) for training
large models. In specific, we divide a large model into
smaller sub-modules, train these modules separately, and
then assemble them to obtain the final model. Compared
with directly training the whole large network from scratch,
starting the learning on top of smaller modules yields a
faster and more stable converge process and higher robustness against overfitting. The independent nature also allows
the training of each module to be performed on different
17335

