This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffPose: SpatioTemporal Diffusion Model for Video-Based
Human Pose Estimation
Runyang Feng1,2 , Yixing Gao1,2 ,* Tze Ho Elden Tse3 , Xueqing Ma1,2 , Hyung Jin Chang3
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University,
2
Engineering Research Center of Knowledge-Driven Human-Machine Intelligence,
Ministry of Education, China, 3 School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham
{fengry22, maxq21}@mails.jlu.edu.cn, gaoyixing@jlu.edu.cn,
txt994@student.bham.ac.uk, h.j.chang@bham.ac.uk

Abstract
Denoising diffusion probabilistic models that were initially proposed for realistic image generation have recently
shown success in various perception tasks (e.g., object detection and image segmentation) and are increasingly gaining attention in computer vision. However, extending such
models to multi-frame human pose estimation is non-trivial
due to the presence of the additional temporal dimension
in videos. More importantly, learning representations that
focus on keypoint regions is crucial for accurate localization of human joints. Nevertheless, the adaptation of the
diffusion-based methods remains unclear on how to achieve
such objective. In this paper, we present DiffPose, a novel
diffusion architecture that formulates video-based human
pose estimation as a conditional heatmap generation problem. First, to better leverage temporal information, we propose SpatioTemporal Representation Learner which aggregates visual evidences across frames and uses the resulting
features in each denoising step as a condition. In addition, we present a mechanism called Lookup-based MultiScale Feature Interaction that determines the correlations
between local joints and global contexts across multiple
scales. This mechanism generates delicate representations
that focus on keypoint regions. Altogether, by extending
diffusion models, we show two unique characteristics from
DiffPose on pose estimation task: (i) the ability to combine
multiple sets of pose estimates to improve prediction accuracy, particularly for challenging joints, and (ii) the ability
to adjust the number of iterative steps for feature refinement
without retraining the model. DiffPose sets new state-ofthe-art results on three benchmarks: PoseTrack2017, PoseTrack2018, and PoseTrack21.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation has been extensively studied in
computer vision, with the aim of detecting all instances of
* Corresponding Author

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of the original diffusion model where q
and pθ refer to the diffusion and denoising process, respectively.
(b) In this work, we propose a novel framework named DiffPose
which formulates video-based human pose estimation as a generative process of keypoint heatmaps.

people from images and localizing anatomical keypoints for
each individual [20, 57, 63, 68]. It finds numerous applications ranging from human-computer interaction and augmented reality [21, 22] to behavior analysis and surveillance tracking [36, 40, 56, 64, 65, 66]. Conventional
approaches [55, 69, 82] mainly employ the probabilistic
graphical model or the pictorial structure model. Fueled by
the explosion of deep learning, Convolutional Neural Networks [8, 39, 40, 63] and Vision Transformers [38, 75, 80]
have witnessed significant progress in this task.
Until recently, denoising diffusion probabilistic models
[30, 58], which are a type of generative models, have received much research attention for surpassing other methods such as GANs and achieving state-of-the-art generative
results [6, 14]. The superior performance of the diffusion
model has facilitated its expansion in diverse applications,
such as super-resolution [54], inpainting [42], and image
deblurring [52]. Following the demonstration of the effectiveness of diffusion models as representation learners for
discriminative computer vision problems [6], several contemporary approaches have successfully employed the diffusion model for perception tasks, including object detec-

14861

