This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PØDA: Prompt-driven Zero-shot Domain Adaptation
Mohammad Fahes1

Tuan-Hung Vu1,2

Andrei Bursuc1,2 Patrick Pérez1,2
1
2
Inria
Valeo.ai
https://astra-vision.github.io/PODA

Abstract
Domain adaptation has been vastly investigated in computer vision but still requires access to target images at train
time, which might be intractable in some uncommon conditions. In this paper, we propose the task of ‘Prompt-driven
Zero-shot Domain Adaptation’, where we adapt a model
trained on a source domain using only a general description in natural language of the target domain, i.e., a prompt.
First, we leverage a pretrained contrastive vision-language
model (CLIP) to optimize affine transformations of source
features, steering them towards the target text embedding
while preserving their content and semantics. To achieve
this, we propose Prompt-driven Instance Normalization
(PIN). Second, we show that these prompt-driven augmentations can be used to perform zero-shot domain adaptation for semantic segmentation. Experiments demonstrate
that our method significantly outperforms CLIP-based style
transfer baselines on several datasets for the downstream
task at hand, even surpassing one-shot unsupervised domain adaptation. A similar boost is observed on object detection and image classification. The code is available at
https://github.com/astra-vision/PODA .

1. Introduction
The last few years have witnessed tremendous success
of supervised semantic segmentation methods towards better high-resolution predictions [5, 6, 9, 31, 50], multi-scale
processing [30,57] or computational efficiency [56]. In controlled settings where segmentation models are trained using data from the targeted operational design domains, the
accuracy can meet the high industry-level expectations on
in-domain data; yet, when tested on out-of-distribution data,
these models often undergo drastic performance drops [35].
This hinders their applicability in real-world scenarios for
critical applications like in-the-wild autonomous driving.
To mitigate this domain-shift problem [2], unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [16, 18, 45, 46, 48, 59] has
emerged as a promising solution. Training of UDA methods requires labeled data from source domain and unlabeled

PØDA w/ prompt

Raoul de Charette1

PØDA w/ prompt

"driving at
night"

"driving
through fire"

segmenter
(trained on
Cityscapes

PØDA w/ prompt

"driving in
old movie"

PØDA w/ prompt

"driving in
sandstorm"

Figure 1. Zero-shot adaptation with prompt. PØDA enables the
adaptation of a segmenter model (here, DeepLabv3+ trained on
the source dataset Cityscapes) to unseen conditions with only a
prompt. Source-only predictions are shown as smaller segmentation masks to the left or right of the test images.

data from target domain. Though seemingly effortless, for
some conditions even collecting unlabeled data is complex.
For example, as driving through fire or sandstorm rarely occurs in real life, collecting raw data in such conditions is
non-trivial. One may argue on using Internet images for
UDA. However, in the industrial context, the practice of using public data is limited or forbidden. Recent works aim to
reduce the burden of target data collection campaigns by devising one-shot [33,54] UDA methods, i.e., using one target
image for training. Pushing further this line of research, we
frame the challenging new task of prompt-driven zero-shot
domain adaptation where given a target domain description
in natural language (i.e., a prompt), our method accordingly
adapts the segmentation model to this domain of interest.
Figure 1 outlines the primary goal of our work with a few
qualitative examples. Without seeing any fire or sandstorm
images during training, the adapted models succeed in segmenting out critical scene objects, exhibiting fewer errors
than the original source-only model.
Our method, illustrated in Fig. 2, is made possible by
leveraging the vision-language connections from the seminal CLIP model [39]. Trained on 400M web-crawled
image-text pairs, CLIP has revolutionized multi-modal representation learning, bringing outstanding capability to

18623

