This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Realistic Evaluation of Industrial Continual Learning Scenarios with
an Emphasis on Energy Consumption and Computational Footprint
Vivek Chavan*

Paul Koch

Marian Schlüter

Clemens Briese

Fraunhofer IPK, Berlin, Germany

Abstract
Incremental Learning (IL) aims to develop Machine
Learning (ML) models that can learn from continuous
streams of data and mitigate catastrophic forgetting. We
analyse the current state-of-the-art Class-IL implementations and demonstrate why the current body of research
tends to be one-dimensional, with an excessive focus on accuracy metrics. A realistic evaluation of Continual Learning methods should also emphasise energy consumption
and overall computational load for a comprehensive understanding. This paper addresses research gaps between
current IL research and industrial project environments,
including varying incremental tasks and the introduction
of Joint Training in tandem with IL. We introduce InVar100 (Industrial Objects in Varied Contexts), a novel dataset
meant to simulate the visual environments in industrial setups and perform various experiments for IL. Additionally,
we incorporate explainability (using class activations) to
interpret the model predictions. Our approach, RECIL
(Real-World Scenarios and Energy Efficiency Considerations for Class Incremental Learning) provides meaningful
insights about the applicability of IL approaches in practical use cases. The overarching aim is to bring the Incremental Learning and Green AI fields together and encourage the application of CIL methods in real-world scenarios.
Code and dataset are available.

1

Introduction

Advances in Machine Learning (ML) and Computer
Vision have demonstrated the capabilities of deep neural
network-based (NN) models to learn from diverse data and
*Correspondence: vivek.chavan@ipk.fraunhofer.de
Dataset: http://dx.doi.org/10.24406/fordatis/266.2
DOI: 10.24406/fordatis/266.2
Code: https://github.com/Vivek9Chavan/RECIL

PODNet
POD-AANet

DER
Joint (CJT)

90

FOSTER

3

80
70

2

60

1

50
20

40

60

80 100

0

0

5

10

15

Top-1 Accuracy (%)

Energy Consumption(kWh)

vs. Total Classes

vs. Task number

Figure 1: Top-1 Accuracy and Task-wise Energy Consumption for ImageNet-Subset for different CIL approaches.
Task 0 introduces 10 classes, and all subsequent tasks add
5 classes. The total energy consumption of an approach is
given by the area under the curve. Comparing the methods
using only accuracy provides an incomplete understanding;
computational footprint consideration is also important.

perform a multitude of tasks with high accuracy [15,30,41].
The utilisation of ML in industrial applications is expected
to increase substantially [6, 48, 52, 54]. A gradual rampup of raw materials, components, and related data occurs
in industrial projects with long timelines (e.g. manufacturing [17, 29], reverse logistics [2, 57]). This necessitates the
retraining of the ML model by sequentially learning from
new data streams (tasks). It is established that NN models tend to forget the information learned from older data
as they are retrained on new information; this phenomenon
is known as Catastrophic forgetting [21, 27]. Iteratively
retraining the model from scratch on the entire appended
dataset is not a viable long-term solution, since it would result in a compounding of training times and computational
load. Such industrial applications present an opportunity
for widespread adoption and implementation of Continual
Learning.

11506

