This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SPACE

: Speech-driven Portrait Animation with Controllable Expression
Siddharth Gururani, Arun Mallya, Ting-Chun Wang, Rafael Valle, Ming-Yu Liu
NVIDIA
{sgururani, amallya, tingchunw, rafaelvalle, mingyul}@nvidia.com

Pose

Generated

Transferred

Generated

Generated

Emotion

Neutral

Neutral

Happy (top) / Sad (bottom)

Surprise (top) / Fear (bottom)

Fig. 1: SPACE enables speech-driven animation of a portrait, with control over the output pose, emotions, and intensities of expressions.
Unlike prior works, it can handle a wide range of input poses and produce realistic and high-resolution outputs. Please visit the project page
for the video.

Abstract
Animating portraits using speech has received growing
attention in recent years, with various creative and practical
use cases. An ideal generated video should have good lip
sync with the audio, natural facial expressions and head
motions, and high frame quality. In this work, we present
SPACE, which uses speech and a single image to generate
high-resolution, and expressive videos with realistic head
pose, without requiring a driving video. It uses a multi-stage
approach, combining the controllability of facial landmarks
with the high-quality synthesis power of a pretrained face
generator. SPACE also allows for the control of emotions
and their intensities. Our method outperforms prior methods
in objective metrics for image quality and facial motions
and is strongly preferred by users in pair-wise comparisons.
Please visit the project page to view the videos and to see

more results: https://research.nvidia.com/labs/dir/space/.

1. Introduction
Speech-driven portrait animation, which concerns animating a still image of a face using an arbitrary input speech
signal, has a wide range of applications. For example, it
can be used for driving characters in computer games, dubbing in movies, and animating avatars for virtual assistance,
virtual reality, and telecommunications. It has to use the
provided speech to predict all the nuances in human facial
expressions while also guaranteeing that the animation looks
natural, matches what is being said in the speech sample,
and preserves the per-frame and video quality.
These requirements make the task of speech-driven portrait animation challenging. To make things harder, there

20914

