This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Similarity Min-Max: Zero-Shot Day-Night Domain Adaptation
Rundong Luo1,2,3 Wenjing Wang1 Wenhan Yang4 Jiaying Liu1 *
1
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
School of EECS, Peking University 3 School of CS, Peking University 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory

Abstract
Low-light conditions not only hamper human visual experience but also degrade the model’s performance on
downstream vision tasks. While existing works make remarkable progress on day-night domain adaptation, they
rely heavily on domain knowledge derived from the taskspecific nighttime dataset. This paper challenges a more
complicated scenario with border applicability, i.e., zeroshot day-night domain adaptation, which eliminates reliance on any nighttime data. Unlike prior zero-shot adaptation approaches emphasizing either image-level translation or model-level adaptation, we propose a similarity minmax paradigm that considers them under a unified framework. On the image level, we darken images towards minimum feature similarity to enlarge the domain gap. Then on
the model level, we maximize the feature similarity between
the darkened images and their normal-light counterparts
for better model adaptation. To the best of our knowledge,
this work represents the pioneering effort in jointly optimizing both levels, resulting in a significant improvement of
model generalizability. Extensive experiments demonstrate
our method’s effectiveness and broad applicability on various nighttime vision tasks, including classification, semantic segmentation, visual place recognition, and video action
recognition. Our project page is available at https://
red-fairy.github.io/ZeroShotDayNightDAWebpage/.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are sensitive to insufficient illumination, and such deficiency has posed significant threats to
safety-critical computer vision applications. Intuitively, insufficient illumination can be handled by low-light enhancement methods [23, 30, 34, 56, 60, 63], which aim at restoring
low-light images to normal-light. However, enhancement
models do not necessarily benefit downstream high-level vision tasks as they are optimized for human visual perception
* Corresponding author.

Image Level

Zero-Shot
Translation
Daytime

Inference on unseen
nighttime domains

Synthetic
Nighttime
Model Level

Ours
SOTA
Baseline

65.87%

day feature
night feature

90.40%

Classification

Model
Adaptation
Minimize Similarity
Maximize Similarity

Segmentation
44.87%
Place
Recognition

51.52%

Video Action
Recognition

Figure 1. Left: Illustration of our similarity min-max framework
for zero-shot day-night domain adaptation. Right: Our framework
achieves state-of-the-art results on multiple downstream high-level
vision tasks without seeing real nighttime images during training.

and neglect the need for machine vision.
Much existing literature has focused on improving machine vision performance at night through domain adaptation. By aligning the distribution statistics between
the nighttime and daytime datasets through image translation [2, 12, 45], self-supervised learning [52, 53], or multistage algorithms [10, 46, 47], these methods have greatly
improved models’ performance in nighttime environments.
The primary assumption of domain adaptation is that the
target domain data is readily available. Nevertheless, obtaining data from the task-specific target domain may be
challenging in extreme practical application scenerios such
as deep-space exploration and deep-sea analysis.
To reduce the requirement on target domain data, zeroshot domain adaptation has emerged as a promising research direction, where adaptation is performed without accessing the target domain. Regarding day-night domain
adaptation, the primary challenge is learning illuminationrobust representations generalizable to both day and night
modalities. To accomplish this goal under zero-shot constraints, Lengyel et al. [29] proposed a color invariant convolution for handling illumination changes. Cui et al. [8]
designed a Reverse ISP pipeline and generated synthetic
nighttime images with pseudo labels. However, image-level
methods simply consider synthetic nighttime as pseudo-

8104

