This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SINC: Spatial Composition of 3D Human Motions
for Simultaneous Action Generation
Nikos Athanasiou*1
Mathis Petrovich⇤1,2
Michael J. Black1
Gül Varol2
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
2
LIGM, École des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, France

ICCV ‘23 Mathis version, trying to align
sinc.is.tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Our goal is to synthesize 3D human motions given textual inputs describing simultaneous actions, for example ‘waving hand’
while ‘walking’ at the same time. We refer to generating such
simultaneous movements as performing spatial compositions.
In contrast to temporal compositions that seek to transition from
one action to another, spatial compositing requires understanding which
body raise
partstheare
involved in{raise
which
action,
to be able to
the arms,
squat}
{walk forward,
arms}
move them simultaneously. Motivated by the observation that
the correspondence between actions and body parts is encoded
in powerful language models, we extract this knowledge by
prompting GPT-3 with text such as “what are the body parts
involved in the action <action name>?”, while also providing
the parts list and few-shot examples. Given this action-part
mapping, we combine body parts from two motions together
and establish the first automated method to spatially compose
with the left hand,
two {squat,
actions.
data{wave
with
actions
kick
withcompositional
the right foot}
waveHowever,
with the righttraining
hand}
is always limited by the combinatorics. Hence, we further create synthetic data with this approach, and use it to train a new
state-of-the-art text-to-motion generation model, called SINC
(“SImultaneous actioN Compositions for 3D human motions”).
In our experiments, we find that training with such GPT-guided
synthetic data improves spatial composition generation over
baselines. Our code is publicly available at sinc.is.tue.mpg.de.

1. Introduction
Text-conditioned 3D human motion generation has recently
attracted increasing interest in the research community
[4, 15, 44], where the task is to input natural language
descriptions of actions and to output motion sequences that
semantically correspond to the text. Such controlled motion
synthesis has a variety of applications in fields that rely on
motion capture data, such as special effects, games, and virtual
reality. While there have been promising results in this direction,
* Equal contribution

{put hands on the waist,
move torso left}

{put hands on the waist,
lean forwards}

{put hands on the waist,
move torso right}

{sit down,
drink from a cup}

{sit down,
eat with both hands}

{sit down,
stretch with both arms}

Figure 1. Goal: We demonstrate the task of spatial compositions in
human motion synthesis. We generate 3D motions for a pair of actions,
defined by a pair of textual descriptions. Here, we provide six sample
input-output illustrations from our model. For example, we input the
set of actions{‘put hands on the waist’, ‘move torso left’} and generate
one motion that simultaneously performs both.

fine-grained descriptions remain out of reach. Consider the
scenario in which a movie production needs a particular motion
of someone jumping down from a building. One may generate
an initial motion with one description, and then gradually
refine it until the desired motion is obtained, e.g., {‘jumping
down’, ‘with arms behind the back’, ‘while bending the knees’}.
State-of-the-art methods [9, 44] often fail to produce reasonable
motions when conditioned on fine-grained text describing
multiple actions. In this work, we take a step towards this
goal by focusing on the spatial composition of motions. In
other words, we aim to generate one motion depicting multiple
simultaneous actions; see Figure 1. This paves the way for

9984

