This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Under-Display Camera Image Restoration with Scattering Effect
†

Binbin Song1 , Xiangyu Chen1,2 , Shuning Xu1 , and Jiantao Zhou1
1
State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
2
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{yb97426, jtzhou}@umac.mo, {chxy95, rebeccaxu0418}@gmail.com

Abstract
The under-display camera (UDC) provides consumers
with a full-screen visual experience without any obstruction due to notches or punched holes. However, the semitransparent nature of the display inevitably introduces the
severe degradation into UDC images. In this work, we address the UDC image restoration problem with the specific
consideration of the scattering effect caused by the display.
We explicitly model the scattering effect by treating the display as a piece of homogeneous scattering medium. With
the physical model of the scattering effect, we improve the
image formation pipeline for the image synthesis to construct a realistic UDC dataset with ground truths. To suppress the scattering effect for the eventual UDC image recovery, a two-branch restoration network is designed. More
specifically, the scattering branch leverages global modeling capabilities of the channel-wise self-attention to estimate parameters of the scattering effect from degraded images. While the image branch exploits the local representation advantage of CNN to recover clear scenes, implicitly
guided by the scattering branch. Extensive experiments are
conducted on both real-world and synthesized data, demonstrating the superiority of the proposed method over the
state-of-the-art UDC restoration techniques. The source
code and dataset are available at https://github.
com/NamecantbeNULL/SRUDC.

1. Introduction
The adoption of under-display cameras (UDCs) has
gained the popularity as a solution to avoid the inconvenience of notches and punched holes on the screen. This
design meets the growing demand for full-screen hand-held
devices and improves consumers’ visual experience. However, the semi-transparent nature of the display covered on
† Corresponding author.

(a) UDC image

(b) DISCNet [6]

(c) DAGF [31]

(d) UDCUnet [18]

(e) BNUDC [11]

(f) Ours

Figure 1. An example of the UDC image restoration on a realscene image. (a) Degraded UDC image, (b-e) Outputs of stateof-the-art methods w/o considering the scattering effect, (f) Our
result, capable of removing the haziness and contrast distortion,
while restoring fine details. (Zoom in for a better view.)

the camera inevitably introduces various types of the degradation, e.g., contrast distortion, blurring, haziness, noise,
and diffraction artifacts around light sources, into the captured UDC images. To mitigate these issues, rapidly evolving UDC image restoration methods [42, 6, 14, 11, 8, 21,
43, 12, 4, 31, 7, 5] in recent years are dedicated to recovering degraded images. Most of these methods focus on
the degradation of high-frequency components, e.g., blurring, noise, and diffraction artifacts, while simply modeling
the deterioration of low-frequency components as the pixel
intensity attenuation. Whereas, the scattering effect of the
display, which can result in the degradation such as con-

12580

