This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PGFed: Personalize Each Client’s Global Objective for Federated Learning
Jun Luo1 Matias Mendieta2 Chen Chen2 Shandong Wu1,3,4,5
1
Intelligent Systems Program, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
2
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL
3
Department of Radiology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
4
Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
5
Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
jul117@pitt.edu

ma584394@ucf.edu

chen.chen@crcv.ucf.edu

wus3@upmc.edu

Abstract
Personalized federated learning has received an upsurge
of attention due to the mediocre performance of conventional federated learning (FL) over heterogeneous data.
Unlike conventional FL which trains a single global consensus model, personalized FL allows different models for
different clients. However, existing personalized FL algorithms only implicitly transfer the collaborative knowledge
across the federation by embedding the knowledge into the
aggregated model or regularization. We observed that this
implicit knowledge transfer fails to maximize the potential
of each client’s empirical risk toward other clients. Based
on our observation, in this work, we propose Personalized
Global Federated Learning (PGFed), a novel personalized
FL framework that enables each client to personalize its
own global objective by explicitly and adaptively aggregating the empirical risks of itself and other clients. To avoid
massive (O(N 2 )) communication overhead and potential
privacy leakage while achieving this, each client’s risk
is estimated through a first-order approximation for other
clients’ adaptive risk aggregation. On top of PGFed, we
develop a momentum upgrade, dubbed PGFedMo, to more
efficiently utilize clients’ empirical risks. Our extensive experiments on four datasets under different federated settings show consistent improvements of PGFed over previous state-of-the-art methods. The code is publicly available
at https://github.com/ljaiverson/pgfed.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the prosperity of federated learning (FL) [26, 14, 21, 39] in collaborative machine
learning where the participating clients are subject to strict
privacy rules [38]. Conventional FL aims to train a single global consensus model by orchestrating the participat-

Figure 1. In PGFed, the explicit collaborative knowledge transfer shows in the design of the local objective as a “personalized
global” objective at client i, where non-local risks are involved.

ing clients with a central server. The most notable FL algorithm, FedAvg [26], proceeds the training by exchanging between clients and server only the locally updated
and globally aggregated model weights, leaving the private
datasets intact. As a privacy-preserving machine learning
technique, FL tremendously boosts new collaborations of
decentralized parties in a number of areas [41, 16, 24, 14].
Unfortunately, along with the emergence of conventional
FL, new challenges have been posed in terms of systems and
statistical heterogeneity [21]. Systems heterogeneity addresses the variability of clients’ computation abilities, sizes
of storage, or even the choices of model architecture due to
different hardware constraints of the clients. Whereas statistical heterogeneity, the focus of this work, refers to the
non-IID data among the clients, which could lead to nonguaranteed convergence [22, 30] and poor generalizability
performance [32], even after fine-tuning [13].
Over the years, the mediocre performance of conventional FL over heterogeneous data has not only promoted
solutions that improve the single consensus model on top
of FedAvg [22, 1, 15, 20], a new paradigm, personalized
FL [36, 18], has emerged as well. In this paradigm, personalized models are allowed for each individual client. Some
efforts in this direction focus on different personalized layers and optimization techniques [23, 5, 29]. Leveraging

3946

