This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Kick Back & Relax: Learning to Reconstruct the World by Watching SlowTV
Jaime Spencer
University of Surrey

Chris Russell
Oxford Internet Institute

j.spencermartin@surrey.ac.uk

christopher.m.russell@gmail.com

Simon Hadfield
University of Surrey

Richard Bowden
University of Surrey

s.hadfield@surrey.ac.uk

r.bowden@surrey.ac.uk

Image

Ground-truth

Ours

Baseline [56]

Figure 1: Zero-shot Generalization. We present the first SS-MDE model capable of generalizing to a wide-range of complex environments. This is achieved by training on the novel large-scale SlowTV dataset. We outperform other existing self-supervised methods and
perform on par with recent supervised SotA [47, 46, 72].

Abstract
Self-supervised monocular depth estimation (SS-MDE)
has the potential to scale to vast quantities of data. Unfortunately, existing approaches limit themselves to the automotive domain, resulting in models incapable of generalizing
to complex environments such as natural or indoor settings.
To address this, we propose a large-scale SlowTV dataset
curated from YouTube, containing an order of magnitude
more data than existing automotive datasets. SlowTV contains 1.7M images from a rich diversity of environments,
such as worldwide seasonal hiking, scenic driving and
scuba diving. Using this dataset, we train an SS-MDE
model that provides zero-shot generalization to a large collection of indoor/outdoor datasets. The resulting model outperforms all existing SSL approaches and closes the gap on
supervised SoTA, despite using a more efficient architecture.
We additionally introduce a collection of best-practices
to further maximize performance and zero-shot generalization. This includes 1) aspect ratio augmentation, 2) camera intrinsic estimation, 3) support frame randomization
and 4) flexible motion estimation. Code is available at
https://github.com/jspenmar/slowtv_monodepth.

1. Introduction
Reliably reconstructing the 3-D structure of the environment is a crucial component of many computer vision
pipelines, including autonomous driving, robotics, augmented reality and scene understanding. Despite being
an inherently ill-posed task, monocular depth estimation
(MDE) has become of great interest due to its flexibility
and applicability to many fields.
While traditional supervised methods achieve impressive
results, they are limited both by the availability and quality of annotated datasets. LiDAR data is expensive to collect and frequently exhibits boundary artefacts due to motion correction. Meanwhile, Structure-from-Motion (SfM)
is computationally expensive and can produce noisy, incomplete or incorrect reconstructions. Self-supervised learning
(SSL) instead leverages the photometric consistency across
frames to simultaneously learn depth and Visual Odometry (VO) without ground-truth annotations. As only stereo
or monocular video is required, SSL has the potential to
scale to much larger data quantities.
Unfortunately, existing SS-MDE approaches have relied
exclusively on automotive data [18, 13, 24]. The limited diversity of training environments results in models incapable

15768

