This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S EMPART: Self-supervised Multi-resolution Partitioning of Image Semantics
Sriram Ravindran
Adobe

Debraj Basu
Adobe

sravindr@adobe.com

dbasu@adobe.com

Figure 1 Each image is the original image with an overlayed saliency mask. The ﬁrst row of every column utilizes the ground truth saliency
mask, the second and third rows overlay with the self-supervised S EMPART-coarse and -ﬁne masks on the same image respectively.

Abstract
Accurately determining salient regions of an image is
challenging when labeled data is scarce. DINO-based selfsupervised approaches have recently leveraged meaningful
image semantics captured by patch-wise features for locating foreground objects. Recent methods have also incorporated intuitive priors and demonstrated value in unsupervised methods for object partitioning. In this paper,
we propose S EMPART, which jointly infers coarse and ﬁne
bi-partitions over an image’s DINO-based semantic graph.
Furthermore, S EMPART preserves ﬁne boundary details using graph-driven regularization and successfully distills the
coarse mask semantics into the ﬁne mask. Our salient object detection and single object localization ﬁndings suggest
that S EMPART produces high-quality masks rapidly without
additional post-processing and beneﬁts from co-optimizing
the coarse and ﬁne branches.

1. Introduction
Identifying salient regions of an image prone to holding
visual attention remains a long-standing fuzzy problem [59]
relying signiﬁcantly on carefully annotated data [51, 5, 54].
Recently self-supervised (SSL) mechanisms based on largescale pre-trained backbones [9, 6, 22], such as DINO [7],
have demonstrated increased capability in segmenting images [21, 30] and extracting objects in the foreground [41,
39, 54, 4, 42].
The unavailability of labels is limiting to inferring highquality object masks. However, many recent methods have
demonstrated that incorporating well-informed priors into
the partitioning process is signiﬁcantly beneﬁcial to ﬁnding
saliency regions and foreground objects in an unsupervised
setting [36, 41, 46, 47, 31, 54, 4, 39].
Different forms of statistical independence of the foreground have driven recent approaches, with the most recent
state-of-the-art focusing on movability [4] of the salient ob-

723

