This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Recovering a Molecule’s 3D Dynamics from Liquid-phase Electron Microscopy
Movies
Enze Ye1,2,4 Yuhang Wang4 Hong Zhang3 Yiqin Gao3 Huan Wang1,3 He Sun1,2 *
1
National Biomedical Imaging Center, Peking University, Beijing, China.
2
College of Future Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China.
3
College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China.
4
DP Technology, Ltd., Beijing, China.
yez23@stu.pku.edu.cn, wangyh@dp.tech, zhangh@pku.edu.cn,
gaoyq@pku.edu.cn, wanghuan ccme@pku.edu.cn, hesun@pku.edu.cn
Liquid-phase electron microscopy (EM) movies

Abstract
The dynamics of biomolecules are crucial for our understanding of their functioning in living systems. However,
current 3D imaging techniques, such as cryogenic electron
microscopy (cryo-EM), require freezing the sample, which
limits the observation of their conformational changes in
real time. The innovative liquid-phase electron microscopy
(liquid-phase EM) technique allows molecules to be placed
in the native liquid environment, providing a unique opportunity to observe their dynamics. In this paper, we propose
TEMPOR, a Temporal Electron MicroscoPy Object Reconstruction algorithm for liquid-phase EM that leverages an
implicit neural representation (INR) and a dynamical variational auto-encoder (DVAE) to recover time series of molecular structures. We demonstrate its advantages in recovering different motion dynamics from two simulated datasets,
7bcq & Cas9. To our knowledge, our work is the first
attempt to directly recover 3D structures of a temporallyvarying particle from liquid-phase EM movies. It provides
a promising new approach for studying molecules’ 3D dynamics in structural biology.

1. Introduction
The study of the structures and dynamics of biological molecules is crucial for understanding their functions
and interactions in living systems. Electron microscopy
(EM) has become an indispensable tool for providing highresolution images and 3D structures of biological molecules
at the nanoscale level, without the need for crystallization.
Cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM)[23], the Nobelprize-winning innovation, has played a crucial role in this
development. By rapidly freezing the purified sample solution and subsequently reconstructing a 3D scattering potential (i.e. volume) from 104−7 2D projection images taken
from various angles, cryo-EM has enabled researchers to
* Corresponding author

Frame 1

Frame 2

Frame 3

Frame 4

Recovered temporally-varying volumes

Frame 1

Frame 2

Frame 3

Frame 4

Figure 1. Problem definition. Liquid-phase EM reconstruction
aims to recover a 3D volume for each frame of its movies.

obtain precise structures of complex biomolecules, such
as proteins, viruses and ribosomes. This has led to many
breakthroughs in structural biology. However, cryo-EM requires the sample to be immobilized, which limits its capability to study dynamic processes, such as chemical reactions and conformational changes.
Recent advances in liquid-phase EM[17, 38, 40] have
opened up new possibilities for studying the dynamic behavior of biological molecules in real time. By placing
samples in the liquid medium, liquid-phase EM allows
molecules to move and interact in a natural environment,
consequently capturing movies of functional variations in
their structures. However, the current liquid-phase EM
technique primarily focuses on observing the dynamics of
molecules in two dimensions, rather than recovering their
3D structures. A typical liquid-phase EM dataset contains
only 103−4 noisy 2D images. Due to the limited number
of particles that can be imaged and the temporal evolution
of each particle, it is extremely challenging to extract 3D
structural information from the liquid-phase EM data.
In this paper, we propose a novel dynamic tomographic
reconstruction algorithm for liquid-phase EM (Fig. 1),
called TEMPOR (Temporal Electron MicroscoPy Object
Reconstruction). The key insight of this algorithm is that
despite liquid-phase EM collecting a much smaller number

10767

