This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust e-NeRF: NeRF from Sparse & Noisy Events under Non-Uniform Motion
Weng Fei Low
Gim Hee Lee
The NUS Graduate School’s Integrative Sciences and Engineering Programme (ISEP)
Institute of Data Science (IDS), National University of Singapore
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{wengfei.low, gimhee.lee}@comp.nus.edu.sg
https://wengflow.github.io/robust-e-nerf

𝑦

Abstract
Event cameras offer many advantages over standard
cameras due to their distinctive principle of operation: low
power, low latency, high temporal resolution and high dynamic range. Nonetheless, the success of many downstream
visual applications also hinges on an efficient and effective
scene representation, where Neural Radiance Field (NeRF)
is seen as the leading candidate. Such promise and potential of event cameras and NeRF inspired recent works to investigate on the reconstruction of NeRF from moving event
cameras. However, these works are mainly limited in terms
of the dependence on dense and low-noise event streams, as
well as generalization to arbitrary contrast threshold values and camera speed profiles. In this work, we propose
Robust e-NeRF, a novel method to directly and robustly reconstruct NeRFs from moving event cameras under various real-world conditions, especially from sparse and noisy
events generated under non-uniform motion. It consists of
two key components: a realistic event generation model
that accounts for various intrinsic parameters (e.g. timeindependent, asymmetric threshold and refractory period)
and non-idealities (e.g. pixel-to-pixel threshold variation),
as well as a complementary pair of normalized reconstruction losses that can effectively generalize to arbitrary speed
profiles and intrinsic parameter values without such prior
knowledge. Experiments on real and novel realistically simulated sequences verify our effectiveness. Our code, synthetic dataset and improved event simulator are public.

1. Introduction
Event cameras are bio-inspired sensors that represent a
paradigm shift in visual acquisition and processing. This is
attributed to its fundamentally distinctive principle of operation, where its pixels independently respond to log-intensity
changes in an asynchronous manner, yielding a stream of
events, rather than measuring absolute linear intensity syn-

𝑡
𝑥

(a) Dense and low-noise events (left), and
their projection onto the image plane (right).

(b) Uniform-speed
motion.

camera

𝑦

𝑡
𝑥

(c) Sparse and noisy events (left), and their
projection onto the image plane (right).

E2VID + NeRF

Ev-NeRF

(d) Non-uniform-speed camera
motion.

Robust e-NeRF (Ours)

Target

(e) Novel views synthesized from NeRFs that are reconstructed using sparse and
noisy events generated under non-uniform-speed camera motion.

Figure 1. Existing works on NeRF reconstruction from moving
event cameras heavily rely on (a) temporally dense and low-noise
events generated under roughly (b) uniform-speed camera motion.
In contrast, our method, Robust e-NeRF is able to directly and
robustly reconstruct NeRFs from (c) sparse and noisy events generated under (d) non-uniform camera motion, as shown in (e).

chronously at a constant rate, as done in standard cameras.
Such unique properties contribute to their multitude of advantages over standard cameras [9]: low power, low la-

18335

