This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CauSSL: Causality-inspired Semi-supervised Learning for
Medical Image Segmentation
Juzheng Miao1 , Cheng Chen2 , Furui Liu3 *, Hao Wei4 , Pheng-Ann Heng1,5
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Center for Advanced Medical Computing and Analysis,
Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital
3
Zhejiang Lab, 4 Department of Biomedical Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
5
Institute of Medical Intelligence and XR, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
1

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) has recently demonstrated great success in medical image segmentation, significantly enhancing data efficiency with limited annotations. However, despite its empirical benefits, there are
still concerns in the literature about the theoretical foundation and explanation of semi-supervised segmentation.
To explore this problem, this study first proposes a novel
causal diagram to provide a theoretical foundation for the
mainstream semi-supervised segmentation methods. Our
causal diagram takes two additional intermediate variables
into account, which are neglected in previous work. Drawing from this proposed causal diagram, we then introduce
a causality-inspired SSL approach on top of co-training
frameworks called CauSSL, to improve SSL for medical image segmentation. Specifically, we first point out the importance of algorithmic independence between two networks
or branches in SSL, which is often overlooked in the literature. We then propose a novel statistical quantification
of the uncomputable algorithmic independence and further
enhance the independence via a min-max optimization process. Our method can be flexibly incorporated into different
existing SSL methods to improve their performance. Our
method has been evaluated on three challenging medical
image segmentation tasks using both 2D and 3D network
architectures and has shown consistent improvements over
state-of-the-art methods. Our code is publicly available at:
https://github.com/JuzhengMiao/CauSSL.

1. Introduction
Data-driven deep learning methods have shown remarkable performance in medical image segmentation [18, 38].
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Previous causal diagram for medical image segmentation. The cause is the input image (X), based on which experts
give the corresponding effect, i.e. segmentation mask (Y ). The
green arrow represents the prediction direction for the segmentation network. ⊥ indicates algorithmic independence defined on
two functions or distributions. According to ICM, unlabeled data
can help improve the estimation of P (X) but fail to improve the
network P (Y |X) since they are algorithmically independent.

However, they typically require a large number of highquality labeled data, which is extremely costly and difficult to obtain for the pixel-wise annotations of medical images requiring domain expertise. To solve this problem,
semi-supervised learning (SSL) has become more and more
popular and achieved remarkable success in medical image
segmentation with limited annotations and large amounts
of unlabeled data [1, 14, 25, 55]. Current semi-supervised
segmentation methods can be mainly divided into two categories. The first one is self-training or pseudo-labeling
methods [1, 14], which utilize pseudo-labels as supervision
for unlabeled images. The other mainstream SSL methods
are based on consistency regularization. These methods apply consistency regularization on the predictions between
different models or branches based on the popular Mean
Teacher (MT) [25, 55] or co-training [36, 52] frameworks.
Although many works have demonstrated the success

21426

