This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAFE: Sensitivity-Aware Features for
Out-of-Distribution Object Detection
Samuel Wilson1 , Tobias Fischer1 , Feras Dayoub2 , Dimity Miller1 , Niko Sünderhauf1
1
QUT Centre for Robotics, Queensland University of Technology
2
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide
s84.wilson@hdr.qut.edu.au

Abstract

Sensitivity-Aware
Feature (SAFE) Maps

Training Set

We address the problem of out-of-distribution (OOD)
detection for the task of object detection. We show that
residual convolutional layers with batch normalisation produce Sensitivity-Aware FEatures (SAFE) that are consistently powerful for distinguishing in-distribution from outof-distribution detections. We extract SAFE vectors for every detected object, and train a multilayer perceptron on
the surrogate task of distinguishing adversarially perturbed
from clean in-distribution examples. This circumvents the
need for realistic OOD training data, computationally expensive generative models, or retraining of the base object detector. SAFE outperforms the state-of-the-art OOD
object detectors on multiple benchmarks by large margins,
e.g. reducing the FPR95 by an absolute 30.6% from 48.3%
to 17.7% on the OpenImages dataset.

…
…

Object
Detector

Inlier

✓

Object-Specific
SAFE Vectors
…

X

Detector
MLP

Outlier

…

Perturbed Outliers

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Overview of our proposed SAFE OOD object detector. Feature maps are extracted from sensitivity-aware layers
in the backbone of a pretrained object detector. Object-specific
SAFE vectors are extracted for the predicted bounding boxes. Predeployment, an auxiliary MLP is trained to distinguish the feature vectors of normal ID detections (blue) from adversariallyperturbed ID samples (orange). At test time, the pipeline for
the training samples is repeated (blue) for all test samples, with
the auxiliary MLP producing OOD detection scores for each object in a test image. Illustrative input images are drawn from
BDD100K [70].

Across a variety of tasks, deep neural networks (DNNs)
produce state-of-the-art performance when tested on data
that closely matches the training data distribution [19, 54].
However, when deployed into the real world, out-of-distribution (OOD) samples that do not belong to the training distribution are likely encountered. Upon encountering OOD
samples, DNNs tend to fail silently and produce overconfident erroneous predictions [51, 40, 21, 3, 5, 16]. Especially
in safety-critical applications, such as self-driving vehicles
or medical robotics, such silent failures present a severe
safety risk that must be addressed before the widespread
adoption of these systems [59, 2].
OOD detection, where OOD samples are distinguished
from in-distribution (ID) samples, is thus an important task.
OOD detection has been addressed widely in the image
classification setting [31, 35, 22, 53, 66, 6, 57, 68]. In
this paper, we expand upon the limited body of work in
OOD object detection [9, 8, 7], leveraging recent theoret-

ical insights on the behaviour of the feature space of DNNs.
Specifically, recent theory [34, 43, 61, 55] has highlighted
the importance of ensuring that the feature space of a DNN
is distance-preserving through the constraints of sensitivity
and smoothness. In particular, sensitivity, i.e. the preservation of input distances in the output, has been shown to play
a crucial role in learning a robust feature set that avoids
mapping ID and OOD data to similar feature representations [61].
Furthermore, prior work established the role of adversarial attacks in OOD generalisation [69], increasing the separability of ID samples from OOD [32, 23] and perturbing
feature representations [15, 49, 36]. We thus leverage the
most sensitive layers in a pretrained object detector backbone through targeted input-level adversarial perturbations.
This paper introduces SAFE, a new approach to visual OOD object detection that utilises object-specific

23565

