This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RANA: Relightable Articulated Neural Avatars
Umar Iqbal1*

Akin Caliskan2*

Koki Nagano1 Sameh Khamis1 Pavlo Molchanov1
1
2
NVIDIA
Flawless AI
https://nvlabs.github.io/RANA/

Jan Kautz1

We present, RANA, an approach for learning dynamic and relightable full-body avatars from monocular RGB videos. A
training frame of the person is shown in the first column. RANA can synthesize images of the person under novel poses,
viewpoints, and lighting environments. In the insets, we show the synthesized albedo image, the normal map, and the target
HDRI light map.
Abstract
thesis. RANA first generates the normal and albedo maps
of the person in any given target body pose and then uses
spherical harmonics lighting to generate the shaded imWe propose RANA, a relightable and articulated neural
age in the target lighting environment. We also propose
avatar for the synthesis of humans under arbitrary viewto pre-train RANA using synthetic images and demonstrate
points, body poses, and lighting. We only require a short
that it leads to better disentanglement between geometry
video clip of the person to create the avatar and assume
and texture while also improving robustness to novel body
no knowledge about the lighting environment. We present a
poses. Finally, we also present a new photo-realistic synnovel framework to model humans while disentangling their
thetic dataset, Relighting Human, to quantitatively evaluate
geometry, texture, and lighting environment from monocuthe performance of the proposed approach.
lar RGB videos. To simplify this otherwise ill-posed task
we first estimate the coarse geometry and texture of the person via SMPL+D model fitting and then learn an articulated neural representation for higher quality image syn1. Introduction
*equal contribution. The work was partially done during AC’s internship
at NVIDIA.

Articulated neural avatars of humans have numerous applications across telepresence, animation, and visual con-

23142

