This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PRIOR: Prototype Representation Joint Learning
from Medical Images and Reports
Pujin Cheng 1,2 , Li Lin 1,3 , Junyan Lyu1,4 , Yijin Huang 1,5 ,
Wenhan Luo 6 , Xiaoying Tang 1,2,
1
Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
2
Jiaxing Research Institute, Southern University of Science and Technology
3
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The University of Hong Kong
4
Queensland Brain Institute, The University of Queensland
5
School of Biomedical Engineering, University of British Columbia
6
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University

Abstract
Contrastive learning based vision-language joint pretraining has emerged as a successful representation learning strategy. In this paper, we present a prototype representation learning framework incorporating both global and
local alignment between medical images and reports. In
contrast to standard global multi-modality alignment methods, we employ a local alignment module for fine-grained
representation. Furthermore, a cross-modality conditional
reconstruction module is designed to interchange information across modalities in the training phase by reconstructing masked images and reports. For reconstructing long
reports, a sentence-wise prototype memory bank is constructed, enabling the network to focus on low-level localized visual and high-level clinical linguistic features. Additionally, a non-auto-regressive generation paradigm is
proposed for reconstructing non-sequential reports. Experimental results on five downstream tasks, including supervised classification, zero-shot classification, image-totext retrieval, semantic segmentation, and object detection,
show the proposed method outperforms other state-of-theart methods across multiple datasets and under different
dataset size settings. The code is available at https:
//github.com/QtacierP/PRIOR.

1. Introduction
Powered by large-scale labeled natural image datasets,
deep learning has achieved great success in computer vision [17, 12, 41, 42, 51]. However, annotating medical images is extremely expensive and labor-intensive [4, 45]. A
Corresponding author: <tangxy@sustech.edu.cn>.

practical approach is to first pre-train a model on a largescale labeled natural image dataset like ImageNet [11], and
then fine-tune it on the downstream medical image dataset
with limited annotation [39, 37, 58]. This approach may
nevertheless fail to achieve generalized performance due to
the domain gap between natural images and medical images
[44, 33]. To effectively inherit representation from images
of the same domain, self-supervised learning (SSL) methods [5, 16, 6, 8] have been proposed through pre-training on
unlabeled datasets. However, it has been suggested that the
performance gain of pre-training on unlabeled medical images is relatively limited compared to ImageNet initialization [57]. There are potentially two reasons: 1) The sample
size of medical images, even unlabeled, is still quite limited compared to that of the ImageNet dataset; 2) Medical
images often exhibit high inter-class similarity.
Recently, vision-language pre-training (VLP) has shown
natural language supervision can effectively transfer linguistic information to visual representation via welldesigned proxy tasks such as contrastive learning [38, 26,
54, 31, 25] and generative reconstruction [30, 55]. VLP may
particularly work for medical image analysis since medical reports are highly likely to be accessible in most situations. However, jointly pre-training medical images and
reports is still challenging. First, there are typically multiple sentences in a medical report, and the textual information is highly complex [53, 27, 24]. Second, most descriptions in a medical report are exclusively related to specific sub-regions in the corresponding medical image [32].
Most existing VLP methods tend to ignore fine-grained representation and may fail to transfer to locality-aware downstream tasks such as semantic segmentation and object detection. Several methods have employed local alignment
losses through contrastive tasks [18, 32, 50]. For exam1
21361

