This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ESSAformer: Efficient Transformer for Hyperspectral Image Super-resolution
Mingjin Zhang1 , Chi Zhang1∗ , Qiming Zhang2∗ , Jie Guo1 , Xinbo Gao3 , Jing Zhang2
1
Xidian University, China
2
The University of Sydney, Australia
3
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
mjinzhang@xidian.edu.cn, ch zhang@stu.xidian.edu.cn, qzha2506@uni.sydney.edu.au,
jguo@mail.xidian.edu.cn, gaoxb@cqupt.edu.cn, jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Single hyperspectral image super-resolution (singleHSI-SR) aims to restore a high-resolution hyperspectral image from a low-resolution observation. However, the prevailing CNN-based approaches have shown limitations in
building long-range dependencies and capturing interaction information between spectral features. This results in
inadequate utilization of spectral information and artifacts
after upsampling. To address this issue, we propose ESSAformer, an ESSA attention-embedded Transformer network for single-HSI-SR with an iterative refining structure. Specifically, we first introduce a robust and spectralfriendly similarity metric, i.e., the spectral correlation coefficient of the spectrum (SCC), to replace the original attention matrix and incorporates inductive biases into the model
to facilitate training. Built upon it, we further utilize the
kernelizable attention technique with theoretical support
to form a novel efficient SCC-kernel-based self-attention
(ESSA) and reduce attention computation to linear complexity. ESSA enlarges the receptive field for features after
upsampling without bringing much computation and allows
the model to effectively utilize spatial-spectral information
from different scales, resulting in the generation of more
natural high-resolution images. Without the need for pretraining on large-scale datasets, our experiments demonstrate ESSA’s effectiveness in both visual quality and quantitative results. The code will be released at ESSAformer.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging (HSI) involves densely sampling
spectral features with many narrow bands to encode rich
spectral and spatial structure information for material differentiation. It has been widely used in various applica*Corresponding author

tions. Hyperspectral image super-resolution (HSI-SR) aims
to generate high-resolution HSI from low-resolution HSI
and can be categorized into two approaches: single-HSI-SR
[25, 32, 19, 54] and fusion-based HSI-SR [30, 64, 34, 24].
This paper focuses on the challenging single-HSI-SR task,
which aims to restore high-resolution HSI from a single
low-resolution HSI without auxiliary images.
Conventional methods for single-HSI-SR involve designing a mapping function between low-resolution and
high-resolution HSI using hand-crafted priors such as lowrank approximation and sparse coding [18, 40, 17, 13].
However, with the fast development of deep learning, powerful convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have led to significant progress in the single-HSI-SR task [25, 27, 32, 48,
23, 39, 19]. These CNN-based approaches usually use deep
neural networks to formulate and learn the mapping function in an end-to-end manner using abundant training data
pairs. As a result, they achieve significant improvements in
both visual quality and quantitative metrics.
However, the CNNs methods show limitations in solving
the single-HSI-SR task. There exists a significant amount
of long-range information in high-dimensional data of HSI,
while the most prevailing CNNs focus on local features captured by the convolutional kernels [25, 23, 39, 19, 27, 32,
48, 57, 55, 56]. The limited receptive field in the network
can thus hinder the models’ representation ability. Consequently, unwished artifacts, such as the blocking ones, may
appear and affect the model’s generation quality. To address
this issue, we make an attempt to propose a Transformer
model for the single-HSI-SR task. The attention mechanism
introduced in Vision Transformers allows them to capture
long-range dependencies and provide powerful representations, leading to superior performance compared to CNNs
in many vision tasks [7, 66, 63, 59, 47, 9, 65, 60].
While the long-range dependency advantage of Vision
Transformers can potentially address the aforementioned issues, it cannot be directly applied to single-HSI-SR. Firstly,
Vision Transformers typically require a large amount of

23073

