This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ETran: Energy-Based Transferability Estimation
Mohsen Gholami1,2 , Mohammad Akbari1 , Xinglu Wang1 , Behnam Kamranian 1 , Yong Zhang1
1
Huawei Technologies Canada Co., Ltd., 2 University of British Columbia
{mohsen.gholami,mohammad.akbari,xinglu.wang,behnam.kamranian,yong.zhang3}@huawei.com

Abstract

1 https://developer.huaweicloud.com/
develop/aigallery/notebook/detail?id=
56e6645a-8133-49f6-a7ef-d877ef608fa5

Pre-trained Models

...

Pre-trained neural networks are widely available on platforms such as HuggingFace [50] and TensorFlowHub [35]
for different tasks such as classification, object detection,
segmentation, and natural language processing. These
pre-trained models, which have acquired the fundamental knowledge in vision [25] or language [9] domains, are
very important in transfer learning to downstream target
tasks with limited training data. Since training these models from scratch is computationally expensive, task-specific
fine-tuning from the pre-trained checkpoints is commonly

Φ𝑀

...

1. Introduction

Φ2

Φ10

Ranked Models

Transferability
metric

Φ1

This paper addresses the problem of ranking pre-trained
models for object detection and image classification. Selecting the best pre-trained model by fine-tuning is an expensive
and time-consuming task. Previous works have proposed
transferability estimation based on features extracted by the
pre-trained models. We argue that quantifying whether the
target dataset is in-distribution (IND) or out-of-distribution
(OOD) for the pre-trained model is an important factor
in the transferability estimation. To this end, we propose
ETran, an energy-based transferability assessment metric,
which includes three scores: 1) energy score, 2) classification score, and 3) regression score. We use energy-based
models to determine whether the target dataset is OOD or
IND for the pre-trained model. In contrast to the prior
works, ETran is applicable to a wide range of tasks including classification, regression, and object detection (classification+regression). This is the first work that proposes
transferability estimation for object detection task. Our extensive experiments on four benchmarks and two tasks show
that ETran outperforms previous works on object detection
and classification benchmarks by an average of 21% and
12%, respectively, and achieves SOTA in transferability assessment. Code is available here1 .

Φ2

Φ𝑀

Target Dataset

Figure 1: The overall framework of transferability assessment, given M pre-trained models and a target dataset.

considered a time- and cost-efficient alternative solution.
One of the major challenges in transfer learning is to select the best pre-trained model for a target task (or dataset),
given numerous pre-trained models. The trivial solution
to this problem is brute-force fine-tuning, where all the
given pre-trained models need to be fine-tuned on the given
dataset and then the best-performing fine-tuned model is
chosen for the target task. However, this procedure is very
time-consuming and computationally expensive although it
is highly accurate. Recent studies have proposed fast transferability assessment and ranking solutions to properly and
quickly rank the models and select the best ones (Figure 1).
Most of the previous works extract features from the target dataset using the pre-trained models and try to find the
model whose features can be more effectively mapped to the
labels from the target dataset (e.g., N LEEP [29], LogME
[52], PACTran [10], and SFDA [43]). In other words, these
methods try to mitigate the fine-tuning process in order to
find a model that is more compatible with the given data
samples based on the extracted features.
One limitation of these approaches is that the extracted
features are drastically different before and after finetuning, which is due to the difference in source and target
domains. As a result, the transferability assessment only
based on the extracted features cannot lead to a reliable,

18613

