This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Few-Shot Common Action Localization
via Cross-Attentional Fusion of Context and Temporal Dynamics
Juntae Lee1 , Mihir Jain*, and Sungrack Yun1
1
Qualcomm AI Research†
{juntlee, sungrack}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to localize action instances in
a long untrimmed query video using just meager trimmed
support videos representing a common action whose class
information is not given. In this task, it is crucial to mine
reliable temporal cues representing a common action from
handful support videos. In our work, we develop an attention mechanism using cross-correlation. Based on this
cross-attention, we first transform the support videos into
query video’s context to emphasize query-relevant important frames, and suppress less relevant ones. Next, we
summarize sub-sequences of support video frames to represent temporal dynamics in coarse temporal granularity,
which is then propagated to the fine-grained support video
features through the cross-attention. In each case, the
cross-attentions are applied to each support video in the
individual-to-all strategy to balance heterogeneity and compatibility of the support videos. In contrast, the candidate
instances in the query video are lastly attended by the resulting support video features, at once. In addition, we also
develop a relational classifier head based on the query and
support video representations. We show the effectiveness of
our work with the state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance in
benchmark datasets (ActivityNet1.3 and THUMOS14), and
analyze each component extensively.

1. Introduction
Temporal action localization [2, 4, 33, 23, 31, 18, 15, 16,
20] have been widely studied in fully or weakly-supervised
manner. However, they require collecting massive videos
labeled by action classes, and also only detect the action
classes observed in training. Whereas, we aim to temporally localize action instances in a long untrimmed query
* Work completed during employment at Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
† Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

Figure 1: Attention represents the relationship between a
moment of query and support videos. (a) Vanilla: attention of a query proposal is obtained simultaneously for the
frames of all the support videos. (b) Ours: the attention is
computed for the frames of one support video, at a time.
While important frames of support video #2 cannot be attended by the related query proposal in (a), they are appropriately transformed to the context of the query in (b).
video based on the few trimmed support videos describing
a common action class. As the testing action class is unseen
in training and no ground-truth class cue is given, the only
cue is the commonality of the few support videos.
In this task, the alignment between query and support
videos is important, which can be attained by representing
the common action cues of interest from the support videos
considering the query video’s context. For better alignment,
we divide this problem into two points: re-calibrating support video features under query video’s context, and enhancing temporal dynamics and compatibility of the recalibrated support video features.
Existing methods [39, 22, 7, 3] have mainly focused on
the former point, handling the multiple support videos as a
whole. However, as exemplified in Fig. 1, though the support videos represent a common action class, their context
(e.g background, camera angle) can be different. Hence,

10214

