This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Robust and Smooth 3D Multi-Person Pose Estimation
from Monocular Videos in the Wild
Sungchan Park

Eunyi You
Inhoe Lee
Seoul National University

Joonseok Lee*

{warld2234, onlyou0416, inhoelee, joonseok}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
3D pose estimation is an invaluable task in computer
vision with various practical applications. Especially, 3D
pose estimation for multi-person from a monocular video
(3DMPPE) is particularly challenging and is still largely
uncharted, far from applying to in-the-wild scenarios yet.
We pose three unresolved issues with the existing methods: lack of robustness on unseen views during training,
vulnerability to occlusion, and severe jittering in the output. As a remedy, we propose POTR-3D, the ﬁrst realization of a sequence-to-sequence 2D-to-3D lifting model for
3DMPPE, powered by a novel geometry-aware data augmentation strategy, capable of generating unbounded data
with a variety of views while caring about the ground plane
and occlusions. Through extensive experiments, we verify
that the proposed model and data augmentation robustly
generalizes to diverse unseen views, robustly recovers the
poses against heavy occlusions, and reliably generates
more natural and smoother outputs. The effectiveness of our
approach is veriﬁed not only by achieving the state-of-theart performance on public benchmarks, but also by qualitative results on more challenging in-the-wild videos. Demo
videos are available at https://www.youtube.com/@potr3d.

1. Introduction
3D pose estimation aims to reproduce the 3D coordinates
of a person appearing in an untrimmed 2D video. It has
been extensively studied in literature with many real-world
applications, e.g., sports [3], healthcare [38], games [17],
movies [1], and video compression [36]. Instead of fully
rendering 3D voxels, we narrow down the scope of our discussion to reconstructing a handful number of body keypoints (e.g., neck, knees, or ankles), which concisely represent dynamics of human motions in the real world.
Depending on the number of subjects, 3D pose estimation is categorized into 3D Single-Person Pose Estimation (3DSPPE) and 3D Multi-Person Pose Estimation
* Corresponding author

(3DMPPE). In this paper, we mainly tackle 3DMPPE, reproducing the 3D coordinates of body keypoints for everyone appearing in a video. Unlike 3DSPPE that has been
extensively studied and already being used for many applications, 3DMPPE is still largely uncharted whose models
are hardly applicable to in-the-wild scenarios yet. For this
reason, we pose 3 unresolved issues with previous models.
First, existing models are not robustly applicable to unseen views (e.g. unusual camera angle or distance). Trained
on a limited amount of data, most existing models perform well only on test examples captured under similar
views, signiﬁcantly underperforming when applied to unseen views. Unfortunately, however, most 3D datasets provide a limited number of views (e.g., 4 for Human 3.6M [12]
or 14 for MPI-INF-3DHP [24]), recorded under limited
conditions like the subjects’ clothing or lighting due to
the high cost of motion capturing (MoCap) equipment [8].
This practical restriction hinders learning a universally applicable model, failing to robustly generalize to in-the-wild
videos.
Second, occlusion is another long-standing challenge
that most existing models still suffer from. Due to the invisible occluded keypoints, there is unavoidable ambiguity
since there are multiple plausible answers for them. Occlusion becomes a lot more severe when a person totally blocks
another from the camera, making the model output inconsistent estimation throughout the frames.
Third, the existing methods often produce a sequence
of 3D poses with severe jittering. This is an undesirable
byproduct of the models, not present in the training data.
In this paper, we propose a 3DMPPE model, called
POTR-3D, that works robustly and smoothly on in-the-wild
videos with severe occlusion cases. Our model is powered by a novel data augmentation strategy, which generates training examples by combining and adjusting existing
single-person data, to avoid actual data collection that requires high cost. For this augmentation, we decouple the
core motion from pixel-level details, as creating a realistic
3D video at the voxel level is not a trivial task. Thereby,
we adopt the 2D-to-3D lifting approach, which ﬁrst de-

14772

