This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Informative Data Mining for One-shot Cross-Domain Semantic Segmentation
Yuxi Wang1,2 Jian Liang2,3,4 Jun Xiao3 Shuqi Mei5 Yuran Yang5 Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3,4, *
1
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI-CAS
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems 5 Tencent
{yuxiwang93, liangjian92}@gmail.com

zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Contemporary domain adaptation offers a practical solution for achieving cross-domain transfer of semantic segmentation between labelled source data and unlabeled target data. These solutions have gained significant popularity; however, they require the model to be retrained
when the test environment changes. This can result in
unbearable costs in certain applications due to the timeconsuming training process and concerns regarding data
privacy. One-shot domain adaptation methods attempt to
overcome these challenges by transferring the pre-trained
source model to the target domain using only one target
data. Despite this, the referring style transfer module still
faces issues with computation cost and over-fitting problems. To address this problem, we propose a novel framework called Informative Data Mining (IDM) that enables
efficient one-shot domain adaptation for semantic segmentation. Specifically, IDM provides an uncertainty-based selection criterion to identify the most informative samples,
which facilitates quick adaptation and reduces redundant
training. We then perform a model adaptation method using
these selected samples, which includes patch-wise mixing
and prototype-based information maximization to update
the model. This approach effectively enhances adaptation
and mitigates the overfitting problem. In general, we provide empirical evidence of the effectiveness and efficiency
of IDM. Our approach outperforms existing methods and
achieves a new state-of-the-art one-shot performance of
56.7%/55.4% on the GTA5/SYNTHIA to Cityscapes adaptation tasks, respectively. The code will be released at
https://github.com/yxiwang/IDM .

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental computer vision
task that has made remarkable progress with the help of
* Zhaoxiang Zhang is the corresponding author.

Testing

Pretrained
Source Model
Source Data
Adaptation

Dynamicly Changing Target Environment

Figure 1. We consider the one-shot domain adaptation scenario,
where only one single target image is used to fit the trained source
model. It is realistic for the adaptation model to tackle dynamically changing target environments, such as suddenly occurrent
weather (e.g. foggy, rainy, night, snow). Our method aims to
achieve quick adaptation for one-shot domain adaptation.

vast amounts of pixel-level annotated training data. However, collecting such large-scale datasets requires tremendous labeling efforts in terms of time and cost. For instance, annotating a single image in the Cityscapes dataset
can take about 90 minutes and cost 1.5 dollars [7]. To reduce this burden of labeling, previous cross-domain semantic segmentation approaches [24, 39, 26, 41, 53, 21, 56, 38]
have been developed. These methods transfer the knowledge from label-rich synthetic data (source) [32, 33] to the
unlabeled real-world data (target) [7], referred to as domain
adaptive semantic segmentation (DASS).
Despite significant efforts in developing DASS methods,
most of them still suffer from the following limitations.
First, existing approaches train an adaptation model from
a specific source domain to a specific target domain. Therefore, they require retraining the model every time when the
11064

