This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

How Far Pre-trained Models Are from Neural Collapse on the Target Dataset
Informs their Transferability
Zijian Wang1 Yadan Luo1 Liang Zheng2 Zi Huang1 Mahsa Baktashmotlagh1
1
The University of Queensland 2 Australian National University
{zijian.wang, y.luo, helen.huang, m.baktashmotlagh}@uq.edu.au, liang.zheng@anu.edu.au

Abstract
This paper focuses on model transferability estimation,
i.e., assessing the performance of pre-trained models on
a downstream task without performing fine-tuning. Motivated by neural collapse (NC) [25] that reveals particular
feature geometry at the terminal stage of training, we consider model transferability as how far the target activations
obtained by pre-trained models are from their hypothetical
state in the terminal phase of the model fine-tuned on the
target domain. We propose a metric that measures this proximity based on three phenomena of NC: within-class variability collapse, simplex encoded label interpolation geometry structure is formed, and the nearest center classifier
becomes optimal on training data. Through experiments
on 11 datasets, we confirm none of the three NC proxies
are dispensable, which allows us to obtain very competitive transferability estimation accuracy with approximately
10× wall-clock time speed up compared to state-of-the-art
approaches.

1. Introduction
The past decade has witnessed a surge in the availability of off-the-shelf pre-trained models in public repositories. They are adapted and re-tuned to facilitate new tasks,
which has become a standard practice [12]. Nevertheless,
this approach raises an important practical question of how
to effectively select the best pre-trained model from a large
model pool to be carried onto a downstream task.
While precise ranking of these pre-trained models on a
new task can be obtained by a greedy approach of fineturning each model and comparing the test accuracy, it
is often prohibitive as it requires a vast amount of computing resources. Therefore, an early line of research
has been developed referred to as transferability estimation [22, 41, 24, 29], where the aim is to design efficient
methods for ranking the performances of pre-trained models on a downstream task without fine-tuning. Existing

Model Pool

Strong correlation but
Time-consuming

Model Rank
1

Fine-tuning
2

Labeled
Target Data

…

Transferability
Estimation

3

N

…

Strong correlation and
Efficient

Figure 1: Illustration of the transferability estimation problem. Given a pool of pre-trained models and labeled target
data, the objective of transferability estimation is to predict
which models can achieve higher performance on the target
data after fine-tuning. This task is much more time efficient
than fine-tuning the models to obtain ground truth rankings.
approaches in transferability estimation typically consider
the current status of the pre-trained models (w.r.t the target
task) and can be generally categorized into two streams of
probabilistic-based [22, 36, 41, 1] and feature distributionbased techniques [24, 29]. Approaches from the former
category model the expected conditional probability of target labels given the extracted target features [41, 20] or predictions [36, 22]. The latter category models transferability
as the class-wise separation of features, in which Pandey et
al. [24] employed the Bhattacharyya coefficient to approximate the overlap between class distributions.
From a different viewpoint for transferability estimation,
this paper measures the difference between the current status and the hypothetical terminal status of pre-trained models after fine-tuning. The latter status refers to neural collapse (NC) [25, 33] on the target domain, which commonly
occurs when the training loss approaches zero. Specifically,
there are three distinct characteristics of NC: 1) the withinclass feature variability drops towards zero; 2) class means
gradually converge to a simplex encoded label interpolation

5549

