This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Contrastive Learning Relies More on Spatial Inductive Bias
Than Supervised Learning: An Empirical Study

1

Yuanyi Zhong1†
Haoran Tang2†
Jun-Kun Chen1†
Yu-Xiong Wang1
2
†
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
University of Pennsylvania
Equal Contribution
{yuanyiz2, junkun3, yxw}@illinois.edu
thr99@seas.upenn.edu

Figure 1: We study the reliance on spatial inductive bias for both contrastive learning (CL) and supervised learning (SL), by pre-training
them on dataset with destroyed global or local spatial structure to prevent such inductive bias, and compare the performance drop in
evaluation. Our experiments show that compared with SL, CL has a higher performance drop without either global or local spatial inductive
bias, which has a significantly lower uniformity and a more messy, entangled, and non-separable feature space (Sec. 4.3), clearly leading
to the conclusion that CL relies more on spatial inductive bias than SL.

Abstract
Though self-supervised contrastive learning (CL) has
shown its potential to achieve state-of-the-art accuracy
without any supervision, its behavior still remains underinvestigated. Different from most previous work that understands CL from learning objectives, we focus on an unexplored yet natural aspect: the spatial inductive bias which
seems to be implicitly exploited via data augmentations in
CL. We design an experiment to study the reliance of CL on
such spatial inductive bias, by destroying the global or local spatial structures of an image with global or local patch
shuffling, and comparing the performance drop between experiments on original and corrupted dataset to quantify the
reliance on certain inductive bias. We also use the uniformity of feature space to further research how CL-pretrained models behave with the corrupted dataset. Our results and analysis show that CL has a much higher reliance

on spatial inductive bias than SL, regardless of specific CL
algorithm or backbones, opening a new direction for studying the behavior of CL.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised contrastive learning (CL) has demonstrated tremendous potential in learning generalizable representations from unlabeled datasets [4, 18, 16, 2, 8, 35] in
recent years. Current state-of-the-art CL algorithms learn
representations from ImageNet [11] that match or even exceed the accuracy of their supervised learning (SL) counterparts on ImageNet and downstream tasks. Understanding
the behavior and the power of contrastive learning is therefore becoming an interesting and crucial topic in academia.
Previous work on understanding CL [6, 29, 27] mostly focuses on the loss functions, while few work focuses on the
data-centric inductive bias in CL – which information CL

16327

