This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Zero-Shot Scale-Aware Monocular Depth Estimation
Vitor Guizilini

Igor Vasiljevic

Dian Chen

Rares, Ambrus,

Adrien Gaidon

Toyota Research Institute (TRI), Los Altos, CA

KITTI

DDAD

nuScenes

NYUv2

Figure 1: Our proposed framework enables robust zero-shot transfer of metric depth predictions. The pointclouds
above were generated by the same model, that has never seen any of these datasets, and without groundtruth scale alignment.
Ground-truth LiDAR pointclouds are shown as height maps, overlaid with colored predicted monocular pointclouds.

Abstract
Monocular depth estimation is scale-ambiguous, and
thus requires scale supervision to produce metric predictions. Even so, the resulting models will be geometryspecific, with learned scales that cannot be directly transferred across domains. Because of that, recent works focus instead on relative depth, eschewing scale in favor of
improved up-to-scale zero-shot transfer. In this work we
introduce ZeroDepth, a novel monocular depth estimation
framework capable of predicting metric scale for arbitrary
test images from different domains and camera parameters.
This is achieved by (i) the use of input-level geometric embeddings that enable the network to learn a scale prior
over objects; and (ii) decoupling the encoder and decoder
stages, via a variational latent representation that is conditioned on single frame information. We evaluated ZeroDepth targeting both outdoor (KITTI, DDAD, nuScenes)
and indoor (NYUv2) benchmarks, and achieved a new stateof-the-art in both settings using the same pre-trained model,
outperforming methods that train on in-domain data and require test-time scaling to produce metric estimates. Project
page: https://sites.google.com/view/tri-zerodepth.

1. Introduction
Monocular depth estimation is a key task in computer vision, with practical applications in areas such as robotics [9,
31] and autonomous driving [19, 23, 37, 27]. It is easy to
understand why: the promise of turning any camera into a
dense range sensor is very appealing, both as a means to reduce costs and in terms of its rich semantics and widespread
application. However, in order to be truly useful as a 3D re-

construction tool these predictions need to be scale-aware,
meaning that they need to be metrically scaled. Supervised
methods train with groundtruth depth maps [14, 38], while
self-supervised methods inject additional information in the
form of velocity measurements [23], camera intrinsics [2]
and/or extrinsics [27, 56]. Even so, the resulting models will
be camera-specific, since the learned scale will not transfer
across datasets, due to differences in the cameras used to
capture training data.
This geometric domain gap is separate from the traditional appearance domain gap, however while the latter
has been extensively studied in recent years [26, 59, 29,
39, 53, 34, 60], very few works have addressed the former [2, 12, 57]. Instead, the recent trend is to focus on
relative depth [10, 46, 47], eschewing scale completely in
favor of improved zero-shot transfer of unscaled depth predictions. Even though this approach qualitatively leads to
very accurate depth maps, the resulting predictions still require groundtruth information at test-time to be metrically
scaled, which severely limits their application in practical
scenarios, such as autonomous driving and indoor robotics.
In this paper, we rethink this recent trend and introduce
ZeroDepth, a novel monocular depth estimation framework
that is robust to the geometric domain gap, and thus capable
of generating metric predictions across different datasets.
We achieve this by proposing two key modifications to the
standard architecture for monocular depth estimation: (i)
we use input-level geometric embeddings to jointly encode
camera parameters and image features, which enables the
network to reason over the physical size of objects and learn
scale priors; and (ii) we decouple the encoding and decoding stages, via a learned global latent representation. Im-

9233

