This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Large Language-Vision Models
for Source-free Video Domain Adaptation
Giacomo Zara1 *, Alessandro Conti1∗ , Subhankar Roy3 , Stéphane Lathuilière3 , Paolo Rota1 , Elisa Ricci1,2
1
University of Trento, Italy 2 Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Italy
3
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut polytechnique de Paris, France
{giacomo.zara,alessandro.conti-1}@unitn.it

Abstract

1. Introduction
Video analysis tasks, such as action recognition, have
long been investigated in computer vision, due to the numerous applications, ranging from video surveillance to
social robotics [50, 14, 29]. Major progress has been
made in the last decade with the development of specialized deep architectures, such as 3D CNNs [4, 3] and
Video Transformers [36], trained on large-scale annotated
datasets. However, obtaining sufficient labelled training
videos for real-world scenarios can be very costly and timeconsuming. In order to alleviate the burden of annotating large scale datasets Video-based Unsupervised Domain
* Giacomo Zara and Alessandro Conti contributed equally.
1 Code is available at https://github.com/giaczara/dallv

Adaptation

50

No
SFUDA
SFVUDA
UDA

45
Accuracy (%)

40

CLIP (ViT-B/32)

EXTERN

MA

ATCON
BAIT CPGA

TRN

20
21

20
19

20
18

20
17

20
16

20
15

Year

20
20

SHOT SFDA

20

SHOT++

20
23

DANN

TA3N

20
22

MK-MMD

30
25

DALL-V (ours)

CLIP (RN50)

35

20
14

Source-Free Video Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
(SFVUDA) task consists in adapting an action recognition
model, trained on a labelled source dataset, to an unlabelled target dataset, without accessing the actual source
data. The previous approaches have attempted to address SFVUDA by leveraging self-supervision (e.g., enforcing temporal consistency) derived from the target data itself. In this work, we take an orthogonal approach by
exploiting “web-supervision” from Large Language-Vision
Models (LLVMs), driven by the rationale that LLVMs contain a rich world prior surprisingly robust to domainshift. We showcase the unreasonable effectiveness of integrating LLVMs for SFVUDA by devising an intuitive
and parameter-efficient method, which we name Domain
Adaptation with Large Language-Vision models (DALLV), that distills the world prior and complementary source
model information into a student network tailored for the
target. Despite the simplicity, DALL-V 1 achieves significant improvement over state-of-the-art SFVUDA methods.

55

Figure 1: Performance over time by various methods on
the Daily-DA video benchmark. A pre-trained LLVM (e.g.,
CLIP [31]) is surprisingly better when compared with Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA), Source Free UDA
(SFUDA) and Source Free Video-based UDA (SFVUDA)
methods. Our proposed DALL-V that is built on top of
LLVM successfully outperforms all existing baselines.
Adaptation (VUDA) [1, 28, 2] have been introduced. The
VUDA methods are derived from the common idea of transferring knowledge from a labelled source domain to an unlabelled target domain. While considering different strategies for adaptation, these approaches have all shown significant improvements in the robustness of learnt video models
without requiring annotated target data.
In the last few years, the field of computer vision has
also witnessed the emergence of a new generation of powerful deep architectures, trained on mammoth internet-scale
image-text datasets [35]. These models, commonly known
as foundation models [32, 37, 31, 10] or Large LanguageVision Models (LLVM), have achieved outstanding performance, and have become a cornerstone of modern computer vision research. In particular, recent works such as
CLIP [31] or FLAVA [37] have shown that rich visual representations for images can be learned from natural language
descriptions as a form of supervision. These pre-trained

10307

