This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rendering Humans from Object-Occluded Monocular Videos
Tiange Xiang*, Adam Sun, Jiajun Wu, Ehsan Adeli, Li Fei-Fei
Stanford University

Abstract

1. Introduction
Rendering 3D human bodies from a sequence of observations is of great interest in various communities, including robotics [70], motion analysis [16], and healthcare [19].
This task is challenging, since one must recover the complete human body with complex textures and poses from
sparse partial observations. It is usually cumbersome to acquire images of the same human object from multiple camera angles simultaneously; hence, capturing a monocular
video from a single camera is more common and feasible.
The task of rendering humans from a monocular video
is not new. Progress so far mainly focuses on rendering
quality [51, 66] and rendering efficiency [49, 28]. However, most existing neural rendering methods assume that
the human object is placed in a scene with a clear view of
the entire body without any external interference. In contrast, real-world environments often contain undesired obstacles that contaminate training data and impact the ren* Correspondence to xtiange@stanford.edu

Render / Capture

3D understanding and rendering of moving humans from
monocular videos is a challenging task. Despite recent
progress, the task remains difficult in real-world scenarios, where obstacles may block the camera view and cause
partial occlusions in the captured videos. Existing methods cannot handle such defects due to two reasons. First,
the standard rendering strategy relies on point-point mapping, which could lead to dramatic disparities between the
visible and occluded areas of the body. Second, the naive
direct regression approach does not consider any feasibility criteria (i.e., prior information) for rendering under
occlusions. To tackle the above drawbacks, we present
OccNeRF, a neural rendering method that achieves better rendering of humans in severely occluded scenes. As
direct solutions to the two drawbacks, we propose surfacebased rendering by integrating geometry and visibility priors. We validate our method on both simulated and realworld occlusions and demonstrate our method’s superiority. Project page: https://cs.stanford.edu/
˜xtiange/projects/occnerf/

obstacles

Scene

Neural

Rendering

occlusions

Monocular video

Figure 1. Object obstacles in the scene may cause severe occlusions in the rendered/captured videos, imposing additional challenges into the rendering process. Top row: Ideal scene with no
defects and clear view of the body; Bottom row: Real-world scene
with undesired obstacles and occluded body parts.

dering quality (See Figure 1). These real-world occlusions
pose significant challenges for training when using only
monocular videos, where no other camera angles can be
used to provide complementary information. As a result, a
direct application of previous neural rendering methods on
object-occluded videos leads to subpar performance. Optimizing a neural radiance field is difficult under occlusions.
There is often no ground truth associated with the occluded
area. Additionally, radiance fields are typically optimized
in a scene-specific manner; that is, no external information
can and should be used to fill in the occluded areas.
Two major drawbacks of previous methods impair their
capabilities to train on object-occluded videos. First, the
prior work does not account for local geometry cues in
their rendering process. Following the point-based rendering paradigm as in NeRF [43], most previous methods render color and density values of a ray sample by only looking at a single 3D coordinate. However, we explain in section 3.2 that this basic strategy may lead to dramatically
different rendering results even in very close positions. Second, methods suffer from not properly incorporating priors.
In the monocular video setting, geometry (e.g., SMPL [40])
and visibility priors can describe a complete human geometry and indicate which body parts are visible to the camera.
In this work, we propose novel methods for dealing with
the above drawbacks, allowing us to accurately render occluded humans from monocular video. We first present a
surface-based rendering strategy that determines the radiance of each 3D ray sample by conditioning it on a wide re-

3239

