This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pose-Free Neural Radiance Fields via Implicit Pose Regularization
Jiahui Zhang1 Fangneng Zhan2 Yingchen Yu1
Rongliang Wu1 Xiaoqin Zhang3 Ling Shao4
1

Nanyang Technological University
3

Wenzhou University

4

Max Planck Institute for Informatics

UCAS-Terminus AI Lab, UCAS

Abstract
Pose-free neural radiance fields (NeRF) aim to train
NeRF with unposed multi-view images and it has achieved
very impressive success in recent years. Most existing works
share the pipeline of training a coarse pose estimator with
rendered images at first, followed by a joint optimization
of estimated poses and neural radiance field. However,
as the pose estimator is trained with only rendered images, the pose estimation is usually biased or inaccurate
for real images due to the domain gap between real images and rendered images, leading to poor robustness for
the pose estimation of real images and further local minima in joint optimization. We design IR-NeRF, an innovative pose-free NeRF that introduces implicit pose regularization to refine pose estimator with unposed real images
and improve the robustness of the pose estimation for real
images. With a collection of 2D images of a specific scene,
IR-NeRF constructs a scene codebook that stores scene features and captures the scene-specific pose distribution implicitly as priors. Thus, the robustness of pose estimation
can be promoted with the scene priors according to the rationale that a 2D real image can be well reconstructed from
the scene codebook only when its estimated pose lies within
the pose distribution. Extensive experiments show that IRNeRF achieves superior novel view synthesis and outperforms the state-of-the-art consistently across multiple synthetic and real datasets.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis has recently achieved remarkable
progress, largely driven by the development of neural radiance fields (NeRF) [21] that learns 3D scene representations from multi-view 2D images and can generate novel
views with superb multi-view consistency. However, most
existing works rely heavily on accurate camera poses of the
* Corresponding author, E-mail: shijian.lu@ntu.edu.sg

2

Kunhao Liu1
Shijian Lu *1

multi-view 2D images which are complicated to collect and
not available in many existing image datasets. The camera pose constraint can be mitigated by leveraging structurefrom-motion (SfM) [14, 26] that allows estimating camera
poses from multi-view 2D images. On the other hand, SfM
requires keypoint detection and is prone to errors while handling objects and scenes with low texture or repeated visual
patterns. How to train effective NeRF with unposed multiview images has become one bottleneck for the wide adoption of NeRF in various 3D synthesis tasks.
Several studies attempt pose-free NeRF by training
NeRF with unposed multi-view images. One approach is
to train NeRF with certain inaccurate camera poses or prior
knowledge about camera pose distributions. For example,
[33] jointly optimizes NeRF and camera poses to alleviate
the requirement for accurate camera poses. BARF [18] exploits bundle adjusting to train NeRF with imperfect camera
poses. [3] introduces Gaussian activated radiance field that
employs Gaussian activation to avoid falling into local minima. Nevertheless, this approach still requires reasonable
camera pose initialization that is often not easy to obtain.
Another approach does not require any pose information in
training. For example, GNeRF [20] first trains coarse NeRF
with randomly initialized camera poses and predicts coarse
camera poses, and then jointly refines them with the NeRF
training process. However, the pose estimator in GNeRF is
trained only with images rendered by the coarse NeRF. The
pose prediction for real images is biased or inaccurate due
to the domain gap between rendered images and real images, leading to poor robustness of pose estimation for real
images and local minima [20] while jointly refining NeRF
and camera poses.
We propose IR-NeRF, an innovative pose-free NeRF that
introduces Implicit Regularization to promote the robustness of pose estimator for real images. Specifically, given
a set of multi-view images of a scene, a scene codebook
is first constructed which stores the scene features and encodes scene-specific pose distribution implicitly as priors.
With that, a pose-guided view reconstruction scheme is then

3534

