This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Content-Aware Local GAN for Photo-Realistic Super-Resolution
JoonKyu Park1 Sanghyun Son1 Kyoung Mu Lee1,2
1
Dept. of ECE&ASRI, 2 IPAI, Seoul National University, Korea
{jkpark0825, thstkdgus35, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently, GAN has successfully contributed to making single-image super-resolution (SISR) methods produce
more realistic images. However, natural images have complex distribution in the real world, and a single classifier in the discriminator may not have enough capacity
to classify real and fake samples, making the preceding
SR network generate unpleasing noise and artifacts. To
solve the problem, we propose a novel content-aware local GAN framework, CAL-GAN, which processes a large
and complicated distribution of real-world images by dividing them into smaller subsets based on similar contents.
Our mixture of classifiers (MoC) design allocates different super-resolved patches to corresponding expert classifiers. Additionally, we introduce novel routing and orthogonality loss terms so that different classifiers can handle various contents and learn separable features. By
feeding similar distributions into the corresponding specialized classifiers, CAL-GAN enhances the representation power of existing super-resolution models, achieving state-of-the-art perceptual performance on standard
benchmarks and real-world images without modifying the
generator-side architecture. The codes are available at
https://github.com/jkpark0825/CAL GAN.

1. Introduction
As one of the long-standing challenges in computer vision, single image super-resolution (SISR, or SR in short)
aims to reconstruct a super-resolved image ISR from its lowresolution (LR) counterpart ILR . While the inverse problem
has multiple possible solutions for a given input due to the
ill-posedness, the practical goal of SISR is to generate a perceptually favorable result from the LR input. To this end,
earlier approaches [8, 24, 30] have constructed various network architectures specialized for SR and optimized pixelwise L2 or L1 loss terms. Later, perceptual objective functions [22] and adversarial training frameworks [13, 26, 50]
are introduced to generate more realistic textures and improve the realism of SR results.

Classifier

Real / Fake

Classifier

Real / Fake

Classifier

Real / Fake

Classifier

Real / Fake

Classifier

Real / Fake

(a) Conventional global GANs

(b) Conventional local GANs

(c) Our CAL-GAN with mixture of classifiers (MoC)

Figure 1: Overall framework of our CAL-GAN. Unlike the approaches mentioned in (a) and (b), our CAL-GAN in (c) groups
local contents with similar properties and feeds them to their corresponding specialized discriminators.

Previous perceptual SR methods jointly optimize the
SR network and discriminator through adversarial training,
while the discriminator is responsible for distinguishing real
and generated, i.e., fake, SR samples. However, as shown in
Figure 1a, the majority of methods [26, 50, 32, 57, 29, 48]
adopt a global discriminator that is not specialized to consider the importance of local distribution in SR tasks. To
improve local details, recent approaches [48, 51, 6] have incorporated local discriminators, which aim to differentiate
between each local texture in HR and SR. However, such
discriminators are regarded as content-blind, indicating that
they cannot learn the various properties of the local content. Specifically, they naı̈vely try to learn the whole distributions from each local content using a single discriminator, as shown in Figure 1b. Thus, they struggle to learn
the complex distribution of natural images, resulting in suboptimal solutions. As adversarial training benefits from

10585

