This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Domain Adaptive Few-Shot Open-Set Learning
Debabrata Pal1 , Deeptej More2 , Sai Bhargav1 , Dipesh Tamboli3 , Vaneet Aggarwal3 , Biplab Banerjee1
1
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, 2 Manipal Institute of Technology, India,3 Purdue University
debabrata.pal@iitb.ac.in, deeptejrane16@gmail.com, sai.bhargav@iitb.ac.in,
dtamboli@purdue.edu, vaneet@purdue.edu, getbiplab@gmail.com

Figure 1. Domain Adaptive Few-Shot Open-Set Learning (DA-FSOS) tackles the challenges of both Domain Adaptive Few-Shot Learning
(DA-FSL) and Few-Shot Open-Set Learning (FSOS) by integrating them into a unified framework. In training phase, the model observes
a fully-supervised source domain S and a sparsely-supervised target domain T , where the labels of both domains are disjoint. However,
during testing, the model encounters a few-shot support set of new known classes from T , while the test query set contains unlabeled samples from both the known and previously unknown classes. Project page: https://github.com/DebabrataPal7/DAFOSNET

Abstract
Few-shot learning has made impressive strides in addressing the crucial challenges of recognizing unknown
samples from novel classes in target query sets and managing visual shifts between domains. However, existing techniques fall short when it comes to identifying target outliers
under domain shifts by learning to reject pseudo-outliers
from the source domain, resulting in an incomplete solution
to both problems. To address these challenges comprehensively, we propose a novel approach called Domain Adaptive Few-Shot Open Set Recognition (DA-FSOS) and introduce a meta-learning-based architecture named DAFOSN ET. During training, our model learns a shared and
discriminative embedding space while creating a pseudoopen-space decision boundary, given a fully-supervised
source domain and a label-disjoint few-shot target domain.
To enhance data density, we use a pair of conditional adversarial networks with tunable noise variances to augment both domains’ closed and pseudo-open spaces. Furthermore, we propose a domain-specific batch-normalized
class prototypes alignment strategy to align both domains
globally while ensuring class-discriminativeness through
novel metric objectives. Our training approach ensures that
DAFOS-N ET can generalize well to new scenarios in the
target domain. We present three benchmarks for DA-FSOS
based on the Office-Home, mini-ImageNet/CUB, and DomainNet datasets and demonstrate the efficacy of DAFOSNet through extensive experimentation.

1. Introduction
The development of deep learning techniques has led
to significant advancements in visual recognition tasks by
leveraging their ability to learn data-driven features from a
vast amount of training examples [14, 21]. However, labeling is a laborious and costly task, which is why few-shot
learning (FSL) [33, 22] aims to recognize target classes with
limited supervision by learning transferable features from a
label-disjoint source domain that has sufficient supervision.
Despite progress [40], FSL models encounter difficulties
in two critical scenarios: i) when the under-represented target domain classes are drawn from a different distribution
than the source domain. One solution to this is Domain
Adaptive Few-Shot Learning (DA-FSL), which adapts disjoint classes from the fully-supervised source and sparselysupervised target domains during training [41, 34, 10], and
ii) Few-Shot Open-Set Learning (FSOS) [25], which assumes no domain gap between source and target but combines FSL with Open-Set Recognition (OSR) [12, 1] to detect novel class samples as outliers during testing. However,
it is desirable for a generic FSL system to handle domain
discrepancy and reject outliers during inference in a unified
manner for practical applications. To this end, we introduce
a novel scenario, called Domain Adaptive Few-Shot OpenSet Learning (DA-FSOS), which is illustrated in Fig 1.
DA-FSOS is a method that addresses a challenging problem: how to learn from supervision in one domain while
adapting to a different domain with non-overlapping known

18831

