This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning a More Continuous Zero Level Set in Unsigned Distance Fields through
Level Set Projection
Junsheng Zhou1 *, Baorui Ma1,2,∗ , Shujuan Li1 , Yu-Shen Liu1†, Zhizhong Han3
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China1
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China2
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA3
zhoujs21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, brma@baai.ac.cn, lisj22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn, h312h@wayne.edu

Abstract
Latest methods represent shapes with open surfaces using unsigned distance functions (UDFs). They train neural
networks to learn UDFs and reconstruct surfaces with the
gradients around the zero level set of the UDF. However, the
differential networks struggle from learning the zero level
set where the UDF is not differentiable, which leads to large
errors on unsigned distances and gradients around the zero
level set, resulting in highly fragmented and discontinuous
surfaces. To resolve this problem, we propose to learn a
more continuous zero level set in UDFs with level set projections. Our insight is to guide the learning of zero level
set using the rest non-zero level sets via a projection procedure. Our idea is inspired from the observations that the
non-zero level sets are much smoother and more continuous than the zero level set. We pull the non-zero level sets
onto the zero level set with gradient constraints which align
gradients over different level sets and correct unsigned distance errors on the zero level set, leading to a smoother
and more continuous unsigned distance field. We conduct
comprehensive experiments in surface reconstruction for
point clouds, real scans or depth maps, and further explore
the performance in unsupervised point cloud upsampling
and unsupervised point normal estimation with the learned
UDF, which demonstrate our non-trivial improvements over
the state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at https:
//github.com/junshengzhou/LevelSetUDF.

1. Introduction
Surface reconstruction from point clouds plays an important role in vision, robotics and graphics. Recently, neural implicit functions [61, 58, 57] have achieved remarkable
* Equal contribution.
† The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu.

results by representing 3D geometries with signed distance
functions (SDFs) [51, 13, 73], occupancy [57, 64, 60] or
unsigned distance functions (UDFs) [89, 20, 27]. SDFs and
occupancy explore the internal-to-external relations, which
are limited to reconstruct closed surfaces. Researchers
therefore turn to UDFs, which is a more general function,
to represent shapes with arbitrary typologies.
Learning an accurate zero level set of UDF is the key
factor for representing complex geometries and supporting
3D applications [52, 42, 26, 17]. However, the differential
neural networks struggle from learning the zero level set
where the UDF is not differentiable. This leads to unstable
optimizations, which results in large errors on unsigned distances and gradients around the zero level set, causing failures in downstream 3D applications. Taking surface reconstruction for example, SOTA methods [89, 27] extract surfaces from UDFs by judging gradient directions around the
zero level set, where the unreliable gradients lead to highly
fragmented and discontinuous surfaces.
To resolve this issue, we introduce two novel constraints
on the zero level set in forms of losses for learning accurate UDF without ground truth unsigned distances. The key
insight is from the observation that despite the unreliable
zero level set, the non-zero level sets learned by UDF are
quite convincing, which can serve as an accurate guidance
for the optimization on zero level set. We therefore propose
the level set projection constraint to achieve a smoother and
more continuous zero level set of UDF by enforcing the parallelism between the gradient of a query in a non-zero level
set and the gradient of its projection to the zero level set.
Moreover, we introduce an adaptive weighting strategy to
force the neural network to focus more on the optimization
nearer to the zero level set.
The level set projection constraint aims to guide the gradients at zero level set, where we propose another unsigned
distance loss as a supplement for correcting distance errors

3181

