This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Facial Performance Editing via Vector-Quantized StyleGAN
Representations
Berkay Kicanaoglu

Pablo Garrido

Gaurav Bharaj

Flawless AI
{berkay.kicanaoglu, pablo.garrido, gaurav.bharaj}@flawlessai.com

Articulation Edits
Original Frame

Input Frame

Input

Local Semantic Edits

Expression Transfer

Gaze

shift
gaze

Unsupervised Segmentation

Mouth

open
mouth

Eye

close
eyes

Our method enables semantic video editing by converting StyleGAN [27] prior into unsupervised segmentation prior.

Abstract
High-fidelity virtual human avatar applications create
a need for photorealistic video face synthesis with controllable semantic editing over facial features. While recent
generative neural methods have shown significant progress
in portrait video synthesis, intuitive facial control, e.g., of
mouth interior and gaze at different levels of details, remains
a challenge. In this work, we present a novel face editing
framework that combines a 3D face model with StyleGAN
vector-quantization to learn multi-level semantic facial control. We show that vector quantization of StyleGAN features
unveils richer semantic facial representations, e.g., teeth and
pupils, which are difficult to model with 3D tracking priors.
Such representations along with 3D tracking can be used as
self-supervision to train a generator with control over coarse
expressions and finer facial attributes. Learned representations can be combined with user-defined masks to create
semantic segmentations that act as custom detail handles for
semantic-aware video editing. Our formulation allows video
face manipulation with precise local control over facial attributes, such as eyes and teeth, opening up a number of face
reenactment and visual expression articulation applications.

1. Introduction
High-resolution editing and rendering of photorealistic
facial portrait videos are in high demand due to virtual hu-

man applications, such as actor performance editing, multilanguage telepresence, and video conferencing.
In the area of high-resolution video face editing, stateof-the-art methods [41, 36, 56, 1, 42, 57] use pre-trained
generative neural networks, such as StyleGAN [25, 27] that,
when trained on large face datasets [25, 32], leads to learning
a face prior that can be exploited for video editing. In the
literature, various formulations leverage such a pre-trained
GAN as input in an attempt to disentangle style spaces for
semantic face image editing [44, 8]. Here, editing is limited by the training dataset distribution as well as attributes
such as pose range, expression, ethnicity, and gender. The
edits are often not explicit and can be unintuitive since it
involves finding directions or discriminating features in a
high-dimensional feature space to achieve the desired effects [44].
Several generative neural face synthesis methods have
been proposed [51]. They take 2D videos frames and a
tracked 3D face, often parameterized via a 3D morphable
model (3DMM) [11], as supervised inputs and learn to neurally render the video. Once the neural network is learned,
faces can be edited by modifying the tracked 3D face (or the
3DMM parameters) and rendering new subject videos. The
tracked 3D face can be altered using audio input [53, 67], target reenactment videos [55], or artist-based modifications of
the 3D face morphable model [49, 50]. Such 3DMM-aware

2371

