This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Task Agnostic Restoration of Natural Video Dynamics
Muhammad Kashif Ali
Dongjin Kim
Tae Hyun Kim∗
Department of Computer Science, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea
{kashifali, dongjinkim, taehyunkim}@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract
In many video restoration/translation tasks, image processing operations are naı̈vely extended to the video domain by processing each frame independently, disregarding the temporal connection of the video frames. This disregard for the temporal connection often leads to severe
temporal inconsistencies. State-Of-The-Art (SOTA) techniques that address these inconsistencies rely on the availability of unprocessed videos to implicitly siphon and utilize
consistent video dynamics to restore the temporal consistency of frame-wise processed videos which often jeopardizes the translation effect. We propose a general framework for this task that learns to infer and utilize consistent motion dynamics from inconsistent videos to mitigate
the temporal flicker while preserving the perceptual quality for both the temporally neighboring and relatively distant frames without requiring the raw videos at test time.
The proposed framework produces SOTA results on two
benchmark datasets, DAVIS and videvo.net, processed by
numerous image processing applications. The code and
the trained models are available at https://github.
com/MKashifAli/TARONVD.

1. Introduction
Video sharing social media platforms like Snapchat and
TikTok have introduced the common populace to a plethora
of computer vision applications such as Style Transfer [9],
Colorization [43], Denoising [42], and Dehazing [38]. With
this wide-scale integration of these classical computer vision applications in such platforms, various image processing operations are naı̈vely extended to videos due to scarcity
of annotated video datasets and their computational complexity of video processing methodologies. This naı̈ve extension of static image processing methodologies to videos
disregards the temporal connection of the video progression and introduces severe temporal flickering in the videos.
This temporal flicker can appear for various reasons; for in∗ : Corresponding author.

stance, these image processing methods can produce drastically different results for temporally neighboring frames
due to slight changes in their global or local content statistics, or it could also happen due to the multi-modality of the
application as there could exist a number of valid solutions
for images with similar content as highlighted in [3, 41].
Therefore, the extension of these image-to-image translation tasks to the video domain is an active area of research in
computer vision, and methods that can help extend various
image processing applications with little to no knowledge
of the operations used to create videos are quite useful.
Currently, there are several task-dependent temporal
consistency correction approaches available such as [4, 23,
34], but due to the complex nature of these applications,
only a handful of approaches have been proposed to tackle
the problem of blind temporal consistency correction. Bonneel et al. [3] initiated the investigation of blind temporal
consistency correction with gradient-domain minimization
of per-frame processed video with the unprocessed video
to minimize the warping error between the frames. Lai et
al. [16] extended the formulation of [3] with the help of
recurrent Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and introduced a perceptual penalty in their formulation to restrict
the deviation of perceptual content of the restored video
from the frame-wise processed video. Deep Video Prior
(DVP) [19] extended Deep Image Prior (DIP) [35] to the
temporal dimension and proposed to formulate enforcing
temporal consistency by training a CNN to generate processed video from the unprocessed video without utilizing
optical flow. All of these approaches rely on the availability
of unprocessed videos for implicit extraction of consistent
motion dynamics to use as a restoration guide.
Please note that all the previously proposed approaches
for this task define it with the help of unprocessed videos
(both task-specific and task-agnostic). Having access to unprocessed videos at test time helps the models in siphoning and transferring consistent motion dynamics to the inconsistent videos to decrease temporal flicker. Despite its
efficacy, this implicit definition limits the applicability of
the previously proposed approaches to only the videos for
which their unprocessed counterparts are available and also

13534

