This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLNeRF: Continual Learning Meets NeRF
Zhipeng Cai⇤
Intel Labs

Matthias Müller
Intel Labs

zhipeng.cai@intel.com

matthias.mueller.2@kaust.edu.sa

Figure 1. Teaser. This work studies continual learning for NeRFs. We propose a new benchmark – World Across Time (WAT) – to study
practical scenarios where images of a scene arrive as a sequence of multiple scans with appearance and geometry changes, over an extended
period of time. We also propose an effective system – CLNeRF – that can sequentially learn from these scans, without requiring stored
historical images. The top and bottom rows show rendered novel views of the same scene for the current and past scans respectively.
CLNeRF accurately renders both the current and the past scans, performing on-par with the upper bound model (UB) trained on all scans at
once. Naively training (NT) on the sequence of scans overfits to the current scan, resulting in erroneous appearance (lightning) and geometry
(extra cups marked by bounding boxes, which only exist in the current scan) for the past scan.

Abstract
Novel view synthesis aims to render unseen views given
a set of calibrated images. In practical applications, the
coverage, appearance or geometry of the scene may change
over time, with new images continuously being captured.
Efficiently incorporating such continuous change is an open
challenge. Standard NeRF benchmarks only involve scene
coverage expansion. To study other practical scene changes,
we propose a new dataset, World Across Time (WAT), consisting of scenes that change in appearance and geometry
over time. We also propose a simple yet effective method,
CLNeRF, which introduces continual learning (CL) to Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs). CLNeRF combines generative replay and the Instant Neural Graphics Primitives
(NGP) architecture to effectively prevent catastrophic forgetting and efficiently update the model when new data arrives. We also add trainable appearance and geometry
embeddings to NGP, allowing a single compact model to
handle complex scene changes. Without the need to store
historical images, CLNeRF trained sequentially over mul-

tiple scans of a changing scene performs on-par with the
upper bound model trained on all scans at once. Compared to other CL baselines CLNeRF performs much better
across standard benchmarks and WAT. The source code,
a demo, and the WAT dataset are available at https:
//github.com/IntelLabs/CLNeRF.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) have emerged as the preeminent method for novel view synthesis. Given images of a
scene from multiple views, NeRFs can effectively interpolate
between them. However, in practical applications (e.g., city
rendering [32]), the scene may change over time, resulting
in a gradually revealed sequence of images with new scene
coverage (new city blocks), appearance (lighting or weather)
and geometry (new construction). Learning continually from
such sequential data is an important problem.
Naive model re-training on all revealed data is expensive,
millions of images may need to be stored for large scale
systems [32]. Meanwhile, updating the model only on new

23185

