This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Anchor Structure Regularization Induced Multi-view Subspace Clustering via
Enhanced Tensor Rank Minimization
Jintian Ji1,2 , Songhe Feng1,2, *
Key Laboratory of Big Data & Artificial Intelligence in Transportation,
Ministry of Education, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, 100044, China
2
School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, 100044, China
1

{22120385,shfeng}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
The tensor-based multi-view subspace clustering algorithms have received widespread attention due to the powerful ability to capture high-order correlation across views.
Although such algorithms have achieved remarkable success, they still suffer from three main issues: 1)The extremely high computational complexity makes tensor-based
methods difficult to handle large-scale data sets. 2)The
subspace-based methods usually ignore the local geometric structure of the original data. 3)The commonly
used Tensor Nuclear Norm (TNN) treats different singular values equally and under-penalizes the noise components, resulting in a sub-optimal representation tensor. Being aware of these, we propose Anchor Structure
Regularitation Induced Multi-view Subspace Clustering via
Enhanced Tensor Rank Minimization (ASR-ETR). Specifically, an anchor-representation tensor is constructed by
using the anchor representation strategy rather than the
self-representation strategy to reduce the time complexity,
and the local geometric structure in the learned anchorrepresentation tensor is enhanced by adopting the Anchor
Structure Regularization (ASR). We further devise an Enhanced Tensor Rank (ETR), which is a tighter surrogate of
the tensor rank to effectively capture the multi-view highorder correlation. An efficient iterative optimization algorithm is designed to solve the ASR-ETR, which is timeeconomical and enjoys favorable convergence. Extensive
experimental results on various data sets demonstrate the
superiority of the proposed algorithm as compared to stateof-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Clustering is an important and fundamental task in unsupervised learning, which has been widely used in many
* Corresponding Author

fields, such as pattern recognition, computer vision, objection recognition, etc. [2, 33]. However, with the development of technology, the storage and representation of data
have become more diverse, for example, human fingerprints
can be recorded via multiple sensors. Such data is known
as multi-view data, and the emergence of multi-view data
also makes it difficult for traditional clustering algorithms to
meet current needs. Traditional clustering algorithms such
as spectral clustering [32] can only deal with single-view
data, which is difficult to utilize the rich complementary information among different views, so multi-view clustering
is born to break this limitation by exploring the consensus
information and complementary information hidden in different views.
The current multi-view clustering algorithms can be categorized into graph-based methods [41, 28, 35, 19], cotraining-based methods [15], and subspace-based methods
[22, 17, 6, 21, 44, 4, 7]. The subspace-based methods have
received wide attention due to their efficient performance
and noise robustness. They first construct the representation matrix of multiple views via self-representation and
send the fused affinity matrix to spectral clustering to obtain
the final results. The self-representation strategy always focuses on the global information among data points, leading
to poor discriminability of the learned representation matrices. Therefore, many efforts have been made [1, 36, 11] to
improve the discriminability of the representation matrix.
For example, the Hilbert Schmidt Independence Criterion
is employed in [1] to diversify the representation matrix of
each view. However, such methods simply explore the relationship between point pairs and fail to effectively explore
the higher-order correlation across views.
More recently, tensor-based algorithms [43, 25, 45, 26,
40], which aim to constrain the low rankness of the representation tensor composed by multi-view affinity matrices
to capture the higher-order correlation and complementary
information across views, are proposed and achieve promis-

19343

