This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Growing a Brain with Sparsity-Inducing Generation for Continual Learning
Eunwoo Kim1
Hyundong Jin1
Gyeong-hyeon Kim1
Chanho Ahn2 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Chung-Ang University
2
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT)
{jude0316, leonardkkh, eunwoo}@cau.ac.kr

Abstract
Deep neural networks suffer from catastrophic forgetting
in continual learning, where they tend to lose information
about previously learned tasks when optimizing a new incoming task. Recent strategies isolate the important parameters for previous tasks to retain old knowledge while learning the new task. However, using the fixed old knowledge
might act as an obstacle to capturing novel representations.
To overcome this limitation, we propose a framework that
evolves the previously allocated parameters by absorbing
the knowledge of the new task. The approach performs under two different networks. The base network learns knowledge of sequential tasks, and the sparsity-inducing hypernetwork generates parameters for each time step for evolving old knowledge. The generated parameters transform old
parameters of the base network to reflect the new knowledge. We design the hypernetwork to generate sparse parameters conditional to the task-specific information and
the structural information of the base network. We evaluate the proposed approach on class-incremental and taskincremental learning scenarios for image classification and
video action recognition tasks. Experimental results show
that the proposed method consistently outperforms a large
variety of continual learning approaches for those scenarios by evolving old knowledge.

1. Introduction
The ability of deep learning to incrementally accumulate knowledge for sequentially incoming tasks is an important capability required for modern AI algorithms. However, deep neural networks tend to lose previously acquired
knowledge while learning new data. This limitation of deep
neural networks, called catastrophic forgetting, has been investigated by previous studies [29, 17]. Catastrophic forgetting significantly degrades performance when data from
previous tasks (task-incremental) or already-learned class
* This work was done independently, without any support from SAIT.

chanho.ahn@samsung.com

data (class-incremental) cannot be accessed. Under those
incremental learning scenarios, continual learning methods
have toiled to preserve the previous knowledge.
Various approaches have been proposed for continual
learning and are categorized into three types: regularization
[2, 4, 20, 17, 48], data rehearsal [5, 26, 32, 35, 38, 47], and
parameter isolation [1, 30, 28]. The conventional continual
learning methods introduced regularization approaches to
suppress changes in important parameters [48, 2] or inputoutput mappings from a network trained up to previous
tasks [22, 7]. The network is trained in a way that contributable parameters to the performance of the previously
trained model remain unchanged. On the other hand, data
rehearsal methods [25, 35] address catastrophic forgetting
by accessing old data. The old data can be obtained by storing some data from old tasks [35, 47] or leveraging a generative network [38]. However, the privacy of data and the
difficulty of learning generative models limit their versatility. Recently, parameter isolation approaches [28, 30, 15]
construct a disjoint set of parameters for each task, preventing it from mixing old and new knowledge. These methods
learn a new set of parameters by associating all [28] or some
helpful old knowledge [15].
Unlike other approaches, the parameter isolation approach is designed to prevent forgetting without requiring
access to old data by disallowing updates to previous sets of
parameters. Despite this advantage, these methods can limit
the ability to learn new tasks by relying on parameters that
were learned for older tasks and remain unchanged. We observe that this limitation arises when there is a low correlation between the old and new data. This raises the question:
In parameter isolation-based continual learning, is it possible to transform the knowledge from old tasks to fit newer
tasks better?
In this paper, we introduce a novel method for transforming prior knowledge into a form that can aid in learning new
tasks. The approach involves reframing the parameter selection problem, which previous works [15] have addressed, as
a generation problem. The proposed framework emphasizes
a subset of pre-trained knowledge, selecting and highlight-

18961

