This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Leveraging SE(3) Equivariance for Learning 3D Geometric Shape Assembly
Ruihai Wu1,3 * Chenrui Tie2,1 * Yushi Du2,1 Yan Zhao1,3 Hao Dong1,3†
1
CFCS, School of CS, PKU 2 School of EECS, PKU
3
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of CS, PKU
{wuruihai,crtie,duyushi628,yan790,hao.dong}@pku.edu.cn

Multiple
Parts

Shape assembly aims to reassemble parts (or fragments)
into a complete object, which is a common task in our daily
life. Different from the semantic part assembly (e.g., assembling a chair’s semantic parts like legs into a whole chair),
geometric part assembly (e.g., assembling bowl fragments
into a complete bowl) is an emerging task in computer vision and robotics. Instead of semantic information, this task
focuses on geometric information of parts. As the both geometric and pose space of fractured parts are exceptionally
large, shape pose disentanglement of part representations
is beneficial to geometric shape assembly. In our paper, we
propose to leverage SE(3) equivariance for such shape pose
disentanglement. Moreover, while previous works in vision
and robotics only consider SE(3) equivariance for the representations of single objects, we move a step forward and
propose leveraging SE(3) equivariance for representations
considering multi-part correlations, which further boosts
the performance of the multi-part assembly. Experiments
demonstrate the significance of SE(3) equivariance and our
proposed method for geometric shape assembly. Project
page: https://crtie.github.io/SE-3-part-assembly/

Two Parts

Abstract
Datasets

Input parts (a)

Input parts (b)
Change Initial Pose

Non-SE(3)Equivariant
Network

SE(3)Equivariant
Network

Non-SE(3)Equivariant
Network

SE(3)Equivariant
Network

Figure 1. Geometric Shape Assembly aims to assemble different
fractured parts into a whole shape. We propose to leverage SE(3)
Equivariance for learning Geometric Shape Assembly, which disentangles poses and shapes of fractured parts, and performs better
than networks without SE(3)-equivariant representations.

1. Introduction
Shape assembly aims to compose the parts or fragments
of an object into a complete shape. It is a common task
in the human-built world, from furniture assembly [16, 36]
(e.g., assemble chair parts like legs and handles into a whole
chair) to fractured object reassembly [5, 24] (e.g., assemble
bowl fractures into a whole bowl) . When trying to complete
an object from parts, we will focus on their geometric and
semantic information.
There is a vast literature in both the computer vision and
robotics fields studying the shape assembly problem, especially for the application purposes like furniture assembly
* Equal contribution, order determined by coin flip.
† Corresponding author

and object assembly [1, 16, 19, 36]. Imagine we want to
assemble a simple table with four wooden sticks and a flat
board, we can infer that the sticks are the table legs so they
should be vertically placed, while the board is the table top
and should be horizontally placed. Here, we not only use
geometric clues to infer the parts’ functions but also use semantic information to predict the parts’ poses.
Recently, a two-part geometric mating dataset is proposed in NSM [5], which considers shape assembly from
a pure geometric perspective, without relying on semantic
information. This work randomly cuts an object into two
pairs, and studies how to mate the fragment pairs into the
original shape. Such design is practical in some applications
such as object kitting [7, 18], form fitting [35], and pro-

14311

