This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LIST: Learning Implicitly from Spatial Transformers
for Single-View 3D Reconstruction
Mohammad Samiul Arshad and William J. Beksi
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX, USA
mohammadsamiul.arshad@mavs.uta.edu, william.beksi@uta.edu

Abstract
Accurate reconstruction of both the geometric and topological details of a 3D object from a single 2D image embodies a fundamental challenge in computer vision. Existing explicit/implicit solutions to this problem struggle to recover self-occluded geometry and/or faithfully reconstruct
topological shape structures. To resolve this dilemma, we
introduce LIST, a novel neural architecture that leverages
local and global image features to accurately reconstruct
the geometric and topological structure of a 3D object from
a single image. We utilize global 2D features to predict
a coarse shape of the target object and then use it as a
base for higher-resolution reconstruction. By leveraging
both local 2D features from the image and 3D features from
the coarse prediction, we can predict the signed distance
between an arbitrary point and the target surface via an
implicit predictor with great accuracy. Furthermore, our
model does not require camera estimation or pixel alignment. It provides an uninfluenced reconstruction from the
input-view direction. Through qualitative and quantitative
analysis, we show the superiority of our model in reconstructing 3D objects from both synthetic and real-world images against the state of the art. Our source code is publicly
available to the research community [13].

1. Introduction
Constructing a truthful portrayal of the 3D world from a
single 2D image is a basic problem for many applications
including robot manipulation and navigation, scene understanding, view synthesis, virtual reality, and more. Following the work of Erwin Kruppa [11] in camera motion estimation and the recovery of 3D points, researchers have attempted to solve the 3D reconstruction issue using structure
from motion [33, 16, 28], and visual simultaneous localization and mapping [8, 27]. However, the main limitation of
such approaches is that they require multiple observations

Fig. 1: Five unique views of objects reconstructed by LIST from
a single RGB image. Not only does our model accurately recover
occluded geometry, but also the reconstructed surfaces are not influenced by the input-view direction.

of the desired object or scene from distinct viewpoints with
shared features. Such a multi-view formulation allows for
integrating information from numerous images to compensate for occluded geometry.
Reconstructing a 3D object from a single image is a more
difficult task since a sole image does not contain the whole
topology of the target shape due to self-occlusions. Researchers have tried both explicit and implicit techniques to
reconstruct a target object with self-occluded parts. Explicit
methods attempt to infer the target shape directly from the
input image. Nevertheless, a major drawback of such approaches is that the output resolution needs to be defined in
advance, which constrains these techniques from achieving
high-quality results. Recent advances in implicit learning
offer a solution to reconstruct the target shape in an arbitrary resolution by indirectly inferring the desired surface
through a distance/occupancy field. Then, the target surface is reconstructed by extracting a zero level set from the

9321

