This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

What do neural networks learn in image classification?
A frequency shortcut perspective
Shunxin Wang

Raymond Veldhuis
Christoph Brune
University of Twente, The Netherlands

Nicola Strisciuglio

Abstract
Frequency analysis is useful for understanding the mechanisms of representation learning in neural networks (NNs).
Most research in this area focuses on the learning dynamics of NNs for regression tasks, while little for classification. This study empirically investigates the latter and
expands the understanding of frequency shortcuts. First,
we perform experiments on synthetic datasets, designed
to have a bias in different frequency bands. Our results demonstrate that NNs tend to find simple solutions
for classification, and what they learn first during training depends on the most distinctive frequency characteristics, which can be either low- or high-frequencies. Second, we confirm this phenomenon on natural images. We
propose a metric to measure class-wise frequency characteristics and a method to identify frequency shortcuts.
The results show that frequency shortcuts can be texturebased or shape-based, depending on what best simplifies the objective. Third, we validate the transferability
of frequency shortcuts on out-of-distribution (OOD) test
sets. Our results suggest that frequency shortcuts can be
transferred across datasets and cannot be fully avoided by
larger model capacity and data augmentation. We recommend that future research should focus on effective training schemes mitigating frequency shortcut learning. Codes
and data are available at https://github.com/
nis-research/nn-frequency-shortcuts.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely used to
tackle problems in many fields, e.g. medical data analysis,
self-driving vehicles, robotics, and surveillance. However,
the underlying predictive processes of DNNs are not completely understood due to the black-box nature of their nonlinear multilayer structure [3]. While a DNN can approximate any function [23], its (hundreds of) millions of parameters limit the understanding of function approximation
process. Analyzing the learned features is a viable way to
understand what triggers the predictions, although explain-

retaining
dominant frequencies only

Figure 1: Images of ‘container ship’ and ’siamese cat’ and
their DFM-filtered versions with only top-5% dominant frequencies (the white dots in the central figures) retained can
both be recognized correctly by NNs.

ing how DNNs process data needs further exploration [28].
Researchers worked on explaining the predictions of
NNs in terms of their input, using Saliency [27], Gradientweighted Class Activation Mapping [25] and Layer-wise
Relevance Propagation [2]. These techniques highlight the
area of an image that contributes to prediction but do not
explain why the performance of NNs degrades on OOD
data. Recently, an interest in understanding the learning
dynamics of NNs from a frequency perspective has grown.
NNs are found to learn lower frequencies first in regression tasks [23], as they carry most of the needed information to reconstruct signals [35]. Thus NNs tend to fit lowfrequency functions first to data [17]. This biased learning
behavior is known as simplicity bias [26], which induces
the NNs to learn simple but effective patterns, i.e. shortcuts
solutions that disregard semantics related to the problem at
hand but are simpler for solving the optimization task. For
instance, the frequency shortcuts proposed in [31] are sets
of frequencies used specifically to classify certain classes.
In this work, we empirically analyze the learning dynamics of NNs for image classification and relate it to
simplicity-bias and shortcut learning from a frequency perspective. Our results indicate that simplicity-biased learn-

1433

