This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffTAD: Temporal Action Detection with Proposal Denoising Diffusion
Sauradip Nag1,2 *
1

Xiatian Zhu1,3

CVSSP, University of Surrey, UK
3

Jiankang Deng4
2

Yi-Zhe Song1,2

Tao Xiang1,2

iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Center on Artificial Intelligence, UK

Surrey Institute for People-Centred Artificial Intelligence, UK

4

Imperial College London, UK

Text as Condition

Abstract
We propose a new formulation of temporal action detection (TAD) with denoising diffusion, DiffTAD in short.
Taking as input random temporal proposals, it can yield action proposals accurately given an untrimmed long video.
This presents a generative modeling perspective, against
previous discriminative learning manners. This capability is achieved by first diffusing the ground-truth proposals to random ones (i.e., the forward/noising process) and
then learning to reverse the noising process (i.e., the backward/denoising process). Concretely, we establish the denoising process in the Transformer decoder (e.g., DETR)
by introducing a temporal location query design with faster
convergence in training. We further propose a cross-step
selective conditioning algorithm for inference acceleration. Extensive evaluations on ActivityNet and THUMOS
show that our DiffTAD achieves top performance compared to previous art alternatives. The code is available
at https://github.com/sauradip/DiffusionTAD.

1. Introduction
Temporal action detection (TAD) aims to predict the
temporal duration (i.e., start and end time) and the class label of each action instance in an untrimmed video [32, 9].
Existing methods rely on proposal prediction by regressing
anchor proposals [86, 13, 21, 47] or predicting the start/end
times of proposals [41, 8, 42, 90, 52, 87, 88, 50, 49, 51].
These models are all discriminative learning based.
In the generative learning perspective, diffusion model
[66] has been recently exploited in image based object detection [15]. This represents a new direction for designing
detection models in general. Although conceptually similar to object detection, the TAD problem presents more
complexity due to the presence of temporal dynamics. Besides, there are several limitations with the detection diffusion formulation in [15]. First, a two-stage pipeline (e.g.,
RCNN [13]) is adopted, suffering localization-error prop* This work was done during internship with Jiankang Deng.

"A picture of a
golden retriever smiling"

(a)

Text Encoder

Denoised Image

Noisy Image

Video as Condition

Video Encoder

(b)

Noisy Action Proposal

Denoised Action Proposal

Figure 1. Diffusion for temporal action detection (TAD). (a) A
diffusion model for text-to-image generation where text embeddings are passed as the condition in the denoising (reverse) process. We draw an analogy by exploiting (b) a diffusion model for
TAD: To generate action temporal boundaries from noisy proposals with the condition of video embedding.

agation from proposal generation to proposal classification
[48]. Second, as each proposal is processed individually,
their relationship modeling is overlooked, potentially hurting the learning efficacy. To avoid these issues, we adopt
the one-stage detection pipelines [75, 80] that have already
shown excellent performance with a relatively simpler design, in particular, DETR [11].
Nonetheless, it is non-trivial to integrate denoising diffusion with existing detection models, due to several reasons.
(1) A unique challenge with TAD is big boundary ambiguity. This is because activities are continuous in time without
clear start/end points (i.e., non-zero momentum), and the
transition between consecutive activities is often stochastic.
Further, human perception of action boundaries is also in-

10362

