This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MeViS: A Large-scale Benchmark for Video Segmentation
with Motion Expressions

†

Henghui Ding† Chang Liu‡ Shuting He‡ Xudong Jiang‡ Chen Change Loy†
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University ‡ School of EEE, Nanyang Technological University
https://henghuiding.github.io/MeViS
"The bird flying away"

First Frame

"The cat playing with the teaser"

"Bears that walk forwards from left to right then walk back"

Figure 1. Examples of video clips from Motion expressions Video Segmentation (MeViS) are provided to illustrate the dataset’s nature and
complexity. The expressions in MeViS primarily focus on motion attributes and the referred target object cannot be identified by examining
a single frame solely. For instance, the first example features three parrots with similar appearances, and the target object is identified as
“The bird flying away”. This object can only be recognized by capturing its motion throughout the video.

Abstract
This paper strives for motion expressions guided video
segmentation, which focuses on segmenting objects in video
content based on a sentence describing the motion of the
objects. Existing referring video object datasets typically
focus on salient objects and use language expressions that
contain excessive static attributes that could potentially
enable the target object to be identified in a single frame.
These datasets downplay the importance of motion in video
content for language-guided video object segmentation.
To investigate the feasibility of using motion expressions
to ground and segment objects in videos, we propose a
large-scale dataset called MeViS, which contains numerous motion expressions to indicate target objects in complex environments. We benchmarked 5 existing referring
video object segmentation (RVOS) methods and conducted
a comprehensive comparison on the MeViS dataset. The
results show that current RVOS methods cannot effectively
address motion expression-guided video segmentation. We
further analyze the challenges and propose a baseline
henghui.ding@gmail.com, ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

approach for the proposed MeViS dataset. The goal of
our benchmark is to provide a platform that enables the
development of effective language-guided video segmentation algorithms that leverage motion expressions as a
primary cue for object segmentation in complex video
scenes. The proposed MeViS dataset has been released at
https://henghuiding.github.io/MeViS.

1. Introduction
Language-guided video segmentation is an emerging
field that involves segmenting and tracking target objects
using natural language expressions. This field has traditionally been a sub-branch of semi-supervised video object segmentation, where referring expressions are used to describe
the target object. Existing referring video object datasets,
such as [13, 21, 44], commonly feature videos with isolated
and salient objects that have obvious static features. The
corresponding expressions often contain static attributes
such as object color, which can be observed in a single
frame. As a result, motion properties of videos are often

2694

