This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Energy-based Self-Training and Normalization for Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation
Samitha Herath1†
1

Basura Fernando2
Mehrtash Harandi1

Monash University, Australia

2

Ehsan Abbasnejad3
Hamid Rezatofighi1

A*STAR, Singapore
†

3

Munawar Hayat1 Shahram Khadivi4
Gholamreza Haffari1

The University of Adelaide, Australia

4

eBay Inc.

samitha.herath1@monash.edu

Abstract
We propose an Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA)
method by making use of Energy-Based Learning (EBL) and
demonstrate 1. EBL can be used to improve the instance
selection for a self-training task on the unlabelled target
domain, and 2. alignment and normalizing energy scores
can learn domain-invariant representations. For the former, we show that an energy-based selection criterion can
be used to model instance selections by mimicking the joint
distribution between data and predictions in the target domain. As per learning domain invariant representations,
we show that stable domain alignment can be achieved by
a combined energy alignment and an energy normalization process. We implement our method in consistent with
the vision-transformer (ViT) backbone and show that our
proposed method can outperform state-of-the-art ViT based
UDA methods on diverse benchmarks (DomainNet, OfficeHome, and VISDA2017).

1. Introduction
The recent progress in Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
(UDA) methods depend on two key factors: the capacity to
learn discriminatively from unlabelled target data and the
potential to achieve domain alignment without compromising the integrity of the representation (i.e., avoiding degenerated representations). In this study, we propose a novel
approach for UDA that leverages the energy-based interpretation of discriminative classifiers [11, 16, 36]. We show
how energy-based learning can be used to generate a better
self-training signal when learning discriminatively from the
unlabelled target domain data. To this end, we demonstrate
that the representation integrity during domain alignment
can be maintained with a proposed novel normalization process for the energy-based learning framework. We show
that our energy-based self-training, the energy normalization process together with free-energy alignment proposed
in [36] forms a seamless energy-based learning framework

for UDA on top of the transformer [7] backbone. Our results
confirm that this proposed framework outperforms state-ofthe-art UDA methods on established UDA benchmarks.
Prior work has emphasized the significance of a discriminative objective in the target domain data for UDA. For example, [28] employs entropy minimization principles [10]
as a discriminative loss on the unlabelled data. Prabhu et
al. [23] illustrate the effectiveness of min-max learning of
the entropy loss function when utilized to learn from the unlabelled target domain data. The recent transformer-based
technique presented in [24] proposes a self-training task that
involves pseudo-labelling and learning augmentation masks
from the data. Nonetheless, these approaches only make
use of the consistency of the conditional distribution of the
labels (i.e., pseudo labels) given the unlabelled data to develop the self-training task. It is evident that the joint distribution between data and labels captures a stronger relationship between them [25]; but an utterly involved choice to
be considered. For instance, modelling the joint distribution
will require the help of computationally exhaustive generative modelling techniques [37, 38]. In this work, we show
how we can mimic the behaviour of the joint distribution
modelling to generate an informative self-training signal by
using the energy-based learning concepts for classifiers.
With the current success of the transformers [33] in both
vision and NLP [6], we focus our efforts on examining the
proposed approach using the vision transformer (ViT) [7]
backbone. As such, the quality of training depends on the
capacity of the self-attention parameters to accurately emphasize related information in the training data. However,
for UDA, due to the domain shift between the source and
the target data, the self-attention parameters learnt through
the source domain supervision may not well align with all
target data points. Here, we propose a selection criterion
to decide on instances that are compatible with the attention of the transformer model. In our formulation, we use
the relationship between free-energy to the marginal density
of the data. Thereafter, we show that by a careful combination of such marginal density-based instance selections with
11653

