This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Advancing Referring Expression Segmentation Beyond Single Image
Yixuan Wu12∗ Zhao Zhang1 * Chi Xie13 Feng Zhu1B Rui Zhao14
1
SenseTime Research 2 Zhejiang University 3 Tongji University
4
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
wyx chloe@zju.edu.cn

zzhang@mail.nankai.edu.cn

zhufeng@sensetime.com

Abstract
Referring Expression Segmentation (RES) is a widely explored multi-modal task, which endeavors to segment the
pre-existing object within a single image with a given linguistic expression. However, in broader real-world scenarios, it is not always possible to determine if the described
object exists in a specific image. Generally, a collection
of images is available, some of which potentially contain
the target objects. To this end, we propose a more realistic
setting, named Group-wise Referring Expression Segmentation (GRES), which expands RES to a group of related
images, allowing the described objects to exist in a subset
of the input image group. To support this new setting, we
introduce an elaborately compiled dataset named Grouped
Referring Dataset (GRD), containing complete group-wise
annotations of the target objects described by given expressions. Moreover, we also present a baseline method named
Grouped Referring Segmenter (GRSer), which explicitly
captures the language-vision and intra-group vision-vision
interactions to achieve state-of-the-art results on the proposed GRES setting and related tasks, such as Co-Salient
Object Detection and traditional RES. Our dataset and
codes are publicly released in https://github.com/shikras/dcube.

1. Introduction
Segmenting target objects described by users in a collection of images is a fundamental but overlooked capability that facilitates various real-world applications (as illustrated in Fig. 1), such as Internet images automatic labeling, multi-monitors joint event discovery, and mobile album retrieval. In recent years, Referring Expression Segmentation (RES) has become a research hotspot with great
potentials to solve this demand. Various promising approaches [17, 38, 44, 6, 14] and datasets [21, 46, 36, 42]
have contributed to significant advancements in this field.
*

Equal Contribution

a person wearing a hat playing golf

Image Search

“a vehicle damaged in a traffic accident”

Figure 1: Real-world applications of our proposed Groupwise Referring Expression Segmentation (GRES) setting,
which facilitates Internet images automatic labeling (upper), multi-monitors joint event discovery (lower), etc.

However, the setting of RES is overly idealistic, which aims
to segment what has been known to exist in a single image.
This has restricted the practicality of RES in real-world situations, given that it is not always possible to determine if
the described object exists in a specific image. Generally, a
group of images is available, only some of which may potentially contain the target objects.
To address this limitation, in this paper, we introduce
a new realistic setting, namely Group-wise Referring Expression Segmentation (GRES), and define it as segmenting
objects described in language expression from a group of
related images. Compared with traditional RES task, our
GRES setting get extended in two points: (a) tolerance for
negative images where no target object exists, and (b) simultaneous processing of a group of images. Note that the
application scope of GRES is the superset of RES, which
means (a) or (b) can be omitted based on the actual scenarios. Moreover, we establish the foundation of GRES
in two aspects: firstly, a baseline method named Grouped
Referring Segmenter (GRSer) that explicitly leverages language and intra-group vision connections to obtain promis-

2628

