This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

High-Resolution Document Shadow Removal via A Large-Scale Real-World
Dataset and A Frequency-Aware Shadow Erasing Net
Zinuo Li*

Xuhang Chen*
Chi-Man Pun†
University of Macau

Xiaodong Cun†

Abstract
Shadows often occur when we capture the document with
casual equipment, which influences the visual quality and
readability of the digital copies. Different from the algorithms for natural shadow removal, the algorithms in document shadow removal need to preserve the details of fonts
and figures in high-resolution input. Previous works ignore this problem and remove the shadows via approximate attention and small datasets, which might not work
in real-world situations. We handle high-resolution document shadow removal directly via a larger-scale realworld dataset and a carefully-designed frequency-aware
network. As for the dataset, we acquire over 7k couples of high-resolution (2462 × 3699) images of realworld documents pairs with various samples under different lighting circumstances, which is 10 times larger
than existing datasets. As for the design of the network, we decouple the high-resolution images in the frequency domain, where the low-frequency details and highfrequency boundaries can be effectively learned via the
carefully designed network structure. Powered by our network and dataset, the proposed method shows a clearly
better performance than previous methods in terms of visual quality and numerical results. The code, models,
and dataset are available at https://github.com/
CXH-Research/DocShadow-SD7K.

1. Introduction
When occluders obstruct the light source, shadows are
cast on the paper. These shadows reduce the readability and hinder subsequent text-related intelligent tasks
such as document enhancement, optical character recognition (OCR), key information extraction, and semantic entity
labeling [17, 36, 28], etc.
Removing the cast shadow of the digital copy has a long
need in the real world and also there are a lot of meth* Equal contributions
† Corresponding authors

(a) Input

(b) Shah et al. [27]

(c) Fu et al. [8]

(d) Liu et al. [25]

(e) Hu et al. [15]

(f) Ours

Figure 1. Visual results of input document shadow image (a),
classic method (b), supervised method (c), weakly-supervised
method (d), unsupervised method (e) and ours (f). Our model removes the shadow while preserving the original document’s content and aspect ratio.

ods, including the traditional methods that applied physicsbased illumination models [16, 30, 32]. In reality, these approaches are significantly constrained due to the fact that the
assumptions utilized in illumination models [27] are often
too rigid to account for real-world shadow. Thus, they may

12449

