This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CrossMatch: Source-Free Domain Adaptive Semantic Segmentation via
Cross-Modal Consistency Training
Yifang Yin1 , Wenmiao Hu2,4 , Zhenguang Liu3 *, Guanfeng Wang4 *, Shili Xiang1 , Roger Zimmermann2
1
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR 2 National University of Singapore
3
Zhejiang Gongshang University 4 Grabtaxi Holdings Pte. Ltd.
{yin yifang, sxiang}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, hu.wenmiao@u.nus.edu
liuzhenguang2008@gmail.com, guanfeng.wang@grab.com, rogerz@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Source-free domain adaptive semantic segmentation has
gained increasing attention recently. It eases the requirement of full access to the source domain by transferring
knowledge only from a well-trained source model. However, reducing the uncertainty of the target pseudo labels
becomes inevitably more challenging without the supervision of the labeled source data. In this work, we propose a
novel asymmetric two-stream architecture that learns more
robustly from noisy pseudo labels. Our approach simultaneously conducts dual-head pseudo label denoising and
cross-modal consistency regularization. Towards the former, we introduce a multimodal auxiliary network during
training (and discard it during inference), which effectively
enhances the pseudo labels’ correctness by leveraging the
guidance from the depth information. Towards the latter,
we enforce a new cross-modal pixel-wise consistency between the predictions of the two streams, encouraging our
model to behave smoothly for both modality variance and
image perturbations. It serves as an effective regularization
to further reduce the impact of the inaccurate pseudo labels in source-free unsupervised domain adaptation. Experiments on GTA5 → Cityscapes and SYNTHIA → Cityscapes
benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our proposed
method, obtaining the new state-of-the-art mIoU of 57.7%
and 57.5%, respectively.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation predicts pixel-level category labels to given scenes. Although deep neural networks have
been widely adopted, attaining state-of-the-art performance
relies mainly on the assumption that the training and testing data follow the same distribution [62, 32, 33]. This assumption is impractical as target scenarios often exhibit a
* The corresponding authors.

Source
model

Source
model

Auxiliary task

Pseudo labels

Pseudo
labels
Semantic loss

Depth
Semantic loss

Semantic loss
Depth loss
Consistency
loss

Depth
Decoder

Semantic
Decoder
Image
Encoder

Semantic
Decoder

Semantic
Decoder

Image
Encoder

RGB-D
Encoder

Auxiliary network

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Comparison of our proposed framework with existing
depth-aware semantic segmentation models. (a) Prior art mostly
adopts a multitask learning framework by adding depth estimation
as an auxiliary task. (b) We introduce a multimodal auxiliary network that takes depth modality as an additional input for effective
pseudo label denoising and consistency regularization.

distribution shift, e.g., street scenes collected under a crosscity [11] or cross-weather [44] environment. Unsupervised
domain adaptation (UDA) techniques have been proposed
to address the domain shift problem, which aim at transferring the knowledge learned from a labeled source domain
to an unlabeled target domain [48, 50, 69, 67]. However,
one major limitation of such UDA approaches lies in the requirement for full access to the source dataset. In practice,
the source data may be restricted from being shared due to
proprietary, privacy, or profit related concerns [26].
To cope with data sharing restrictions, recent efforts have
investigated source-free domain adaptation, which transfers knowledge from a well-trained source model (rather
than from the source data itself) to an unlabeled target domain [39, 31]. Early solutions introduce a generator to estimate the source domain based on the pre-trained source
model [31], which can be used to generate fake source samples for supervision as in typical UDA. However, due to the

21786

