This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beating Backdoor Attack at Its Own Game
Min Liu1 , Alberto Sangiovanni-Vincentelli2 , Xiangyu Yue3
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 UC Berkeley, 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
minliu2@cs.cmu.edu, alberto@berkeley.edu, xyyue@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to backdoor attack, which does not affect the network’s performance on clean data but would manipulate the network
behavior once a trigger pattern is added. Existing defense methods have greatly reduced attack success rate,
but their prediction accuracy on clean data still lags behind a clean model by a large margin. Inspired by the
stealthiness and effectiveness of backdoor attack, we propose a simple but highly effective defense framework which
injects non-adversarial backdoors targeting poisoned samples. Following the general steps in backdoor attack, we
detect a small set of suspected samples and then apply
a poisoning strategy to them. The non-adversarial backdoor, once triggered, suppresses the attacker’s backdoor
on poisoned data, but has limited influence on clean data.
The defense can be carried out during data preprocessing,
without any modification to the standard end-to-end training pipeline. We conduct extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks with different architectures and representative attacks. Results demonstrate that our method achieves
state-of-the-art defense effectiveness with by far the lowest
performance drop on clean data. Considering the surprising defense ability displayed by our framework, we call for
more attention to utilizing backdoor for backdoor defense.
Code is available at https://github.com/damianliumin/nonadversarial backdoor.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have
achieved impressive performance across tasks, such as object detection [36, 33], speech recognition [46, 2] and machine translation [37, 41]. With the increasing usage of
DNNs, security of neural networks has attracted a lot of attention. Studies have shown that DNNs are especially vulnerable to backdoor attack [43], a variant of data poisoning
which fools the model to establish a false correlation between inserted patterns and target classes. Specifically, the
adversary injects a trigger pattern to a small proportion of

Figure 1: Representations under the effect of adversarial backdoor (AB) and non-adversarial backdoor (NAB),
which are injected by attackers and defenders respectively.
“Stamp” is the trigger pattern for NAB. (a) Clean samples
are not influenced by backdoor. (b) AB changes model behavior on poisoned samples. (c) NAB is not triggered on
clean samples. (d) NAB suppresses the effectiveness of AB
on poisoned samples.

the training data. A network trained on the poisoned data
has normal behavior on benign data, but deviates from its
expected output when the trigger pattern is implanted.
To ensure the security of DNN systems, a lot of novel
defense methods have been proposed in the past few years.
Most of the defense methods try to either 1) avoid learning
the backdoor during training or 2) erase it from a poisoned
model at the end. Following idea 1), some studies detect
and filter poisoned samples [38, 6]. Since a small number of poisoned samples slipping from detection can lead
to a successful attack, simply filtering the potentially poisoned samples is not enough in most cases. A more realistic
way is to adopt data separation as an intermediate procedure
[23, 14]. Some other works pre-process the input to depress
the effectiveness of injected patterns [31, 13]. However,
these methods have limited effects under the increasingly
diverse attacking strategies. Another line of work follows
idea 2) [24, 44]. Despite promising defense effectiveness,

4620

