This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Implicit Transporter for Temporally Consistent Keypoint Discovery
Chengliang Zhong1,2 , Yuhang Zheng3 , Yupeng Zheng4 , Hao Zhao2 ,* Li Yi5 , Xiaodong Mu1 ,
Ling Wang1 , Pengfei Li2 , Guyue Zhou2 , Chao Yang6 , Xinliang Zhang2 , Jian Zhao7,8,9
1
Xi’an Research Institute of High-Tech, 2 AIR, Tsinghua University, 3 Beihang University,
4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 5 IIIS, Tsinghua University,
6
Shanghai AI Laboratory, 7 Institute of North Electronic Equipment,
8
Intelligent Game and Decision Laboratory, 9 Peng Cheng Laboratory
zhongcl19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhaohao@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

P erception
Input Point Clouds

Keypoint-based representation has proven advantageous
in various visual and robotic tasks. However, the existing 2D and 3D methods for detecting keypoints mainly rely
on geometric consistency to achieve spatial alignment, neglecting temporal consistency. To address this issue, the
Transporter method was introduced for 2D data, which reconstructs the target frame from the source frame to incorporate both spatial and temporal information. However, the direct application of the Transporter to 3D point
clouds is infeasible due to their structural differences from
2D images. Thus, we propose the first 3D version of
the Transporter, which leverages hybrid 3D representation,
cross attention, and implicit reconstruction. We apply this
new learning system on 3D articulated objects and nonrigid animals (humans and rodents) and show that learned
keypoints are spatio-temporally consistent. Additionally,
we propose a closed-loop control strategy that utilizes the
learned keypoints for 3D object manipulation and demonstrate its superior performance. Codes are available at
https://github.com/zhongcl-thu/3D-Implicit-Transporter.

1. Introduction
The ability to establish correspondences in temporal inputs is a hallmark of the human visual system, and this ability has been verified by developmental biologists [52] as
the enabling factor of object perception. Specifically, infants can naturally separate different objects by considering
pixels that move together. Meanwhile, establishing dense
correspondences from image sequences (i.e., optical flow)
[5, 6, 9, 13, 54, 55, 53] is also one of the oldest computer
vision topics, dating back to the birth of this discipline [19].
* Corresponding author

Initial

M anipulation

3D Implicit Transporter

Target

Interaction

Correspondent
Keypoints

..
.

..
.

Figure 1. Given paired point clouds, our 3D Implicit Transporter
leverages the object/part motion to discover temporally consistent
keypoints and recover the underlying shape for each input. Moreover, the learned keypoints can serve downstream robotics tasks,
such as articulated object manipulation.

On the other hand, keypoints are preferred as a compact mid-level representation in many scenarios, like visual recognition [51], pose estimation[72], reconstruction
[37], and robotic manipulation [43]. Sparse correspondence
from keypoints [30, 7, 10, 45] is another fundamental vision
topic. Most of the 2D and 3D keypoint detection methods
[73, 25] depend on the consistency under geometric transformations to achieve spatial alignment of keypoints. However, these methods are limited in their ability to identify
temporally consistent keypoints, which is crucial for representing movable or deformable objects such as the human
body whose shape and topology may vary over time. So
does there exist a generic principle that reflects how humans
extract spatiotemporally consistent keypoints? One (possible) such principle is that good mid-level representation can
be used to re-synthesize raw visual inputs. This principle
has been explored in legacy methods like FRAME [77], but
limited by the modeling power of generative models at that
age, and this principle has not seen much success.
Recently, a method named Transporter [23] has been
proposed in the 2D domain, successfully connecting keypoint extraction and correspondence establishment in a self-

3869

