This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ASM: Adaptive Skinning Model for High-Quality 3D Face Modeling

Kai Yang, Hong Shang*, Tianyang Shi, Xinghan Chen, Jingkai Zhou, Zhongqian Sun, Wei Yang
Tencent AI Lab
{arvinkyang, hongshang, tirionshi, xinghanchen, fszhou, sallensun, willyang}@tencent.com

Abstract
The research fields of parametric face model and 3D
face reconstruction have been extensively studied. However, a critical question remains unanswered: how to tailor the face model for specific reconstruction settings. We
argue that reconstruction with multi-view uncalibrated images demands a new model with stronger capacity. Our
study shifts attention from data-dependent 3D Morphable
Models (3DMM) to an understudied human-designed skinning model. We propose Adaptive Skinning Model (ASM),
which redefines the skinning model with more compact
and fully tunable parameters. With extensive experiments,
we demonstrate that ASM achieves significantly improved
capacity than 3DMM, with the additional advantage of
model size and easy implementation for new topology. We
achieve state-of-the-art performance with ASM for multiview reconstruction on the Florence MICC Coop benchmark. Our quantitative analysis demonstrates the importance of a high-capacity model for fully exploiting abundant information from multi-view input in reconstruction.
Furthermore, our model with physical-semantic parameters
can be directly utilized for real-world applications, such as
in-game avatar creation. As a result, our work opens up
new research direction for parametric face model and facilitates future research on multi-view reconstruction.

1. Introduction
A key preliminary decision factor for 3D face modeling is a proper choice of face representation, as there
is no one representation that fits all. For reconstruction with abundant constraints from multiple calibrated
images (high-end), high capacity in the form of raw 3D
points is essential to achieve high-fidelity scans with finegrained details within the Multi-view Stereo (MVS) frame* Corresponding author.

work [5, 6, 12, 13, 20]. For reconstruction with a single in-the-wild image (low-end), an intrinsically ill-posed
problem, parametric face models with a strong prior are
indispensable to ensure robust reconstruction with consistent topology [10, 11, 36, 18]. Reconstruction with multiview uncalibrated images (middle-end) is a previously less
explored scenario with performance on par with the lowend setting, and far behind the high-fidelity scans in the
high-end setting. This suggests that the additional constraints from multi-view uncalibrated images are not fully
exploited. Previous studies in this category [1, 15, 33, 3, 2]
have used parametric face models interchangeably with the
low-end setting. We contend that parametric face models with a higher representation capacity should be employed to accommodate extra constraints from multi-view
images. Consequently, this study investigates the design
of high-capacity parametric face models for reconstruction
with multi-view uncalibrated images. This understudied
scenario is increasingly relevant in real-world applications
due to the widespread use of high-quality camera-equipped
mobile phones and the need for precise reconstruction for
applications such as avatar creation and facial animation.
The parametric face model is an extensively researched
field. The majority of studies are based on the 3D Morphable Model (3DMM), originally introduced in the pioneering work of Blanz and Vetter [7]. Subsequent studies
have continued to refine the 3DMM method by either improving the amount and diversity of data [19, 34] or proposing new methods [26, 30, 8] for dimensional reduction given
such data. Simultaneously, a different trend has emerged in
the game and film industries, where parametric face models
are primarily represented in the form of human-designed
skinning models. These models employ a set of controllable bones and skinning weights, which determine the degree to which each vertex on the mesh is influenced by the
surrounding bones. This representation has demonstrated
sufficient capability for extensive applications such as facial animation and avatar customization [16, 28, 29].

20708

