This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distribution-Aware Prompt Tuning for Vision-Language Models
Eulrang Cho*

Jooyeon Kim*

Hyunwoo J. Kim†

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University
{ercho, parang, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr

1. Introduction
In recent years, pre-trained vision-language models
(VLMs) have shown great success in a wide range of
applications in computer vision such as image classification [28, 32], object detection [7, 11, 43], captioning
[21, 24, 41], and visual question answering (VQA) [9]. Notably, VLMs have shown promising generalization power
and transferability in various downstream tasks. For instance, VLMs such as CLIP [28] and ALIGN [15] show
outstanding performance in zero-shot and few-shot learning. These models opened the door for zero-shot image
classification and zero-shot object detection. To further improve the pre-trained models’ zero-shot generalization abil* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

(a) Zero-shot CLIP

(b) DAPT

(c) Zero-shot CLIP

(d) DAPT

Image

Pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) have shown
impressive performance on various downstream tasks by
utilizing knowledge learned from large data. In general,
the performance of VLMs on target tasks can be further improved by prompt tuning, which adds context to the input
image or text. By leveraging data from target tasks, various prompt-tuning methods have been studied in the literature. A key to prompt tuning is the feature space alignment between two modalities via learnable vectors with
model parameters fixed. We observed that the alignment
becomes more effective when embeddings of each modality are ‘well-arranged’ in the latent space. Inspired by this
observation, we proposed distribution-aware prompt tuning
(DAPT) for vision-language models, which is simple yet effective. Specifically, the prompts are learned by maximizing
inter-dispersion, the distance between classes, as well as
minimizing the intra-dispersion measured by the distance
between embeddings from the same class. Our extensive experiments on 11 benchmark datasets demonstrate that our
method significantly improves generalizability. The code is
available at https://github.com/mlvlab/DAPT.

Text

Abstract

Figure 1: Points in (a) and (b) denote normalized t-SNE
embeddings of text features from OxfordPets [26]. In addition, points on (c) and (d) represent the image features’
t-SNE embeddings from EuroSAT [12]. As shown in (a)
and (b), zero-shot CLIP has small distances between text
embeddings of class labels, but its image embeddings do
not cluster well. However, prompt-tuning with DAPT leads
to more evenly spaced text embeddings and better clusterings of image embeddings within the same class.
ity, prompting has been proposed. For instance, in image
classification, CLIP [28] suggests using a context text “A
photo of a ” in front of the class label [CLASS] to
obtain text embeddings for target classes.
Prompting is an emerging research topic due to several
advantages over fine-tuning, which is a conventional approach to utilize pre-trained deep-learning models. For a
pre-trained VLM, fine-tuning is often practically challenging due to the large number of model parameters. In ad-

22004

