This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S3IM: Stochastic Structural SIMilarity and Its Unreasonable Effectiveness
for Neural Fields
Zeke Xie* , Xindi Yang∗ , Yujie Yang,
Qi Sun, Yixiang Jiang, Haoran Wang, Yunfeng Cai, and Mingming Sun
Baidu Research

Ground Truth

Multiplex (Ours)

DVGO - T&T
NeRF - T&T
TensoRF - T&T

Recently, Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) has shown great
success in rendering novel-view images of a given scene by
learning an implicit representation with only posed RGB
images. NeRF and relevant neural field methods (e.g., neural surface representation) typically optimize a point-wise
loss and make point-wise predictions, where one data point
corresponds to one pixel. Unfortunately, this line of research
failed to use the collective supervision of distant pixels, although it is known that pixels in an image or scene can
provide rich structural information. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to design a nonlocal multiplex training
paradigm for NeRF and relevant neural field methods via a
novel Stochastic Structural SIMilarity (S3IM) loss that processes multiple data points as a whole set instead of process
multiple inputs independently. Our extensive experiments
demonstrate the unreasonable effectiveness of S3IM in improving NeRF and neural surface representation for nearly
free. The improvements of quality metrics can be particularly significant for those relatively difficult tasks: e.g., the
test MSE loss unexpectedly drops by 90% for TensoRF and
DVGO over eight novel view synthesis tasks; a 198% F-score
gain and a 64% Chamfer L1 distance reduction for NeuS
over eight surface reconstruction tasks. Moreover, S3IM
is consistently robust even with sparse inputs, corrupted
images, and dynamic scenes.

Standard

DVGO - Replica

Abstract

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison of standard training and multiplex
training for neural radiance field on Replica Dataset [30] and T&TAdvanced Dataset [10]. Model: DVGO, TensoRF, and NeRF.

1. Introduction
Synthesizing novel-view images of a 3D scene from a
group of images is a long-standing task in computer vision
and computer graphics [4, 5, 12, 8, 28]. This long-standing
task has recently made significant progress due to advances
in learning-based neural rendering methods [22, 13, 15].
Learning-based neural field methods can represent 3D scenes
* Equal Contributions. {xiezeke,yangxindi}@baidu.com.

and even the corresponding surfaces from posed images
toward photorealistic novel-view synthesis.
Particularly, benefited from strong representations of deep
neural networks (DNNs), Neural Radiance Field (NeRF)
[15] has shown impressive success in synthesizing novel
view synthesis of a given scene by implicitly encoding volumetric density and color through a fully connected neu-

18024

