This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Stable Signature: Rooting Watermarks in Latent Diffusion Models
Pierre Fernandez1,2
1

Guillaume Couairon1,3

Meta AI

2

Hervé Jégou1

Matthijs Douze1
3

Centre Inria de l’Université de Rennes

Teddy Furon2 *

Sorbonne University

Abstract
Model training (by Alice)

Generative image modeling enables a wide range of applications but raises ethical concerns about responsible deployment. We introduce an active content tracing method
combining image watermarking and Latent Diffusion Models. The goal is for all generated images to conceal an invisible watermark allowing for future detection and/or identification. The method quickly fine-tunes the latent decoder
of the image generator, conditioned on a binary signature.
A pre-trained watermark extractor recovers the hidden signature from any generated image and a statistical test then
determines whether it comes from the generative model. We
evaluate the invisibility and robustness of the watermarks
on a variety of generation tasks, showing that the Stable
Signature is robust to image modifications. For instance, it
detects the origin of an image generated from a text prompt,
then cropped to keep 10% of the content, with 90+% accuracy at a false positive rate below 10−6 .

1. Introduction
Recent progress in generative modeling and natural language processing enable easy creation and manipulation of
photo-realistic images, such as with DALL·E 2 [64] or Stable Diffusion [68]. They have given birth to many image
edition tools like ControlNet [104], Instruct-Pix2Pix [7],
and others [13, 28, 71], that are becoming mainstream creative tools for artists, designers, and the general public.
While this is a great step forward for generative AI, it
also undermines confidence in the authenticity or veracity of photo-realistic images. Indeed, methods for photorealistic image edition existed before, but generative AI significantly lowers the barriers to convincing synthetic image generation and edition (e.g. a generated picture recently
won an art competition [29]). This raises new risks like deep
fakes, impersonation or copyright usurpation [8, 17]. A tool
to determine that images are AI-generated would make it
easier to ensure their compliance with ethical standards and
to remove them from certain platforms.
* Work supported by ANR / AID under Chaire SAIDA ANR-20-CHIA-0011.

Correspondance to pfz@meta.com

Decoder

Latent
Generative Model

: 011001

D
Fine-tuning

Latent
Generative Model

z

‘Tahiti mountains, in the style of Gauguin’

Image generation (by Bob)

Watermark Extractor

: 011001

Identification
Statistical Test

..
Detection ‘AI generated?’
✔ / ✗

Watermark analysis

Published
image

Figure 1. Overview. The latent decoder can be fine-tuned to preemptively embed a signature into all generated images.

A baseline solution to identify generated images is forensics, i.e. methods to detect generated/manipulated images
passively (the image is not modified for identification). An
active baseline is to apply existing watermarking methods
after the image generation. Watermarking invisibly embeds
a secret message into the image, which can then be extracted
and used to identify the image. This has several drawbacks.
If the model leaks or is open-sourced, the post-generation
watermarking can be removed trivially. The open source
Stable Diffusion [70] is a case in point, since removing the
watermark amounts to commenting out a single line in the
source code.
Our Stable Signature method merges watermarking into
the generation process itself, without any architectural
change. It adjusts the pre-trained generative model such that
all the images it produces conceal a given watermark. There
are several advantages to this approach [46, 99]. It does not
require additional processing of the generated image, which
makes the watermarking computationally lighter, straightforward, and secure. Model providers could deploy their
models to different user groups with a unique watermark,
and monitor that they are used in a responsible manner.

22466

