This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SSDA: Secure Source-Free Domain Adaptation
Sabbir Ahmed1∗ , Abdullah Al Arafat2∗ , Mamshad Nayeem Rizve3∗ , Rahim Hossain1 ,
Zhishan Guo2 , Adnan Siraj Rakin1
1
Binghamton University (SUNY), 2 North Carolina State University, 3 University of Central Florida

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have shown remarkable
success across a multitude of tasks [18, 8, 12, 9, 5, 37,
∗ These authors contributed equally

100

G-SFDA

Attack Success Rate (%)

Source-free domain adaptation (SFDA) is a popular unsupervised domain adaptation method where a pre-trained
model from a source domain is adapted to a target domain without accessing any source data. Despite rich results in this area, existing literature overlooks the security challenges of the unsupervised SFDA setting in presence of a malicious source domain owner. This work investigates the effect of a source adversary which may inject a hidden malicious behavior (Backdoor/Trojan) during
source training and potentially transfer it to the target domain even after benign training by the victim (target domain owner). Our investigation of the current SFDA setting reveals that because of the unique challenges present
in SFDA (e.g., no source data, target label), defending
against backdoor attack using existing defenses become
practically ineffective in protecting the target model. To
address this, we propose a novel target domain protection scheme called secure source-free domain adaptation
(SSDA). SSDA adopts a single-shot model compression of
a pre-trained source model and a novel knowledge transfer
scheme with a spectral-norm-based loss penalty for target
training. The proposed static compression and the dynamic
training loss penalty are designed to suppress the malicious
channels responsive to the backdoor during the adaptation
stage. At the same time, the knowledge transfer from an uncompressed auxiliary model helps to recover the benign test
accuracy. Our extensive evaluation on multiple dataset and
domain tasks against recent backdoor attacks reveal that
the proposed SSDA can successfully defend against strong
backdoor attacks with little to no degradation in test accuracy compared to the vulnerable baseline SFDA methods.
Our code is available at https://github.com/ML-SecurityResearch-LAB/SSDA.

100

Attack Success Rate (%)

Abstract

AaD
SHOT

NRC

Vulnerable
50

0

Secure

SSDA
0

50

Accuracy (%)

(a)

100

Worst

SFDA (BadNets)
SFDA (Blended)
SFDA
WaNet (WaNet)

50

SSDA (BadNets)
SSDA (Blended)
SSDA (WaNet)

0

50

Best

55

Accuracy (%)

60

(b)

Figure 1: Performance of a) existing SFDA [24, 42, 43, 44]
methods and SSDA against one attack [10], and b) one
competing SFDA [24] and SSDA against popular backdoor
attacks [10, 3, 28]. Compared to the vulnerable previous
SFDA, the proposed SSDA is highly secure.
2, 15, 26]. In particular, they have exhibited extraordinary performance in various visual tasks such as classification [18], object detection [8], and semantic segmentation [12]. Even though DNNs have achieved great success
in various visual tasks, they heavily depend on the underlying distribution of training data. Unfortunately, DNNs
deployed in real-world scenarios, such as those utilized in
autonomous vehicles, frequently encounter new situations,
such as varying weather conditions [1] and changing illumination levels [36]. Consequently, the machine learning
community has increasingly directed their attention towards
domain adaptation [4, 27, 22] concept.
Existing Domain Adaptation (DA) setup requires access
of the source domain dataset for target domain adaptation.
However, due to increasing privacy concerns and a lack of
available source data, these existing DA methods are becoming impractical. To address this, researchers have introduced a new setup for domain adaptation, popularly known
as source-free domain adaptation (SFDA), which aims to
transfer knowledge from a prior domain (i.e., source) to a
new domain (i.e., target) w/o accessing the source dataset.
Moreover, recent SFDA works [24, 43, 6, 19] have also considered the practical constraint of limited labeled data in the
real world and performed domain adaptation without any
labeled data in the target domain dataset. Therefore, the
two primary constraints in SFDA setting are that the target
domain is denied access to the source dataset during adap-

19180

