This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AutoSynth: Learning to Generate 3D Training Data
for Object Point Cloud Registration

1

Zheng Dang1 and Mathieu Salzmann1,2
CVLab, EPFL, Switzerland 2 ClearSpace, Switzerland
{zheng.dang, mathieu.salzmann}@epfl.ch

Abstract
In the current deep learning paradigm, the amount and
quality of training data are as critical as the network architecture and its training details. However, collecting, processing, and annotating real data at scale is difficult, expensive, and time-consuming, particularly for tasks such as
3D object registration. While synthetic datasets can be created, they require expertise to design and include a limited
number of categories. In this paper, we introduce a new
approach called AutoSynth, which automatically generates
3D training data for point cloud registration. Specifically,
AutoSynth automatically curates an optimal dataset by exploring a search space encompassing millions of potential
datasets with diverse 3D shapes at a low cost. To achieve
this, we generate synthetic 3D datasets by assembling shape
primitives, and develop a meta-learning strategy to search
for the best training data for 3D registration on real point
clouds. For this search to remain tractable, we replace
the point cloud registration network with a much smaller
surrogate network, leading to a 4056.43 times speedup.
We demonstrate the generality of our approach by implementing it with two different point cloud registration networks, BPNet [13] and IDAM [34]. Our results on TUDL [26], LINEMOD [23] and Occluded-LINEMOD [7] evidence that a neural network trained on our searched dataset
yields consistently better performance than the same one
trained on the widely used ModelNet40 dataset [65].

1. Introduction
3D point cloud registration, which aims to estimate the
relative transformation between two given point clouds, is a
traditional computer vision task. With the advent of deep
learning, point cloud registration is nowadays commonly
tackled with deep networks, achieving impressive results.
The main research direction in this area consists of designing new network architectures to improve performance.
Here, by contrast, we argue that the quantity and quality
of training data have as crucial an impact on the networks’

performance as its architecture and training details, and thus
advocate data creation as a research goal in itself.
The traditional approach to collecting 3D registration
data consists of scanning real objects. This, however, is
highly time-consuming and does not scale to the quantity of
data commonly expected for deep network training. Generating synthetic data, therefore, comes as a promising alternative. Nevertheless, it requires access to 3D object models,
thus often limiting the number of categories, and human expertise to generate realistic data, typically leading to a domain gap w.r.t. real-world point clouds despite best efforts.
In this work, we address this by introducing an approach
dubbed AutoSynth, automating the process of curating a 3D
dataset. Specifically, we aim for the resulting dataset to act
as effective training data for a 3D object registration network that will then be deployed on real-world point clouds.
To achieve this, we develop a meta-learning strategy that
searches for the optimal dataset over a space encompassing millions of potential datasets, covering a wide diversity of 3D shapes. The search is guided by a target realworld dataset, thus producing data that reduces the domain
gap. Our experiments demonstrate that the resulting training dataset yields improved registration performance not
only on the target data but on other real-world point clouds.
For this to be possible, we design a very large search
space based on the assumption that complex shapes can be
created by combining simple primitives. Diverse datasets
can then be sampled from this space, and we design an evolutionary algorithm to automatically curate the best training
dataset to achieve high performance on the target data. Employing a registration network in the search process, however, would be impractical as even the smallest competitive
model would require 1, 875 GPU days on a single RTX8000
for only 1, 000 search steps. To make the search tractable,
we observe that the true quality function, i.e., the accuracy
of the registration network of interest, can be replaced with
a proxy one, i.e., the reconstruction accuracy of an autoencoder. Specifically, our experiments evidence that, for the
same training and testing data, registration accuracy and reconstruction quality follow the same trend, even when using

9009

