This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring the Benefits of Visual Prompting in Differential Privacy
Yizhe Li1 , Yu-Lin Tsai2 , Chia-Mu Yu2 , Pin-Yu Chen3 , and Xuebin Ren* †1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
3
IBM Research

Abstract
Visual Prompting (VP) is an emerging and powerful
technique that allows sample-efficient adaptation to downstream tasks by engineering a well-trained frozen source
model. In this work, we explore the benefits of VP in constructing compelling neural network classifiers with differential privacy (DP). We explore and integrate VP into
canonical DP training methods and demonstrate its simplicity and efficiency. In particular, we discover that VP in
tandem with PATE, a state-of-the-art DP training method
that leverages the knowledge transfer from an ensemble of
teachers, achieves the state-of-the-art privacy-utility tradeoff with minimum expenditure of privacy budget. Moreover,
we conduct additional experiments on cross-domain image
classification with a sufficient domain gap to further unveil
the advantage of VP in DP. Lastly, we also conduct extensive ablation studies to validate the effectiveness and contribution of VP under DP consideration. Our code is available
at https://github.com/EzzzLi/Prompt-PATE.

1. Introduction
Originating from the domain of deep learning for natural
language processing, prompt engineering has gained significant popularity as an emergent technique for efficient adoption and adaptation of pre-trained language models for solving different downstream tasks [24]. In recent years, the notion of prompting has been extended to other domains and
data modalities, especially in computer vision and images
[18, 3]. Specifically, the term visual prompting (VP) has
been coined by [3], and the authors show competitive accuracy of VP on some downstream image classification tasks
over linear probing (i.e., attaching a trainable linear head to
* Corresponding Author.
† This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science

Foundation of China under Grants 61802298 and 62172329.

a pre-trained model) when used with a large vision model
such as CLIP [35] (only the image encoder). It is worth noting that VP in [3] can be viewed as a special case of model
reprogramming (MR) [8] on a pre-trained model. MR inserts an input transformation layer and an output mapping
layer into a pre-trained frozen model for fine-tuning downstream tasks. MR is equivalent to VP in [3] when the input transformation is a trainable input perturbation and the
output mapping is a specified source-target label correspondence or a set of text prompts for label inference (e.g., “a
photo of [predicted class]”). Throughout this paper, for ease
of elucidation, we will use VP and MR interchangeably.
VP has been extensively studied for various use cases,
ranging from image classification [3], enhancing adversarial robustness [6], image-inpainting [4], cross-domain adaptation [39, 31], to name a few. In this paper, we explore yet
another benefit of VP with pre-trained models – deep learning with differential privacy (DP). In deep learning, scaling the training parameters of a neural network often leads
to improved task performance (e.g., a classification model
with higher accuracy) [19]. However, with a DP budget,
training a larger neural network usually means more consumption of data privacy [27]. Motivated by this dilemma
of the tradeoff between neural network capacity and DP, we
aim to study the following fundamental question:
Can VP with a pre-trained model (trained on non-private
data) improve the privacy-accuracy tradeoff in off-the-shelf
DP-training mechanisms?
In this paper, we give an affirmative answer to this question,
validated through a comprehensive analysis and empirical
comparisons. We purposely focus on existing DP-training
mechanisms, in order to study the benefit of improved performance contributed by VP. Our proposed approach applies VP (at data inputs) to off-the-shelf DP-training mechanisms, together with a pre-trained model trained on nonprivate data. Particularly, when VP is used in PATE (Private Aggregation of Teacher Ensembles) [33], a DP training

5158

