This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiFaReli: Diffusion Face Relighting
Puntawat Ponglertnapakorn

Nontawat Tritrong
VISTEC, Thailand

Input

Relit 1

Relit 2

Input

Input

Relit 1

Relit 2

Relit 3

Supasorn Suwajanakorn

Relit 1

Relit 2

Softer shadows

Stronger shadows

Figure 1: Relighting and shadow manipulation. Our method can realistically relight an input image using different target
lights shown in small shading references. We can add or remove cast shadows, as well as control their intensity.

Abstract
We present a novel approach to single-view face relighting in the wild. Handling non-diffuse effects, such as global
illumination or cast shadows, has long been a challenge in
face relighting. Prior work often assumes Lambertian surfaces, simplified lighting models or involves estimating 3D
shape, albedo, or a shadow map. This estimation, however, is error-prone and requires many training examples
with lighting ground truth to generalize well. Our work bypasses the need for accurate estimation of intrinsic components and can be trained solely on 2D images without
any light stage data, multi-view images, or lighting ground
truth. Our key idea is to leverage a conditional diffusion
implicit model (DDIM) for decoding a disentangled light
encoding along with other encodings related to 3D shape
and facial identity inferred from off-the-shelf estimators. We
also propose a novel conditioning technique that eases the
modeling of the complex interaction between light and geometry by using a rendered shading reference to spatially
modulate the DDIM. We achieve state-of-the-art performance on standard benchmark Multi-PIE and can photorealistically relight in-the-wild images. Please visit our page:
https://diffusion-face-relighting.github.io.

1. Introduction
The ability to relight face images under any lighting condition has a wide range of applications, such as in Augmented Reality, where consistent lighting for all individuals
in the scene is essential to achieve realism. Another use is
in portrait photography, where one may aim to soften cast
shadows to create a more pleasing, diffuse appearance. Yet,
relighting single-view face images remains unsolved.
Relighting a face image requires modeling the physical
interactions between the geometry, material, and lighting,
which are not inherently present in a 2D image and difficult
to estimate accurately. Earlier work [4, 53, 26, 68, 56] thus
often assumes Lambertian surfaces and a simplified lighting
model, which struggle to model complex light interactions
like global illumination, subsurface scattering, or cast shadows. Using multi-view, multi-illumination data from a light
stage or a simulation, [38, 72] proposed relighting pipelines
that predict surface normals, albedo, and a set of diffuse
and specular maps with neural networks given a target HDR
map. Some recent methods aim to specifically model cast
shadows by predicting a shadow map with a neural network
[23, 35] or rendering a shadow map through physical ray
tracing with estimated geometry [22].

22646

