This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Perceiver for Efficient Visual Recognition
Yizeng Han1 * Dongchen Han1∗ Zeyu Liu2 Yulin Wang1 Xuran Pan1 Yifan Pu1
Chao Deng3 Junlan Feng3 Shiji Song1 Gao Huang1,4†
1

Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University

2

Department of Computer Science and Technology, BNRist, Tsinghua University

3

China Mobile Research Institute

4

Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence

Abstract

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

...

(a) The previous early-exiting scheme.
Feature Branch

...

...
...

Classification Branch
Latent
Code

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [19, 25, 67, 49,
40, 34] and vision Transformers [11, 54, 72, 39, 59, 41] have

...

Image

1. Introduction

Image

Early exiting has become a promising approach to improving the inference efficiency of deep networks. By structuring models with multiple classifiers (exits), predictions
for “easy” samples can be generated at earlier exits, negating the need for executing deeper layers. Current multi-exit
networks typically implement linear classifiers at intermediate layers, compelling low-level features to encapsulate
high-level semantics. This sub-optimal design invariably
undermines the performance of later exits. In this paper,
we propose Dynamic Perceiver (Dyn-Perceiver) to decouple the feature extraction procedure and the early classification task with a novel dual-branch architecture. A feature branch serves to extract image features, while a classification branch processes a latent code assigned for classification tasks. Bi-directional cross-attention layers are
established to progressively fuse the information of both
branches. Early exits are placed exclusively within the
classification branch, thus eliminating the need for linear
separability in low-level features. Dyn-Perceiver constitutes a versatile and adaptable framework that can be built
upon various architectures. Experiments on image classification, action recognition, and object detection demonstrate that our method significantly improves the inference
efficiency of different backbones, outperforming numerous
competitive approaches across a broad range of computational budgets. Evaluation on both CPU and GPU platforms substantiate the superior practical efficiency of DynPerceiver. Code is available at https://www.github.
com/LeapLabTHU/Dynamic_Perceiver.

Feature Extraction Network

...

...

Cross Attention

Classifier

(b) Our proposed Dynamic Perceiver.

Figure 1: Comparison of Dyn-Perceiver with the previous
early-exiting scheme. (a) Conventional methods build classifiers on intermediate features, degrading the performance
of the last exit; (b) Dyn-Perceiver decouples feature extraction and early classification with a two-branch structure.
precipitated substantial advancements in visual recognition.
Despite concerted efforts towards scaling up vision models for superior accuracy [75, 38, 51], the high computational demands have acted as a deterrent to their deployment
in resource-constrained scenarios. Research endeavours towards improving the inference efficiency of deep networks
span a multitude of directions, including lightweight architecture design [23, 77, 22], pruning [15, 20, 70], quantization [30, 73], etc. In contrast to traditional models, which
adhere to a static computational graph during testing, dynamic networks [16, 3, 35, 61, 18, 64, 65, 79, 78] can adapt
their computation with varying input complexities, leading
to promising results in efficient visual recognition.
In the field of dynamic networks, dynamic early-exiting

5992

