This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeuRBF: A Neural Fields Representation with Adaptive Radial Basis Functions
Zhang Chen1†
Zhong Li1†
Liangchen Song2
Lele Chen1
Jingyi Yu3
Junsong Yuan2
Yi Xu1
1
2
3
OPPO US Research Center
University at Buffalo
ShanghaiTech University
{zhang.chen,zhong.li,lele.chen,yi.xu}@oppo.com
{lsong8,jsyuan}@buffalo.edu

yujingyi@shanghaitech.edu.cn

https://oppo-us-research.github.io/NeuRBF-website/

SDF

Abstract
We present a novel type of neural fields that uses general radial bases for signal representation. State-of-the-art
neural fields typically rely on grid-based representations for
storing local neural features and N-dimensional linear kernels for interpolating features at continuous query points.
The spatial positions of their neural features are fixed on
grid nodes and cannot well adapt to target signals. Our
method instead builds upon general radial bases with flexible kernel position and shape, which have higher spatial
adaptivity and can more closely fit target signals. To further
improve the channel-wise capacity of radial basis functions,
we propose to compose them with multi-frequency sinusoid
functions. This technique extends a radial basis to multiple
Fourier radial bases of different frequency bands without
requiring extra parameters, facilitating the representation
of details. Moreover, by marrying adaptive radial bases
with grid-based ones, our hybrid combination inherits both
adaptivity and interpolation smoothness. We carefully designed weighting schemes to let radial bases adapt to different types of signals effectively. Our experiments on 2D
image and 3D signed distance field representation demonstrate the higher accuracy and compactness of our method
than prior arts. When applied to neural radiance field reconstruction, our method achieves state-of-the-art rendering quality, with small model size and comparable training
speed.

1. Introduction
Neural fields (also termed implicit neural representation)
have gained much popularity in recent years due to their effectiveness in representing 2D images, 3D shapes, radiance
fields, etc. [50, 44, 15, 70, 62, 47, 48]. Compared to tra† Corresponding author.

NeRF

Gigapixel Image

Figure 1. NeuRBF provides an accurate and compact neural fields
representation for 2D images, 3D SDF, and neural radiance fields.

ditional discrete signal representations, neural fields utilize
neural networks to establish a mapping from continuous input coordinates to the corresponding output value. Owing
to their concise and efficient formulation, neural fields have
been applied to various areas ranging from signal compression [66, 22, 12, 86], 3D reconstruction [49, 83, 79], neural rendering [47, 48, 9, 39, 63, 25, 64, 14], medical imaging [24, 81, 75], acoustic synthesis [11] and climate prediction [31].
Early neural fields [50, 44, 15, 47] use neural features that are globally shared in the input domain. Despite the compactness of the models, they have difficulty
in representing high-frequency details due to the inductive
bias [5, 70] of MLPs. To tackle this problem, local neural fields have been proposed and widely adopted [7, 32,
51, 41, 26, 67, 48, 9], where each local region in the input domain is assigned with different neural features. A
common characteristic in this line of work is to use explicit grid-like structures to spatially organize neural features and apply N-dimensional linear interpolation to aggregate local neural features. However, grid-like structures
are not adaptive to the target signals and cannot fully exploit
the non-uniformity and sparsity in various tasks, leading to

4182

