This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SparseFusion: Fusing Multi-Modal Sparse Representations
for Multi-Sensor 3D Object Detection
Yichen Xie1,∗ , Chenfeng Xu1,∗ , Marie-Julie Rakotosaona2 , Patrick Rim3 , Federico Tombari2 ,
Kurt Keutzer1 , Masayoshi Tomizuka1 , Wei Zhan1
1
University of California, Berkeley 2 Google 3 California Institute of Technology

Abstract
By identifying four important components of existing
LiDAR-camera 3D object detection methods (LiDAR and
camera candidates, transformation, and fusion outputs), we
observe that all existing methods either ﬁnd dense candidates or yield dense representations of scenes. However,
given that objects occupy only a small part of a scene,
ﬁnding dense candidates and generating dense representations is noisy and inefﬁcient. We propose SparseFusion,
a novel multi-sensor 3D detection method that exclusively
uses sparse candidates and sparse representations. Speciﬁcally, SparseFusion utilizes the outputs of parallel detectors
in the LiDAR and camera modalities as sparse candidates
for fusion. We transform the camera candidates into the LiDAR coordinate space by disentangling the object representations. Then, we can fuse the multi-modality candidates in
a uniﬁed 3D space by a lightweight self-attention module.
To mitigate negative transfer between modalities, we propose novel semantic and geometric cross-modality transfer modules that are applied prior to the modality-speciﬁc
detectors. SparseFusion achieves state-of-the-art performance on the nuScenes benchmark while also running at
the fastest speed, even outperforming methods with stronger
backbones. We perform extensive experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness and efﬁciency of our modules and
overall method pipeline. Our code will be made publicly
available at https://github.com/yichen928/SparseFusion.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving cars rely on multiple sensors, such
as LiDAR and cameras, to perceive the surrounding environment. LiDAR sensors provide accurate 3D scene occupancy information through point clouds with points in
the xyz coordinate space, and cameras provide rich semantic information through images with pixels in the RGB
* indicates equal contribution.

17591

(a) mAP vs. FPS
LiDAR Modality Inputs
3D
Detector

BEV Features (LiDAR)

BEV Features (Fusion)

Image Features

BEV Features (Camera)

(b) Dense-to-dense fusion.

Instance Features (LiDAR)

……

Information
Transfer
Camera
Detector

Camera Modality Inputs

……

……

Instance Features (Fusion)

Instance Features (Camera)

(c) Overview of our sparse fusion strategy. We extract instancelevel features from the LiDAR and camera modalities separately,
and fuse them in a uniﬁed 3D space to perform detection.

Figure 1: Compared to existing fusion algorithms, SparseFusion achieves state-of-the-art performance as well as the
fastest inference speed on nuScenes test set. † : Ofﬁcial
code of [5] uses ﬂip as test-time augmentation. ‡ : We use
BEVFusion-base results in the ofﬁcial repository of [28] to
match the input resolutions of other methods. § : SwinT [27, 21] is adopted as image backbone.
color space. However, there are often signiﬁcant discrepancies between representations of the same physical scene acquired by the two sensors, as LiDAR sensors capture point
clouds using 360-degree rotation while cameras capture images from a perspective view without a sense of depth. This
impedes an effective and efﬁcient fusion of the LiDAR and
camera modalities. To tackle this challenge, multi-sensor
fusion algorithms were proposed to ﬁnd correspondences
between multi-modality data to transform and fuse them
into a uniﬁed scene representation space.
Dense representations, such as bird-eye-view (BEV),
volumetric, and point representations, are commonly used

