This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FateZero: Fusing Attentions for Zero-shot Text-based Video Editing
Chenyang Qi1 *
Xiaodong Cun2†
Yong Zhang2
Chenyang Lei3
Xintao Wang2
Ying Shan2
Qifeng Chen1†
1

HKUST

2

Tencent AI Lab

3

CAIR, HKISI-CAS

https://fate-zero-edit.github.io

Source Video Prompt: A silver jeep driving down a curvy road in the countryside.

Zero-shot object shape editing with pre-trained video diffusion model [52]: silver jeep −
→ Porsche car.

Zero-shot video style editing with pre-trained image diffusion model [42]: watercolor painting.
Figure 1. Zero-shot text-driven video editing. We present a zero-shot approach for shape-aware local object editing and video style editing
from pre-trained diffusion models [42, 52] without any optimization for each target prompt.

Abstract
The diffusion-based generative models have achieved
remarkable success in text-based image generation. However, since it contains enormous randomness in generation
progress, it is still challenging to apply such models for
real-world visual content editing, especially in videos. In
this paper, we propose FateZero, a zero-shot text-based
* Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
† Corresponding Authors.

editing method on real-world videos without per-prompt
training or use-speciﬁc mask. To edit videos consistently,
we propose several techniques based on the pre-trained
models. Firstly, in contrast to the straightforward DDIM
inversion technique, our approach captures intermediate
attention maps during inversion, which effectively retain
both structural and motion information. These maps are
directly fused in the editing process rather than generated
during denoising. To further minimize semantic leakage of
the source video, we then fuse self-attentions with a blending

15932

