This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TiDy-PSFs: Computational Imaging with Time-Averaged Dynamic
Point-Spread-Functions
Sachin Shah∗
University of Maryland, College Park

Sakshum Kulshrestha∗
University of Maryland, College Park

shah2022@umd.edu

sakshumk@umd.edu

Christopher A. Metzler
University of Maryland, College Park
metzler@umd.edu

Abstract
Point-spread-function (PSF) engineering is a powerful
computational imaging technique wherein a custom phase
mask is integrated into an optical system to encode additional information into captured images. Used in combination with deep learning, such systems now offer stateof-the-art performance at monocular depth estimation, extended depth-of-field imaging, lensless imaging, and other
tasks. Inspired by recent advances in spatial light modulator (SLM) technology, this paper answers a natural question: Can one encode additional information and achieve
superior performance by changing a phase mask dynamically over time? We first prove that the set of PSFs described by static phase masks is non-convex and that, as
a result, time-averaged PSFs generated by dynamic phase
masks are fundamentally more expressive. We then demonstrate, in simulation, that time-averaged dynamic (TiDy)
phase masks can leverage this increased expressiveness to
offer substantially improved monocular depth estimation
and extended depth-of-field imaging performance.

1. Introduction
Extracting depth information from an image is a critical
task across a range of applications including autonomous
driving [29, 33], robotics [23, 34], microscopy [7, 19], and
augmented reality [31, 14]. To this end, researchers have
developed engineered phase masks and apertures which
serve to encode depth information into an image [12, 25].
To optimize these phase masks, recent works have exploited
deep learning: By simultaneously optimizing a phase mask
and a reconstruction algorithm “end-to-end learning” is able
to dramatically improve system performance [32, 26].

Figure 1. Time-averaged Dynamic PSFs Top: Phase mask sequence that was optimized to perform simultaneous extended
depth-of-field imaging and monocular depth estimation. Middle:
Proposed TiDy PSFs at specific depths. Bottom left: Depth estimation and all-in-focus imaging performance improve as one averages over more phase masks. Bottom right: Depth-encoded image
and reconstructed depth map.

Most existing works have focused on learning or optimizing a single phase mask for passive depth perception.
We conjecture that this restriction leaves much room for
improvement. Perhaps by using an SLM to introduce a sequence of phase masks over time, one could do much better.
Supporting this idea is the fact, which we prove in Theorem 3, that the set of PSFs described by a single phase
mask is non-convex. This implies that time-averaged PSFs,
which span the convex hull of this set, can be significantly
more expressive. In this work, we exploit the PSF nonconvexity by developing a multi-phase mask end-to-end optimization approach for learning a sequence of phase masks
whose PSFs are averaged over time.
This work’s central contributions are as follows:

* These authors contributed equally to this work

• We prove the set of PSFs generated by a single phase

10657

