This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Conditional 360-degree Image Synthesis for Immersive Indoor Scene Decoration
Ka Chun Shum1 , Hong-Wing Pang1 , Binh-Son Hua2,3 , Duc Thanh Nguyen4 , and Sai-Kit Yeung1
1

2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Trinity College Dublin
3
4
VinAI Research, Vietnam
Deakin University

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of conditional
scene decoration for 360◦ images. Our method takes a
360◦ background photograph of an indoor scene and generates decorated images of the same scene in the panorama
view. To do this, we develop a 360-aware object layout
generator that learns latent object vectors in the 360◦ view
to enable a variety of furniture arrangements for an input
360◦ background image. We use this object layout to condition a generative adversarial network to synthesize images of
an input scene. To further reinforce the generation capability
of our model, we develop a simple yet effective scene emptier that removes the generated furniture and produces an
emptied scene for our model to learn a cyclic constraint. We
train the model on the Structure3D dataset and show that our
model can generate diverse decorations with controllable
object layout. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on the Structure3D dataset and generalizes well to
the Zillow indoor scene dataset. Our user study confirms
the immersive experiences provided by the realistic image
quality and furniture layout in our generation results. Our
implementation is available at https://github.com/
kcshum/neural_360_decoration.git.

1. Introduction
Panoramas (360◦ images) enable immersive user experiences and have been applied intensively to various virtual
reality (VR) applications [1, 4, 44]. However, automated
generation of indoor scenes in the 360◦ view for architectural and interior design remains understudied due to many
challenges. First, the generation process must conform the
common distortions in the 360◦ view. Second, generated
content must be controllable.
Common generative models, e.g., StyleGAN [22, 23] can
generate photorealistic images. However, these methods are
unconditional generation techniques, i.e., an output image

is generated from a random code sampled in a latent space
without interpreted meaning, thus limiting content controllability. Existing conditional image synthesis techniques, e.g.,
image-to-image translation [18, 65, 54, 50], on the other
hand, do not have explicit support for scene representations
and thus have limited capability for scene manipulation.
In this work, we focus on conditional image synthesis of
360◦ indoor scenes. We are inspired by the neural scene decoration (NSD) in [38], aiming to generate a decorated scene
image from a given background image and user-defined furniture arrangement. However, the NSD method in [38] has
several limitations. First, it requires an object layout modeling furniture arrangement from users, making the generation
process not fully automatic. Second, its object layout, represented by rectangles, is not applicable in the 360◦ view using
equirectangular projection [47]. Third, there is no mechanism to control different attributes of the generated furniture,
limiting the diversity of the generated content.
We instead take a different approach for scene representation and propose a conditional image synthesis method
for automatic scene decoration in the 360◦ setting. We first
develop a 360-aware object layout generator that learns a
set of object vectors representing the furniture arrangement
of a 360◦ scene. We use this layout as the latent representation in a generative adversarial network to condition the
generated content. To support the training of the layout and
generative adversarial network, we devise a scene emptier
that performs a dual task, i.e., making a decorated scene
empty. In summary, we make the following contributions in
our work.
• A 360-aware object layout generator that automatically
learns an object arrangement from a 360◦ background image. Generated layouts condition the scene decoration in
the 360◦ viewer;
• A novel framework that synthesizes diverse and controllable scene decorations in the 360◦ setting;
• A scene emptier for reinforcement of the conditioning
ability and generation ability in the training;

4478

