This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Transformer-based 3D Object Detection with Dynamic Token Halting
Mao Ye* 1,2 , Gregory P. Meyer†2 , Yuning Chai2 , and Qiang Liu1
1

The University of Texas at Austin
2
Cruise LLC

Abstract
Balancing efficiency and accuracy is a long-standing
problem for deploying deep learning models. The tradeoff is even more important for real-time safety-critical systems like autonomous vehicles. In this paper, we propose an
effective approach for accelerating transformer-based 3D
object detectors by dynamically halting tokens at different
layers depending on their contribution to the detection task.
Although halting a token is a non-differentiable operation,
our method allows for differentiable end-to-end learning by
leveraging an equivalent differentiable forward-pass. Furthermore, our framework allows halted tokens to be reused
to inform the model’s predictions through a straightforward token recycling mechanism. Our method significantly
improves the Pareto frontier of efficiency versus accuracy
when compared with the existing approaches. By halting
tokens and increasing model capacity, we are able to improve the baseline model’s performance without increasing
the model’s latency on the Waymo Open Dataset.

1. Introduction
Recent progress has shown the potential of applying
the transformer architecture, which has been widely used
by the natural language processing community [72, 25],
to computer vision tasks [11, 42]. Transformers already
meet or exceed the performance of convolutional neural
networks. However, transformer architectures often suffer from high latency, which is crucial for real-time safetycritical or edge-computing applications.
This paper explores how to speed-up transformer-based
3D object detection. Our method is inspired by network
pruning, which increases efficiency by removing less important parts of the model. However, instead of pruning
neurons like in [41, 43, 84], our approach prunes or halts

tokens. We want to reduce superfluous tokens because
the computational complexity of the transformer’s attention
mechanism increases with the number of tokens. Unlike
network pruning, deciding whether or not to halt a token
needs to depend on the input, since the importance of a token will depend on the particular example.
There are several recent works that attempt to dynamically halt tokens throughout a vision transformer [58, 87,
54, 16, 31, 70]. However, these works consider the task
of image classification, while we focus on 3D object detection. Going from image classification to 3D object detection
has its challenges, but also its benefits. A challenge that
arises with object detection is that any token could contain
an object; therefore, we require a method that can detect objects from all tokens regardless of whether or not they were
halted. This issue does not occur for image classification
with vision transformers. For image classification, an artificial token is often added to classify the image, and this
token is prevented from being halted. Since the halting of
a token is a non-differentiable operation, a new design of
the computation graph is needed to define pseudo-gradients
that enable the back-propagation during training. A benefit
with object detection is that the labels contain not only the
object’s classification but also its location, and our approach
is able to leverage the localization of the objects to help the
model learn which tokens are more important than others.
Our method is designed for 3D object detection for autonomous driving. For safety-critical tasks, it is often important that the model is non-stochastic. Therefore, unlike
[58, 16], our halting module is designed to be deterministic.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a deterministic module that progressively
halts tokens throughout the transformer, and a simple
but effective token recycling mechanism to reuse the
information from the halted tokens.
• An equivalent differentiable forward-pass is proposed
to overcome the non-differentiability of token halting,
and a theoretical analysis is conducted to evaluate the
accuracy of the pseudo-gradient.

* mao.ye@getcruise.com
† greg.meyer@getcruise.com

8438

