This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Quality Diversity for Visual Pre-Training
Ruchika Chavhan1 , Henry Gouk1 , Da Li2 , Timothy Hospedales1,2
1

The University of Edinburgh 2 Samsung AI Center, Cambridge

R.Chavhan@sms.ed.ac.uk, {henry.gouk, t.hospedales}@ed.ac.uk,
dali.academic@gmail.com
Abstract
Models pre-trained on large datasets such as ImageNet
provide the de-facto standard for transfer learning, with
both supervised and self-supervised approaches proving effective. However, emerging evidence suggests that any
single pre-trained feature will not perform well on diverse downstream tasks. Each pre-training strategy encodes a certain inductive bias, which may suit some downstream tasks but not others. Notably, the augmentations
used in both supervised and self-supervised training lead
to features with high invariance to spatial and appearance transformations. This renders them sub-optimal for
tasks that demand sensitivity to these factors. In this
paper we develop a feature that better supports diverse
downstream tasks by providing a diverse set of sensitivities and invariances. In particular, we are inspired
by Quality-Diversity in evolution, to define a pre-training
objective that requires high quality yet diverse features
— where diversity is defined in terms of transformation
(in)variances. Our framework plugs in to both supervised and self-supervised pre-training, and produces a
small ensemble of features. We further show how downstream tasks can easily and efficiently select their preferred
(in)variances. Both empirical and theoretical analysis
show the efficacy of our representation and transfer learning approach for diverse downstream tasks. Code available at https://github.com/ruchikachavhan/
quality-diversity-pretraining.git

Figure 1. Illustration of the quality and behavior space of QD4V
feature representations. Each point in this space is a potential feature extractor. The x and y axes correspond sensitivity-invariance
axes for spatial and appearance transformations, and define the
behaviour space for features. The z axis shows the quality of the
features (eg: ImageNet accuracy). The shaded zones schematically show the range of feature encodings that might be preferred
by different types of downstream tasks. Conventional pre-training
learns a single solution (denoted with +) that is high-quality (z
axis near 1) but by default occupies the green zone of high invariance to spatial and appearance transforms. In contrast, QD4V
aims to learn a set of solutions (marked by ) that better span the
(in)variance axes, while being also being high quality. These lead
to better performance for diverse downstream tasks. Note that in
practice the invariance space has many more dimensions than the
two illustrated here.

stream tasks across computer vision, with evaluation studies
showing promising results [34, 24]. Nevertheless, emerging
evidence suggests that any single pre-trained feature will
not be optimal for diverse downstream tasks [25, 68, 13].
This is because, any given pre-training strategy encodes a
certain inductive bias in the learned representation, which
will better suite some downstream tasks more than others.
This issue is evident with regards to transformation invariance. By way of example, downstream object recognition benefits from strong affine invariance in a feature
since pose is a distractor for object recognition. In con-

1. Introduction
Pre-training neural networks on large-scale datasets such
as ImageNet followed by representation transfer is a dominant paradigm in applied deep learning [58]. Supervised
pre-training [34] is long established, with self-supervised
[14, 30, 15, 11, 69] pre-training rapidly gaining popularity. Such pre-training algorithms often aspire to providing a
universal representation which is effective for diverse down-

5384

