This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prototype Reminiscence and Augmented Asymmetric Knowledge Aggregation
for Non-Exemplar Class-Incremental Learning
Wuxuan Shi1 , Mang Ye1,2 ,*
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan, China
https://shiwuxuan.github.io/PRAKA-project

Abstract

prototype
feature

Non-exemplar class-incremental learning (NECIL) requires deep models to maintain existing knowledge while
continuously learning new classes without saving old class
samples. In NECIL methods, prototypical representations
are usually stored, which inject information from former
classes to resist catastrophic forgetting in subsequent incremental learning. However, since the model continuously
learns new knowledge, the stored prototypical representations cannot correctly model the properties of old classes in
the existence of knowledge updates. To address this problem, we propose a novel prototype reminiscence mechanism
that incorporates the previous class prototypes with arriving new class features to dynamically reshape old class feature distributions thus preserving the decision boundaries
of previous tasks. In addition, to improve the model generalization on both newly arriving classes and old classes,
we contribute an augmented asymmetric knowledge aggregation approach, which aggregates the overall knowledge
of the current task and extracts the valuable knowledge of
the past tasks, on top of self-supervised label augmentation.
Experimental results on three benchmarks suggest the superior performance of our approach over the SOTA methods.

decision
boundary
(a) Joint training

Task t

Task t+1

(b) Baseline
inject information

ߤ

ߤ
inject information

Task t
Task t+1
(c) Gaussian Noise Augmentation

Task t
Task t+1
(d) Prototype Reminiscence

Figure 1. Idea illustration. (a) Joint training with abundant samples. (b) Baseline: Updating the model with the memorized prototype and new data, which narrows the decision boundary of the
old classes. (c) Gaussian Noise Augmentation [66]: The decision
boundary of the old class is retained, but it introduces an overlap between the old and new class distributions due to the change
in representation space. (d) With prototype reminiscence, newly
learned information can be injected while reshaping the feature
distribution of past data to reduce overlap and resist forgetting.

samples. Worse still, the old class samples could not be
fully accessible. In this case, an alternative is to ﬁne-tune
the model on new data, yet catastrophic forgetting [38, 15]
will be a serious challenge. The decision boundary of the
uniﬁed classiﬁer would be signiﬁcantly changed and biased
towards the new classes. Conversely, another direction is to
ﬁx the feature embedding space of a trained model, which
suffers from frustrating generalization ability and thus performs poorly on new tasks, i.e., the plasticity of the model
is greatly degraded.
To overcome the catastrophic forgetting issue, many CIL
methods [42, 8, 6, 56, 2, 53] store a fraction of the old
data in memory and replay them in subsequent incremental phases to maintain the existing knowledge. Unfortunately, storing data poses privacy concerns and comes at
a sharp cost to memory and computation. In this paper, we
follow a paradigm holding for more extensive applications,

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks have achieved
great success on various tasks. In dynamic and open environments, deep models also require the ability to continuously learn new tasks as the input stream is updated. Hence,
class-incremental learning (CIL), which aims to learn a uniﬁed classiﬁer that can classify all seen classes under progressive changes in the classes to be learned, has attracted
extensive attention [30, 41, 16, 47, 31, 28].
As new data becomes available, it is computationally expensive to jointly retrain the model with new and old class
* Corresponding Author: Mang Ye (yemang@whu.edu.cn)

1772

