This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Label Self-Supervised Learning with Scene Images
Ke Zhu Minghao Fu Jianxin Wu*
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, China
zhuk@lamda.nju.edu.cn, fumh@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wujx2001@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Self-supervised learning (SSL) methods targeting scene
images have seen a rapid growth recently, and they mostly
rely on either a dedicated dense matching mechanism or
a costly unsupervised object discovery module. This paper shows that instead of hinging on these strenuous operations, quality image representations can be learned by treating scene/multi-label image SSL simply as a multi-label
classification problem, which greatly simplifies the learning framework. Specifically, multiple binary pseudo-labels
are assigned for each input image by comparing its embeddings with those in two dictionaries, and the network
is optimized using the binary cross entropy loss. The proposed method is named Multi-Label Self-supervised learning (MLS). Visualizations qualitatively show that clearly the
pseudo-labels by MLS can automatically find semantically
similar pseudo-positive pairs across different images to facilitate contrastive learning. MLS learns high quality representations on MS-COCO and achieves state-of-the-art results on classification, detection and segmentation benchmarks. At the same time, MLS is much simpler than existing
methods, making it easier to deploy and for further exploration.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) methods based on contrastive learning [4, 3] have facilitated numerous downstream tasks. Those [16, 6, 14, 13] that target objectcentric images (e.g., ImageNet) are already relatively mature, but inventing SSL methods for scene images (e.g.,
MS-COCO [23]) gains popularity recently. Since unlabeled
scene images (or multi-label images) are more natural [46]
and richer in semantics, various SSL methods [39, 45, 19,
40, 20, 44] have successively emerged.
SSL methods focusing on scene/multi-label images can
* J. Wu is the corresponding author. This paper was partly supported by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62276123
and Grant 61921006.

person,
horse, road,
bus, …
Composed of
Image Patch

BCE Loss

Dictionary

pos (+)

pos (+)

pos (+)

neg (-)

Figure 1. Illustrating our motivation. An image patch cropped
from a multi-label image comprises multiple objects. Each object
can find similar (‘pos’) and dissimilar (‘neg’) images from a large
dictionary. The whole image patch is pulled closer to those positive ones and pushed away from the negatives using a BCE loss.
See Fig. 4 for positives and negatives chosen by our algorithm.

be summarized into two categories. One is dense matching,
such as DenseCL [39], MaskCo [51] and Self-EMD [24].
They take the features’ locations into account to improve the
performance on dense prediction tasks. They mostly differ
in how the heuristic matching metric is designed. Another
branch of work like SoCo [41] and ORL [46] resort to unsupervised object discovery to find local object contents, and
learn quality representation with both object- and scenelevel semantics. However, they usually involve multi-stage
SSL pretraining on top of expensive box generation [35].
These scene image SSL methods are generally based on
the contrastive loss (e.g., InfoNCE [27]), where two randomly augmented views of the same image are forced to
be close to each other, and optionally push away views
from different images. The loss assumes single-label images [27], but the input are in fact multi-label: hence there
is a mismatch between the loss and the data. On one hand,
it can be difficult for two views randomly cropped from the
same scene image to be exactly matched [39, 47]. On the
other hand, there is only one matched positive pair in InfoNCE, while more positive pairs are naturally preferred: a
view cropped from a multi-label image likely contains mul-

6694

