This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S-TREK: Sequential Translation and Rotation
Equivariant Keypoints for local feature extraction
Emanuele Santellani *, Christian Sormann *, Mattia Rossi † , Andreas Kuhn † , Friedrich Fraundorfer *
* Graz University of Technology, † Stuttgart Laboratory 1, SSS-EU, Sony Europe B.V.
* name.surname@icg.tugraz.at,

†

name.surname@sony.com

Abstract
In this work we introduce S-TREK, a novel local feature
extractor that combines a deep keypoint detector, which is
both translation and rotation equivariant by design, with a
lightweight deep descriptor extractor. We train the S-TREK
keypoint detector within a framework inspired by reinforcement learning, where we leverage a sequential procedure to
maximize a reward directly related to keypoint repeatability. Our descriptor network is trained following a “detect,
then describe” approach, where the descriptor loss is evaluated only at those locations where keypoints have been
selected by the already trained detector. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks confirm the effectiveness of
our proposed method, with S-TREK often outperforming
other state-of-the-art methods in terms of repeatability and
quality of the recovered poses, especially when dealing with
in-plane rotations.

1. Introduction
Being able to find point correspondences between images
has been of paramount importance since the early days of
computer vision. In fact, a wide range of applications, such
as Structure from Motion (SfM) [35, 1], Visual Localization
[40, 33], SLAM [23, 2], object recognition [24] and object
tracking [47] rely on image-to-image point correspondences.
After decades where SIFT [19], SURF [6], ORB [30] and
many other hand-engineered feature extractors have been
ubiquitous, the community has recently experienced a fast
shift toward learned methods, with several ones based on
deep architectures [12, 11, 27, 44]. While many of these
newly proposed methods show remarkable matching performances, the commonly used multi-layer convolutional architecture lacks one of the properties that most hand-engineered
keypoint detectors have by design: rotation equivariance.
Rather unexpectedly, modern detectors show poor performances when the input image undergoes in-plane rotations
unless specifically trained to handle this transformation. In

(a) DISK [44]

(b) REKD [17]

(c) S-TREK (ours)

Figure 1: Qualitative comparison with two state-of-the-art
feature extraction methods on the Image Matching Benchmark [15] (top) and on our ± 45° rotated version of it (bottom). RANSAC inlier matches are color coded from green
to yellow, representing reprojection errors equal to zero and
5px, respectively; the outlier matches are in red.

order to avoid this pitfall, we take advantage of the recent
developments in the field of group-equivariant networks
[9, 10] and design the keypoint detector of our novel feature
extractor method, named S-TREK, to make use of rotationequivariant convolutional layers. This makes our keypoints
independent of the image orientation by design, regardless
of the dataset used for training.
The detection of keypoints in an image is a hard selection
process, where a finite set of locations is selected. Because
of the non-differentiability of this process, some keypoint
detection methods in the literature resort to training with
with proxy losses, which are applied to the entire detection
heatmaps at the network output [27, 31], while others train
for keypoints and descriptors jointly [12, 20]. To train di-

9728

