This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bridging Cross-task Protocol Inconsistency for Distillation
in Dense Object Detection
Longrong Yang1 *, Xianpan Zhou2 *, Xuewei Li1 , Liang Qiao1,3
Zheyang Li1,3 , Ziwei Yang3 , Gaoang Wang4 , Xi Li1,5,6†
1
College of Computer Science & Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Polytechnic Institute, Zhejiang University
3
Hikvision Research Institute 4 ZJU – UIUC Institute, Zhejiang University
5
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study of Zhejiang University
6
Zhejiang – Singapore Innovation and AI Joint Research Lab, Hangzhou
{longrongyang, zhouxianpan, xueweili, xilizju}@zju.edu.cn
{qiaoliang6, lizheyang, yangziwei5}@hikvision.com, gaoangwang@intl.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) has shown potential for
learning compact models in dense object detection. However, the commonly used softmax-based distillation ignores
the absolute classification scores for individual categories.
Thus, the optimum of the distillation loss does not necessarily lead to the optimal student classification scores for
dense object detectors. This cross-task protocol inconsistency is critical, especially for dense object detectors, since
the foreground categories are extremely imbalanced. To address the issue of protocol differences between distillation
and classification, we propose a novel distillation method
with cross-task consistent protocols, tailored for the dense
object detection. For classification distillation, we address
the cross-task protocol inconsistency problem by formulating the classification logit maps in both teacher and student models as multiple binary-classification maps and applying a binary-classification distillation loss to each map.
For localization distillation, we design an IoU-based Localization Distillation Loss that is free from specific network structures and can be compared with existing localization distillation losses. Our proposed method is simple but effective, and experimental results demonstrate its
superiority over existing methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/TinyTigerPan/BCKD.

1. Introduction
Recent progress in dense object detectors has yielded
significant performance improvements in the object detec* The first two authors contributed equally to this paper.
† Corresponding author.

(a) Classification scores after Sigmoid in dense object detection.
Position-aware Inter-sample Difference

3

Area 1
Area 2
Area 3
Area 4

Dense Object Detection

Σ=0.27

Score

Σ=0.31

Score

Area 1: Negative Sample Area 2: Negative Sample

Σ=0.53

Score

Σ=0.60

Score

Area 3: Positive Sample Area 4: Positive Sample

(b) The cross-task protocol inconsistency problem.
Σ=0.60

Score

Sigmoid
Protocol

Different
Σ=0.32

Score

Sigmoid
Protocol

Teacher Logits

Area 4
Student Logits

Softmax
Protocol

Σ=1.00

Score

Equivalent
Softmax
Protocol

Σ=1.00

Score

Figure 1. (a) In dense object detection, different samples exhibit
inter-sample differences in their classification score sums on various positions on dense maps, which is significantly different from
those in image classification. (b) The cross-task protocol inconsistency problem arises in dense object detection due to the mismatch
between Sigmoid protocol used in this task and Softmax protocol used in classification distillation. Specifically, when classification distillation loss equals 0, inconsistencies emerge between the
scores of the student and teacher models in dense object detection.

tion task [25, 29, 18, 17, 33]. However, the high computational burden of existing detection methods poses a significant challenge for deployment on resource-constrained
devices. To address this problem, knowledge distillation
(KD) [13, 5, 11, 35, 36, 4, 15, 22, 47, 6, 40] has emerged as
a promising approach to compress models. The KD frame-

17175

