This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SwinLSTM: Improving Spatiotemporal Prediction Accuracy using Swin
Transformer and LSTM
Song Tang* Chuang Li∗ Pu Zhang RongNian Tang†
Hainan University
{songtang,lc,zhangpu,rn.tang}@hainanu.edu.cn

Abstract
Input / State

Integrating CNNs and RNNs to capture spatiotemporal dependencies is a prevalent strategy for spatiotemporal prediction tasks. However, the property of CNNs to
learn local spatial information decreases their efficiency
in capturing spatiotemporal dependencies, thereby limiting their prediction accuracy. In this paper, we propose
a new recurrent cell, SwinLSTM, which integrates Swin
Transformer blocks and the simplified LSTM, an extension
that replaces the convolutional structure in ConvLSTM with
the self-attention mechanism. Furthermore, we construct
a network with SwinLSTM cell as the core for spatiotemporal prediction. Without using unique tricks, SwinLSTM
outperforms state-of-the-art methods on Moving MNIST,
Human3.6m, TaxiBJ, and KTH datasets. In particular, it
exhibits a significant improvement in prediction accuracy
compared to ConvLSTM. Our competitive experimental results demonstrate that learning global spatial dependencies
is more advantageous for models to capture spatiotemporal dependencies. We hope that SwinLSTM can serve as a
solid baseline to promote the advancement of spatiotemporal prediction accuracy. The codes are publicly available
at https://github.com/SongTang-x/SwinLSTM.

1. Introduction
Spatiotemporal prediction has received increasing attention in recent years due to it can benefit many practical
applications, e.g., precipitation forecasting [24, 25, 33], autonomous driving [1,16], and traffic flow prediction [38,40].
However, the complex physical dynamics and chaotic properties of spatiotemporal predictive learning make it challenging for purely data-driven deep learning methods to
make accurate predictions. Existing methods [3, 8, 19, 24,
31–34,39] integrate CNNs and RNNs to learn spatiotemporal dependencies in spatiotemporal data to improve prediction accuracy. To capture the spatial and temporal depen* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Transition

State

Linear operations
(a) FC-LSTM
Convolutions
(b) ConvLSTM
Self-Attention

(c) SwinLSTM (ours)

Figure 1. Comparison of input-to-state and state-to-state transitions in three different recurrent cells. (a) FC-LSTM utilizes linear operations to process 1D vectors. (b) ConvLSTM employs 2D
convolutions to process 3D tensors. (c) The proposed SwinLSTM
leverages self-attention to process 2D matrices.

dencies simultaneously, ConvLSTM [24] extends the fully
connected LSTM (FC-LSTM) [26] by replacing linear operations with convolutional operations. Subsequently, several
variants of ConvLSTM are proposed. PredRNN [33] and
MIM [34] modify the internal structure of the LSTM unit.
E3D-LSTM [32] integrates 3D-Convs into LSTMs. PhyDNet [8] leverages a CNN-based module to disentangle physical dynamics. Admittedly, these methods achieve impressive results on spatiotemporal prediction tasks. However,
convolution operators focus on capturing local features and
relations and are inefficient for modeling global spatial information [4]. Although the receptive field can be enlarged
by stacking convolution layers, the effective receptive field
only reaches a fraction of the theoretical receptive field in
practice [21]. Therefore, it can be inferred that the CNNbased models may prove to be ineffective in capturing spa-

13470

