This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Contrastive Pseudo Learning for Open-World DeepFake Attribution
Zhimin Sun1,2,3 * Shen Chen2 * Taiping Yao2 Bangjie Yin2
Ran Yi1† Shouhong Ding2† Lizhuang Ma1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Tencent YouTu Lab
3
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Computer Software Testing & Evaluating

Abstract
The challenge in sourcing attribution for forgery faces
has gained widespread attention due to the rapid development of generative techniques. While many recent works
have taken essential steps on GAN-generated faces, more
threatening attacks related to identity swapping or expression transferring are still overlooked. And the forgery
traces hidden in unknown attacks from the open-world unlabeled faces still remain under-explored. To push the related
frontier research, we introduce a new benchmark called
Open-World DeepFake Attribution (OW-DFA), which aims
to evaluate attribution performance against various types of
fake faces under open-world scenarios. Meanwhile, we propose a novel framework named Contrastive Pseudo Learning (CPL) for the OW-DFA task through 1) introducing a
Global-Local Voting module to guide the feature alignment
of forged faces with different manipulated regions, 2) designing a Confidence-based Soft Pseudo-label strategy to
mitigate the pseudo-noise caused by similar methods in unlabeled set. In addition, we extend the CPL framework with
a multi-stage paradigm that leverages pre-train technique
and iterative learning to further enhance traceability performance. Extensive experiments verify the superiority of
our proposed method on the OW-DFA and also demonstrate
the interpretability of deepfake attribution task and its impact on improving the security of deepfake detection area.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of generative technologies
such as Deepfakes [2], the malicious usage of fake content
on social media has raised public concerns about face security and privacy. Dedicated research efforts [26, 48, 56]
have been made in the real/fake detection task in recent
years. Nonetheless, with its distinctive merits, DeepFake
Attribution (DFA), known as identifying the source model
* Equal contribution. This work was done when Zhimin Sun was a research intern at Tencent YouTu Lab.
† Corresponding authors.

Identity Swap

Labeled Set

OW-DFA

Deepfakes

FSGAN

Expression Transfer

Attribute Manipulation

SC-FEGAN

FaceAPP

Entire Face Synthesis

Unlabeled Set

NeuralTextures

FOMM

StyleGAN

PGGAN

Figure 1. In the OW-DFA setting, the unlabeled dataset may contain attacks that have never been encountered in the labeled set.
A feasible model should attribute the known attacks (images with
blue border) and assign the unknown attacks (images with red border) to novel classes simultaneously.

of fake faces, has also significantly drawn widespread attentions [59, 61, 24]. On the one hand, DFA can be used
for legal proceedings and provide interpretability to human
beings, i.e.“why the face is fake.” On the other hand, with
the nature of learning enhanced representation for different
attacking types, DFA is also effective to boost the deepfake
detection performance [29, 17].
Early approaches of sourcing attribution [59, 61, 24]
mostly focus on the GAN-generated images rather than
the more realistic and threatening attacks related to identity swapping or expression transferring. Meanwhile, most
of them assume a closed scenario where the training set
and test set share the same category distributions, which is
not applicable to open-world scenarios since new types of
forgery attacks emerge immensely. To this end, we introduce a new benchmark, Open-World DeepFake Attribution
(OW-DFA), as shown in Figure 1. The OW-DFA benchmark consists of a labeled training dataset and an unlabeled
dataset. The labeled dataset contains samples from known
classes, while the unlabeled dataset includes samples from
both known and unknown classes. More importantly, OWDFA considers nearly 20 challenging and realistic forgery
methods, including 4 widely-used forgery types, namely
identity swap [1, 2], expression transfer [5, 49], attribute
manipulation [12, 13] and entire face synthesis [32, 34].
The main challenge of OW-DFA is how to utilize unlabeled
data in open-world scenes to improve the attribution performance for both known and unknown forged faces.

20882

