This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Probabilistic Triangulation for Uncalibrated Multi-View 3D Human Pose
Estimation

1

Boyuan Jiang1,2 , Lei Hu1,2 Shihong Xia1,2 *
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences;
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{jiangboyuan20s, hulei19z, xsh}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
3D human pose estimation has been a long-standing
challenge in computer vision and graphics, where multiview methods have significantly progressed but are limited
by the tedious calibration processes. Existing multi-view
methods are restricted to fixed camera pose and therefore
lack generalization ability. This paper presents a novel
Probabilistic Triangulation module that can be embedded
in a calibrated 3D human pose estimation method, generalizing it to uncalibration scenes. The key idea is to
use a probability distribution to model the camera pose
and iteratively update the distribution from 2D features
instead of using camera pose. Specifically, We maintain a camera pose distribution and then iteratively update this distribution by computing the posterior probability of the camera pose through Monte Carlo sampling.
This way, the gradients can be directly back-propagated
from the 3D pose estimation to the 2D heatmap, enabling end-to-end training. Extensive experiments on Human3.6M and CMU Panoptic demonstrate that our method
outperforms other uncalibration methods and achieves
comparable results with state-of-the-art calibration methods. Thus, our method achieves a trade-off between estimation accuracy and generalizability. Our code is in
https://github.com/bymaths/probabilistic triangulation

1. Introduction
3D human pose estimation is a fundamental tool in
many downstream applications of computer vision and
computer graphics, such as motion recognition[13], humancomputer interaction[23], movie game animation[4], virtual
reality[24], etc. The development of these fields requires a
more accurate, convenient, and robust 3D human pose estimation algorithm.
Recently, RGB-based pose estimation has become the
* Corresponding author

trend because of its convenience, wide application scenarios, and low cost[27]. These methods can be divided
into two categories: single-view and multi-view methods. Although single-view methods[39, 37, 11, 38, 25]
have more widespread application scenarios, the lack of
depth information makes single-view estimation of 3D human pose an ill-posed problem, especially when dealing
with occlusions and multi-person scenes[21]. Multi-view
methods[18, 16, 36, 33, 2, 14, 31, 20] can achieve more
accurate results than single view-based methods because
multi-view cameras can restore the depth information as
well as the occluded parts.
However, the multi-view approach faces several issues
when applied in practice. First, multi-view methods require synchronized and calibrated cameras, which complicates the process. Second, existing datasets for multi-view
human pose estimation lack the diversity of camera external
parameters. This results in the trained model cannot generalize well to unseen camera parameters, thus requiring reannotation and re-training once the camera configurations
change.
To alleviate the above issues, we propose Probabilistic
Triangulation module for uncalibrated 3D human pose estimation. Our module enables the network to get rid of camera pose parameters during the training process, which results in better generalization performance to be applied to
wild scenes. The main idea is to use a probability distribution to model the camera pose, making the whole process
differentiable. Specifically, we transform the uncalibrated
3D human pose estimation into a nonlinear optimization
problem based on the reprojection error. The camera pose
distribution is estimated from the 2D pose features, and then
the posterior probability of the camera pose is computed by
Monte Carlo sampling to iteratively update this distribution.
We conducted extensive experiments on two benchmark
datasets (Human3.6M[17] and CMU Panoptic[19, 29, 35])
to demonstrate that our method outperforms other uncalibrated methods and achieves comparable results with the
state-of-the-art calibration methods, which indicates that

14850

