This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Video Frame Interpolation from Shutter Mode Induced Degradation
Xiang Ji1 Zhixiang Wang1,2
1
The University of Tokyo, Japan

Zhihang Zhong1,2 Yinqiang Zheng1†
2
National Institute of Informatics, Japan

{jixiang,wangzhixiang}@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp,
zhong@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp, yqzheng@ai.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Image restoration from various motion-related degradations, like blurry effects recorded by a global shutter (GS)
and jello effects caused by a rolling shutter (RS), has been
extensively studied. It has been recently recognized that
such degradations encode temporal information, which can
be exploited for video frame interpolation (VFI), a more
challenging task than pure restoration. However, these VFI
researches are mainly grounded on experiments with synthetic data, rather than real data. More fundamentally, under the same imaging condition, it remains unknown which
degradation will be more effective toward VFI. In this paper, we present the first real-world dataset for learning and
benchmarking degraded video frame interpolation, named
RD-VFI, and further explore the performance differences of
three types of degradations, including GS blur, RS distortion,
and an in-between effect caused by the rolling shutter with
global reset (RSGR), thanks to our novel quad-axis imaging
system. Moreover, we propose a unified Progressive Mutual
Boosting Network (PMBNet) model to interpolate middle
frames at arbitrary time for all shutter modes. Its disentanglement strategy and dual-stream correction enable us to
adaptively deal with different degradations for VFI. Experimental results demonstrate that our PMBNet is superior to
the respective state-of-the-art methods on all shutter modes.

1. Introduction
When high-speed cameras are not accessible, the perceiving and modeling of fast motion in video understanding can
be challenging. One promising computational alternative
is to up-convert low-framerate videos through video frame
interpolation (VFI). Specifically, given two consecutive inputs, frame interpolation aims to reconstruct intermediate
frames with temporal and spatial coherence, which has been
addressed in existing VFI methods [13, 1, 12, 18, 29].
Unfortunately, despite the remarkable success, these ap† Corresponding author

proaches with sharp frames as input are less applicable, since
image degradations are almost unavoidable in the presence
of fast motion, which are closely related to shutter modes as
well. Therefore, VFI with degraded inputs are of greater interest in practice, and it is even believed that the degradations
encode rich information relating to motion, which might benefit VFI. Recent video restoration works have demonstrated
this insight in VFI from single [15, 30] or multiple blurred inputs [14, 33, 3, 41, 28]. Meanwhile, the RS (rolling shutter)
counterpart has also been conducted very recently [9, 11].
However, those VFI algorithms with degraded inputs,
without exception, are evaluated on synthetic data only, and
their performance in the real-world remains unknown. For
example, the most prevalent datasets for blur (GoPRO [25],
Adobe240fps [36]) or RS (Fastec-RS [20]) VFI cannot exactly mimic real captured degradations due to their oversimplified operations of blending consecutive frames or copying distinct scanlines from sharp frames. Such a synthesis
method can easily lead to unnatural artifacts, as shown in
Fig. 1, which is also mentioned in [32, 43]. Artifacts caused
by unrealistic simulation tend to destroy degradations induced by motion and shutter modes, and the learned model
has inferior generalization. Therefore, a real dataset without
such synthesis artifacts is in immediate need. More importantly, VFI with GS blur or RS distortion has been studied
independently, yet a unified study of these degradations under the same condition can reveal the advantages of different
shutter modes for VFI, which is completely missing.
To address the aforementioned issues, we present the first
real-world dataset for learning and benchmarking degraded
video frame interpolation, which is dubbed RD-VFI. Inspired
by the hardware design of [32, 43], we further propose a
quad-axis imaging system to capture temporally and geometrically aligned high-speed sharp videos and low-speed
degraded videos with three kinds of degradations, including
GS blur, RS distortion, and a mixed effect caused by a rolling
shutter with global reset (RSGR). RSGR [38] leads to blurry
effects with varying magnitude, a special degradation lying
between GS blur and RS distortion. Although RSGR video
restoration has been explored in [38], its performance for

12259

