This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Clutter Detection and Removal in 3D Scenes with View-Consistent Inpainting
Fangyin Wei

Thomas Funkhouser
Princeton University

Abstract
Removing clutter from scenes is essential in many applications, ranging from privacy-concerned content filtering to data augmentation. In this work, we present an automatic system that removes clutter from 3D scenes and
inpaints with coherent geometry and texture. We propose techniques for its two key components: 3D segmentation based on shared properties and 3D inpainting, both
of which are important problems. The definition of 3D
scene clutter (frequently-moving objects) is not well captured by commonly-studied object categories in computer
vision. To tackle the lack of well-defined clutter annotations, we group noisy fine-grained labels, leverage virtual rendering, and impose an instance-level area-sensitive
loss. Once clutter is removed, we inpaint geometry and
texture in the resulting holes by merging inpainted RGB-D
images. This requires novel voting and pruning strategies
that guarantee multi-view consistency across individually
inpainted images for mesh reconstruction. Experiments on
ScanNet and Matterport3D dataset show that our method
outperforms baselines for clutter segmentation and 3D inpainting, both visually and quantitatively. Project page:
https://weify627.github.io/clutter/.

1. Introduction
With the proliferation of RGB-D cameras, we can imagine a day when people can quickly scan their rooms with a
phone and upload the reconstructed 3D model to a website
for subleasing. It is more desirable to show an attractive,
clean room without pillows and kitchenware scattered all
around. However, people prefer not to spend hours cleaning
them up before scanning. This is when a tool for automatic
scene clutter removal would come in handy. Such a scene
editing tool can be applied to a wide range of tasks from automatic content and privacy filtering to data augmentation
(by adding new objects to cleaned scenes).
In this paper, we investigate how to reconstruct a scene
without clutter, starting from a set of indoor RGB-D scans.
This task consists of two steps: clutter segmentation and 3D
inpainting, both of which present new challenges.

Szymon Rusinkiewicz

Input Texture

Labeled Segmentation

Inpainted Texture

Input Geometry

Predicted Segmentation

Inpainted Geometry

Figure 1. Clutter detection and removal in 3D Scenes with
view-consistent inpainting. Beginning from an input scene (left),
our first task is to predict clutter regions. Traditional semantic segmentation datasets and methods [9] (top center) were not designed
for this problem, and contain missing or incorrect labels (especially for small objects) as well as semantic categories that only
sometimes correspond to clutter. In contrast, our method (bottom
center) correctly identifies clutter segments, which we then remove
and inpaint with coherent texture and geometry (right).

Thanks to large-scale 3D indoor scene datasets [4, 9,
1, 40], data-driven methods have led to remarkable success in 3D scene segmentation [18, 34, 24]. However, existing annotations are insufficient for clutter segmentation
for two reasons. First, ambiguity exists even in the most
fine-grained datasets to date (around 550 raw categories for
datasets [4, 9], 200 for benchmark [40]). For example, some
objects from the category whiteboard are portable and belong to clutter, while others are installed on the wall and not
clutter. Such intra-category ambiguity is widespread: consider light, seat, speaker, decoration, etc., all of which exist
in both fixed (non-clutter) and mobile (clutter) variations.
Secondly, the quality of annotations is often suboptimal,
with some clutter objects being unannotated or mislabeled
as non-clutter, as shown in Fig. 1, top center. Considering
the mesh resolution and the time required to label a large
number of small objects, it is almost impossible to annotate
clutter precisely and exhaustively in a large dataset.
The task of 3D inpainting aims to synthesize a visually

18131

