This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reducing Training Time in Cross-Silo Federated Learning using
Multigraph Topology
Tuong Do1† , Binh X. Nguyen1† , Vuong Pham1 , Toan Tran2 ,
Erman Tjiputra1 , Quang D.Tran1 , Anh Nguyen3
1
AIOZ, Singapore
2
VinAI Research, Vietnam
3
University of Liverpool, UK
{tuong.khanh-long.do, binh.xuan.nguyen} @aioz.io

1. Introduction
Federated learning entails training models via remote devices or siloed data centers while keeping data locally to
respect the user’s privacy policy [43]. According to [29],
there are two popular training scenarios: the cross-device
scenario, which encompasses a variety (millions or even
billions) of unreliable edge devices with limited computational capacity and slow connection speeds; and the crosssilo scenario, which involves only a few hundred reliable
data silos with powerful computing resources and highspeed access links. Recently, the cross-silo scenario be† indicates equal contribution.

100
Wall-clock Time

Time (s)

Federated learning is an active research topic since it enables several participants to jointly train a model without
sharing local data. Currently, cross-silo federated learning is a popular training setting that utilizes a few hundred
reliable data silos with high-speed access links to training
a model. While this approach has been widely applied in
real-world scenarios, designing a robust topology to reduce the training time remains an open problem. In this
paper, we present a new multigraph topology for crosssilo federated learning. We first construct the multigraph
using the overlay graph. We then parse this multigraph
into different simple graphs with isolated nodes. The existence of isolated nodes allows us to perform model aggregation without waiting for other nodes, hence effectively reducing the training time. Intensive experiments on
three public datasets show that our proposed method significantly reduces the training time compared with recent
state-of-the-art topologies while maintaining the accuracy
of the learned model. Our code can be found at:https:
//github.com/aioz-ai/MultigraphFL

4000
Accuracy

3000

75

2000

50

1000

25

0

Accuracy (%)

Abstract

0

(+)
AR
HA
ST
TC
A
M

T
T
MS -MBS
δ

G
RIN

RS
OU

Figure 1. Comparison between different topologies on FEMNIST
dataset and Exodus network [63]. The accuracy and total wallclock training time (or overhead time) are reported after 6, 400
communication rounds. Our method significantly reduces the
training time while maintaining the model accuracy.

comes popular in different federated learning applications
such as healthcare [88, 28, 21], robotics [68, 94, 83], medical imaging [8, 51], and finance [76, 50].
In practice, federated learning is a promising research
direction where we can utilize the effectiveness of machine
learning methods while respecting the user’s privacy. Critical challenges in federated learning include model convergence, communication congestion, and imbalance of data
distributions in different silos [29]. A popular federated
training method is to set a central node that orchestrates
the training process and aggregates contributions of all
clients [60]. The main limitation of this client-server approach is that the server node potentially represents a communication congestion point in the system, especially when
the number of clients is large. To overcome this limitation,
recent research has investigated the decentralized (or peer-

19409

