This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Overcoming Forgetting Catastrophe in Quantization-Aware Training
Ting-An Chen1,2 , De-Nian Yang2,3 , Ming-Syan Chen1,3
1
Graduate Institute of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
2
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
3
Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
tachen@arbor.ee.ntu.edu.tw, dnyang@iis.sinica.edu.tw, mschen@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract

(a) Proximal Quantization Space Search (ProxQ)
General Quantization

Quantization is an effective approach for memory cost
reduction by compressing networks to lower bits. However,
existing quantization processes learned only from the current
data tend to suffer from forgetting catastrophe on streaming
data, i.e., significant performance decrement on old task
data after being trained on new tasks. Therefore, we propose
a lifelong quantization process, LifeQuant, to address the
problem. We theoretically analyze the forgetting catastrophe
from the shift of quantization search space with the change of
data tasks. To overcome the forgetting catastrophe, we first
minimize the space shift during quantization and propose
Proximal Quantization Space Search (ProxQ), for regularizing the search space during quantization to be close to a
pre-defined standard space. Afterward, we exploit replay
data (a subset of old task data) for retraining in new tasks
to alleviate the forgetting problem. However, the limited
amount of replay data usually leads to biased quantization
performance toward the new tasks. To address the imbalance
issue, we design a Balanced Lifelong Learning (BaLL) Loss
to reweight (to increase) the influence of replay data in new
task learning, by leveraging the class distributions. Experimental results show that LifeQuant achieves outstanding
accuracy performance with a low forgetting rate.

1. Introduction
With increasing requirements for real-time inferences in
computer vision tasks [1, 2, 3], neural networks deployed on
edge devices have received increasing attention [4]. Due to
the limited memory storage on edge devices, networks with a
large volume of parameters are required to be compressed [5].
Accordingly, in addition to pruning [6, 7, 8, 9] and structure
simplification [10, 11], quantization has been developed
as an efficient learning technique to effectively compress
networks to lower bits without a significant performance
loss [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17].
Quantization can be categorized as Post-Training Quan-

*Forgetting

T=t-1

Ours
Standard Space

T=t

Initial

Space Shift

T=t-1

T=t

Proximal Space Regularization

(b) Balanced Lifelong Learning (BaLL)
General Lifelong Learning

Ours

*Forgetting

P(y = j)

Balancing
Replay

T=t-1

j

T=t

T=t

Imbalance

Class Distributions

Figure 1: Overview of LifeQuant. In Fig. (a), Proximal
Quantization Space Search (ProxQ) is proposed to overcome
the forgetting catastrophe problem by minimizing space shift,
i.e., regularizing the search space to be close to a pre-defined
standard space, during the quantization process. In Fig. (b),
previous lifelong learning (LL) research employs replay data
(old task data) in new task training to alleviate the forgetting
problem. However, the limited amount of replay data inhibits
the efficacy of overcoming the forgetting catastrophe. Therefore, Balanced Lifelong Learning (BaLL) loss is designed
to reweight (to increase) the influence of replay data in new
tasks, by carefully examining the class data distributions, to
avoid significant forgetting catastrophe.

tization (PTQ) and Quantization-Aware Training (QAT)
according to the training process [18]. PTQ compresses
the pretrained full-precision model weights and activations
into low bits in a deterministic way without retraining and
fine-tuning, which incurs only a tiny overhead in training
[12, 13, 19, 20, 21]. However, PTQ usually suffers from
significant accuracy degradation since the quantization criteria are not trained with weights [18]. In contrast, QAT

17358

