This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

COCO-O: A Benchmark for Object Detectors under Natural Distribution Shifts
Xiaofeng Mao†

Yuefeng Chen† Yao Zhu‡ Da Chen§ Hang Su¶
Rong Zhang † Hui Xue†
†
‡
Alibaba Group, Zhejiang University, § University of Bath, ¶ Tsinghua University
{mxf164419,yuefeng.chenyf}@alibaba-inc.com
FIBER-B
YOLOv7

GLIP-T
Uniformer-S
PVTv2-B2

ViTDet-B
Swin-S

Effective
Robustness

YOLOX-S
YOLOv5s

Def-DETR

YOLOv3

DETR

SSD
YOLOS-S

Figure 1: An overview of representative object detectors evaluated on COCO and our COCO-O dataset. The plotted dash
line presents the linear function fitted on classic detectors, which demonstrates the trend of COCO-O mAP increasing along
with COCO mAP. The Effective Robustness (red text in figure) measures how far the model lies above the linear fit.

Abstract
Practical object detection application can lose its effectiveness on image inputs with natural distribution shifts.
This problem leads the research community to pay more
attention on the robustness of detectors under Out-OfDistribution (OOD) inputs. Existing works construct
datasets to benchmark the detector’s OOD robustness for
a specific application scenario, e.g., Autonomous Driving.
However, these datasets lack universality and are hard to
benchmark general detectors built on common tasks such
as COCO. To give a more comprehensive robustness assessment, we introduce COCO-O(ut-of-distribution), a test
dataset based on COCO with 6 types of natural distribution shifts. COCO-O has a large distribution gap with
training data and results in a significant 55.7% relative
performance drop on a Faster R-CNN detector. We leverage COCO-O to conduct experiments on more than 100
modern object detectors to investigate if their improvements are credible or just over-fitting to the COCO test
set. Unfortunately, most classic detectors in early years

do not exhibit strong OOD generalization. We further
study the robustness effect on recent breakthroughs of detector’s architecture design, augmentation and pre-training
techniques. Some empirical findings are revealed: 1)
Compared with detection head or neck, backbone is the
most important part for robustness; 2) An end-to-end detection transformer design brings no enhancement, and
may even reduce robustness; 3) Large-scale foundation
models have made a great leap on robust object detection. We hope our COCO-O could provide a rich testbed
for robustness study of object detection. The dataset will
be available at https://github.com/alibaba/
easyrobust/tree/main/benchmarks/coco_o.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved tremendous success in the
field of computer vision. As a prerequisite, Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs) rely on a rigorous assumption that trainThis research is supported in part by the National Key Research and
Development Program of China under Grant No.2020AAA0140000.

6339

