This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Viewpoint Robustness in Bird’s Eye View Segmentation
Tzofi Klinghoffer1,2 * Jonah Philion2,3,4 Wenzheng Chen2,3,4 Or Litany2
Zan Gojcic2 Jungseock Joo2,5 Ramesh Raskar1 Sanja Fidler2,3,4 Jose M. Alvarez2†
1

MIT

2

NVIDIA

3

University of Toronto

4

Vector Institute

5

UCLA

Project page: https://nvlabs.github.io/viewpoint-robustness

Abstract
Autonomous vehicles (AV) require that neural networks
used for perception be robust to different viewpoints if they
are to be deployed across many types of vehicles without the
repeated cost of data collection and labeling for each. AV
companies typically focus on collecting data from diverse
scenarios and locations, but not camera rig configurations,
due to cost. As a result, only a small number of rig variations exist across most fleets. In this paper, we study how
AV perception models are affected by changes in camera
viewpoint and propose a way to scale them across vehicle
types without repeated data collection and labeling. Using
bird’s eye view (BEV) segmentation as a motivating task,
we find through extensive experiments that existing perception models are surprisingly sensitive to changes in camera
viewpoint. When trained with data from one camera rig,
small changes to pitch, yaw, depth, or height of the camera
at inference time lead to large drops in performance. We
introduce a technique for novel view synthesis and use it
to transform collected data to the viewpoint of target rigs,
allowing us to train BEV segmentation models for diverse
target rigs without any additional data collection or labeling cost. To analyze the impact of viewpoint changes, we
leverage synthetic data to mitigate other gaps (content, ISP,
etc). Our approach is then trained on real data and evaluated on synthetic data, enabling evaluation on diverse target rigs. We release all data for use in future work. Our
method is able to recover an average of 14.7% of the IoU
that is otherwise lost when deploying to new rigs.

1. Introduction
Neural networks (NNs) are becoming ubiquitous across
domains. Safety critical applications, such as autonomous
vehicles (AVs), rely on these NN to be robust to out of distribution (OOD) data. Yet, recent work has drawn attention to the susceptibility of NNs to failure when exposed
* Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.
† Corresponding author: Jose M. Alvarez (josea@nvidia.com).

Figure 1. Impact of Changed Camera Viewpoint: We find that
the performance of state-of-the-art methods for bird’s eye view
(BEV) segmentation quickly drop with small changes to viewpoint
at inference. Above we see predictions from Cross View Transformers [29] trained on data from a source rig (top). The target rig
pitch is reduced by 10◦ (bottom), leading a 17% drop in IoU.

to OOD data, such as adversarial corruptions [10], unseen
weather conditions [15], and new geographic regions [6].
While each of these pose a significant challenge for safety
critical applications, we focus on another distribution shift,
which, thus far, has been understudied in the research literature – changes in camera viewpoint between train data and
test data. Because camera viewpoint changes are realistic in
AVs, we study their impact on AV perception tasks.
AVs use cameras around the ego-vehicle to perceive their
surroundings. Using images from each camera, NNs detect
and segment objects in the scene, such as vehicles, pedestrians, roads, and more. This information is used by trajectory
planners to decide how the ego-vehicle navigates. Camera
viewpoint for AVs may differ between train and test in several real-world scenarios. First, the camera viewpoint may
change over time due to wear and tear or damage. Second,
camera viewpoint may change due to installation variation.
Third, and most relevant for our work, if a single NN is
to be deployed across different types of vehicles, it must
be able to generalize to the camera viewpoints of each car.
Collecting and labeling train data for each target rig is not
scalable and quickly becomes intractable for AV companies
wishing to scale across many types of vehicles due to cost,
thus motivating our work to transform collected data into
the viewpoint of diverse target rigs to use for training.
The goal of this paper is to bring understanding and a

8515

