This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Event-Guided Procedure Planning
from Instructional Videos with Text Supervision
An-Lan Wang∗ , Kun-Yu Lin∗ , Jia-Run Du, Jingke Meng† , Wei-Shi Zheng†
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
{wanganlan, linky5, dujr6}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, mengjke@gmail.com, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
In this work, we focus on the task of procedure planning from instructional videos with text supervision, where
a model aims to predict an action sequence to transform
the initial visual state into the goal visual state. A critical
challenge of this task is the large semantic gap between observed visual states and unobserved intermediate actions,
which is ignored by previous works. Specifically, this semantic gap refers to that the contents in the observed visual states are semantically different from the elements of
some action text labels in a procedure. To bridge this semantic gap, we propose a novel event-guided paradigm,
which first infers events from the observed states and then
plans out actions based on both the states and predicted
events. Our inspiration comes from that planning a procedure from an instructional video is to complete a specific
event and a specific event usually involves specific actions.
Based on the proposed paradigm, we contribute an Eventguided Prompting-based Procedure Planning (E3P) model,
which encodes event information into the sequential modeling process to support procedure planning. To further consider the strong action associations within each event, our
E3P adopts a mask-and-predict approach for relation mining, incorporating a probabilistic masking scheme for regularization. Extensive experiments on three datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed model.

1. Introduction
In this work, we focus on the procedure planning task
from instruction videos [7, 5, 38, 53]. Given the current
state (a frame or a clip), procedure planning aims to predict
a sequence of actions to reach a desired goal state. This
goal-driven decision-making capability comes naturally to
humans but is difficult for machine learning systems to acquire. Therefore, due to its wide real-world applications,
* indicates equal contribution. † indicates the corresponding author.

Unobserved
Intermediate States

Observed
Start State

Observed
Goal State

Intermediate
Actions

𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛1

𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛2

𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛3

𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛4

Action
Text Labels

Dip Bread
in Mixture

Melt Butter

Put Bread
in Pan

Flip Bread

Figure 1: Illustration of the semantic gap, i.e., the contents
in the observed visual states are semantically different from
the elements of some action text labels in a procedure. We
show a four-action procedure as an example. As shown
above, it is difficult to predict that we should “Melt Butter” by observing the start and goal states, since we see no
butter but some other things (e.g., bread, pan, mixture) from
the observed states. However, if we take the event of procedure “Make French Toast” into thinking, “Melt Butter” is
an indispensable step. Best viewed in color.

e.g., Autopilot [48] and Robotic systems [3], solving procedure planning is of great significance.
Early works [7, 5, 38] typically address the procedure
planning task in an auto-regressive manner, following traditional sequential modeling works [15, 27, 8, 41]. Specifically, given both intermediate action labels and intermediate visual states as supervision, these works adopt twobranch networks to predict the action labels and representations of states separately, based on the input start and goal
states. These methods mainly differ in the feature extractor for sequential modeling, e.g., DDN [7] uses RNNs [27],
Plate [38] uses Transformers [42]. However, all these methods need access to intermediate visual states for supervision. In such a setting, it is necessary to precisely identify the start and end timestamps of all actions in training
videos, which is time-consuming and labor-intensive for annotation.

13565

