This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Batch-based Model Registration for Fast 3D Sherd Reconstruction
Jiepeng Wang1
1

Congyi Zhang1
Peng Wang1
Xin Li3
Christian Theobalt2
Wenping Wang3 *

Peter J. Cobb1

2
The University of Hong Kong
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
3
Texas A&M University

Abstract
3D reconstruction techniques have widely been used for
digital documentation of archaeological fragments. However, efficient digital capture of fragments remains as a challenge. In this work, we aim to develop a portable, highthroughput, and accurate reconstruction system for efficient
digitization of fragments excavated in archaeological sites.
To realize high-throughput digitization of large numbers of
objects, an effective strategy is to perform scanning and
reconstruction in batches. However, effective batch-based
scanning and reconstruction face two key challenges: 1)
how to correlate partial scans of the same object from multiple batch scans, and 2) how to register and reconstruct
complete models from partial scans that exhibit only small
overlaps. To tackle these two challenges, we develop a new
batch-based matching algorithm that pairs the front and
back sides of the fragments, and a new Bilateral Boundary
ICP algorithm that can register partial scans sharing very
narrow overlapping regions. Extensive validation in labs
and testing in excavation sites demonstrate that these designs enable efficient batch-based scanning for fragments.
We show that such a batch-based scanning and reconstruction pipeline can have immediate applications on digitizing
sherds in archaeological excavations. Our project page:
https://jiepengwang.github.io/FIRES/.

1. Introduction
Digital documentation of archaeological artifacts is
widely used in archaeological heritage preservation and virtual restoration [25, 4, 18, 34]. Sherds, also referred to as
fragments, are the most commonly uncovered artifacts during archaeological excavations and they carry rich information about past human societies, so their 3D shapes need to
be accurately reconstructed and digitally archived for analysis and preservation. At an excavation site, typically hun* Corresponding author.

2022
0331
v2

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Illustration of batch processing of sherds. (a)
Fast image acquisition device; (b) Reference images of the
front sides and back sides of a batch of fragments; and (c)
Reconstructed 3D sherds.

dreds of fragments are uncovered in a day, far beyond the
scanning and reconstruction capacity of existing imaging
systems [27, 1, 23, 19]. Hence, there is high demand for
methods and systems capable of scanning and reconstructing hundreds of fragments per day.
The most promising approach to high throughput scanning of sherds is via batch processing. A straightforward
flow of batching processing works as follows. First, all the
fragments to be processed are divided into groups of 5 - 20
fragments per group, with the specific number depending
on the sizes of the fragments. For each group, the following
three steps of operation are performed.
Step 1 - Front side reconstruction. The group of fragments are manually placed flat on a turning-table and imaged by several fixed cameras in a couple of minutes. For
easy of reference, we call the upward sides of the fragments
at this moment their front sides. See Fig. 1 (a). Then the acquired images are used by an off-the-shelf MVS software to
automatically reconstruct the 3D models of the front sides.
Step 2 - Back side reconstruction. In order to scan the
complete models, the fragments are manually flipped over
and placed again on the turntable. Then the back sides of
the fragments are scanned (Fig. 1 (b)) and reconstructed in
a similar fashion.
Step 3 - Full model registration. Now we have obtained
the reconstructed partial 3D models of the front sides and

14519

