This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CaPhy: Capturing Physical Properties for Animatable Human Avatars
Zhaoqi Su
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Liangxiao Hu
Harbin Institute of Technology
Weihai, Shandong, China

Siyou Lin
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

suzq13@tsinghua.org.cn

lx.hu@hit.edu.cn

linsy21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Hongwen Zhang
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Shengping Zhang
Harbin Institute of Technology
Weihai, Shandong, China

zhanghongwen@tsinghua.edu.cn

s.zhang@hit.edu.cn

Justus Thies
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany

Yebin Liu
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

justus.thies@tuebingen.mpg.de

liuyebin@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Figure 1: We propose CaPhy, a novel method for reconstructing physics-based 3D human avatars from 3D scans. We
optimize a garment deformation model that is based on a deep neural network using real-world observations to capture the
physical properties of the clothing. The neural garment deformation model is conditioned on the pose of the underlying body
model, allowing us to repose the avatar with a realistic synthesis of cloth wrinkles. Specifically, the reconstructed avatar can
be controlled by monocular RGB input data which is used to estimate the body pose.

Abstract
We present CaPhy, a novel method for reconstructing animatable human avatars with realistic dynamic properties
for clothing. Specifically, we aim for capturing the geometric and physical properties of the clothing from real observations. This allows us to apply novel poses to the human
avatar with physically correct deformations and wrinkles of
the clothing. To this end, we combine unsupervised training
with physics-based losses and 3D-supervised training using
scanned data to reconstruct a dynamic model of clothing

that is physically realistic and conforms to the human scans.
We also optimize the physical parameters of the underlying
physical model from the scans by introducing gradient constraints of the physics-based losses. In contrast to previous
work on 3D avatar reconstruction, our method is able to
generalize to novel poses with realistic dynamic cloth deformations. Experiments on several subjects demonstrate
that our method can estimate the physical properties of the
garments, resulting in superior quantitative and qualitative
results compared with previous methods.

14150

