This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Foreground-Background Distribution Modeling Transformer for Visual Object
Tracking
Dawei Yang1, *, Jianfeng He1, *, Yinchao Ma1 , Qianjin Yu1 , Tianzhu Zhang1,†
1
University of Science and Technology of China
{yangdawei,hejf,imyc,sa21010105}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {tzzhang}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual object tracking is a fundamental research topic
with a broad range of applications. Benefiting from the
rapid development of Transformer, pure Transformer trackers have achieved great progress. However, the feature
learning of these Transformer-based trackers is easily disturbed by complex backgrounds. To address the above limitations, we propose a novel foreground-background distribution modeling transformer for visual object tracking (FBDMTrack), including a fore-background agent learning
(FBAL) module and a distribution-aware attention (DA2 )
module in a unified transformer architecture. The proposed
F-BDMTrack enjoys several merits. First, the proposed
FBAL module can effectively mine fore-background information with designed fore-background agents. Second, the
DA2 module can suppress the incorrect interaction between
foreground and background by modeling fore-background
distribution similarities. Finally, F-BDMTrack can extract
discriminative features under ever-changing tracking scenarios for more accurate target state estimation. Extensive
experiments show that our F-BDMTrack outperforms previous state-of-the-art trackers on eight tracking benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking(VOT) aims to locate the position
of a class-agnostic target in a video sequence given the target in the first frame, which is a fundamental and essential
research topic in computer vision. Due to its great application potential (such as video surveillance [9, 49, 9], antiUAV tracking [64, 25, 29], and automatic driving [47, 41,
15]), VOT has attracted substantial attention and has been
developed tremendously [56, 31, 17]. However, as a video
processing task, visual object tracking still faces various
challenges including deformation, motion blur, and susceptibility to background interference [51, 27, 24].
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

Figure 1. Response map comparisons among different attention
mechanisms. Both (a) and (b) have incorrect similarities between
the target (green square patch) and background distractor (yellow
triangle patch) due to similar appearance, causing messy response
map. Differently, in our proposed DA2 module (c), the similarity
between target and distractor is suppressed, since the similarity is
obtained according to their fore-background distributions.

To deal with the above challenges, numerous approaches
have been proposed [23, 2, 3, 59, 10, 5, 62]. These methods can be generally divided into three main paradigms,
including CNN-based [8, 52, 58, 35, 3, 13], hybrid CNNTransformer [7, 59, 36, 50, 42], and pure Transformer
trackers [5, 62, 32, 57]. CNN-based trackers first extract
features from the template and search region separately
through a shared convolutional neural network (CNN), and
then the target state is estimated by calculating crosscorrelation [2, 58, 52] between features in template and
search regions, or learning a discriminative correlation filter [12, 3, 13]. With the successful development of transformer in the computer vision field, an increasing number
of hybrid CNN-Transformer trackers [7, 59, 42] have been
proposed. These trackers also leverage CNN to extract features separately, but adopt transformer to realize the feature
interaction between the template and search region, which
can alleviate the loss of discriminative foreground information. However, for the above two paradigm trackers, there
is no interaction between the template and the search region when extracting features. These target-unaware feature
extraction ways have limited target-background discriminative power, especially when the target category is not seen

10117

