This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly-supervised 3D Pose Transfer with Keypoints
Jinnan Chen
Chen Li
Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{jinnan.c, lichen}@u.nus.edu

gimhee.lee@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
The main challenges of 3D pose transfer are: 1) Lack
of paired training data with different characters performing the same pose; 2) Disentangling pose and shape information from the target mesh; 3) Difficulty in applying to
meshes with different topologies. We thus propose a novel
weakly-supervised keypoint-based framework to overcome
these difficulties. Specifically, we use a topology-agnostic
keypoint detector with inverse kinematics to compute transformations between the source and target meshes. Our
method only requires supervision on the keypoints, can be
applied to meshes with different topologies and is shapeinvariant for the target which allows extraction of pose-only
information from the target meshes without transferring
shape information. We further design a cycle reconstruction
to perform self-supervised pose transfer without the need
for ground truth deformed mesh with the same pose and
shape as the target and source, respectively. We evaluate
our approach on benchmark human and animal datasets,
where we achieve superior performance compared to the
state-of-the-art unsupervised approaches and even comparable performance with the fully supervised approaches. We
test on the more challenging Mixamo dataset to verify our
approach’s ability in handling meshes with different topologies and complex clothes. Cross-dataset evaluation further
shows the strong generalization ability of our approach.
Our source code is available at: https://github.
com/jinnan-chen/3D-Pose-Transfer.

1. Introduction
3D Pose transfer refers to transferring the pose from a
target input to a source input while keeping the identity information of the source at the same time. Pose transfer is
an important research topic in computer vision because of
its wide applications in many real-world applications such
as augmented/virtual reality (AR/VR), movie making, gaming, metaverse, etc.
Significant progress has been made for 3D pose transfer with the development of deep learning-based methods

Source

Target1

Target2

Deformed1

Deformed2

Source

Target1

Target2

Deformed1

Deformed2

Figure 1. Examples of our pose transfer results on human and animal. Given a source mesh and a target mesh, we aim to transfer
the pose from the target to the source.

[28, 20, 26, 8, 7]. However, 3D pose transfer remains a
very challenging task due to the lack of paired training data
since it is difficult to obtain data of two characters performing the same pose. To alleviate this problem, existing works
[26, 20, 8] generate such paired data synthetically using the
SMPL [18] and SMAL [29] models. The advantage of synthetic data is that it is convenient to generate paired training data by keeping the pose parameter of different meshes
the same. However, the data generated from SMPL and
SMAL has a strong bias for both shape and pose information due to the model parameterization. Consequently,
a network trained with synthetic data cannot adapt well to
real 3D meshes with large shape and pose variations. Unsupervised approaches are proposed in [28, 7, 10] to circumvent the requirement for paired training data. These works
adopt an auto-encoder-based framework to learn the shape
and pose embeddings implicitly. The pose transfer can then
be achieved by swapping the pose code between the source
and target meshes. Although data-efficient, these works
only show results for 3D pose transfer between meshes with
the same topology. Furthermore, the shape and pose information are not fully disentangled in [10, 28] due to their
implicit representation.
We propose a 3D pose transfer model weakly-supervised
with keypoints to mitigate the limitations of existing works.
Our method is weakly-supervised since we only need the
supervision on keypoints instead of ground truth deformed

15156

