This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Personalized Semantics Excitation for Federated Image Classification
Haifeng Xia1 , Kai Li2 , Zhengming Ding1
1
Department of Computer Science, Tulane University, 2 NEC Labs, America
{hxia,zding1}@tulane.edu, kaili@nec-labs.com

Abstract
Federated learning casts a light on the collaboration of
distributed local clients with privacy protected to attain a
more generic global model. However, significant distribution shift in input/label space across different clients makes
it challenging to well generalize to all clients, which motivates personalized federated learning (PFL). Existing PFL
methods typically customize the local model by fine-tuning
with limited local supervision and the global model regularizer, which secures local specificity but risks ruining the
global discriminative knowledge. In this paper, we propose a
novel Personalized Semantics Excitation (PSE) mechanism
to breakthrough this limitation by exciting and fusing personalized semantics from the global model during local model
customization. Specifically, PSE explores channel-wise gradient differentiation across global and local models to identify important low-level semantics mostly from convolutional
layers which are embedded into the client-specific training.
In addition, PSE deploys the collaboration of global and
local models to enrich high-level feature representations
and facilitate the robustness of client classifier through a
cross-model attention module. Extensive experiments and
analysis on various image classification benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness and advantage of our method over
the state-of-the-art PFL methods.

1. Introduction
Deep learning algorithms typically demand prolific training samples for model optimization [22, 34, 47], which often
entails crowd-sourcing from different clients. However, data
privacy issue arises when transmitting data across clients
[49, 43, 48]. This motivates the exploration of federated
learning (FL), which aims to learn a highly generalizable
global model from the collaboration across multiple clients
communicating with a centralized server to perform knowledge sharing [25, 18]. While tremendous efforts have been
made by existing method to build a global model of strong
generalizability to all clients, the crowd-sourcing nature of
FL makes it difficult to learn a generic model satisfying the

Original

FedAvg

FedAvg+FT

Ditto

FedRep

Ours

Figure 1. Comparison of attention maps drawn by global model
(FedAvg), local models respectively learned by FedAvg+FT [32],
Ditto [23], FedRep [7] and our proposed method. It suggests that
well-learned discriminative semantics by global model are easily
mitigated via customized training of client in several situations.
For example, the global model of FedAvg focuses on the nose and
mouth of the dog and utilizes these discriminative information to
successfully identify the dog. However, FedAvg+FT, Ditto and
FedRep show different degrees of degradation on these parts and
fail to correctly classify it.

demand of all clients with various data distributions [4, 39].
The straightforward and efficient solution to this FL challenge is directly fine-tuning the well-learned global model
to adapt the distribution property of each client [30, 16, 53].
This widely-explored strategy is named as personalized federated learning (PFL), which conducts model customization
per client by refining the local model with both local data and
global model constraint [1, 45, 6]. Alternatively, personalization relies on the limited supervision per client refine the
model to preserve client-specific patterns with the integration of global model [28, 37]. To reach better customization,
[14, 8] adopt additive mixture manner over the global and
local network parameters to gradually adjust the local model
learning. Similarly, one recent work named as Ditto [23]
enforces the local model parameters to be close to the global
ones with ℓ2 -norm regularization term, which encourages
clients to obtain generic knowledge and guarantees the convergence of training process. In addition, meta-learning
mechanism has attracted much attention to overcome PFL
challenges, since it enables the learning process of clients to
imitate the attribution of knowledgeable global model [26, 7].

19301

