This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Feedback DETR for Temporal Action Detection
Jihwan Kim
Miso Lee
Jae-Pil Heo†
Sungkyunkwan University
{damien, dlalth557, jaepilheo}@skku.edu

Abstract
Temporal Action Detection (TAD) is challenging but
fundamental for real-world video applications. Recently,
DETR-based models have been devised for TAD but have
not performed well yet. In this paper, we point out the problem in the self-attention of DETR for TAD; the attention
modules focus on a few key elements, called temporal collapse problem. It degrades the capability of the encoder
and decoder since their self-attention modules play no role.
To solve the problem, we propose a novel framework, SelfDETR, which utilizes cross-attention maps of the decoder
to reactivate self-attention modules. We recover the relationship between encoder features by simple matrix multiplication of the cross-attention map and its transpose. Likewise, we also get the information within decoder queries.
By guiding collapsed self-attention maps with the guidance
map calculated, we settle down the temporal collapse of
self-attention modules in the encoder and decoder. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that Self-DETR resolves
the temporal collapse problem by keeping high diversity
of attention over all layers. Moreover, it is validated that
our simple framework achieves a new state-of-the-art performance on THUMOS14 and outperforms all the DETRbased approaches on ActivityNet-v1.3.

1. Introduction
Understanding videos has become fundamental as uncountable videos are produced all over devices every moment. In the first place, action recognition using trimmed
video clips led the field with tremendous advances during
past decades. However, unacceptable costs to snip realworld videos fostered the literature towards temporal action detection (TAD). Temporal action detection not just
classifies an action but also predicts time boundaries of
untrimmed video.
Pioneering methods [2, 3, 11] adopted the concept of
fixed-length windows called action proposals inspired by
† Corresponding author

Figure 1: Temporal collapse problem of self-attention.
The figure shows self-attention maps by DETR-based methods in object detection (OD) and temporal action detection
(TAD). Each map at the top and bottom is from the last
layer of the encoder and decoder, respectively. We can see
that the self-attention maps of the encoder and decoder in
TAD are collapsed to a small number of keys (b, e). On the
other hand, those from OD and ours show high correlation
for neighboring features (a, c) or query themselves (d, f).
object detection [15, 16, 36]. Meanwhile, the following
approaches [20, 25, 53, 58] developed point-wise learning
where they predict probabilities of start and end boundaries
to solve the low-recall issue. They reached the high-recall
score from more flexible action proposals by grouping each
pair of start and end boundaries, but unfortunately, a bunch
of generated proposals with various lengths made the ranking process more challenging. Accordingly, the previous
methods heavily rely on ranking with post-processing such
as non-maximum suppression (NMS) to cope with lowprecision action proposals.
As DETR [4] has had a great impact on object detection, DETR-based methods for videos [22,30,32,39,44] are
also introduced recently. In TAD, queries of DETR are defined as action instances of a video with their time intervals,
called action queries. Here, the model learns to map these
query vectors to relevant temporal features of the video to

10286

