This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DCPB: Deformable Convolution based on the Poincaré Ball for Top-view Fisheye
Cameras
Xuan Wei
School of Automation, Southeast University
Nanjing 210096, China

Zhidan Ran
School of Automation, Southeast University
Nanjing 210096, China

wx1204@seu.edu.cn

230218198@seu.edu.cn

Xiaobo Lu
School of Automation, Southeast University
Nanjing 210096, China
xblu2013@126.com

Abstract
The accuracy of the visual tasks for top-view ﬁsheye
cameras is limited by the Euclidean geometry for posedistorted objects in images. In this paper, we demonstrate
the analogy between the ﬁsheye model and the Poincaré
ball and that learning the shape of convolution kernels in
the Poincaré Ball can alleviate the spatial distortion problem. In particular, we propose the Deformable Convolution
based on the Poincaré Ball, named DCPB, which conducts
the Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) in the Poincaré
ball and calculates the geodesic distances to Poincaré hyperplanes as the offsets and modulation scalars of the
modulated deformable convolution. Besides, we explore
an appropriate network structure in the baseline with the
DCPB. The DCPB markedly improves the neural network’s
performance. Experimental results on the public dataset
THEODORE show that DCPB obtains a higher accuracy,
and its efﬁciency demonstrates the potential for using temporal information in ﬁsheye videos.

1. Introduction
Visual tasks for top-view ﬁsheye cameras are challenging but with valuable practical signiﬁcance in real-world
scenarios [18, 45]. Due to their large ﬁeld of view, top-view
ﬁsheye cameras are the most cost-effective devices to capture 360◦ content and cover a more comprehensive range of
applications in visual surveillance [17]. A traditional per* This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under grant 62271143, the National Key R&D Program of China
under Grant 2020YFB1600700, and the Big Data Center of Southeast University.

spective camera samples a ﬁeld of view of the 3D scene
projected onto a 2D plane with relative positions in the real
world [35]. In contrast, a top-view ﬁsheye camera captures the entire view surrounding its optical center. Thus,
top-view ﬁsheye cameras provide more spatial information
than traditional perspective cameras. However, the geometric transformations inherent in ﬁsheye cameras cause spatial distortion, leading to magnifying objects near the center of ﬁsheye images while the objects away from the center of ﬁsheye images shrink [41, 46]. The spatial distortion
considerably increases the difﬁculty of accurate visual tasks
for top-view ﬁsheye cameras, demanding the algorithms to
be robust. Besides, the algorithms trained on perspective
cameras usually perform poorly on top-view ﬁsheye cameras [49, 51]. To solve these problems, many researchers
are committed to adapting Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) to the severe distortion of ﬁsheye images for the
higher accuracy of visual tasks.
In object detection, [17, 24] proposed CNNs that predict arbitrarily rotated bounding boxes in a ﬁsheye image
to increase IoU. [10, 36] rotated each ﬁsheye image and applied YOLO [31] only to the upper center part of the image,
where people usually appear upright. These methods only
deal with the input and output of CNNs and ignore that a
convolution kernel may not be appropriate for the distorted
object. Deformable convolution [14] is proposed for addressing the issue that geometric variations due to scale,
pose, viewpoint, and part deformation degrade the performance of CNNs in object recognition and detection. In deformable convolution, the grid sampling locations of standard convolution are each offset by displacements learned
for the preceding feature maps. Deformable ConvNets v2
(DCNv2) [50] introduced modulated deformable convolu-

13308

