This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting Domain-Adaptive 3D Object Detection by Reliable, Diverse and
Class-balanced Pseudo-Labeling

1

Zhuoxiao Chen1 Yadan Luo1 Zheng Wang2 Mahsa Baktashmotlagh1 Zi Huang1
The University of Queensland 2 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

{zhuoxiao.chen, y.luo, m.baktashmotlagh, helen.huang}@uq.edu.au, zh wang@hotmail.com

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (DA) with the aid of
pseudo labeling techniques has emerged as a crucial approach for domain-adaptive 3D object detection. While effective, existing DA methods suffer from a substantial drop
in performance when applied to a multi-class training setting, due to the co-existence of low-quality pseudo labels
and class imbalance issues. In this paper, we address this
challenge by proposing a novel ReDB framework tailored
for learning to detect all classes at once. Our approach
produces Reliable, Diverse, and class-Balanced pseudo 3D
boxes to iteratively guide the self-training on a distributionally different target domain. To alleviate disruptions
caused by the environmental discrepancy (e.g., beam numbers), the proposed cross-domain examination (CDE) assesses the correctness of pseudo labels by copy-pasting target instances into a source environment and measuring the
prediction consistency. To reduce computational overhead
and mitigate the object shift (e.g., scales and point densities), we design an overlapped boxes counting (OBC) metric
that allows to uniformly downsample pseudo-labeled objects across different geometric characteristics. To confront
the issue of inter-class imbalance, we progressively augment the target point clouds with a class-balanced set of
pseudo-labeled target instances and source objects, which
boosts recognition accuracies on both frequently appearing
and rare classes. Experimental results on three benchmark
datasets using both voxel-based (i.e., SECOND) and pointbased 3D detectors (i.e., PointRCNN) demonstrate that our
proposed ReDB approach outperforms existing 3D domain
adaptation methods by a large margin, improving 23.15%
mAP on the nuScenes → KITTI task. The code is available
at https://github.com/zhuoxiao-chen/ReDB-DA-3Ddet.

1. Introduction
As LiDAR-based 3D object detection continues to gain
traction in various applications such as robotic systems
[1, 40, 60, 56, 83, 74] and self-driving automobiles [8, 59,

Beams

Environmental Shift

Range

Domain Gap

Size

Object Shift
ST3D (Car)
ST3D (Pedestrian)

40

3D AP Drop

0

ST3D (Cyclist)
ST3D (All)
60
50

20
Car Pedestrian Cyclist

Density

40

3D AP Drop

Car Pedestrian Cyclist

Figure 1: Top: An illustration of the domain gap in 3D point
clouds. Bottom: Average Precision (AP) drop of ST3D [70]
when applied to the multi-class adaptation from nuScenes
to KITTI (left), and from Waymo to KITTI (right).
42, 61, 2, 78, 37, 39, 32, 25, 38], it becomes increasingly
vital to address the challenges of deploying detectors in
real-world scenes. The primary obstacles stem from the
discrepancy between the training and test point cloud data,
which are commonly curated from different scenes, locations, times, and sensor types, creating a domain gap. This
domain gap mainly comes from the object shift and environmental shift, and can significantly degrade the prediction
accuracy of 3D detectors. Object shift [62, 36] refers to the
changes in the spatial distribution, point density, and scale
of objects between the training and test domains. For instance, the average length of cars in the Waymo dataset [52]
is significantly different from the one in the KITTI dataset
[15] by around 0.91 meters [62]. Environmental shift, on
the other hand, arises from composite differences in the sur-

3714

