This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Anti-DreamBooth: Protecting users from personalized text-to-image synthesis
Thanh Van Le∗1 , Hao Phung∗1 , Thuan Hoang Nguyen∗1 , Quan Dao∗1 , Ngoc N. Tran†2 , Anh Tran1
1
2
VinAI Research
Vanderbilt University
v.{thanhlv19, haopt12, thuannh5, quandm7, anhtt152}@vinai.io, ngoc.n.tran@vanderbilt.edu

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion models are nothing but a revolution, allowing anyone, even without design skills, to create realistic images from simple text inputs. With powerful personalization tools like DreamBooth, they can generate images of a specific person just by learning from
his/her few reference images. However, when misused,
such a powerful and convenient tool can produce fake
news or disturbing content targeting any individual victim, posing a severe negative social impact. In this paper, we explore a defense system called Anti-DreamBooth
against such malicious use of DreamBooth. The system
aims to add subtle noise perturbation to each user’s image before publishing in order to disrupt the generation
quality of any DreamBooth model trained on these perturbed images. We investigate a wide range of algorithms
for perturbation optimization and extensively evaluate them
on two facial datasets over various text-to-image model
versions. Despite the complicated formulation of DreamBooth and Diffusion-based text-to-image models, our methods effectively defend users from the malicious use of those
models. Their effectiveness withstands even adverse conditions, such as model or prompt/term mismatching between training and testing. Our code will be available at
https://github.com/VinAIResearch/Anti-DreamBooth.git.

1. Introduction
Within a few years, denoising diffusion models [23, 54,
43] have revolutionized image generation studies, allowing
producing images with realistic quality and diverse content
[19]. They especially succeed when being combined with
language [40] or vision-language models [39] for text-toimage generation. Large models [41, 3, 43, 47, 9] can produce photo-realistic or artistic images just from simple text
description inputs. A user can now generate art within a few
seconds, and a generated drawing even beat professional
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Work done while at VinAI.

Personalized
text-to-image

Clean images

AntiDreamBooth

Personalized
text-to-image

Perturbed images

DSLR portrait

in front of
Eiﬀel Tower

Figure 1: A malicious attacker can collect a user’s images
to train a personalized text-to-image generator for malicious
purposes. Our system, called Anti-DreamBooth, applies
imperceptible perturbations to the user’s images before releasing, making any personalized generator trained on these
images fail to produce usable images, protecting the user
from that threat.
artists in an art competition [44]. Photo-realistic synthetic
images can be hard to distinguish from real photos [27].
Besides, ControlNet [62] offers extra options to control the
generation outputs, further boosting the power of the textto-image models and bringing them closer to mass users.
One extremely useful feature for image generation models is personalization, which allows the models to generate
images of a specific subject, given a few reference examples. For instance, one can create images of himself/herself
in a fantasy world for fun, or create images of his/her family
members as a gift. Textual Inversion [20] and DreamBooth
[46] are two prominent techniques that offer that impressive
ability. While Textual Inversion only optimizes the text embedding inputs representing the target subject, DreamBooth
finetunes the text-to-image model itself for better personalization quality. Hence, DreamBooth is particularly popular
and has become the core technique in many applications.
While the mentioned techniques provide a powerful and

2116

