This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IST-Net: Prior-free Category-level Pose Estimation with
Implicit Space Transformation

1

Jianhui Liu1 , Yukang Chen2 , Xiaoqing Ye3 , Xiaojuan Qi1†
The University of Hong Kong, 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 3 Baidu

jhliu0212@gmail.com, yukangchen@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, yexiaoqing@baidu.com, xjqi@eee.hku.hk

Abstract
Category-level 6D pose estimation aims to predict the
poses and sizes of unseen objects from a specific category. Thanks to prior deformation, which explicitly adapts
a category-specific 3D prior (i.e., a 3D template) to a given
object instance, prior-based methods attained great success
and have become a major research stream. However, obtaining category-specific priors requires collecting a large
amount of 3D models, which is labor-consuming and often not accessible in practice. This motivates us to investigate whether priors are necessary to make prior-based
methods effective. Our empirical study shows that the 3D
prior itself is not the credit to the high performance. The
keypoint actually is the explicit deformation process, which
aligns camera and world coordinates supervised by worldspace 3D models (also called canonical space). Inspired
by these observations, we introduce a simple prior-free implicit space transformation network, namely IST-Net, to
transform camera-space features to world-space counterparts and build correspondences between them in an implicit manner without relying on 3D priors. Besides, we design camera- and world-space enhancers to enrich the features with pose-sensitive information and geometrical constraints, respectively. Albeit simple, IST-Net achieves stateof-the-art performance based-on prior-free design, with top
inference speed on the REAL275 benchmark. Our code
and models are available at https://github.com/
CVMI-Lab/IST-Net.

1. Introduction
Category-level pose estimation [39] draws great attention and plays an important role in practical applications,
including robotic manipulation [6, 28, 22], augmented reality [34], and scene understanding [29, 43, 19, 20, 18, 14,
46]. Unlike instance-level pose estimation [15, 17, 23, 30,
13, 42], which requires a 3D CAD model for each object
instance, this task aims at exploiting category-specific in-

Prior-based methods
Prior-free methods

Figure 1. Comparison with competitive methods on REAL275
dateset. DPN refers to the DualPoseNet [26]. All speeds are measured on a single RTX3090Ti GPU. We use blue/red to distinguish
prior-based/free methods. IST-Net achieves top performance on
3D75 with the best inference speed.

formation and thus can further generalize to unseen objects
within given categories.
Recently, many methods [25, 3, 35, 40, 4, 2, 5] have been
proposed for category-level pose estimation, which can be
categorized into two groups: prior-free methods and priorbased methods. Prior-free methods [4, 26, 39, 38] mainly
focus on designing network structures to fit the training data
better. These methods are relatively simple but struggle
to generalize to novel objects and suffer from poor performance.
To address this issue, prior-based methods [25, 3, 35, 7,
21, 10] leverage category-specific 3D priors (templates) to
guide pose estimation. They adopt a prior-driven deformation module [35] to deform the prior for synthesizing the
target object in world-space. And then, they formulate the
pose estimation problem as a camera- and world-space correspondence learning problem which explicitly aligns the
coordinates [35]. Although considerable progress has been
attained with prior-based methods [3, 45, 40], the requirements of collecting a large amount of ground-truth 3D models of target objects for obtaining the 3D prior and super-

13978

