This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stabilizing Visual Reinforcement Learning via Asymmetric
Interactive Cooperation
Yunpeng Zhai1 , Peixi Peng2,3,∗ , Yifan Zhao1 , Yangru Huang1 , Yonghong Tian1,2,3, *
1
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering,
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{ypzhai, pxpeng, zhaoyf, yhtian}@pku.edu.cn, yrhuang@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Vision-based reinforcement learning (RL) depends on
discriminative representation encoders to abstract the observation states. Despite the great success of increasing CNN parameters for many supervised computer vision tasks, reinforcement learning with temporal-difference
(TD) losses cannot benefit from it in most complex environments. In this paper, we analyze that the training instability arises from the oscillating self-overfitting of the
heavy-optimizable encoder. We argue that serious oscillation will occur to the parameters when enforced to fit the
sensitive TD targets, causing uncertain drifting of the latent
state space and thus transmitting these perturbations to the
policy learning. To alleviate this phenomenon, we propose
a novel asymmetric interactive cooperation approach with
the interaction between a heavy-optimizable encoder and
a supportive light-optimizable encoder, in which both their
advantages are integrated including the highly discriminative capability as well as the training stability. We also
present a greedy bootstrapping optimization to isolate the
visual perturbations from policy learning, where representation and policy are trained sufficiently by turns. Finally,
we demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in utilizing
larger visual models by first-person highway driving task
CARLA and Vizdoom environments.

1. Introduction
Learning complex control from high-dimensional observations such as images is significant for many real-world
applications [37, 28]. It puts forward higher requirements
for the representation capability of visual encoder models,
* Corresponding author.

a) Returns during training

b) Parameter oscillation

Figure 1. Comparison of DeepMDP agents on CARLA with
light- and heavy-weight visual
P encoders in
Pepisode returns (a)
and parameter oscillation ( Tt ∥∇θt ∥)/∥ Tt ∇θt ∥ (b). Compared with 4-layer CNN, larger models like ResNet-18 do not improve the RL performance as in supervised learning. The deterioration results from the oscillating self-overfitting of the larger
model, which occurs in neither supervised learning nor RL with a
lightweight encoder.

especially in some complex scenes such as self-driving [5]
and robot controlling [29]. The last decade has witnessed
impressive progress in computer vision by training largescale networks [18] as they increase the search space of possible solutions. However, such parameter increment of visual models cannot directly benefit the reinforcement learning, and even leads to deterioration of training. For example, as shown in Fig. 1(a), we illustrated the training
curves of DeepMDP [7] agents that use different CNN networks as visual encoders on the self-driving environment
CARLA [5]. The result shows that using a larger model,
e.g., ResNet-18 [18], leads to unstable training and achieves
distinctly lower returns than the lighter model with only
four convolutional layers.
To investigate this phenomenon, we quantified the oscillation of the network parameters by introducing an in-

207

