This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Walking Your LiDOG: A Journey Through Multiple Domains for LiDAR
Semantic Segmentation

1

Cristiano Saltori1 , Aljoša Ošep2 , Elisa Ricci1,3 , Laura Leal-Taixé4
University of Trento, 2 TU Munich, 3 Federazione Bruno Kessler, 4 NVIDIA
cristiano.saltori@unitn.it

LiDAR Semantic Segmentation (LSS)
Train: Source

This work: Domain generalization for LSS

Test: Target 1

Train: Source 1

Domain
shift
Test: Source
Domain
shift
Train: Source 2

Test: Target 2

Figure 1: Domain Generalization for LiDAR Semantic Segmentation (DG-LSS). Left: Existing LSS methods are trained
and evaluated on point clouds drawn from the same domain. Right: We focus on studying LSS under domain shifts, where the
test samples are drawn from a different data distribution. Our paper aims to address the generalization aspect of this task.

Abstract
The ability to deploy robots that can operate safely in
diverse environments is crucial for developing embodied
intelligent agents. As a community, we have made tremendous progress in within-domain LiDAR semantic segmentation. However, do these methods generalize across domains?
To answer this question, we design the first experimental
setup for studying domain generalization (DG) for LiDAR
semantic segmentation (DG-LSS). Our results confirm a significant gap between methods, evaluated in a cross-domain
setting: for example, a model trained on the source dataset
(SemanticKITTI) obtains 26.53 mIoU on the target data,
compared to 48.49 mIoU obtained by the model trained on
the target domain (nuScenes). To tackle this gap, we propose
the first method specifically designed for DG-LSS, which
obtains 34.88 mIoU on the target domain, outperforming
all baselines. Our method augments a sparse-convolutional
encoder-decoder 3D segmentation network with an additional, dense 2D convolutional decoder that learns to classify a birds-eye view of the point cloud. This simple auxiliary
task encourages the 3D network to learn features that are
robust to sensor placement shifts and resolution, and are
transferable across domains. With this work, we aim to in-

spire the community to develop and evaluate future models
in such cross-domain conditions.

1. Introduction
We address the challenge of achieving accurate and robust semantic segmentation of LiDAR point clouds. LiDAR
semantic segmentation (LSS) is one of the most fundamental
perception problems in mobile robot navigation, with applications ranging from mapping [28], localization [32], and
online dynamic situational awareness [45].1
Status Quo. State-of-the-art LSS methods [8, 16, 44, 68]
perform well when trained and evaluated using the same sensory setup and environment (i.e., source domain, Fig. 1, left).
However, their performance degrades significantly in the
presence of domain shifts (Fig. 1, right), commonly caused
by differences in sensory settings, e.g., a new type of sensor,
or recording environments, e.g., geographic regions with
different road layouts or types of vehicles. One way to mitigate this is to collect multi-domain datasets for pre-training,
1 Semantic point classifier was part of the perception stack in early
autonomous vehicles, such as Stanley, that won the DARPA challenge in
2005.

1196

