This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Video Object Segmentation with Online Adversarial Self-Tuning
Tiankang Su1 Huihui Song1 * Dong Liu2 Bo Liu3 Qingshan Liu4
1
B-DAT and CICAEET, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
Netflix Inc, Los Gatos, CA, 95032, USA
3
Walmart Global Tech, Sunnyvale, CA, 94086, USA
4
School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China

Abstract
The existing unsupervised video object segmentation
methods depend heavily on the segmentation model trained
offline on a labeled training video set, and cannot well generalize to the test videos from a different domain with possible distribution shifts. We propose to perform online finetuning on the pre-trained segmentation model to adapt to
any ad-hoc videos at the test time. To achieve this, we
design an offline semi-supervised adversarial training process, which leverages the unlabeled video frames to improve
the model generalizability while aligning the features of
the labeled video frames with the features of the unlabeled
video frames. With the trained segmentation model, we further conduct an online self-supervised adversarial finetuning, in which a teacher model and a student model are first
initialized with the pre-trained segmentation model weights,
and the pseudo label produced by the teacher model is used
to supervise the student model in an adversarial learning
framework. Through online finetuning, the student model is
progressively updated according to the emerging patterns in
each test video, which significantly reduces the test-time domain gap. We integrate our offline training and online finetuning in a unified framework for unsupervised video object
segmentation and dub our method Online Adversarial SelfTuning (OAST). The experiments show that our method outperforms the state-of-the-arts with significant gains on the
popular video object segmentation datasets.

1. Introduction
Video Object Segmentation (VOS) aims to track the
moving objects in a video sequence with an accurate segmentation mask. The existing VOS works can be catego* Corresponding author. Email:songhuihui@nuist.edu.cn.
This work is supported in part by National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant No. 2018AAA0100400, in part by
the NSFC under Grant Nos. 61825601, U21B2044, 62276141, 61872189,
in part by the Postgraduate Research&Practice Innovation Program of
Jiangsu Province under Grant Nos. KYCX23 1367.

Figure 1. Examples of “visual discrepancy” (row (a)-(b)) in
UVOS, where “train” and “test” indicate where the example image is drawn from. Our OAST method produces more precise segmentation masks (third column) comparing to the method without
OAST (second column).

rized into two paradigms based on whether the prior knowledge is provided at the test time. One is the Semi-supervised
VOS (SVOS), where a model is trained on the training set,
and at the test time is provided with the ground truth mask
on the first frame as prior to segment the objects in the subsequent frames. The other is called Unsupervised VOS1
(UVOS), where no ground-truth mask is provided at the test
time and there is no prior to leverage to segment the target.
We focus on UVOS since it requires no prior input
and is closer to the real-world applications. The existing
UVOS works train a model with a labeled video set, and
then directly apply it to the unlabeled videos at the test
time [51, 7, 40]. Without any prior as input, the inference
has to completely depend on the trained model. This has
proven to be effective when the test data are drawn from
the same domain as the training data [68, 65, 46]. However, the inference result can become degraded when the test
data originate from a different domain which is a common
case under the zero-shot setting. The main scenario that can
cause severe domain shifts in the test data is called “visual
1 It is also referred to as “zero-shot VOS” or “primary object segmentation” in the literature.

688

