This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Normalizing Flows for Human Pose Anomaly Detection
Or Hirschorn
Tel-Aviv University, Israel

Shai Avidan
Tel-Aviv University, Israel

orhirschorn@mail.tau.ac.il

avidan@eng.tau.ac.il

Abstract
Video anomaly detection is an ill-posed problem because
it relies on many parameters such as appearance, pose,
camera angle, background, and more. We distill the problem to anomaly detection of human pose, thus decreasing
the risk of nuisance parameters such as appearance affecting the result. Focusing on pose alone also has the side
benefit of reducing bias against distinct minority groups.
Our model works directly on human pose graph sequences and is exceptionally lightweight (∼1K parameters), capable of running on any machine able to run the
pose estimation with negligible additional resources. We
leverage the highly compact pose representation in a normalizing flows framework, which we extend to tackle the
unique characteristics of spatio-temporal pose data and
show its advantages in this use case.
The algorithm is quite general and can handle training
data of only normal examples as well as a supervised setting
that consists of labeled normal and abnormal examples.
We report state-of-the-art results on two anomaly detection benchmarks - the unsupervised ShanghaiTech dataset
and the recent supervised UBnormal dataset. Code available at https://github.com/orhir/STG-NF.

1. Introduction
Research on human anomaly detection aims to detect unusual events such as violence or people needing assistance
due to an accident [9]. As these instances are time-critical,
the surveillance footage requires immediate processing to
enable instant support on-site. This raises the need for fast
and reliable methods to detect abnormal events.
Although investigated extensively [1, 8, 13, 14, 23, 28,
29, 36, 39, 40, 46], anomaly detection in videos remains a
difficult task. Utilizing conventional discriminative methods is challenging as the amount of video data captured exceeds our ability to label it manually. Furthermore, as abnormal events are far more infrequent than normal ones, the
goal is to detect anomalies using only normal events.
We desire an unsupervised algorithm that can detect ab-

normal actions based on the context of past normal activities. Moreover, we require the method to disregard nuisance
parameters in the videos, such as background clutter, illumination changes, and other factors unrelated to the extent of
the human activity normality.
This is why we only use skeleton data. This representation distills anomaly detection to human activity. Human pose sequences are highly semantic, intuitive, and
very low dimensional signals, incorporating information
regarding the extent of a video’s normality [28, 29, 36].
They also provide interpretability for the abnormality in
the scene, as each human’s pose sequence is given a normality score. A side-effect of working only with skeleton
representation is that it can reduce privacy violation and
bias that might be associated with appearance-based methods [3, 6, 9, 24, 30, 33, 38].
Previous pose-based methods build on autoencoders to
reconstruct or predict future poses [29, 36]. They use reconstruction error as a proxy for the normality score. However, autoencoders tend to generalize strongly, i.e., anomalies can be reconstructed as well as normal samples [15].
Markovitz et al. [28] suggested using a Dirichlet process
mixture to determine the normality score. However, these
scoring algorithms are ineffective for anomaly detection as
they highly depend on the autoencoder’s generalization capabilities and performance [4, 17, 41]. The use of memory
mechanisms [16, 32] or multi-modal data [14, 25, 31] can
suppress this generalization to some extent but at the cost of
additional memory consumption and computation.
In contrast, our end-to-end approach is based on a normalizing flows architecture, which learns the data distribution and scores the samples according to their likelihood
instead of relying on reconstruction error. We leverage the
highly semantic pose representation to extend the architecture of normalizing flows, adapting it explicitly for human
pose data using spatio-temporal graph convolution blocks.
Kirichenko et al. [21] show that while normalizing flows
perform poorly when trained on pixel data, they can detect
OOD images when trained on high-level semantic representations. But, unlike pixels, pose data holds substantial semantic value. Thus, abstracting videos to pose data forces

13545

