This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Foreground Object Search by Distilling Composite Image Feature
Bo Zhang1 , Jiacheng Sui2 , and Li Niu* 1
1

Center for Machine Cognitive Computing of Artificial Intelligence Institute
Artificial Intelligence Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{bo-zhang, ustcnewly}@sjtu.edu.cn
2

Xian Jiao Tong University

rookiecharles99@gmail.com

Abstract
Foreground object search (FOS) aims to find compatible foreground objects for a given background image, producing realistic composite image. We observe that competitive retrieval performance could be achieved by using a discriminator to predict the compatibility of composite image, but this approach has unaffordable time
cost. To this end, we propose a novel FOS method
via distilling composite feature (DiscoFOS). Specifically,
the abovementioned discriminator serves as teacher network. The student network employs two encoders to extract foreground feature and background feature. Their
interaction output is enforced to match the composite
image feature from the teacher network. Additionally,
previous works did not release their datasets, so we
contribute two datasets for FOS task: S-FOSD dataset
with synthetic composite images and R-FOSD dataset
with real composite images. Extensive experiments on
our two datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method over previous approaches. The dataset and
code are available at https://github.com/bcmi/
Foreground-Object-Search-Dataset-FOSD.

1. Introduction
Foreground Object Search (FOS) aims to find compatible foregrounds from specified category for a given background image which has a query bounding box indicating
the foreground location [42]. More precisely, an object is
compatible with a background image if it can be realistically composited into the image [44], as illustrated in Figure 1. FOS is a core technique in many image composition
applications [24]. For example, FOS technique can help
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Illustration of foreground object search. Given a background image with query bounding box (yellow), foreground object search aims to find compatible foreground objects of a specified category from a database, which is composited with the background to produce a realistic composite image.

users acquire suitable foregrounds from a foreground pool
automatically and efficiently for object insertion in photo
editing [19]. Moreover, FOS also can be used to fill a region
comprising undesired objects using new foreground [44].
There exist many factors that affect the compatibility between background and foreground, including semantics, style (e.g., color and texture), lighting, and geometry (e.g., shape and viewpoint). Previous works on FOS
may consider different factors. For example, early methods [42, 44] focused on the semantic compatibility. Recent works [19, 37, 47] considered geometry and other factors, including style [37] and lighting [47]. In this paper,
we focus on semantics and geometry compatibility following [19], because incompatible color and lighting between
the background and foreground can be tackled to some extent by image harmonization [6, 21, 4].

22986

