This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Document Understanding Dataset and Evaluation
)
(DUDE

Jordy Van Landeghem1,2
8

Rafał Powalski

Rubèn Tito5

Łukasz Borchmann3

3,7

9

Dawid Jurkiewicz

2 Contract.fit

3 Snowflake

6 Jagiellonian University

3

Sien Moens

4 Warsaw University of Technology

Paweł Józiak3,4
Ernest Valveny5

Bertrand Ackaert

1

Matthew Blaschko
1 KU Leuven

2

Mickaël Coustaty

1

Michał Pietruszka3,6
Tomasz Stanisławek

5 Computer Vision Center, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona

7 Adam Mickiewicz University

8 Instabase

9 University of La Rochelle

#non-answerable

#abstractive #counting

Q: In which year does the Net
Requirement exceed 25,000?

Q: How many attorneys are listed for
the plaintiffs?

A: None

A: Two

#layout-navigating #graphic-intensive
Q: Are the margins of the page
uniform on all pages?
A: Yes
#multi-hop #layout-navigating

#extractive #list

Q: From the list of Top 10 Key
Recovery Components, which is the
last component listed on the second
page?

Q: What are the Years mentioned in
Chart 1?
A: [2020, 2021, 2022]

A: Hope

...
Text

#abstractive #graphic-intensive
Q: Does this document contain any
checkboxes?

Page 1

Page 2

Abstract
We call on the Document AI (DocAI) community to reevaluate current methodologies and embrace the challenge
of creating more practically-oriented benchmarks. Document Understanding Dataset and Evaluation (DUDE) seeks
to remediate the halted research progress in understanding
visually-rich documents (VRDs). We present a new dataset1
with novelties related to types of questions, answers, and
document layouts based on multi-industry, multi-domain,
and multi-page VRDs of various origins, and dates. Moreover, we are pushing the boundaries of current methods by
creating multi-task and multi-domain evaluation setups that
more accurately simulate real-world situations where powerful generalization and adaptation under low-resource settings are desired. DUDE aims to set a new standard as a
more practical, long-standing benchmark for the community, and we hope that it will lead to future extensions and
contributions that address real-world challenges. Finally,
our work illustrates the importance of finding more efficient
ways to model language, images, and layout in DocAI.
1 huggingface.co/datasets/jordyvl/DUDE_loader

Page N

A: No

1. Introduction
Early stages of research and growth in any field are characterized by enacting proof-of-concept and demonstrating
the feasibility of the proposed solution. In the Deep Learning era, this is often echoed by building narrow and simplified datasets that do not reflect real-world complexity, leading to models that may not be suitable for practical use.
The field of Document Understanding (DU) is not an
exception to the recent proliferation of deep architectures,
which in this case are predominantly used for classification
and information extraction from documents. However, the
wide and complex nature of documents presents many challenges that remain unsolved or not yet addressed. One such
challenge is domain generalization, where a model trained
on medical documents may not be directly applicable to
financial or tabular content. Another challenge concerns
task-agnostic architectures, where a model must be able
to adapt to various DU subtasks such as document classification, key information extraction (KIE), and question answering (QA). Lastly, the high variability of document contents and layouts often leads to highly imbalanced samples

19528

