This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video Task Decathlon: Unifying Image and Video Tasks
in Autonomous Driving
Thomas E. Huang1
1

Yifan Liu1
ETH Zürich

2

Luc Van Gool1,2
KU Leuven

Fisher Yu1

https://www.vis.xyz/pub/vtd

Abstract
Performing multiple heterogeneous visual tasks in dynamic scenes is a hallmark of human perception capability.
Despite remarkable progress in image and video recognition
via representation learning, current research still focuses on
designing specialized networks for singular, homogeneous,
or simple combination of tasks. We instead explore the
construction of a unified model for major image and video
recognition tasks in autonomous driving with diverse input
and output structures. To enable such an investigation, we
design a new challenge, Video Task Decathlon (VTD), which
includes ten representative image and video tasks spanning
classification, segmentation, localization, and association
of objects and pixels. On VTD, we develop our unified network, VTDNet, that uses a single structure and a single set
of weights for all ten tasks. VTDNet groups similar tasks
and employs task interaction stages to exchange information
within and between task groups. Given the impracticality of
labeling all tasks on all frames and the performance degradation associated with joint training of many tasks, we design
a Curriculum training, Pseudo-labeling, and Fine-tuning
(CPF) scheme to successfully train VTDNet on all tasks and
mitigate performance loss. Armed with CPF, VTDNet significantly outperforms its single-task counterparts on most
tasks with only 20% overall computations. VTD is a promising new direction for exploring the unification of perception
tasks in autonomous driving.

1. Introduction
Agents that operate in dynamic environments are required
to perform a wide range of visual tasks of varying complexities to carry out their functions. For instance, autonomous
driving vehicles must identify drivable areas [49], detect
pedestrians [32, 8], and track other vehicles [43, 55], among
others. Taking a continuous stream of visual inputs, they
must be capable of performing tasks at the level of images,

Temporal
Spatial

Localization
Semantic

Tag

Pixel

Figure 1: Task categorization of representative image and
video recognition tasks. We design a new challenge and a
new architecture to learn a unified representation of image
and video tasks for autonomous driving.
instances, and instances across the spatial and temporal extent of the input data. While humans can effortlessly complete diverse visual tasks, and representation learning has
shown impressive results on individual tasks [28], there is
still a lack of unified architectures that can combine various
heterogeneous tasks.
Unified representations for image and video tasks offer
numerous advantages, including significant computational
savings over using separate networks for each task [3]. Additionally, shared task input and output structures [53, 52] and
cascaded tasks [35, 20] provide opportunities for learning
algorithms to exploit inter-task relationships, resulting in better representations, generalization, and overall accuracy [38].
However, realizing these benefits poses unique challenges.
Network architectures must support the predictions of all
heterogeneous tasks, which is non-trivial due to the diversity in input and output structures and granularity of visual
representation needed for each task. Furthermore, the impracticality of annotating all video frames for all tasks [55]
results in data imbalance between each task and necessitates
a more sophisticated training strategy than with single-task
or homogeneous multi-task learning.
Another major obstacle to arrive at such a unified representation framework is the lack of large-scale evaluation

8647

