This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Blending-NeRF: Text-Driven Localized Editing in Neural Radiance Fields
Hyeonseop Song1*

Seokhun Choi1*

Hoseok Do1

Chul Lee1

Taehyeong Kim2†

1

2

AI Lab, CTO Division, LG Electronics, Republic of Korea
Dept. of Biosystems Engineering, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea
{hyeonseop.song, seokhun.choi, hoseok.do, clee.lee}@lge.com

taehyeong.kim@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Text-driven localized editing of 3D objects is particularly difficult as locally mixing the original 3D object with
the intended new object and style effects without distorting the object’s form is not a straightforward process. To
address this issue, we propose a novel NeRF-based model,
Blending-NeRF, which consists of two NeRF networks: pretrained NeRF and editable NeRF. Additionally, we introduce new blending operations that allow Blending-NeRF to
properly edit target regions which are localized by text. By
using a pretrained vision-language aligned model, CLIP,
we guide Blending-NeRF to add new objects with varying
colors and densities, modify textures, and remove parts of
the original object. Our extensive experiments demonstrate
that Blending-NeRF produces naturally and locally edited
3D objects from various text prompts.

1. Introduction
3D image synthesis and related technologies are greatly
impacting industries such as art, product design, and animation. While recent 3D image synthesis techniques like
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [22] have opened up new
applications for 3D content production [8, 14, 26] at scale,
their ability to enable precise and localized editing of object
shapes and colors remains a challenge for broader adoption.
Often time, a more localized and granular editing of 3D
objects, especially attaching or removing certain objects of
certain styles, is still difficult and costly in spite of several
recent attempts at 3D object editing [4, 18, 21, 35, 40].
Previous attempts, such as EditNeRF [18] and NeRFEditing [40], only offer limited and non-versatile editing
options, while Text2Mesh [21] and TANGO [4] allow only
simple texture and shallow shape transformations of entire
3D objects. CLIP-NeRF [35] propose a generative method
with disentangled conditional NeRF for object editing but
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author. Partially conducted at LG Electronics.

(a) bulldozer (original)

(b) twinkle bulldozer

(c) bulldozer in glass

(d) bulldozer frame

Figure 1. Representative results of text-driven localized object
editing using our method. (a) Bulldozer is the original object, and
each editing is performed by (b) color change, (c) density addition,
and (d) density removal operations.

it requires a large volume of training data for the targeted
editing category and is hard to edit only the desired part of
objects locally. They present an additional approach, finetuning a single NeRF per scene with a CLIP-driven objective, which can edit object appearance but not shape well.
To achieve effective and practical localized editing of 3D
objects by any text prompts at scale, it is necessary to apply
style changes to specific portions of the object, including
selectively changing color and locally adding and removing densities, as shown in Figure 1. In this study, we propose a novel method for localized object editing that allows
modification of 3D objects by text prompts, enabling full
stylization including density-based localized editing. We
believe that relying on the simple fine-tuning of a single
NeRF to generate new densities in the low initial density
area or to alter existing densities through a CLIP-driven objective is inadequate for achieving complete stylization of

14383

