This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAtch, eXpand and Improve: Unsupervised Finetuning for Zero-Shot Action
Recognition with Language Knowledge
Wei Lin†1
Leonid Karlinsky2
Nina Shvetsova3
1
2
Mateusz Kozinski
Rameswar Panda
Rogerio Feris2
Horst Bischof1

Horst Possegger1
Hilde Kuehne2,3,4

1

2

Institute of Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology, Austria
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, USA 3 Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany 4 University of Bonn, Germany

Abstract

MAXI: Unsupervised Finetuning

Unlabeled video collection

Large scale Vision Language (VL) models have shown
tremendous success in aligning representations between visual and text modalities. This enables remarkable progress
in zero-shot recognition, image generation & editing, and
many other exciting tasks. However, VL models tend to
over-represent objects while paying much less attention to
verbs, and require additional tuning on video data for best
zero-shot action recognition performance. While previous
work relied on large-scale, fully-annotated data, in this
work we propose an unsupervised approach. We adapt a
VL model for zero-shot and few-shot action recognition using a collection of unlabeled videos and an unpaired action dictionary. Based on that, we leverage Large Language Models and VL models to build a text bag for each
unlabeled video via matching, text expansion and captioning. We use those bags in a Multiple Instance Learning
setup to adapt an image-text backbone to video data. Although finetuned on unlabeled video data, our resulting
models demonstrate high transferability to numerous unseen zero-shot downstream tasks, improving the base VL
model performance by up to 14%, and even comparing favorably to fully-supervised baselines in both zero-shot and
few-shot video recognition transfer. The code is released at
https://github.com/wlin-at/MAXI.

1. Introduction
Vision Language (VL) models [36, 23, 17] have met unprecedented success in unlocking many vision applications
[36] to work with potentially unlimited open vocabularies,
through the promise of zero-shot transfer [55, 57, 58, 14,
39, 59, 22, 37]. This is empowered by the alignment be† Correspondence: wlin2021at@gmail.com

VL models

(e.g. CLIP / BLIP)

(e.g. K400, labels stripped)

LLM
(e.g. GPT-3)
Actions
Dictionary

MIL

objective

Text Bag

Downstream

Zero-Shot transfer

VL model
(e.g. CLIP)

Finetune

UCF

HMDB

Charades

K600

MiniSSv2

MiT

UAV Human

Few-Shot transfer

Previous Work: Fully Supervised Finetuning

GT annotations

Figure 1: While previous work relied on full annotation of
action datasets which is time-consuming and cost-intensive
to collect, our approach MAXI finetunes the VL model with
unlabeled video data. Specifically, we leverage a set of language sources (action dictionary, VL model and LLM) to
construct a text bag for each unlabeled video, and employ
the Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) objective for finetuning. MAXI demonstrates outstanding improvement of
zero-shot and few-shot transfer on downstream novel action
datasets.

tween visual and language representation spaces, which is
effectively attained by VL models leveraging huge amounts
of paired image and text data. Incorporating a VL model
as a source (base) model or as an architectural component
has allowed scaling finetuning on relatively small datasets
(e.g. limited in terms of the number of observed objects or

2851

