This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lightweight Image Super-Resolution with Superpixel Token Interaction
Aiping Zhang1 Wenqi Ren1 * Yi Liu2 Xiaochun Cao1
1
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Sun Yat-Sen University 2 Baidu Inc.
{zhangaip7@mail2, renwq3@mail, caoxiaochun@mail}.sysu.edu.cn, liuyi22@baidu.com

32.5

Abstract

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) is a crucial task in
computer vision that aims to enhance the resolution and visual quality of low-resolution (LR) images. The goal of
SISR is to generate a high-resolution (HR) image from a
given LR image, which can be particularly useful in applications where high-quality images are necessary, such as
medical imaging, surveillance, and digital photography.
Since the pioneering work of Dong et al. [5], numerous
neural networks have been developed to tackle the challenge
of reconstructing high-quality images from low-resolution
inputs. Some of the CNN-based methods use deeper and
* Corresponding author.

SwinIR-light

ELAN-light

32.4

PSNR(dB)

Transformer-based methods have demonstrated impressive results on single-image super-resolution (SISR) task.
However, self-attention mechanism is computationally expensive when applied to the entire image. As a result,
current approaches divide low-resolution input images into
small patches, which are processed separately and then
fused to generate high-resolution images. Nevertheless,
this conventional regular patch division is too coarse and
lacks interpretability, resulting in artifacts and non-similar
structure interference during attention operations. To address these challenges, we propose a novel super token interaction network (SPIN). Our method employs superpixels to cluster local similar pixels to form the explicable local regions and utilizes intra-superpixel attention to enable
local information interaction. It is interpretable because
only similar regions complement each other and dissimilar regions are excluded. Moreover, we design a superpixel cross-attention module to facilitate information propagation via the surrogation of superpixels. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed SPIN model performs favorably against the state-of-the-art SR methods in
terms of accuracy and lightweight. Code is available at
https://github.com/ArcticHare105/SPIN .

SPIN

32.3

DRSAN
RFDN

IMDN
ESRT
LAPAR-AGLANDSR
SMSR

32.2
32.1
32.0
300

AWSRN-M
CARN

MADNet
600

900

1200

Model Size(K)

1500

1800

Figure 1. PSNR and model parameters for ×4 super-resolution
on Set5. We compare our SPIN with state-of-the-art lightweight
Transformer-based and CNN-based models, including SwinIRlight [20], ESRT [26], ELAN-light[43], and IMDN [12], etc.

more complex architectures to achieve better performance.
However, these methods come with a trade-off of increased
computational resources and higher cost, which can limit
their application scenarios.
Attention mechanism [37] has been proven to have significant effects on both high-level vision tasks and low-level
fields, including super-resolution (SR). Attention mechanisms allow the network to selectively focus on relevant regions of the input, which can improve the quality of the
SR output. Capitalized on attention mechanisms, transformers have been applied to SR tasks such as SwinIR [20]
and ESRT [26]. These models highlight the importance of
global feature extraction abilities in SISR. Furthermore, to
improve the efficiency, ELAN [43] proposes a group-wise
self-attention module and shared the weights when calculating the association of patches. However, the attention mechanism has high computational complexity and memory consumption, which requires dividing large images into small
patches for separate processing. While this strategy enhances the efficiency of transformer-based models, it results
in some problems. Dividing patches based on a fixed shape
leads to the splitting up of continuous structures, which hin-

12728

