This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hyperbolic Audio-visual Zero-shot Learning
Jie Hong1,2 , Zeeshan Hayder2 , Junlin Han1,2 , Pengfei Fang3 ,*
Mehrtash Harandi4 , Lars Petersson2
1
Australian National University, 2 Data61-CSIRO, 3 Southeast University, 4 Monash University
jie.hong@anu.edu.au, zeeshan.hayder@data61.csiro.au, junlinhcv@gmail.com,
fangpengfei@seu.edu.cn, mehrtash.harandi@monash.edu, lars.petersson@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
Audio-visual zero-shot learning aims to classify samples
consisting of a pair of corresponding audio and video sequences from classes that are not present during training.
An analysis of the audio-visual data reveals a large degree of hyperbolicity, indicating the potential benefit of using a hyperbolic transformation to achieve curvature-aware
geometric learning, with the aim of exploring more complex hierarchical data structures for this task. The proposed approach employs a novel loss function that incorporates cross-modality alignment between video and audio
features in the hyperbolic space. Additionally, we explore
the use of multiple adaptive curvatures for hyperbolic projections. The experimental results on this very challenging
task demonstrate that our proposed hyperbolic approach for
zero-shot learning outperforms the SOTA method on three
datasets: VGGSound-GZSL, UCF-GZSL, and ActivityNetGZSL achieving a harmonic mean (HM) improvement of
around 3.0%, 7.0%, and 5.3%, respectively.

1. Introduction
Visual and audio signals frequently co-occur. For example, movies combine visual and auditory signals, providing an immersive experience to viewers. Humans perceive multiple sensory inputs jointly and make decisions
accordingly. When a vehicle approaches from behind and
honks, the driver sees the vehicle in the rear-view mirror,
hears the sound, and decides to give way. The integration
of joint visual and audio signals benefits numerous applications. For instance, acoustic features can help localize objects that emit sound in videos [30, 58, 52, 45, 13, 46, 44].
Furthermore, the natural correlations between visual and
audio signals provide strong supervision for learning video
representations. As such, there has been growing interest in learning informative representations from audio sig-

nals for video classification [38, 39, 3, 2, 11, 29, 41]. The
benefits of audio-visual multi-modality learning have also
been demonstrated in other tasks, such as robotic navigation [9, 18, 12], action recognition [27, 20], highlight detection [54, 5], violence detection [51], aerial scene recognition [26] and speech recognition [53, 1].
Collecting vast amounts of audio-visual data needed for
training deep neural networks is time-intensive, expensive,
and in some applications, impractical. Additionally, deep
models may face difficulties in making accurate predictions
when presented with objects from unseen classes in realworld scenarios. This is because they lack the necessary
knowledge and context to make well-informed decisions
about unfamiliar objects. Low-shot audio-visual tasks [42]
have emerged to address the problem of insufficient data,
with an aim to generalize models effectively from seen to
unseen data. These tasks include one-shot learning [50],
few-shot learning [34], and audio-visual zero-shot learning
[37, 36, 35, 42]. One-shot and few-shot audio-visual learning deals with classification from a few examples of unseen classes. However, audio-visual zero-shot classification
poses a more challenging scenario as the model has no access to audio-visual data from unseen classes during training [42].
In this paper, we focus on audio-visual zero-shot learning. We investigate curvature-aware geometric learning for
the audio-visual feature alignment. Our inspiration for using hyperbolic geometry comes from the following observations:
• Data hierarchy. Audio-visual datasets exhibit a hierarchy. For instance, in VGGSound [10], all 309 classes
can be categorized into 9 parent classes (or superclasses): “people”, “animals”, “music”, “sports”, “nature”, “vehicle”, “home”, “tools” and “others”. Similarly, the dataset ActivityNet [6] provides a rich hierarchy with at least four levels. For example, the class
“Hand washing clothes” belongs to “Laundry” (the
2nd level), “Housework” (the 3rd level), and “Household Activities” (the 4th level). Most existing audio-

* Corresponding author

7873

