This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ESTextSpotter: Towards Better Scene Text Spotting with Explicit Synergy in
Transformer
Mingxin Huang1†

Jiaxin Zhang2† Dezhi Peng1 Hao Lu3 Can Huang2
Yuliang Liu3 Xiang Bai3 Lianwen Jin1∗
1
2
South China University of Technology
ByteDance
3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
eelwjin@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
In recent years, end-to-end scene text spotting approaches are evolving to the Transformer-based framework.
While previous studies have shown the crucial importance
of the intrinsic synergy between text detection and recognition, recent advances in Transformer-based methods usually adopt an implicit synergy strategy with shared query,
which can not fully realize the potential of these two interactive tasks. In this paper, we argue that the explicit
synergy considering distinct characteristics of text detection and recognition can significantly improve the performance text spotting. To this end, we introduce a new
model named Explicit Synergy-based Text Spotting Transformer framework (ESTextSpotter), which achieves explicit
synergy by modeling discriminative and interactive features for text detection and recognition within a single decoder. Specifically, we decompose the conventional shared
query into task-aware queries for text polygon and content, respectively. Through the decoder with the proposed
vision-language communication module, the queries interact with each other in an explicit manner while preserving
discriminative patterns of text detection and recognition,
thus improving performance significantly. Additionally, we
propose a task-aware query initialization scheme to ensure stable training. Experimental results demonstrate that
our model significantly outperforms previous state-of-theart methods. Code is available at https://github.
com/mxin262/ESTextSpotter.

1. Introduction
End-to-end text spotting, aiming at building a unified
framework for text detection and recognition in natural
scenes, has received great attention in recent years [32, 25,
† Equal contribution.
∗ Corresponding author.

(I) Implicit Synergy

(a) Shared Back.

(b) Shared Back.
and Enc.

CNN

Detector

CNN

Encoder

RoI Op.

Recognizer

“MEXOUT”

Detector
Recognizer

“MEXOUT”

Shared Query

Shared Back. ,

(c) Enc. and Dec.

CNN

Encoder

Decoder
“MEXOUT”

(II) Explicit Synergy
Detection Queries
Recognition Queries
Interaction

(d) Ours

TA Dec.
CNN

Encoder

“MEXOUT”

Figure 1: Comparison of implicit and explicit synergy between text detection and recognition. Implicit synergy is
achieved by sharing parameters and features. Explicit synergy is attained by explicitly modeling discriminative and
interactive features. Back.: backbone. Enc. (Dec.): encoder (decoder). TA Dec.: task-aware decoder.

33]. Intuitively, the position and shape of the text in the detection can help the text recognition accurately extract the
content of the text. Similarly, the position and classification information in recognition can also guide the detector
to distinguish between different text instances and the background. Such mutual interaction and cooperation between
text detection and recognition are recently known as scene
text spotting synergy [17], which aims to produce a combined effect greater than the sum of their separate effects.
Indeed, synergy is the key to the success in literature.
In the past few years, many methods attempt to join text
detection and recognition by proposing a new Region-ofInterest (RoI) operation to achieve the synergy between text
detection and text recognition [32, 12, 50, 33, 52], as shown

19495

