This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DG3D: Generating High Quality 3D Textured Shapes by Learning to
Discriminate Multi-Modal Diffusion-Renderings

Qi Zuo

Yafei Song

Jianfang Li

Lin Liu

Liefeng Bo

Alibaba Group
{muyuan.zq,huaizhang.syf,wuhui.ljf,lorrain.ll,liefeng.bo}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

do not take into account the interdependent relationship between geometry and texture.

Many virtual reality applications require massive 3D
content, which impels the need for low-cost and efficient
modeling tools in terms of quality and quantity. In this paper, we present a Diffusion-augmented Generative model
to generate high-fidelity 3D textured meshes that can be
directly used in modern graphics engines. Challenges
in directly generating textured mesh arise from the instability and texture incompleteness of a hybrid framework
which contains conversion between 2D features and 3D
space. To alleviate these difficulties, DG3D incorporates
a diffusion-based augmentation module into the min-max
game between the 3D tetrahedral mesh generator and 2D
renderings discriminators, which stabilizes network optimization and prevents mode collapse in vanilla GANs. We
also suggest using multi-modal renderings in discrimination to further increase the aesthetics and completeness of
generated textures. Extensive experiments on the public
benchmark and real scans show that our proposed DG3D
outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods by a large
margin, i.e., 5% ∼ 40% in FID-3D score and 5% ∼
10% in geometry-related metrics. Code is available at
https://github.com/seakforzq/DG3D.

3D-aware image generation [4, 24, 34, 3], a related research field with textured mesh generation, aims to synthesize images from all viewpoints. These methods ensure consistency between different views by incorporating
the priority constraint of volume rendering. They can produce high-resolution images with a super-resolution network. However, though the shapes can always be extracted
from the density field by setting specific levels-set values,
the quality of the extracted shapes is often much lower than
the quality of the synthetic novel views. Since conversion from implicit representations to explicit meshes significantly degrades fidelity, methods that directly optimize
explicit meshes are urgently needed.

1. Introduction
The production of 3D content plays a crucial role in
the film, gaming, simulation, and social industries. As
the demand continues to grow, manually made 3D models could not keep up with the expansion of the industries.
Researchers have made substantial progress in generating
geometry for 3D models [9, 10, 22, 27, 35, 2, 28], but the
corresponding textures received less attention. While some
methods have considered texture generation [3, 25, 41, 36],
most of them infer textures based on fixed geometric inputs,
which means that they are not fully generative models and

Recently, differentiable mesh reconstruction [11, 33,
12] has shed light on the generation of textured mesh.
DefTet [11] utilizes a neural network to deform an initial tetrahedral mesh’s vertices and predict the occupancy
for each tetrahedron. DMTet [33] instead reconstructs the
shapes by predicting the SDF defined on a deformable tetrahedral grid. Then it converts the SDF to a surface mesh by a
novel differential Marching Tetrahedral layer. GET3D [12]
further incorporates DMTet [33] in StyleGAN2 [18] and
uses a hybrid tri-plane representation for transformation
from 2D feature space to 3D tetrahedral space. It extracts
textured meshes by the differentiable Marching Tetrahedron
layer and adopts DiffRast [20] to render the textured meshes
as RGB images and silhouettes for discrimination. Though
GET3D [12] achieves an impressive performance, a potential deficiency that causes instability in training with rendered images is the inadequate 3D supervision that discriminators can receive. As a result, we often observe mode collapse in such a paradigm that combines a 3D generator and
multiple 2D discriminators [12]. Moreover, we find that direct discrimination on the entire image results in texture incompleteness, significantly degrading the quality of shapes.

14575

