This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Manifold Linearizing and Clustering
Tianjiao Ding1 Shengbang Tong2 Kwan Ho Ryan Chan1 Xili Dai3 Yi Ma2 Benjamin D. Haeffele1

Abstract
We consider the problem of simultaneously clustering
and learning a linear representation of data lying close to a
union of low-dimensional manifolds, a fundamental task in
machine learning and computer vision. When the manifolds
are assumed to be linear subspaces, this reduces to the classical problem of subspace clustering, which has been studied extensively over the past two decades. Unfortunately,
many real-world datasets such as natural images can not
be well approximated by linear subspaces. On the other
hand, numerous works have attempted to learn an appropriate transformation of the data, such that data is mapped
from a union of general non-linear manifolds to a union of
linear subspaces (with points from the same manifold being mapped to the same subspace). However, many existing
works have limitations such as assuming knowledge of the
membership of samples to clusters, requiring high sampling
density, or being shown theoretically to learn trivial representations. In this paper, we propose to optimize the Maximal Coding Rate Reduction metric with respect to both the
data representation and a novel doubly stochastic cluster
membership, inspired by state-of-the-art subspace clustering results. We give a parameterization of such a representation and membership, allowing efficient mini-batching
and one-shot initialization. Experiments on CIFAR-10, -20,
-100, and TinyImageNet-200 datasets show that the proposed method is much more accurate and scalable than
state-of-the-art deep clustering methods, and further learns
a latent linear representation of the data.4

1. Introduction
1.1. Clustering: from Linear to Non-linear Models
Clustering is a fundamental problem in machine learning, allowing one to group data into clusters based on assumptions about the geometry of each cluster. As early
as the 1950s, the classic k-means [43, 23, 30, 46] algo1 Mathematical Institute for Data Science, Johns Hopkins University,
USA 2 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, USA 3 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), PRC
4 Code is available at https://github.com/tianjiaoding/mlc.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: (a) Input data X where 100 points in green lie
on a curve and 100 in blue lie close to a point. (b) Stage
0: Features f✓ (X) from a neural network f✓ whose parameters ✓ are randomly initialized. (c) Stage 1: Features
after self-supervised learning. (d) Stage 2: Features further
improved by the proposed Manifold Linearizing and Clustering (MLC).
rithm emerged to cluster data that concentrate around distinct centroids, with numerous variants [8, 2, 4] following. This assumption of distinct centroids was later generalized in subspace clustering methods, which aim to cluster data lying close to a union of low-dimensional linear
(or affine) subspaces5 . This motivated numerous lines of
research in the past two decades, leading to various formulations [20, 22, 44, 41, 28, 75, 40, 33] with efficient algorithms [76, 75, 15] and theoretical guarantees on the correctness of the clustering [58, 59, 71, 72, 36, 63, 74, 55, 69].
Subspace clustering has been used in a wide range of applications, such as segmenting image pixels [45, 70, 42], video
frames [65, 61, 37], or rigid-body motions [66, §11], along
5 Note, a centroid can be seen as a 0-dimensional affine subspace.

5450

