This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Devil is in the Upsampling: Architectural Decisions Made Simpler for
Denoising with Deep Image Prior
Yilin Liu1* , Jiang Li1* , Yunkui Pang 1* , Dong Nie1 , and Pew-Thian Yap 1
1
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{yilinliu, yunkuipa, dongnie}@cs.unc.edu, jiang.li@unc.edu, ptyap@med.unc.edu

Abstract
Deep Image Prior (DIP) shows that some network architectures inherently tend towards generating smooth images while resisting noise, a phenomenon known as spectral bias. Image denoising is a natural application of this
property. Although denoising with DIP mitigates the need
for large training sets, two often intertwined practical challenges need to be overcome: architectural design and noise
fitting. Existing methods either handcraft or search for suitable architectures from a vast design space, due to the limited understanding of how architectural choices affect the
denoising outcome. In this study, we demonstrate from a
frequency perspective that unlearnt upsampling is the main
driving force behind the denoising phenomenon with DIP.
This finding leads to straightforward strategies for identifying a suitable architecture for every image without laborious search. Extensive experiments show that the estimated
architectures achieve superior denoising results than existing methods with up to 95% fewer parameters. Thanks to
this under-parameterization, the resulting architectures are
less prone to noise-fitting1 .

1. Introduction
Image denoising is useful on its own and can be a plug-in
module for many other image restoration tasks [37, 38, 4].
Deep neural networks have become the tool of choice for
image denoising owing to their ability to learn natural image priors from large-scale datasets. Yet, Deep Image Prior
(DIP) [33] requires only a single degraded image for image resotration. Remarkably, DIP shows that a randomly
initialized convolutional neural network (CNN) can regularize image restoration through its architecture and earlystopping optimization. This is inspired by the phenomenon
that some network architectures act inherently as image priors, favoring generating smooth, natural images and re* These authors contribute equally.
1 https://github.com/YilinLiu97/FasterDIP-devil-in-upsampling.git

Figure 1: Top: Performance (SSIM↑) under different levels of
Gaussian noises. Bottom: Denoising of a fine-grained (1st row)
and a coarse-grained image (2nd row). Most existing methods,
including the recent image-specific ISNAS-DIP[1], struggle to
perform well simultaneously in both cases. Our simple strategies are flexible in image-specific architectural adaptation without requiring a search. Moreover, the results of the lightweight
ConvDecoder[10] and Deep Decoder[15] suggest that without
proper model setups, under-parameterization itself can neither ensure good denoising performance nor remove the need for earlystopping.

sisting noises or degradations. However, image denoising with DIP is greatly influenced by architectural design
[3, 1, 33, 15, 17], and the associated tendency to fit the original noisy image, i.e., over-fitting [15, 16].
Architectural design for DIP remains an open problem.
One prevailing view is that model under-parameterization
limits noise over-fitting and thus mitigates the need for early
stopping [15]. However, our experiments reveal that multiple model architectures can exist under a similar parameter
budget, where inappropriate model setups can still lead to

12408

