This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Predict to Detect: Prediction-guided 3D Object Detection using Sequential
Images
Sanmin Kim

Youngseok Kim
In-Jae Lee
KAIST

Dongsuk Kum

{sanmin.kim, youngseok.kim, oliver0922, dskum}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent camera-based 3D object detection methods have
introduced sequential frames to improve the detection performance hoping that multiple frames would mitigate the
large depth estimation error. Despite improved detection
performance, prior works rely on naive fusion methods
(e.g., concatenation) or are limited to static scenes (e.g.,
temporal stereo), neglecting the importance of the motion
cue of objects. These approaches do not fully exploit the
potential of sequential images and show limited performance improvements. To address this limitation, we propose a novel 3D object detection model, P2D (Predict to
Detect), that integrates a prediction scheme into a detection
framework to explicitly extract and leverage motion features. P2D predicts object information in the current frame
using solely past frames to learn temporal motion features.
We then introduce a novel temporal feature aggregation
method that attentively exploits Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) features based on predicted object information, resulting in accurate 3D object detection. Experimental results demonstrate that P2D improves mAP and NDS by 3.0% and 3.7%
compared to the sequential image-based baseline, proving
that incorporating a prediction scheme can significantly improve detection accuracy.

1. Introduction
3D object detection is an essential task for building a reliable self-driving system. In recent years, camera-based 3D
object detection [29, 33, 35, 38] has gained widespread attention due to the cost-effectiveness of a camera sensor and
its high-resolution characteristic. However, camera-based
3D object detection still has limited performance due to the
scale ambiguity caused by projecting 3D space onto a 2D
image and the absence of motion cues that are difficult to
capture in a single image.
Recent works have mitigated these drawbacks by leveraging multiple frames from history. Multi-frame ap-

proaches incorporate temporal information into the space
domain to provide richer information. Moreover, sequence
images are often readily available in real-world applications
such as autonomous driving, making the use of sequence
images an attractive option for performance improvements.
Previous works [12, 14, 18, 23] have used temporal images in feature-level aggregation by concatenating sequential features to merge them. On the other hand, another line
of work [16, 30, 36, 41] has adopted a temporal stereo [42]
to enhance depth estimation using the multi-view stereo
(MVS) [9]. Although these methods have proved the effectiveness of sequence frames over a single frame, they did
not thoroughly investigate into the motion cue of objects,
from which the object detection would benefit by using sequence images.
Temporal images have rich motion information, which
can provide critical motion features for accurate object detection. To further demonstrate the importance of motion
cues in detection, we conducted experiments and evaluated
the performance of the prediction-only results, which rely
on motion prediction from previous frames, without using
the current frame. Our findings from Table 3 indicate that
the prediction-only results (P) can achieve comparable performance to the final results (P+D), reaching up to 76% and
89% in terms of mAP and NDS, respectively. The final
results (P+D) denote detection results that incorporate all
temporal frames, including the current frame. This experiment highlights the potential of using motion features from
previous frames, which has been overlooked in prior works.
To this end, we propose a novel sequential image-based
3D object detection model that learns motion cues to improve detection accuracy. Our approach, P2D (Predict to
Detect), introduces a prediction scheme into the detection
task to fully exploit multi-frame image data. Specifically,
P2D conducts motion prediction using previous frames to
output the predicted objects’ information for the current
frame. In the feature aggregation module, we employ a deformable attention [46] to make a spatio-temporal feature
on the basis of prediction results that contains motion features. Finally, the 3D detection head takes aggregated the

18057

