This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Corrupting Neuron Explanations of Deep Visual Features
Divyansh Srivastava
UCSD CSE

Tuomas Oikarinen
UCSD CSE

Tsui-Wei Weng
UCSD HDSI

ddivyansh@ucsd.edu

toikarinen@ucsd.edu

lweng@ucsd.edu

Abstract
The inability of DNNs to explain their black-box behavior has led to a recent surge of explainability methods. However, there are growing concerns that these explainability methods are not robust and trustworthy. In this
work, we perform the first robustness analysis of Neuron Explanation Methods under a unified pipeline and show that
these explanations can be significantly corrupted by random noises and well-designed perturbations added to their
probing data. We find that even adding small random noise
with a standard deviation of 0.02 can already change the
assigned concepts of up to 28% neurons in the deeper layers. Furthermore, we devise a novel corruption algorithm
and show that our algorithm can manipulate the explanation of more than 80% neurons by poisoning less than 10%
of probing data. This raises the concern of trusting Neuron
Explanation Methods in real-life safety and fairness critical
applications.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have revolutionized many
areas of Machine Learning and have been successfully used
in various domains, including computer vision and natural language processing. However, one of the main challenges of DNNs is that they are black-box models with little insight into their inner workings. This lack of explainability can be problematic, particularly when using DNNs
in safety and fairness critical real-world applications, such
as autonomous driving, healthcare or loan/hiring decisions.
Hence, it is imperative to explain the predictions of DNNs
to increase human trust and safety of deployment.
The need for explainability has led to a recent surge in
developing methods to explain DNN predictions. In particular, Neuron Explanation methods (NEMs) [2, 3, 10, 7]
have attracted great research interest recently by providing global description of a DNN’s behavior. This type of
method explains the roles of each neuron in DNNs using
human-interpretable concepts (e.g. natural language descriptions). Representative methods include Network dis-

section [2, 3], Compositional Explanations [10] and MILAN [7].
There has been recent interest in using NEMs to explain DNNs in safety critical tasks such as medical tasks,
including brain tumor segmentation [11] and medical image analysis [12]. However, despite of the excitement of
NEMs, unfortunately the explanations provided by NEMs
could be significantly corrupted and not trustworthy, as first
shown in this work. The untrustworthiness of explanation
may result in negative consequences and misuse. For example, imagine an auditor uses a NEM to monitor potential biases in computer vision models by inspecting whether
there exists neurons activating for specific skin colors. Such
auditor might depend on user-provided probing data as it is
impossible for auditors to collect validation datasets for every task, and would rely on manual inspections of images to
find corruption. This would incentivize the developer of a
biased model to fool NEMs by providing a corrupted probing dataset that bypasses manual inspection since perturbations are imperceptible by human eyes. This raises serious
concerns about utilizing these NEMs for trusting model prediction.
In this paper, we would like to bring this awareness to the
research community by performing the first robustness evaluation of Neuron Explanation methods. Specifically, we
unify existing NEMs under a generic pipeline and develop
techniques to corrupt the neuron descriptions with a high
success rate. We show that the neuron explanations could
be significantly corrupted by both random noises and welldesigned perturbation by only lightly corrupting the probing
dataset in NEMs. We summarize our contributions in this
work below:
1. We are the first to present a unified pipeline for Neuron Explanation methods and show that the pipeline is
prone to corruptions on the input probing dataset.
2. We design a novel corruption on the probing dataset to
manipulate the concept assigned to a neuron. Further,
our formulation can manipulate the pipeline without
explicit knowledge of the similarity function used by
Neuron Explanation methods.

1877

