This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Monte Carlo Linear Clustering with Single-Point Supervision is
Enough for Infrared Small Target Detection
Boyang Li1 , Yingqian Wang1 , Longguang Wang2 , Fei Zhang3 ,
Ting Liu1 , Zaiping Lin1B , Wei An1 , Yulan Guo1
1
National University of Defense Technology, 2 Aviation University of Air Force,
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{liboyang20, linzaiping}@nudt.edu.cn

Step I:
Crop Out Adjacent Local Region

Abstract
Single-frame infrared small target (SIRST) detection
aims at separating small targets from clutter backgrounds
on infrared images. Recently, deep learning based methods have achieved promising performance on SIRST detection, but at the cost of a large amount of training data
with expensive pixel-level annotations. To reduce the annotation burden, we propose the first method to achieve
SIRST detection with single-point supervision. The core
idea of this work is to recover the per-pixel mask of each
target from the given single point label by using clustering
approaches, which looks simple but is indeed challenging
since targets are always insalient and accompanied with
background clutters. To handle this issue, we introduce randomness to the clustering process by adding noise to the
input images, and then obtain much more reliable pseudo
masks by averaging the clustered results. Thanks to this
“Monte Carlo” clustering approach, our method can accurately recover pseudo masks and thus turn arbitrary fully supervised SIRST detection networks into weakly supervised ones with only single point annotation. Experiments
on four datasets demonstrate that our method can be applied to existing SIRST detection networks to achieve comparable performance with their fully-supervised counterparts, which reveals that single-point supervision is strong
enough for SIRST detection. Our code will be available at: https://github.com/YeRen123455/
SIRST-Single-Point-Supervision.

1. Introduction
Single-frame infrared small target (SIRST) detection
has been widely used in many applications such as marine resource utilization [23, 45], high-precision navigation [34, 13], and ecological environment monitoring [35].

Single-point
Annotation

Step II:
Monte Carlo Linear Clustering

Step II:
Retrain As Fully-Supervised

Pseudo Mask
Iter = 1 Iter = 2 Iter = 3

Iter = 20 Iter = 100
Refine

Adjacent Small Region

Target Probability Map Generation

Arbitrary Detection Network

Figure 1. Pipeline of our method. The proposed Monte Carlo
linear clustering along with single-point annotation can produce
high-quality pseudo mask (i.e., target probability map (TPM)).

However, existing SIRST detection methods mainly rely on
segmentation pipeline with pixel-level supervision. Pixellevel annotating is time-consuming and thus hinders the
quick deployment of those large scale data-dependent scenarios. Therefore, it is in urgent need to alleviate the annotation burden while maintaining state-of-the-art performance
in SIRST detection.
Point-level supervision, as an annotation-friendly form of supervision, can provide both category and localization information for each target. Previous works in general object segmentation utilized rich semantic information to design various training loss [4] and network modules [29, 27], and continuously expand the single-point annotation to a pixel-level pseudo mask. Although having
achieved promising performance, these methods heavily rely on prior semantic information (e.g., objectness prior in
[4, 50], shape prior in [29, 27, 49]), and generally need
more than one point as supervision. However, infrared small targets generally occupy no more than 0.15% area of
the whole image [47] and lack texture, shape and color information. Consequently, previous semantic informationdependent methods cannot well adopt to this task.
11009

