This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RegFormer: An Efficient Projection-Aware Transformer Network for
Large-Scale Point Cloud Registration
Jiuming Liu1 , Guangming Wang1,4 , Zhe Liu2∗ , Chaokang Jiang3 , Marc Pollefeys4,5 , Hesheng Wang1 *
1
Department of Automation, Key Laboratory of System Control
and Information Processing of Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
China University of Mining and Technology 4 ETH Zürich 5 Microsoft
{liujiuming,wangguangming,liuzhesjtu,wanghesheng}@sjtu.edu.cn
ts20060079a31@cumt.edu.cn

marc.pollefeys@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Although point cloud registration has achieved remarkable advances in object-level and indoor scenes, largescale registration methods are rarely explored. Challenges
mainly arise from the huge point number, complex distribution, and outliers of outdoor LiDAR scans. In addition, most existing registration works generally adopt a twostage paradigm: They first find correspondences by extracting discriminative local features and then leverage estimators (eg. RANSAC) to filter outliers, which are highly dependent on well-designed descriptors and post-processing
choices. To address these problems, we propose an endto-end transformer network (RegFormer) for large-scale
point cloud alignment without any further post-processing.
Specifically, a projection-aware hierarchical transformer is
proposed to capture long-range dependencies and filter outliers by extracting point features globally. Our transformer
has linear complexity, which guarantees high efficiency
even for large-scale scenes. Furthermore, to effectively reduce mismatches, a bijective association transformer is designed for regressing the initial transformation. Extensive
experiments on KITTI and NuScenes datasets demonstrate
that our RegFormer achieves competitive performance in
terms of both accuracy and efficiency. Codes are available
at https://github.com/IRMVLab/RegFormer.

1. Introduction
Point cloud registration is a fundamental problem in 3D
computer vision, which aims to estimate the rigid transformation between point cloud frames. It is widely applied in
moblie robotics [22, 34], autonomous driving [47, 37], etc.
* Corresponding Authors.

The first two authors contributed equally.

Figure 1. Overview architecture of RegFormer. The whole feature
extraction and frame association sections are transformer-based.
We project point cloud onto a 2D surface and feed its patches into
transformer. A projection mask M T (M S ) is also proposed, which
equips our transformer with the awareness of invalid positions.

Although learning-based methods show great potential
in object-level or indoor registration tasks [42, 10, 1, 17],
large-scale point cloud registration is less studied. Challenges are mainly three-fold: 1) Outdoor LiDAR scans may
consist of hundreds of thousands of unstructured points,
which are intrinsically sparse, irregular, and have a large
spatial range. It is non-trivial to efficiently process all raw
points in one inference [44]. 2) Outliers from dynamic
objects and occlusion would degrade the registration accuracy as they introduce uncertain motions and inconsistency.
3) There are numerous mismatches when directly leveraging distance-based nearest neighbor matching methods (eg.
kNN) to distant point cloud pairs [25].

8451

