This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Homography Guided Temporal Fusion for Road Line and Marking
Segmentation
Shan Wang1,2 Chuong Nguyen1 Jiawei Liu2 Kaihao Zhang2 Wenhan Luo3
Yanhao Zhang2 Sundaram Muthu1 Fahira Afzal Maken1 Hongdong Li2
1

Data61, CSIRO

2

Australian National University

Abstract
Reliable segmentation of road lines and markings is critical to autonomous driving. Our work is motivated by the
observations that road lines and markings are (1) frequently
occluded in the presence of moving vehicles, shadow, and
glare and (2) highly structured with low intra-class shape
variance and overall high appearance consistency. To solve
these issues, we propose a Homography Guided Fusion
(HomoFusion) module to exploit temporally-adjacent video
frames for complementary cues facilitating the correct classification of the partially occluded road lines or markings.
To reduce computational complexity, a novel surface normal estimator is proposed to establish spatial correspondences between the sampled frames, allowing the HomoFusion module to perform a pixel-to-pixel attention mechanism in updating the representation of the occluded road
lines or markings. Experiments on ApolloScape, a largescale lane mark segmentation dataset, and ApolloScape
Night with artificial simulated night-time road conditions,
demonstrate that our method outperforms other existing
SOTA lane mark segmentation models with less than 9% of
their parameters and computational complexity. We show
that exploiting available camera intrinsic data and ground
plane assumption for cross-frame correspondence can lead
to a light-weight network with significantly improved performances in speed and accuracy. We also prove the versatility of our HomoFusion approach by applying it to the
problem of water puddle segmentation and achieving SOTA
performance 1 .

1. Introduction
Lane mark segmentation aims to achieve pixel-wise
classification of road lines and markings simultaneously.
Known for its quintessential importance in autonomous
driving, lane mark segmentation is also an effective tool for
constructing accurate High Definition (HD) maps. Existing
works solve individual sub-tasks, e.g. drivable area segmen1 Code is available at https://github.com/ShanWang-Shan/HomoFusion.

3

Sun Yat-sen University

Framet

Predition
w/o fusion

Framet-2

Predition
w/ fusion

Framet-4

Ground
Truth

Framet-6

Fused
Frame

Figure 1: Illustration of the effect of the proposed HomoFusion module that explores the adjacent frames for cues, facilitating the correct classification of (1) a “Straight Arrow”,
which, with its bottom half occluded by a vehicle, is mistakenly classified as a “Right Turn & Straight Arrow” without the HomoFusion module, and (2) a partially occluded
“Dotted Line”, which is incorrectly classified as a “Solid
Line” without the HomoFusion module. The fused frame
in the 4th row and the 2nd column demonstrates the recovered road lines and markings after projecting the previous
frames onto the current frame with the estimated homography matrices. The yellow box enlarges the area where mistake classifications are corrected. The red box indicates the
spatially corresponding area across the frames. Best viewed
in color.
tation [33, 9] and lane detection [19, 35], while few address
the lane mark segmentation in its entirety [53, 16].
Despite the tremendous progresses in semantic/scene
segmentation [52, 42, 26], little attention has been paid to
the lane mark segmentation task [53, 16]. Yin et al. [53]
leverages additional LiDAR information, merging the segmented visual information with the point clouds, to achieve
lane mark segmentation. IntRA-KD [16] applies the knowledge distillation technique to improve the efficiency of the
lane mark segmentation model.
A major challenge in the lane mark segmentation task is

1075

