This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Multitask Learning with Progressive Parameter Sharing
Haosen Shi†
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Shen Ren
Continental Automotive Singapore

hsshi23@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

shen@shenren.org

Tianwei Zhang
Nanyang Technological University

Sinno Jialin Pan
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

tianwei.zhang@ntu.edu.sg

sinnopan@cuhk.edu.hk

Exclusive Capacity Evaluation (from high to low)

Abstract
own by task 1

We propose a novel progressive parameter-sharing strategy (MPPS) in this paper for effectively training multitask
learning models on diverse computer vision tasks simultaneously. Specifically, we propose to parameterize distributions for different tasks to control the sharings, based on the
concept of Exclusive Capacity that we introduce. A scheduling mechanism following the concept of curriculum learning is also designed to progressively change the sharing
strategy to increase the level of sharing during the learning
process. We further propose a novel loss function to regularize the optimization of network parameters as well as
the sharing probabilities of each neuron for each task. Our
approach can be combined with many state-of-the-art multitask learning solutions to achieve better joint task performance. Comprehensive experiments show that it has competitive performance on three challenging datasets (MultiCIFAR100, NYUv2, and Cityscapes) using various convolution neural network architectures.

1. Introduction
Performing multiple tasks at the same time is a fundamental ability for many intelligent agents. While the
remarkable success of deep neural networks (DNNs) has
been achieved in various computer vision applications such
as image classification [10], semantic segmentation [38],
depth estimation [31], surface normal estimation [69] and
image generation [15, 21], learning and performing similar
but distinctive tasks simultaneously are still a challenge for
them. To address this issue, researchers proposed the MultiTask Learning (MTL) paradigm, which usually trains one
model to act as multiple distinct models. Each task in this
scheme can benefit from reusing knowledge learned from
† This work was done when the author worked as a research assistant at
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.

first epoch

own by task 2

own by task 3

own by all tasks

training epoch

training epoch

last epoch

Figure 1. An illustrative diagram of proposed dynamic optimization in MPPS for MTL.

others to improve its performance and reduce the model’s
learning time. Generally, the DNNs architecture for MTL
is composed of shared parameters and task-specific parameters, which can strike a balance between shared and exclusive knowledge among different tasks [4].
There are two problems that need to be addressed in designing effective MTL algorithms. The first one is the construction of the parameter-sharing scheme. The most common approach is hard-parameter sharing, which builds a
shared feature extractor to map input data from all tasks into
dense features in a common hidden representation space
and then uses these features to generate different outputs via
task-specific functions. Past works have demonstrated the
effectiveness of this strategy in considerably reducing the
model size and enhancing its overall performance across diverse settings [51]. However, it still suffers from two issues.
1) some task combinations may result in a notable performance reduction, which is known as the negative transfer
[50, 61]; 2) an optimal design of the MTL models based
on hard-parameter sharing still requires a high level of human expertise and rich domain-specific knowledge. To mit-

19924

