This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Translating Images to Road Network:
A Non-Autoregressive Sequence-to-Sequence Approach
Jiachen Lu*
Fudan University

Renyuan Peng⋆
Fudan University

Hongyang Li
Shanghai AI Lab

Feng Wen
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Xinyue Cai
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Wei Zhang
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
The extraction of road network is essential for the generation of high-definition maps since it enables the precise localization of road landmarks and their interconnections. However, generating road network poses a significant challenge due to the conflicting underlying combination of Euclidean (e.g., road landmarks location) and
non-Euclidean (e.g., road topological connectivity) structures. Existing methods struggle to merge the two types
of data domains effectively, but few of them address it
properly. Instead, our work establishes a unified representation of both types of data domain by projecting both
Euclidean and non-Euclidean data into an integer series
called RoadNet Sequence. Further than modeling an autoregressive sequence-to-sequence Transformer model to understand RoadNet Sequence, we decouple the dependency
of RoadNet Sequence into a mixture of auto-regressive and
non-autoregressive dependency. Building on this, our proposed non-autoregressive sequence-to-sequence approach
leverages non-autoregressive dependencies while fixing the
gap towards auto-regressive dependencies, resulting in success on both efficiency and accuracy. Extensive experiments
on nuScenes dataset demonstrate the superiority of RoadNet Sequence representation and the non-autoregressive
approach compared to existing state-of-the-art alternatives.

1. Introduction
With the rising prevalence of self-driving cars, a deep
knowledge of the road structure is indispensable for au* Equal contribution
† Li Zhang (lizhangfd@fudan.edu.cn) is the corresponding author with

School of Data Science, Fudan University.

Hang Xu
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Li Zhang†
Fudan University

Road Network
Multi-camera Input

Landmark Location (Euclidean)

Non-Autoregressive
Sequence-to-Sequence
Generation
𝑦!

Centerline curve Shape (Euclidean)

𝑦"

Recover

𝑦#

𝑦$

Semi-Autoregressive
RoadNet Sequence

Road Topology (Non-Euclidean)

Euclidean domain

Non-Euclidean domain

Prediction

Figure 1. High-definition Road Network Topology contains Euclidean data: locations of landmarks and shapes of curves and
non-Euclidean data: road topology. A special sequence, RoadNet Sequence, is proposed as a unified representation of both domains. Then we use a Non-Autoregressive sequence-to-sequence
approach to extract RoadNet Sequence from multi-camera input
efficiently and accurately.

tonomous vehicle navigation [16, 26, 44, 13]. Road network [12, 38, 42] extraction is required to estimate highly
accurate road landmark locations, centerline curve shapes
and road topological connection for self-driving vehicles.
However, the ability to understand road network in realtime using onboard sensors is highly challenging.
In the literature, road network is differentiated from
methods that focus solely on grid-like Euclidean data [6, 5]
such as lane detection [60, 36, 61] or BEV semantic understanding [39, 50, 34, 37]. Instead, road network emphasizes
a more comprehensive understanding of both Euclidean domain and non-Euclidean domain. As shown in Figure 1,
accurate road landmark locations such as crossroads, stoplines, fork-roads, and the shape of centerline curves pertain
to the Euclidean domain, whereas road topology belongs to

23

