This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

4D Myocardium Reconstruction with Decoupled Motion and Shape Model
Xiaohan Yuan

Cong Liu

Yangang Wang*

Southeast University, China

Abstract
Estimating the shape and motion state of the myocardium is essential in diagnosing cardiovascular diseases. However, cine magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging
is dominated by 2D slices, whose large slice spacing challenges inter-slice shape reconstruction and motion acquisition. To address this problem, we propose a 4D reconstruction method that decouples motion and shape, which can
predict the inter-/intra- shape and motion estimation from
a given sparse point cloud sequence obtained from limited
slices. Our framework comprises a neural motion model
and an end-diastolic (ED) shape model. The implicit ED
shape model can learn a continuous boundary and encourage the motion model to predict without the supervision of
ground truth deformation, and the motion model enables
canonical input of the shape model by deforming any point
from any phase to the ED phase. Additionally, the constructed ED-space enables pre-training of the shape model,
thereby guiding the motion model and addressing the issue
of data scarcity. We propose the first 4D myocardial dataset
as we know and verify our method on the proposed, public,
and cross-modal datasets, showing superior reconstruction
performance and enabling various clinical applications.

1. Introduction
Heart attack, also known as myocardial infarction, is
the leading cause of death worldwide [1]. Estimating the
shape and motion state of the myocardium is an essential
step in diagnosing cardiovascular diseases. Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging, which can provide successive sequence images including end-diastolic (ED) and
end-systolic (ES) phases, is considered the gold standard
for cardiac morphological assessment.
* Corresponding author. E-mail: yangangwang@seu.edu.cn. All the
authors from Southeast University are affiliated with the Key Laboratory
of Measurement and Control of Complex Systems of Engineering, Ministry of Education, Nanjing, China. This work was supported in part by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62076061), the
Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (No. BK20220127).

Figure 1. We propose a 4D cardiac reconstruction method predicting the inter-/intra- shape and motion of a cardiac cycle.

However, the standard CMR has a large slice spacing,
which leads to the lack of inter-slice information as shown
in Fig. 1. Meanwhile, the shape and motion observation
of the ventricle for clinicians are almost guided by highresolution two-dimensional slices based on intra-slice information, such as short-axis (SAX) or long-axis (LAX)
views. The dense and faithful 4D (inter-/intra-) reconstruction of the myocardium would assist medical professionals in intuitively observing and accurately obtaining diverse
clinical parameters [3].
The road to inter-slice reconstruction is particularly challenging, as it involves estimating both inter-slice motion
and shape. The lack of inter-slice motion data limits the
applicability of supervised methods, thus complicating the
problem. The large slice thickness of CMR leads to the
inaccuracy of direct linear interpolation of pixels between
slices, hindering the accurate reconstruction of the interslice shape. Few works have considered or fully addressed
this problem. Most recent works [43, 34, 42, 46] focus only
on motion estimation based on 2D plane registration, ignoring the motion between slices and failing to reflect the myocardium movement truly. Others focus solely on 3D shape
reconstruction of a specific phase [4, 21, 19], without con-

21252

