This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MVPSNet: Fast Generalizable Multi-view Photometric Stereo
Dongxu Zhao1 Daniel Lichy2 Pierre-Nicolas Perrin1 Jan-Michael Frahm1 Soumyadip Sengupta1
1

2

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

University of Maryland, College Park

{dongxuz1, pnperrin, jmf, ronisen}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
We propose a fast and generalizable solution to Multiview Photometric Stereo (MVPS), called MVPSNet. The key
to our approach is a feature extraction network that effectively combines images from the same view captured under
multiple lighting conditions to extract geometric features
from shading cues for stereo matching. We demonstrate
these features, termed ‘Light Aggregated Feature Maps’
(LAFM), are effective for feature matching even in textureless regions, where traditional multi-view stereo methods
often fail. Our method produces similar reconstruction results to PS-NeRF, a state-of-the-art MVPS method that optimizes a neural network per-scene, while being 411× faster
(105 seconds vs. 12 hours) in inference. Additionally, we
introduce a new synthetic dataset for MVPS, sMVPS, which
is shown to be effective for training a generalizable MVPS
method.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction of an object can be achieved either
through camera viewpoint variations, Multi-view Stereo
(MVS), or by lighting direction variations, Photometric
Stereo (PS). Both MVS and PS have relative strengths and
weaknesses. While MVS succeeds in obtaining accurate
global shapes, it suffers in textureless regions due to poor
feature matching, often resulting in reconstructions that lack
local details. On the other hand, PS produces accurate local
details, even in textureless regions, by using shading information but fails to reconstruct accurate global shapes. In
this paper, we focus on the problem of Multi-view Photometric Stereo (MVPS) where both camera viewpoint and
lighting direction variations are used to accurately reconstruct global and local details of a 3D shape, even in textureless regions.
3D reconstruction techniques that produce high-quality
results using only viewpoint variations (MVS) rely on testtime optimization, often by training neural networks per

dlichy@umd.edu

scene [53, 64, 66]. These methods are computationally inefficient, typically taking hours of computing time on a
high-end GPU for each object. Existing MVS methods
[20, 56, 62] that focus on computational efficiency employ
feed-forward neural networks that are efficient but fail to
produce high-quality details, especially in textureless regions. Existing MVPS approaches can produce high-quality
reconstructions but require computationally inefficient perscene training or optimization [27, 28, 29, 61]. Sometimes
additional manual efforts and carefully crafted refinement
steps are also needed [34, 47]. In contrast, we propose an
efficient feed-forward neural architecture, MVPSNet, that
can generalize to unseen objects and achieve similar reconstruction quality to that of per-scene optimization techniques while being computationally efficient during inference.
We design MVPSNet by taking inspiration from various
deep MVS architectures [7, 14, 18, 20, 62] that are generalizable, computationally efficient, and can operate on highresolution images. However, these approaches often fail
in textureless regions, and their reconstructed meshes often
lack details. We choose the CasMVSNet [20] architecture
as our feature matching module, which has been repeatedly
used by various MVS pipelines [7, 14, 18] for its simplicity and efficiency, and augment it to effectively incorporate
lighting variation cues for better prediction of 3D shapes. In
this way, we propose a feed-forward generalizable approach
to Multi-view Photometric Stereo.
We introduce a multi-scale feature representation, called
Light Aggregated Feature Maps (LAFM), whose role is
to extract detailed geometric features from images by utilizing lighting variations. For brevity, we define Multilight Images as a collection of images taken from the same
viewpoint under different directional lighting conditions.
Our intuition is that LAFM can efficiently aggregate shading patterns from multi-light images, by creating an ‘artificial shading texture’ in the textureless region. Multi-scale
LAFM will then be used to construct a sequence of cost
volumes to match features across sparse views in order to

12525

