This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Parallel Attention Interaction Network for Few-Shot
Skeleton-based Action Recognition
Xingyu Liu1 Sanping Zhou1∗ Le Wang1 Gang Hua2
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
and Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Wormpex AI Research
1

1. Introduction
Skeleton-based action recognition [48, 2] has attracted
increasing attention in recent years, which is a predominant
topic in many fields ranging from human-robot interaction to
virtual reality, due to its action-focusing nature and compactness [6]. However, how to identify novel actions still remains
an open issue. To overcome this problem, more and more
works have focused on few-shot action recognition, which
∗ Corresponding author.

Take off glass

Take off headphone

Wave up

(b) Self Attention

Learning discriminative features from very few labeled
samples to identify novel classes has received increasing attention in skeleton-based action recognition. Existing works
aim to learn action-specific embeddings by exploiting either
intra-skeleton or inter-skeleton spatial associations, which
may lead to less discriminative representations. To address
these issues, we propose a novel Parallel Attention Interaction Network (PAINet) that incorporates two complementary
branches to strengthen the match by inter-skeleton and intraskeleton correlation. Specifically, a topology encoding module utilizing topology and physical information is proposed
to enhance the modeling of interactive parts and joint pairs
in both branches. In the Cross Spatial Alignment branch, we
employ a spatial cross-attention module to establish joint
associations across sequences, and a directional Average
Symmetric Surface Metric is introduced to locate the closest
temporal similarity. In parallel, the Cross Temporal Alignment branch incorporates a spatial self-attention module to
aggregate spatial context within sequences as well as applies
the temporal cross-attention network to correct misalignment
temporally and calculate similarity. Extensive experiments
on three skeleton benchmarks, namely NTU-T, NTU-S, and
Kinetics, demonstrate the superiority of our framework and
consistently outperform state-of-the-art methods.

(a) Cross Attention

Abstract

Wave up

Figure 1: In classifying the samples with similar appearances,
the intra-sample representations exhibit body-level comprehensive
features, requiring cross-attention to identify subtle differences
between joints. In contrast, for samples with inconsistent motion
patterns, the inter-sample relationships only reveal differences,
necessitating self-attention to enhance the richness of the action.

can alleviate the resulting performance degradation for the
rare category [10, 27, 20, 43, 12]. In particular, these methods explore both the unlabeled query and labeled support
sets, so as to learn a discriminative feature representation to
match query actions with categories represented by a few
support samples [35, 9].
As shown in Figure 1, current approaches focus on how to
exploit intra-skeleton or inter-skeleton relations while ignoring the complementarity between the two paradigms. They
are prone to failure in challenging scenarios, such as similar
spatial appearances or inconsistent temporal dependencies.
On the one hand, some works try to learn discriminative
features within sequences. For example, [3, 52, 26, 21, 31]
utilize local joint features within the skeleton to capture

1379

