This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Anomaly Detection under Distribution Shift

Tri Cao, Jiawen Zhu, and Guansong Pang*
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University

Abstract
Anomaly detection (AD) is a crucial machine learning task that aims to learn patterns from a set of normal
training samples to identify abnormal samples in test data.
Most existing AD studiesassume that the training and test
data are drawn from the same data distribution, but the
test data can have large distribution shifts arising in many
real-world applications due to different natural variations
such as new lighting conditions, object poses, or background appearances, rendering existing AD methods ineffective in such cases. In this paper, we consider the problem of anomaly detection under distribution shift and establish performance benchmarks on four widely-used AD
and out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization datasets. We
demonstrate that simple adaptation of state-of-the-art OOD
generalization methods to AD settings fails to work effectively due to the lack of labeled anomaly data. We further
introduce a novel robust AD approach to diverse distribution shifts by minimizing the distribution gap between indistribution and OOD normal samples in both the training
and inference stages in an unsupervised way. Our extensive empirical results on the four datasets show that our approach substantially outperforms state-of-the-art AD methods and OOD generalization methods on data with various distribution shifts, while maintaining the detection accuracy on in-distribution data. Code and data are available
at https://github.com/mala-lab/ADShift.

1. Introduction
Anomaly Detection (AD) is a crucial task in machine
learning that aims to identify rare and unusual patterns in
data. It is an important problem in various domains, such
as financial domain [1, 4], cybersecurity [69, 72], industrial
inspection [5], and medical diagnosis [66, 68]. Due to the
difficulty and/or high cost of collecting labeled anomaly
data, current AD studies are focused on unsupervised ap* Corresponding author: G. Pang (pangguansong@gmail.com).

Figure 1: Illustrative samples for anomaly detection under distribution shift. First row: the ‘Wood’ dataset from
MVTec [5]. Second row: the ‘Elephant’ class as normal
and the remaining classes as anomaly in PACS [40]. Third
row: the ‘0’ class as normal and the remaining classes as
anomaly in MNIST [36]/MNIST-M [18]. We aim at distinguishing anomalies from normal data in both in-distribution
test data and out-distribution test data
proaches, which aim to learn patterns from a set of normal
training samples to identify abnormal samples in test data.
Although existing AD studies have demonstrated
promising performance [13, 38, 56, 65], they generally assume that the training and test data are drawn from the same
data distribution. However, this assumption is often unrealistic in real-world scenarios as the test data can have large
distribution shifts arising in many applications due to different natural variations such as new lighting conditions,
object poses, or background appearances, rendering the AD
methods ineffective in such cases.
Distribution shift is a ubiquitous problem in different
real-world applications, which can significantly degrade
the performance of models in various tasks such as image classification, object detection, and segmentation [18,
34, 40, 85]. Many out-of-distribution (OOD) generaliza-

6511

