This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Generalization of Adversarial Training via
Robust Critical Fine-Tuning

1

Kaijie Zhu1,2 , Xixu Hu3 , Jindong Wang4 , Xing Xie4 , Ge Yang1,2 *
School of Artifical Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
City University of Hong Kong 4 Microsoft Research
{zhukaijie2021, ge.yang}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks are susceptible to adversarial examples, posing a significant security risk in critical applications. Adversarial Training (AT) is a well-established technique to enhance adversarial robustness, but it often comes
at the cost of decreased generalization ability. This paper
proposes Robustness Critical Fine-Tuning (RiFT), a novel
approach to enhance generalization without compromising
adversarial robustness. The core idea of RiFT is to exploit
the redundant capacity for robustness by fine-tuning the adversarially trained model on its non-robust-critical module.
To do so, we introduce module robust criticality (MRC),
a measure that evaluates the significance of a given module to model robustness under worst-case weight perturbations. Using this measure, we identify the module with the
lowest MRC value as the non-robust-critical module and
fine-tune its weights to obtain fine-tuned weights. Subsequently, we linearly interpolate between the adversarially
trained weights and fine-tuned weights to derive the optimal
fine-tuned model weights. We demonstrate the efficacy of
RiFT on ResNet18, ResNet34, and WideResNet34-10 models trained on CIFAR10, CIFAR100, and Tiny-ImageNet
datasets. Our experiments show that RiFT can significantly
improve both generalization and out-of-distribution robustness by around 1.5% while maintaining or even slightly
enhancing adversarial robustness. Code is available at
https://github.com/Immortalise/RiFT.

1. Introduction
The pursuit of accurate and trustworthy artificial intelligence systems is a fundamental objective in the deep learning community. Adversarial examples [45, 15], which perturbs input by a small, human imperceptible noise that
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Interpolation results of fine-tuning on different modules
of ResNet18 on CIFAR10 dataset. Dots denote different interpolation points between the final fine-tuned weights of RiFT and
the initial adversarially trained weights. All fine-tuning methods improve the generalization ability, but only fine-tuning on the
non-robust-critical module (layer2.1.conv2 in Figure 3) can
preserve robustness. Additionally, fine-tuning on robust-critical
module (layer4.1.conv1) causes the worst trade-off between
generalization and robustness. In the initial interpolation stage,
fine-tuning on non-robust-critical modules enhances adversarial
robustness by around 0.3%.

can cause deep neural networks to make incorrect predictions, pose a significant threat to the security of AI systems. Notable experimental and theoretical progress has
been made in defending against such adversarial examples
[6, 4, 10, 19, 11, 16, 37]. Among various defense methods
[52, 33, 57, 31, 8], adversarial training (AT) [29] has been
shown to be one of the most promising approaches [4, 11]
to enhance the adversarial robustness. However, compared
to standard training, AT severely sacrifices generalization
on in-distribution data [42, 46, 58, 36, 32] and is exceptionally vulnerable to certain out-of-distribution (OOD) exam-

4424

