This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reinforced Disentanglement for Face Swapping without Skip Connection
Xiaohang Ren, Xingyu Chen, Pengfei Yao, Heung-Yeung Shum, Baoyuan Wang
Xiaobing.AI

Figure 1. Face swap results by our method. Note that, the swapped images consistently preserve the identity of the source and the nonidentity attributes(i.e., hair, expression, gaze, pose,.etc.) from a variety of target images. Best viewed with zoom-in and a colored version.

Abstract
The SOTA face swap models still suffer the problem of
either target identity (i.e., shape) being leaked or the target
non-identity attributes (i.e., background, hair) failing to be
fully preserved in the final results. We show that this insufficient disentanglement is caused by two flawed designs
that were commonly adopted in prior models: (1) counting on only one compressed encoder to represent both the
semantic-level non-identity facial attributes(i.e., pose) and
the pixel-level non-facial region details, which is contradictory to satisfy at the same time; (2) highly relying on long
skip-connections [50] between the encoder and the final
generator, leaking a certain amount of target face identity
into the result. To fix them, we introduce a new face swap
framework called “WSC-swap” that gets rid of skip connections and uses two target encoders to respectively capture
the pixel-level non-facial region attributes and the semantic
non-identity attributes in the face region. To further reinforce the disentanglement learning for the target encoder,
we employ both identity removal loss via adversarial training (i.e., GAN [18]) and the non-identity preservation loss
via prior 3DMM models like [11]. Extensive experiments
on both FaceForensics++ and CelebA-HQ show that our
results significantly outperform previous works on a rich set

of metrics, including one novel metric for measuring identity consistency that was completely neglected before.

1. Introduction
Deepfake [27] is a double-edged sword, despite the fact
that various negative use cases are currently dominating the
conversations to steer people’s attention to their social impact [21], it’s arguably true that AI-synthesized faces, bodies, and voices have huge potential for a variety of positive applications, such as virtual instructor or health counseling as discussed in [48], or other content generations in
movie/game industry (i.e., Paul Walker in “Fast and Furious 7”) and etc. Keep improving the generation quality also inspires new ways to detect [7, 15, 20, 57] deepfakes for negative use cases. Face swapping has been studied intensively in both academia and industry, where the
quality improvement is remarkable over the years thanks
to the advances in deep generative learning. As defined
in [32], face swapping must achieve three goals simultaneously (1) fully preserve the face identity from the source
image (2) fully preserve everything else except the identity (identity-irrelevant) from the target image, and (3) ensure the final result is both artifacts-free and photo-realistic.
1
20665

