This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Amodal Video Segmentation from Learning Supervised Signals with
Object-centric Representation
Ke Fan1,† , Jingshi Lei1,† , Xuelin Qian1,∗ , Miaopeng Yu1 , Tianjun Xiao2,∗ , Tong He2
Zheng Zhang2 , Yanwei Fu1
1
Fudan University 2 Amazon Web Service
{kfan21,jslei21}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {xlqian,mpyu19,yanweifu}@fudan.edu.cn
{tianjux, htong, zhaz}@amazon.com

Abstract
!−#

!−#

!

† co-first authors; ∗ corresponding authors.

Cube

!−$

Deep learning has demonstrated remarkable success in
various computer vision tasks. Nevertheless, neural net-

synth.

comp.
!

1. Introduction

Cube
!−$

Video amodal segmentation is a particularly challenging task in computer vision, which requires to deduce the
full shape of an object from the visible parts of it. Recently,
some studies have achieved promising performance by using motion flow to integrate information across frames under a self-supervised setting. However, motion flow has
a clear limitation by the two factors of moving cameras
and object deformation. This paper presents a rethinking to previous works. We particularly leverage the supervised signals with object-centric representation in realworld scenarios. The underlying idea is the supervision
signal of the specific object and the features from different
views can mutually benefit the deduction of the full mask
in any specific frame. We thus propose an Efficient objectcentric Representation amodal Segmentation (EoRaS). Specially, beyond solely relying on supervision signals, we design a translation module to project image features into
the Bird’s-Eye View (BEV), which introduces 3D information to improve current feature quality. Furthermore, we
propose a multi-view fusion layer based temporal module
which is equipped with a set of object slots and interacts
with features from different views by attention mechanism
to fulfill sufficient object representation completion. As a
result, the full mask of the object can be decoded from
image features updated by object slots. Extensive experiments on both real-world and synthetic benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our proposed method, achieving
state-of-the-art performance. Our code will be released at
https://github.com/kfan21/EoRaS.

(Front-view)
amodal

(a) View Prior

amodal

(b) Shape Prior

(BEV)

amodal

(c) Ours (View Prior + Shape Prior)

Figure 1: Illustrations of the difference between view prior,
shape prior, and our model. While SaVos [35] draws support from the optical flow to realize the view prior, imagelevel amodal segmentation algorithms typically just utilize
the shape prior brought in by the supervision signals. Consequently, they are limited by camera motion and complicated object types, respectively. Unlike the previous methods, beyond the mergence of those two priors, EoRaS utilizes view prior by object-centric learning and further introduces the BEV space where obstruction doesn’t exist, which
enables our EoRaS to easily handle complex scenarios.
works are limited to learning visible patterns in the data, and
are typically challenged in reasoning about the broader and
unseen components. Currently, most researches in object
detection and segmentation tasks concentrate on enhancing
the visible part’s performance, leaving few studies on inferring occluded information. Conversely, humans possess
an innate ability to imagine and extrapolate, enabling us to
easily complete an occluded part of an image based on prior
knowledge. This critical capacity is instrumental in advanced deep learning models for real-world scenarios, such
as medical diagnosis and autonomous driving. Thereby, the
central issue addressed in this paper is the video amodal
segmentation task, which aims to deduce an object’s complete mask, whether it is partially obscured or not.
Prior studies on image amodal segmentation [22, 30, 32]

1272

