This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Grand Unified Representation Learning for Unsupervised
Visible-Infrared Person Re-Identification
Bin Yang Jun Chen† Mang Ye†
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software,
School of Computer Science, Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
https://github.com/yangbincv/GUR

Abstract
Unsupervised learning visible-infrared person reidentification (USL-VI-ReID) is an extremely important
and challenging task, which can alleviate the issue of
expensive cross-modality annotations. Existing works
focus on handling the cross-modality discrepancy under
unsupervised conditions. However, they ignore the fact that
USL-VI-ReID is a cross-modality retrieval task with the
hierarchical discrepancy, i.e., camera variation and modality discrepancy, resulting in clustering inconsistencies and
ambiguous cross-modality label association. To address
these issues, we propose a hierarchical framework to learn
grand unified representation (GUR) for USL-VI-ReID.
The grand unified representation lies in two aspects: 1)
GUR adopts a bottom-up domain learning strategy with a
cross-memory association embedding module to explore
the information of hierarchical domains, i.e., intra-camera,
inter-camera, and inter-modality domains, learning a
unified and robust representation against hierarchical
discrepancy. 2) To unify the identities of the two modalities,
we develop a cross-modality label unification module that
constructs a cross-modality affinity matrix as a bridge
for propagating labels between two modalities. Then, we
utilize the homogeneous structure matrix to smooth the
propagated labels, ensuring that the label structure within
one modality remains unchanged. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our GUR framework significantly outperforms existing USL-VI-ReID methods, and even surpasses
some supervised counterparts.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims at matching the
same person images captured by non-overlapping cameras
[13, 16]. This technology has been widely investigated due
to its significance for social security. Most existing ReID
† Corresponding Author.

Inter-modality Discrepancy
Color distortion,
Imaging wavelengths,
…
Inter-camera
Variation
Viewpoint,
Illumination,
Background,
…

Inter-camera
Variation
Viewpoint,
Illumination,
Background,
…

Visible

Camera 1

Camera 2

Clustering
Large Variation
ID Split

Camera 2

Clustering
Clustering
Inconsistencies

Small Variation
ID Merge

Inter-modality
Discrepancy

Inter-camera
Variation
?

Infrared

Camera 1

?
Ambiguous Cross-modality Label Association

Figure 1. Illustration of hierarchical discrepancy in USL-VI-ReID
with two cameras within each modality as an example. Circles and
hexagons represent the sample points of the same person from infrared and visible modalities, respectively. Different colors represent different cameras and modalities. The inter-camera variation
and inter-modality discrepancy collectively result in clustering inconsistencies and ambiguous cross-modality label association.

models concentrate on the single-modality image matching task with RGB images captured by visible cameras.
However, visible cameras cannot capture enough information under poor illumination conditions [54]. Hence, visible
infrared person re-identification (VI-ReID) has emerged to
match person images captured by visible and infrared cameras for the 24-hour surveillance system [35, 42, 55].
Existing VI-ReID methods have achieved remarkable
performance with deep learning methods [56, 51, 49, 50].
However, the success mainly profits from supervised learning over massive human-labeled data, which is more
time-consuming and expensive than manual annotations in
single-modality ReID [21, 43]. Recently, unsupervised
learning visible infrared person re-identification (USL-VI-

11069

