This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Self-Driving Attention Prediction via
Uncertainty Mining and Knowledge Embedding
Pengfei Zhu1 , Mengshi Qi * 1,2 , Xia Li1 , Weijian Li3 , and Huadong Ma1
1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Telecommunications Software and Multimedia,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, 100876
2
Key Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence, Ministry of Education, Shanghai, 200240
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester
{zhupengfei2000,qms,mhd}@bupt.edu.cn; lixia@bupt.cn; wli69@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract
Predicting attention regions of interest is an important yet challenging task for self-driving systems. Existing
methodologies rely on large-scale labeled traffic datasets
that are labor-intensive to obtain. Besides, the huge domain gap between natural scenes and traffic scenes in
current datasets also limits the potential for model training. To address these challenges, we are the first to introduce an unsupervised way to predict self-driving attention by uncertainty modeling and driving knowledge integration. Our approach’s Uncertainty Mining Branch
(UMB) discovers commonalities and differences from multiple generated pseudo-labels achieved from models pretrained on natural scenes by actively measuring the uncertainty. Meanwhile, our Knowledge Embedding Block
(KEB) bridges the domain gap by incorporating driving
knowledge to adaptively refine the generated pseudo-labels.
Quantitative and qualitative results with equivalent or even
more impressive performance compared to fully-supervised
state-of-the-art approaches across all three public datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method and
the potential of this direction. The code is available at
https://github.com/zaplm/DriverAttention.

1. Introduction
With the huge development of autonomous driving, predicting attention regions for self-driving systems [2; 41] has
drawn rapid interest in the community. The predicted attention region provides rich contextual information to assist
autonomous driving systems by locating salient areas in the
* Corresponding author.

natural scene
(pre-train)

self-driving scene
(w/o label)

predicted attention

vs.
domain gap
Models
Uncertainty Loss

pseudo labels
enhanced
pseudo labels

uncertainty maps

prior knowledge

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed unsupervised self-driving attention prediction model. Instead of relying on the ground truth
labels provided by traffic datasets, our method only uses pseudolabels generated from models pre-trained on natural scenes, and
then refined the results by uncertainty mining and knowledge embedding. The red dashed line corresponds to the pre-training stage,
the black dashed line refers to the training process, and the black
solid line means the testing process.

traffic scene [49; 50; 60]. Most importantly, these salient
areas are always the riskiest areas, where small perception
errors can cause great harm to driver’s safety [25]. Therefore, with a successful attention area prediction, computation resources can be reallocated to enhance the perception
accuracy in these fatal areas to reduce driving risks, as well
as increase the explainability and improve the reliability of
autonomous driving systems [28].
Numerous datasets [1; 13; 59] and methods [2; 27; 30;

8558

