This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Identity-Consistent Aggregation for Video Object Detection
Chaorui Deng1 , Da Chen2 , Qi Wu1,∗
1
Australia Institute of Machine Learning, University of Adelaide
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Bath

Abstract

Fast R-CNN

In Video Object Detection (VID), a common practice is
to leverage the rich temporal contexts from the video to enhance the object representations in each frame. Existing
methods treat the temporal contexts obtained from different
objects indiscriminately and ignore their different identities.
While intuitively, aggregating local views of the same object
in different frames may facilitate a better understanding of
the object. Thus, in this paper, we aim to enable the model
to focus on the identity-consistent temporal contexts of each
object to obtain more comprehensive object representations
and handle the rapid object appearance variations such as
occlusion, motion blur, etc. However, realizing this goal
on top of existing VID models faces low-efficiency problems due to their redundant region proposals and nonparallel frame-wise prediction manner. To aid this, we propose
ClipVID, a VID model equipped with Identity-Consistent
Aggregation (ICA) layers specifically designed for mining
fine-grained and identity-consistent temporal contexts. It
effectively reduces the redundancies through the set prediction strategy, making the ICA layers very efficient and
further allowing us to design an architecture that makes
parallel clip-wise predictions for the whole video clip. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the superiority of
our method: a state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance (84.7%
mAP) on the ImageNet VID dataset while running at a speed
about 7× faster (39.3 fps) than previous SOTAs.

Relation Network

1. Introduction
Video Object Detection (VID) aims to recognize and localize the objects in all frames given a video clip. It is a
challenging task as it must handle the complex appearance
variations of video objects, caused by motion blur, occlusion, rotation, unusual poses, and deformable shapes, etc.
To tackle these issues, prior works [16, 26, 27, 53] utilize a
set of support frames (e.g., neighboring frames of the target
frame), which provide rich temporal contexts, to guide the
∗ Corresponds to qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au. Code is available
at https://github.com/bladewaltz1/clipvid.

RPN

Target frame

RPN

RPN

Support frames

Figure 1. Illustration of the temporal context aggregation in a typical VID method [45]. The region proposals from the support
frames (dashed boxes) are treated indiscriminately regardless of
their object identities. However, to detect the cat in the target
frame, the region proposals with red dashed boxes should provide
more relevant information, as they are obtained from the same cat.

object detection in the target frame. For example, [52, 43, 3]
build grid-level relations between the feature maps of the
support frames and the target frame to propagate temporal
contexts. More recent SOTA methods [45, 8, 19, 10, 28]
adopt object-level relation modules [24] to leverage the region proposals extracted from long-range support frames to
enhance the object representations in the target frame.
However, as shown in Figure 1, the temporal contexts
from the support frames usually contain irrelevant and noisy
information that may negatively affect the object representations. E.g., when detecting the cat in the target frame, the
yellow boxes in the support frames only provide information from different objects and even from the background.
On the other hand, the red boxes are different local views
of the same cat, showing it from various perspectives. Intuitively, incorporating these local views into a unified representation could lead to a more comprehensive understanding of the object, and further facilitate the model to deal
with the rapid variations of the object appearance. Unfortunately, existing methods make no distinction between these
two kinds of temporal contexts. In light of this, we propose

13434

