This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Black Box Few-Shot Adaptation for Vision-Language models
Yassine Ouali1 Adrian Bulat1 Brais Matinez1 Georgios Tzimiropoulos1,2
1
Samsung AI Cambridge 2 Queen Mary University of London
{y.ouali, brais.a}@samsung.com, adrian@adrianbulat.com, g.tzimiropoulos@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
Vision-Language (V-L) models trained with contrastive
learning to align the visual and language modalities have
been shown to be strong few-shot learners. Soft prompt
learning is the method of choice for few-shot downstream
adaption aiming to bridge the modality gap caused by
the distribution shift induced by the new domain. While
parameter-efficient, prompt learning still requires access
to the model weights and can be computationally infeasible for large models with billions of parameters. To address these shortcomings, in this work, we describe a blackbox method for V-L few-shot adaptation that (a) operates
on pre-computed image and text features and hence works
without access to the model’s weights, (b) it is orders of
magnitude faster at training time, (c) it is amenable to
both supervised and unsupervised training, and (d) it can
be even used to align image and text features computed
from uni-modal models. To achieve this, we propose Linear Feature Alignment (LFA), a simple linear approach for
V-L re-alignment in the target domain. LFA is initialized
from a closed-form solution to a least-squares problem and
then it is iteratively updated by minimizing a re-ranking
loss. Despite its simplicity, our approach can even surpass
soft-prompt learning methods as shown by extensive experiments on 11 image and 2 video datasets.
Code available at: https://github.com/saic-fi/LFA

1. Introduction
Large-scale Vision-Language (V-L) models [60] trained
with contrastive learning currently represent the de-facto
approach for few-shot visual adaptation. Their unprecedented success lies in part in the strength of the joint V-L
embedding space learned by aligning the image and text
modalities. However, when a V-L model is applied to a
new domain, the domain shift exacerbates the V-L modality
gap [48], and some sort of adaptation is required to obtain
high accuracy (see Fig. 1(a)). The question that we want
to address in this paper is: “can we effectively adapt a V-L
model to a new domain by having access to pre-computed

features only?” We call this black-box adaptation.
Similar to their NLP counterparts [60, 44], soft prompt
learning has emerged as the preferred technique for adapting a V&L to new tasks. Specifically, a number of
works [86, 85, 11, 87, 15, 67, 51, 36] have proposed to
replace the manually designed prompts of [60] (e.g., a
photo of a {cls name}), with a sequence of learnable vectors, coined soft prompts. These are passed as input
to the text encoder jointly with the class name cls name to
create the new prototypes effectively reducing the modality
gap. The prompts are learned in a supervised manner using
a standard cross-entropy loss given a set of labeled images.
While soft-prompt learning approaches demonstrate
promising results on various downstream tasks [86, 85, 11],
they suffer from two limitations: (1) They require access
to the model’s weights, and (2) the training cost can be
prohibitive, especially on commodity hardware and lowpower devices, as computing the gradients and updating
the prompts for thousands of iterations [86] is required. As
the model’s size continues to grow (e.g., billion-parameter
models such as CoCa [80]), and the industry transitions to
models as a service (e.g., via API), the existing methods can
be rendered either inapplicable or impractical.
In this work, we seek to address these limitations by
bridging the modality gap directly in the feature space without prompting or access to the model’s weights. We first
empirically show that a simple linear transformation can approximate the alignment effect of prompt learning (e.g., see
Fig. 1 and Sec. 3). Importantly, this shows that it is possible
to derive a black-box method that manipulates the CLIP features directly for downstream adaptation. Then, motivated
by this observation, we propose Linear Feature Alignment
(LFA), a black-box method that learns a linear mapping W,
obtained by solving a simple optimization problem, which
effectively aligns the image features X with their text class
W
prototypes Y, i.e., X −−→ Y. Specifically, our contributions are:
• We propose the very first black-box method for the
few-shot adaptation of V-L models.
• To this end, and motivated by the observation that
prompting can be successfully approximated by a lin-

15534

