This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StyleGANEX: StyleGAN-Based Manipulation Beyond Cropped Aligned Faces
Shuai Yang

Liming Jiang Ziwei Liu Chen Change Loy
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

{shuai.yang, liming002, ziwei.liu, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg
(b)

(a)
Modigliani

input

output

output

pose

output

(c)

age

outputs

input

output

(d)

input

outputs

input

outputs

(e)

input

output

output

Figure 1: We expand StyleGAN to encompass a diverse set of tasks that go beyond the constraints of cropped aligned faces.

Abstract
Recent advances in face manipulation using StyleGAN
have produced impressive results. However, StyleGAN is
inherently limited to cropped aligned faces at a fixed image
resolution it is pre-trained on. In this paper, we propose a
simple and effective solution to this limitation by using dilated convolutions to rescale the receptive fields of shallow
layers in StyleGAN, without altering any model parameters.
This allows fixed-size small features at shallow layers to be
extended into larger ones that can accommodate variable
resolutions, making them more robust in characterizing unaligned faces. To enable real face inversion and manipulation, we introduce a corresponding encoder that provides
the first-layer feature of the extended StyleGAN in addition
to the latent style code. We validate the effectiveness of our
method using unaligned face inputs of various resolutions
in a diverse set of face manipulation tasks, including facial attribute editing, super-resolution, sketch/mask-to-face
translation, and face toonification. Project page https:
//www.mmlab-ntu.com/project/styleganex

1. Introduction
StyleGAN [17, 18] has emerged as one of the most successful models for generating high-quality faces. Building
upon StyleGAN, researchers have developed a range of face
manipulation models [1, 23, 29, 26, 10, 28, 40, 36]. These
models typically map real face images or other face-related
inputs to the latent space of StyleGAN, perform semantic
editing in the latent space, and then map the edited latent
code back to the image space. This approach enables a variety of tasks, including facial attribute editing, face restoration, sketch-to-face translation, and face toonification. As
the manipulated faces remain within the generative space of
StyleGAN, the quality of the image output is guaranteed.
Despite its ability to ensure high-quality image output,
the generative space of StyleGAN is limited by a fixed-crop
constraint that restricts image resolution and face layout. As
a result, existing face manipulation models based on StyleGAN can only handle cropped and aligned face images. In
such images with a limited field of view (FoV), the face
typically dominates the image, leaving little room for back-

21000

