This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improved Knowledge Transfer for Semi-supervised Domain Adaptation via
Trico Training Strategy
Ba Hung Ngo, Yeon Jeong Chae, Jung Eun Kwon, Jae Hyeon Park and Sung In Cho*
Department of Multimedia Engineering, Dongguk University
{ngohung, toshinyg, kje 9912}@dgu.ac.kr

Abstract
The motivation of the semi-supervised domain adaptation (SSDA) is to train a model by leveraging knowledge
acquired from the plentiful labeled source combined with
extremely scarce labeled target data to achieve the lowest error on the unlabeled target data at the testing time.
However, due to inter-domain and intra-domain discrepancies, the improvement of classification accuracy is limited.
To solve these, we propose the Trico-training method that
utilizes a multilayer perceptron (MLP) classifier and two
graph convolutional network (GCN) classifiers called interview GCN and intra-view GCN classifiers. The first cotraining strategy exploits a correlation between MLP and
inter-view GCN classifiers to minimize the inter-domain discrepancy, in which the inter-view GCN classifier provides
its pseudo labels to teach the MLP classifier, which encourages class representation alignment across domains. In
contrast, the MLP classifier gives feedback to the inter-view
GCN classifier by using a new concept, ‘pseudo-edge’, for
neighbor’s feature aggregation. Doing this increases the
data structure mining ability of the inter-view GCN classifier; thus, the quality of generated pseudo labels is improved. The second co-training strategy between MLP and
intra-view GCN is conducted in a similar way to reduce the
intra-domain discrepancy by enhancing the correlation between labeled and unlabeled target data. Due to an imbalance in classification accuracy between inter-view and
intra-view GCN classifiers, we propose the third co-training
strategy that encourages them to cooperate to address this
problem. We verify the effectiveness of the proposed method
on three standard SSDA benchmark datasets: Office-31,
Office-Home, and DomainNet. The extended experimental
results show that our method surpasses the prior state-ofthe-art approaches in SSDA.

1. Introduction
Recently, the semi-supervised domain adaptation
(SSDA) task has received much attention because the
* Corresponding author.

{pjh0011, csi2267}@dongguk.edu

target classification accuracy significantly increases thanks
to a little labeled target data during training. However,
it releases a new issue called intra-domain discrepancy
presenting the difference between labeled and unlabeled
target data within the target domain. Specifically, only the
unlabeled target data having a strong correlation with the
labeled target data is attracted for alignment, while the
unlabeled target data having a less correlation with the
labeled target data can be misaligned. Therefore, SSDA
is still a challenging task because of existing inter-domain
and intra-domain discrepancies, as represented in Figure 1.
The inter-domain discrepancy occurs due to the different
data distribution between source and target domains called
domain shift [27]. To alleviate inter-domain discrepancy,
the previous works [1, 4, 24, 28, 34] rely much on the adversarial learning strategy. In contrast, to solve the intradomain discrepancy, many approaches [10,11,15,19,25] increase the correlation between labeled and unlabeled target
representations by using contrastive learning or clustering
integrated with the pseudo-labeling strategy. For example,
CDAC [10] combines the pseudo labeling and clustering
methods to enhance the relationship between labeled and
unlabeled target data, while Con2 DA [19] and CLDA [25]
select a solution combining pseudo labeling and contrastive
learning. However, the classification accuracy of these approaches has opportunities for improvement because their
multilayer perceptron (MLP) classifiers often misclassify
the unlabeled target data since the inter-domain and intradomain discrepancies still exist. This is because the quality
and quantity of pseudo labels generated by these MLP classifiers are still limited. Indeed, the MLP classifier only has
the ability to exploit the semantic information of each individual image; thus, it can be failed to capture neighbor features for generalizing data structure for training. To solve
this problem, we take advantage of the graph convolutional
network (GCN) classifier for the neighbor feature aggregation that effectively mines the data structure. To be specific,
we use an inter-view GCN classifier to elaborately exploit
label information on the rich source data that provides an
inter-view observation on the unlabeled target data. Then,

19214

