This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OFVL-MS: Once for Visual Localization across Multiple Indoor Scenes
Tao Xie1 , Kun Dai1 , Siyi Lu1,2 , Ke Wang1, ,* Zhiqiang Jiang1 , Jinghan Gao1 ,
Dedong Liu1 , Jie Xu1 , Lijun Zhao1,3, *, Ruifeng Li1, *
1

Harbin Institute of Technology 2 China Coal Science and Technology Intelligent Storage Technology Co., Ltd.
3
Harbin Institute of Technology, Zhengzhou Research Institute
{xietao1997, wangke, jeff xu, zhaolj, lrf100}@hit.edu.cn
{20s108237, 19S108222, 20s108237, 22s108222, 22S108237}@stu.hit.edu.cn

Abstract
In this work, we seek to predict camera poses across
scenes with a multi-task learning manner, where we view
the localization of each scene as a new task. We propose
OFVL-MS, a unified framework that dispenses with the traditional practice of training a model for each individual
scene and relieves gradient conflict induced by optimizing
multiple scenes collectively, enabling efficient storage yet
precise visual localization for all scenes. Technically, in
the forward pass of OFVL-MS, we design a layer-adaptive
sharing policy with a learnable score for each layer to automatically determine whether the layer is shared or not.
Such sharing policy empowers us to acquire task-shared parameters for a reduction of storage cost and task-specific
parameters for learning scene-related features to alleviate
gradient conflict. In the backward pass of OFVL-MS, we
introduce a gradient normalization algorithm that homogenizes the gradient magnitude of the task-shared parameters
so that all tasks converge at the same pace. Furthermore, a
sparse penalty loss is applied on the learnable scores to facilitate parameter sharing for all tasks without performance
degradation. We conduct comprehensive experiments on
multiple benchmarks and our new released indoor dataset
LIVL, showing that OFVL-MS families significantly outperform the state-of-the-arts with fewer parameters. We also
verify that OFVL-MS can generalize to a new scene with
much few parameters while gaining superior localization
performance. The dataset and evaluation code is available
at https://github.com/mooncake199809/UFVL-Net.

1. Introduction
Visual localization, a challenging task that aims to forecast 6-DOF camera pose on a provided RGB image, is an
integral part of several computer vision tasks, such as simul* Corresponding author.

taneous localization and mapping [51, 32, 5] and structurefrom-motion [11, 31].
Typically, classical structure-based visual localization
frameworks [36, 34, 59, 58] construct 2D keypoints and
3D scene coordinates associations by matching local descriptors, and afterwards use a RANSAC-based PnP algorithm [15, 25] to retrieve camera pose. Recently, with the
advancements of deep learning [57, 56, 41, 49, 48], scene
coordinate regression (SCoRe) based methods [26, 13, 61,
53, 16, 10], which trains a convolutional neural network
(CNN) to regress the 3D scene coordinate corresponding
to each pixel in the input image and calculates camera pose
with PnP algorithm [25], establish state-of-the-art localization performance in small static scenes. Compared with
structure-based methods, these methods require no database
of images or local descriptors and can benefit from highprecision sensors. While SCoRe based methods achieve
impressive results, they come with some drawbacks. Scene
coordinate regression is scene-specific and required to be
trained for new scenes, resulting in a linear increase in total model size with the number of scenes. After witnessing the success of SCoRe-based methods, a naive problem
arise: could a single SCoRe-based model predict 3D coordinates for multiple scenes concurrently and generalize to a
new scene? Solving this problem is a key step towards truly
SCoRe-based model deployment on autonomous robots.
A naive solution to this problem is that using a shared
backbone to extract features from multiple scenes and then
leveraging different regression heads to regress scene coordinates for each scene. Nevertheless, jointly optimizing
cross-scene localization with a fully shared backbone exists
an insurmountable obstacle, i.e., gradient conflict induced
by competition among different tasks for shared parameters, resulting in inferior performance compared with learning tasks separately [27, 7, 14, 17]. Towards this end, we
propose OFVL-MS, a unified SCoRe-based framework that
optimizes visual localization of multiple scenes collectively.
OFVL-MS is a multi-task learning (MTL) [12, 23, 29, 8,

5516

