This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DARTH: Holistic Test-time Adaptation for Multiple Object Tracking
Mattia Segu1,2 , Bernt Schiele2 , Fisher Yu1
1
ETH Zurich, 2 Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
segum@ethz.ch, schiele@mpi-inf.mpg.de, i@yf.io

t = t̂

No Adap.
Target
DARTH

Multiple object tracking (MOT) is a fundamental component of perception systems for autonomous driving, and its
robustness to unseen conditions is a requirement to avoid
life-critical failures. Despite the urge of safety in driving
systems, no solution to the MOT adaptation problem to domain shift in test-time conditions has ever been proposed.
However, the nature of a MOT system is manifold - requiring object detection and instance association - and adapting all its components is non-trivial. In this paper, we analyze the effect of domain shift on appearance-based trackers, and introduce DARTH, a holistic test-time adaptation
framework for MOT. We propose a detection consistency
formulation to adapt object detection in a self-supervised
fashion, while adapting the instance appearance representations via our novel patch contrastive loss. We evaluate
our method on a variety of domain shifts - including sim-toreal, outdoor-to-indoor, indoor-to-outdoor - and substantially improve the source model performance on all metrics.
Project page: https://www.vis.xyz/pub/darth.

t = t̂ + k

Source

Abstract

1. Introduction

Figure 1. We illustrate the effect of domain shift on MOT, and
how our test-time adaptation technique (DARTH) counteracts it.
The top row shows the in-domain performance of a model trained
on the synthetic dataset SHIFT [60] (Source); the same model (No
Adap.) suffers from domain shift when deployed on the real-world
BDD100K [70] (Target); the bottom row shows the benefits of
DARTH. Each row shows two frames spaced by k =2 seconds;
boxes of the same color correspond to the same tracking ID.

Multiple object tracking (MOT) represents a cornerstone
of modern perception systems for challenging computer vision applications, such as autonomous driving [17], video
surveillance [16], behavior analysis [26], and augmented reality [46]. Laying the ground for safety-critical downstream
perception and planning tasks - e.g. obstacle avoidance, motion estimation, prediction of vehicles and pedestrians intentions, and the consequent path planning - the robustness
of MOT to diverse conditions is of uttermost importance.
However, domain shift [28] could result in lifethreatening failures of MOT pipelines, due to the perception system’s inability to understand previously unseen environments and provide meaningful signals for downstream
planning. To the best of our knowledge, despite the urge of
addressing domain adaptation for MOT to enable safer driving and video analysis, no solution has ever been proposed.
This paper analyzes the effect of domain shift on MOT,

and proposes a test-time adaptation solution to counteract it.
We focus on appearance-based tracking, which shows stateof-the-art performance across a variety of datasets [19], outperforms motion-based trackers in complex scenarios - i.e.
BDD100K [70] - and complements motion cues for superior
tracking performance [75]. Since appearance-based trackers [31, 66, 1, 45] associate detections through time based
on the similarity of their learnable appearance embeddings,
domain shift threatens the performance of both their detection and instance association stages (Table 1).
Test-time adaptation (TTA) offers a practical solution to
domain shift by adapting a pre-trained model to any unlabeled target domain in absence of the original source domain. However, current TTA techniques are tailored to
classification tasks [63, 8, 64, 40] or require altering the
source training procedure [61, 35, 42], and they have been
19717

