This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Masked Autoencoders Are Stronger Knowledge Distillers
Shanshan Lao1 * Guanglu Song2 Boxiao Liu2 Yu Liu2† Yujiu Yang1†
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Sensetime Research
laoss21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {songguanglu, liuboxiao}@sensetime.com
liuyuisanai@gmail.com, yang.yujiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) has shown great success in
improving student’s performance by mimicking the intermediate output of the high-capacity teacher in fine-grained
visual tasks, e.g. object detection. This paper proposes
a technique called Masked Knowledge Distillation (MKD)
that enhances this process using a masked autoencoding
scheme. In MKD, random patches of the input image are
masked, and the corresponding missing feature is recovered by forcing it to imitate the output of the teacher. MKD
is based on two core designs. First, using the student
as the encoder, we develop an adaptive decoder architecture, which includes a spatial alignment module that operates on the multi-scale features in the feature pyramid
network (FPN) [20], a simple decoder, and a spatial recovery module that mimics the teacher’s output from the
latent representation and mask tokens. Second, we introduce the masked convolution in each convolution block to
keep the masked patches unaffected by others. By coupling
these two designs, we can further improve the completeness
and effectiveness of teacher knowledge learning. We conduct extensive experiments on different architectures with
object detection and semantic segmentation. The results
show that all the students can achieve further improvements
compared to the conventional KD. Notably, we establish the
new state-of-the-art results by boosting RetinaNet ResNet18, and ResNet-50 from 33.4 to 37.5 mAP, and 37.4 to 41.5
mAP, respectively.

1. Introduction
As fundamental tasks in computer vision, high-level visual predictions such as object detection, instance segmentation, and semantic segmentation have been widely used in
various practical applications. In real-world scenarios, improving the performance of the deployable models is crucial. Improving the performance of a lightweight student
* Work done during internship at SenseTime Research.
† Corresponding authors.

Input Image

Feature of teacher

FitNet

FGD

MKD

Figure 1: Visualization of feature maps of teacher networks
(RetinaNet-ResX101) and student networks (RetinaNetRes50) with different KD paradigms.
model via a high-capacity teacher introduces an effective
paradigm, which is widely known as Knowledge Distillation (KD) [16, 4]. For dense visual prediction tasks, featurebased distillation [17, 7, 11] is more beneficial for the student to mimic the teacher’s intermediate features. Some
elaborated feature-based distillation methods [29, 4, 40, 18]
have established the state-of-the-art performance for many
lightweight models such as ResNet-18 [15].
The core bottleneck of such feature-based KD is how
to learn the complete knowledge from the teacher’s output
containing about 20K spatial coordinates (calculated on the
COCO training set). According to our experiment, 72% of
them are simple enough and converge quickly to achieve
∼90% similarity with the teacher’s output. The remaining important knowledge is suppressed by this large number of simple samples, and it is difficult for the student to
learn effectively. To further verify the existence of information redundancy in teacher features, we conduct experiments that, when 30% of the features are randomly masked
during training and testing on Retina-R101 (38.4 mAP),
it still achieved similar performance (38.1 mAP). Previous
works [34, 46] point out similar observations that each pixel
contributes equally if using a common distillation loss (e.g.
MSE), which will cause the network to easily learn a lot
of similar information and is hard to identify important information. So they use attention [45, 40] and decouple the

6384

