This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Algebraically rigorous quaternion framework for the neural network pose
estimation problem
Chen Lin
CCB & CCM, Flatiron Institute, New York, NY, USA
clin@flatironinstitute.org

Andrew J. Hanson
Dept. of Computer Science, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA
hansona@indiana.edu

Sonya M. Hanson
CCB & CCM, Flatiron Institute, New York, NY, USA
shanson@flatironinstitute.org

Abstract
The 3D pose estimation problem – aligning pairs of noisy
3D point clouds – is a problem with a wide variety of realworld applications. Here we focus on the use of quaternionbased neural network approaches to this problem and apparent anomalies that have arisen in previous efforts to resolve them. In addressing these anomalies, we draw heavily from the extensive literature on closed-form methods to
solve this problem. We suggest that the major concerns
that have been put forward could be resolved using a simple multi-valued training target derived from rigorous theoretical properties of the rotation-to-quaternion map of BarItzhack. This multi-valued training target is then demonstrated to have good performance for both simulated and
ModelNet targets. We provide a comprehensive theoretical
context, using the quaternion adjugate, to confirm and establish the necessity of replacing single-valued quaternion
functions by quaternions treated in the extended domain of
multiple-charted manifolds.

1. Introduction
The basic problem of pose estimation, or specifically 3D
point cloud alignment, is important in a wide variety of disciplines, including machine vision, astronautics, robotics,
and proteomics, with further applications for the general
rotation learning problem in fields ranging from scene reconstruction and cryo-electron microscopy to self-driving
cars and robotics. Efforts seeking how to effectively represent rotations in the context of neural networks have raised

concerns about possible deficiencies in the use of quaternions [24, 43]. Additionally, Xiang & Li [37, 38] have
observed that multiple heuristic charts for a quaternion atlas can resolve some of these objections. Here we provide
a rigorous theoretical basis for the quaternion atlas by exploiting the quaternion adjugate matrix to understand and
resolve the apparent anomalies, concluding that quaternions
have no fundamental defects for this task.
Algebraic Solutions to Pose Estimation We begin by
noting the existence of extensive literature on linear algebra techniques for solving the point-cloud alignment problem in closed form, referred to alternatively as the “Generalized Procrustes Problem” [8], the Kabsch problem [19],
or RMSD (root mean squared deviation) [6, 10, 15, 16, 28],
depending on the field. This is important because the algebraic insights in this literature can inform neural network approaches to similar problems. This algebraic approach completely solves the 3D pose estimation problem
with matched input data, with or without noise, and serves
as an initial benchmark to evaluate machine learning approaches to this class of problems. As shown in Fig. (1)
the algebraic solution provides an order of magnitude improvement on the 3D pose estimation problem in comparison to the current best quaternion-based machine learning
approach [24]. Regarding algebraic solutions to the 3D
pose estimation problem, there are three threads of relevant
work: the SVD method [28], a direct approach using matrix square roots [15], both of which apply to any dimension, and an extensive quaternion-eigensystem based literature [6, 10, 15, 16] that applies specifically to dimensions
2, 3, and 4. We remark that, technically, the existence of

14097

