This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CTVIS: Consistent Training for Online Video Instance Segmentation
Kaining Ying1,2 * Qing Zhong4 * Weian Mao4
Lin Yuanbo Wu5 Yifan Liu4 Chengxiang Fan1
1

Zhenhua Wang3† Hao Chen1†
Yunzhi Zhuge4 Chunhua Shen1

2

Zhejiang University

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology
College of Information Engineering, Northwest A&F University
4
5
The University of Adelaide, Australia
Swansea University, UK
3

https://github.com/KainingYing/CTVIS
Training

Abstract
The discrimination of instance embeddings plays a vital
role in associating instances across time for online video
instance segmentation (VIS). Instance embedding learning is directly supervised by the contrastive loss computed
upon the contrastive items (CIs), which are sets of anchor/positive/negative embeddings. Recent online VIS methods leverage CIs sourced from one reference frame only,
which we argue is insufficient for learning highly discriminative embeddings. Intuitively, a possible strategy to enhance
CIs is replicating the inference phase during training. To
this end, we propose a simple yet effective training strategy,
called Consistent Training for Online VIS (CTVIS), which
devotes to aligning the training and inference pipelines in
terms of building CIs. Specifically, CTVIS constructs CIs by
referring inference the momentum-averaged embedding and
the memory bank storage mechanisms, and adding noise to
the relevant embeddings. Such an extension allows a reliable
comparison between embeddings of current instances and
the stable representations of historical instances, thereby
conferring an advantage in modeling VIS challenges such as
occlusion, re-identification, and deformation. Empirically,
CTVIS outstrips the SOTA VIS models by up to +5.0 points
on three VIS benchmarks, including YTVIS19 (55.1% AP),
YTVIS21 (50.1% AP) and OVIS (35.5% AP). Furthermore,
we find that pseudo-videos transformed from images can
train robust models surpassing fully-supervised ones.

1. Introduction
Video instance segmentation is a joint vision task involving classifying, segmenting, and tracking interested instances
* KY (email: kaining.ying.cv@gmail.com) and QZ contributed
equally to this work. This work was done when KY, QZ, WM, YZ were
visiting Zhejiang University.
† Correponding authors.

Ref.
Key
(a) Previous (e.g., IDOL)

Memory Bank
(b) CTVIS (Ours)

Inference

Memory Bank
Frame

Association

Update

Build CI

Update with Noise

Figure 1. Comparison of inconsistent and consistent training (Ours).
(a) Previous methods typically build contrastive items (CIs) and supervise the instance embeddings between key and reference frames.
We call this paradigm inconsistent training, where the interaction
with the long-term memory bank during training and the lack of
modeling for long video in real inference scenarios is overlooked.
(b) The purpose of CTVIS is to align the training and inference
pipelines. Specifically, CTVIS constructs training stage CIs by
leveraging the memory bank and incorporates noise during the
memory bank updating to simulate real-world scenarios, such as
ID switching, that can occur during inference.

across videos [27]. It is critical in many video-based applications, such as video surveillance, video editing, autonomous
driving, augmented reality, etc. Current mainstream VIS
methods [4, 11–13, 15, 24–28] can be categorized into offline
and online groups. The former [4, 11, 13, 24, 25] segments
and classifies all video frames simultaneously and makes the
instance association in a single step. The latter [12, 26–28]
takes as input a video in a frame-by-frame fashion, detecting
and segmenting objects per frame while associating instances
across time. In this paper, we focus on the online branch.
Online methods are typically built upon image-level instance segmentation models [5, 8, 22, 34, 35]. Several works
[17, 21, 27] utilize convolution-based instance segmentation
models to segment each frame and associate instances by
incorporating heuristic clues, such as mask-overlapping ratios and the similarity of appearance. However, these hand-

899

