This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Frequency Guidance Matters in Few-Shot Learning
Hao Cheng1
Siyuan Yang1
Joey Tianyi Zhou2,3
Lanqing Guo1
Bihan Wen1 *
1
2
Nanyang Technological University
Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR, Singapore
3
Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC), A*STAR, Singapore
{hao006,siyuan005,lanqing001,bihan.wen}@ntu.edu.sg

Support

Abstract
Few-shot classification aims to learn a discriminative
feature representation to recognize unseen classes with few
labeled support samples. While most few-shot learning
methods focus on exploiting the spatial information of image samples, frequency representation has also been proven
essential in classification tasks. In this paper, we investigate the effect of different frequency components on the
few-shot learning tasks. To enhance the performance and
generalizability of few-shot methods, we propose a novel
Frequency-Guided Few-shot Learning framework (dubbed
FGFL), which leverages the task-specific frequency components to adaptively mask the corresponding image information, with a novel multi-level metric learning strategy including a triplet loss among original, masked and unmasked image as well as a contrastive loss between masked
and original support and query sets to exploit more discriminative information. Extensive experiments on four
benchmarks under several few-shot scenarios, i.e., standard, cross-dataset, cross-domain, and coarse-to-fine annotated classification, are conducted. Both qualitative and
quantitative results show that our proposed FGFL scheme
can attend to the class-discriminative frequency components, thus integrating those information towards more effective and generalizable few-shot learning.

1. Introduction
Deep learning typically relies on large-scale annotated
datasets to achieve superior results on image classification
tasks. However, the learned deep models may fail to generalize under some severe conditions, e.g., few data or annotations. Correspondingly, the task to classify a query sample
using only a few labeled data is known as few-shot classification [10, 40]. The key challenge is to learn the discriminative feature representation that can be generalized from
the given training set to novel testing classes. Recently, sev* Corresponding author.

zhouty@cfar.a-star.edu.sg

Query

Frequency
Mask

Figure 1: Visualizations of samples with different frequency
masks on the CUB dataset [41]. Samples with the same
color box belong to the same class. It is easier to distinguish two classes with masked specific frequency components. Each square on the left represents the masked status
of corresponding frequency components, i.e., the dark and
light color for masked and reserved, respectively. For each
row (column), top-to-bottom and left-to-right represent low
frequency to high frequency, respectively.

eral few-shot methods [36, 48, 58] have applied the metalearning framework [40] to build a discriminative feature
space by simulating numerous meta-tasks to obtain the generalized feature representation, achieving superior performance for recognizing novel classes.
However, very recent studies [3, 17, 26, 39] report that
existing methods may fail to generalize well to novel classes
due to large domain gaps between training and testing
sets, e.g., from general to fine-grained tasks or a specific
domain. In these cases, the learned feature embeddings
based on spatial images may capture excessive domainvariant information from the training patterns, leading to
degraded performance in the test scenario with a large domain gap. Several domain adaptation-based few-shot algorithms [26, 37, 39, 57] have been proposed to alleviate
the domain shift issues on few-shot classification. These

11814

