This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pyramid Dual Domain Injection Network for Pan-sharpening
Xuanhua He1,2 * Keyu Yan1,2 * Rui Li2 Chengjun Xie1,2 Jie Zhang2† Man Zhou3†
1
University of Science and Technology of China, China
2
Hefei Institute of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{hexuanhua,keyu}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {lirui,cjxie,zhangjie}@iim.ac.cn,manzhountu@gmail.com

Abstract
Pan-sharpening, a panchromatic image guided lowspatial-resolution multi-spectral super-resolution task,
aims to reconstruct the missing high-frequency information
of high-resolution multi-spectral counterpart. Although the
inborn connection with frequency domain, existing pansharpening research has almost investigated the potential
solution upon frequency domain, thus limiting the model
performance improvement. To this end, we first revisit the
degradation process of pan-sharpening in Fourier space,
and then devise a Pyramid Dual Domain Injection Pansharpening Network upon the above observation by fully
exploring and exploiting the distinguished information in
both the spatial and frequency domains. Specifically, the
proposed network is organized with multi-scale U-shape
manner and composed by two core parts: a spatial guidance pyramid sub-network for fusing local spatial information and a frequency guidance pyramid sub-network for
fusing global frequency domain information, thus encouraging dual-domain complementary learning. In this way,
the model can capture multi-scale dual-domain information to enable generating high-quality pan-sharpening results. Quantitative and qualitative experiments over multiple datasets demonstrate that our method performs the best
against other state-of-the-art ones and comprises a strong
generalization ability for real-world scenes.

1. Introduction
There is often a high demand for high-resolution multispectral (HRMS) images in the domain of agricultural
monitoring and mapping services. However, due to the
limitations of satellite sensors, the existing approaches
must instead separately capture high-resolution panchromatic (PAN) and multispectral low-resolution (LRMS) images and fuse them using a technique known as pan* Co-first authors contributed equally, † Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Frequency domain analysis of multi-scale PAN, MS,
and Ground Truth images. The amplitude, denoted by A, is displayed for the original-scale image, the 2-times downsampled image, and the 4-times downsampled image, from top to bottom, respectively. The last two columns show the degradation of PAN
and MS images relative to GT images.

sharpening to get the desired HRMS images. Essentially,
pan-sharpening is a super-resolution process that utilizes
the richer details of PAN images to guide the reconstruction process of LRMS images. Pan-sharpening technology
has expanded the use of remote sensing images in a wider
range and gained considerable attention.
Pan-sharpening has seen an increase in the use of deep
learning-based techniques in recent years. The PNN [16],
which started this trend, was motivated by the SRCNN [4]
to introduce the convolutional neural network. The PNN
presented a three-layer convolutional neural network that
concatenated LRMS and PAN images as input and subsequently generated the output through the network. Since
then, a flood of deep learning-based techniques has been developed to improve the model’s representation capacity by
employing deeper models or model-driven techniques [33,
29, 7, 32]. While significant progress has been made, there
are still limitations need to be addressed. Prior approaches
have primarily focused on spatial domain solutions, thereby
neglecting the exploration of frequency domain solutions.
Nevertheless, it has been established that CNNs in the spa-

12908

