This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EGformer: Equirectangular Geometry-biased Transformer for 360 Depth
Estimation
Ilwi Yun1

Chanyong Shin2
1

Hyunku Lee1

Hyuk-Jae Lee1

Chae Eun Rhee2

Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
2

Inha University, Incheon, Republic of Korea

yuniw@capp.snu.ac.kr, scyongg@inha.edu, hyunku.lee@snu.ac.kr,
hjlee@capp.snu.ac.kr, chae.rhee@inha.ac.kr

Abstract
Estimating the depths of equirectangular (i.e., 360◦ ) images (EIs) is challenging given the distorted 180◦ × 360◦
ﬁeld-of-view, which is hard to be addressed via convolutional neural network (CNN). Although a transformer with
global attention achieves signiﬁcant improvements over
CNN for EI depth estimation task, it is computationally
inefﬁcient, which raises the need for transformer with local attention. However, to apply local attention successfully for EIs, a speciﬁc strategy, which addresses distorted
equirectangular geometry and limited receptive ﬁeld simultaneously, is required. Prior works have only cared either
of them, resulting in unsatisfactory depths occasionally.
In this paper, we propose an equirectangular geometrybiased transformer termed EGformer. While limiting the
computational cost and the number of network parameters, EGformer enables the extraction of the equirectangular geometry-aware local attention with a large receptive
ﬁeld. To achieve this, we actively utilize the equirectangular
geometry as the bias for the local attention instead of struggling to reduce the distortion of EIs. As compared to the
most recent EI depth estimation studies, the proposed approach yields the best depth outcomes overall with the lowest computational cost and the fewest parameters, demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed methods.

1. Introduction
Estimating the depths of equirectangular (i.e., 360◦ ) images (EIs) can be challenging because such images have a
180◦ × 360◦ wide ﬁeld-of-view (FoV) with distortion. Images with distorted wide FoV often requires a global view
for proper image processing [20, 26, 53]. Such circumstances strongly require a large receptive ﬁeld for accurate
depth estimations of EIs, which is hard to be achieved via

(a) Input [55]

(b) Ground truth [55]

(c) Panoformer [32]
(77.7GFlops, 20.4M params)

(d) EGformer
(73.9GFlops,15.4M params)

Figure 1: By utilizing the equirectangular geometry as the
bias, EGformer efﬁciently enables the extraction of the
equirectangular geometry-aware local attention with a large
receptive ﬁeld, yielding much more accurate depths with
the lowest computational cost and the fewest parameters as
compared to the results in the most recent studies.

convolutional neural network (CNN).
Considering the receptive ﬁeld, the vision transformer
(ViT) [14] may be the best option for equirectangular depth
estimations. ViT has advantages over a CNN in that the attention is extracted in a global manner. A wide FoV can
be addressed through global attention, and the effectiveness of this approach has been demonstrated [53]. However,
in terms of the computational cost, this global mechanism
makes ViT inappropriate for application to EIs. The computational cost of global attention is quadratic with respect
to the input resolutions [23] which raises the need for local
attention [23, 22, 13, 18, 19].
Unfortunately, applying local attention to EIs is a nontrivial problem because the distorted geometry and local receptive ﬁeld should be addressed at the same time. Due
to the non-uniform geometry of EIs, each local attention should be extracted differently while considering the
equirectangular geometry. Therefore, local attention for
general vision tasks cannot yield satisfactory performance

6101

