This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

JOTR: 3D Joint Contrastive Learning with Transformers for
Occluded Human Mesh Recovery
Jiahao Li1,2†, Zongxin Yang1 , Xiaohan Wang1 , Jianxin Ma2 , Chang Zhou2 , Yi Yang1‡
1
ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group

Global Feat.
Regressor

…

3D Joint
Sampling

Flatting

…

…

3D Joint Feat. 2D Global Feat.

Regressor

Fusion
Transformer

GT 3D Joints

…
Comparison limited to
same-type joints

3D Feat.

SPIN

3DCrowdNet

Aligned Prediction

3D Joints

2D Joint Feat.

2D Feat.

Global Supervision
Cropped Image Patch 3D Feature Space

JOTR (Ours)

(a) Comparison with other methods

Previous Methods

Joint and Non-joint Different Class

Occluded
Target Person

2D Joint
Sampling

Predicted 3D Joints

Same Class

Spatial
Averaging

Local Supervision

FusionFeatReg

Two Joints

2D Joints

2D&3D Alignment

Regression Loss

JointFeatReg

Regression Loss

2D Alignment
AvgFeatReg

3D Joints
Push Far
Pull Close

Non-joint Voxel
Joint-to-Joint Contrast
Joint-to-Non-Joint Contrast

3D Joint Contrastive Learning (Ours)

(b) Optimization for 3D space

Figure 1: (a) Current methods for human mesh recovery could be classified into two categories: AvgFeatReg [25, 32]
and JointFeatReg [10, 56, 72], which focus on improving 2D alignment by using average 2D features (feat.) for regression
and employing sampled 2D joint feature for regression, respectively. In contrast, our proposed novel techniques (i.e.,
FusionFeatReg), fuse 2D and 3D features for regression to enhance both 2D and 3D alignment. (b) Moreover, to provide
global supervision for the entire 3D space, we introduce a 3D joint contrastive learning method, which stands in contrast to
previous approaches that solely apply 3D joints as local supervision.

Abstract
In this study, we focus on the problem of 3D human mesh
recovery from a single image under obscured conditions.
Most state-of-the-art methods aim to improve 2D alignment
technologies, such as spatial averaging and 2D joint sampling. However, they tend to neglect the crucial aspect of 3D
alignment by improving 3D representations. Furthermore,
recent methods struggle to separate the target human from
occlusion or background in crowded scenes as they optimize
the 3D space of target human with 3D joint coordinates as local supervision. To address these issues, a desirable method
would involve a framework for fusing 2D and 3D features
and a strategy for optimizing the 3D space globally. Therefore, this paper presents 3D JOint contrastive learning with
TRansformers (JOTR) framework for handling occluded 3D
human mesh recovery. Our method includes an encoderdecoder transformer architecture to fuse 2D and 3D representations for achieving 2D&3D aligned results in a coarseto-fine manner and a novel 3D joint contrastive learning
approach for adding explicitly global supervision for the 3D
†
‡

Jiahao Li worked on this at his Alibaba internship.
Yi Yang is the corresponding author.

feature space. The contrastive learning approach includes
two contrastive losses: joint-to-joint contrast for enhancing
the similarity of semantically similar voxels (i.e., human
joints), and joint-to-non-joint contrast for ensuring discrimination from others (e.g., occlusions and background). Qualitative and quantitative analyses demonstrate that our method
outperforms state-of-the-art competitors on both occlusionspecific and standard benchmarks, significantly improving
the reconstruction of occluded humans. Code is available at
https://github.com/xljh0520/JOTR.

1. Introduction
The estimation of 3D human meshes from single RGB
images is an active area of research in computer vision with
a broad range of applications in robotics, AR/VR, and human behavior analysis. In contrast to estimating the pose
of general objects [69], human mesh recovery is more challenging due to the complex and deformable structure of
the human body. Nevertheless, enhancing human-centric
tasks can be achieved by combining visual features and
prior knowledge about human anatomy through constructing multi-knowledge representations [66]. Generally, the

9110

