This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lighting up NeRF via Unsupervised Decomposition and Enhancement
Haoyuan Wang1 , Xiaogang Xu2,3 , Ke Xu1* , Rynson W.H. Lau1*
1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
2
Zhejiang Lab, 3 Zhejiang University
https://onpix.github.io/llnerf

Abstract
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) is a promising approach
for synthesizing novel views, given a set of images and the
corresponding camera poses of a scene. However, images
photographed from a low-light scene can hardly be used
to train a NeRF model to produce high-quality results, due
to their low pixel intensities, heavy noise, and color distortion. Combining existing low-light image enhancement
methods with NeRF methods also does not work well due
to the view inconsistency caused by the individual 2D enhancement process. In this paper, we propose a novel approach, called Low-Light NeRF (or LLNeRF), to enhance
the scene representation and synthesize normal-light novel
views directly from sRGB low-light images in an unsupervised manner. The core of our approach is a decomposition
of radiance field learning, which allows us to enhance the
illumination, reduce noise and correct the distorted colors
jointly with the NeRF optimization process. Our method
is able to produce novel view images with proper lighting
and vivid colors and details, given a collection of camerafinished low dynamic range (8-bits/channel) images from a
low-light scene. Experiments demonstrate that our method
outperforms existing low-light enhancement methods and
NeRF methods.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [22] is a powerful approach to render novel view images through learning scene
representations as implicit functions. These implicit functions are parameterized by multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs)
and optimized by measuring the colorimetric errors of the
input views. Consequently, high-quality input images are
the precondition for the high-quality results of NeRF. In
other words, training NeRF models typically requires the
input images to have high visibility, and almost all the pixels
to faithfully represent the scene illumination and object colors. However, when taking photos under low-light condi* Joint corresponding authors.

Input

LLE+NeRF

LLFlow [29]

SNR [34]
URetinexNet [31]
LLNeRF (Ours)
Figure 1. A comparison of the baseline model (LLE+NeRF),
SOTA low light enhancement models, and our model.

tions, the quality of the images is not guaranteed. Low-light
images typically have low visibility. Noise from the camera
is also relatively amplified due to the low photons, which
further buries the scene details and distorts object colors.
Such characteristics of low-light images fail existing NeRF
models in producing high-quality novel view images.
We note that recently there are some methods proposed
to train NeRF models from degraded inputs [21, 32, 18].
Ma et al. [18] present a method to synthesize novel view
images from blurry inputs taken in normal-light scenes.
Mildenhall et al. [21] show that when training with high dynamic range RAW data, NeRF can be robust to zero-mean
noise of low-light input images. Huang et al. [32] propose
HDR-NeRF, which produces high dynamic range (HDR)
novel views from a set of low dynamic range (LDR) input
images taken at different known exposure levels. The latter two methods take advantages of HDR information and
metadata (i.e., exposure levels) recorded in the RAW images to enhance the scene representations. However, these
methods do not work on camera-finished sRGB images (8bits/channel) taken in low-light scenes. Unlike RAW data,
sRGB images are produced by the camera ISP process.
They are of low dynamic range and low signal-to-noise ratio.
A straightforward solution to this problem is to first enhance the low-light input images and then use the enhanced

12632

