This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

iVS-Net: Learning Human View Synthesis from Internet Videos
Junting Dong1

Qi Fang2
1

Tianshuo Yang1

Qing Shuai 1
2

Zhejiang University

Chengyu Qiao1

Sida Peng1†

NetEase Games AI Lab

Input
Novel view synthesis
Input
Novel view synthesis
Figure 1: Given a single image of a person as input, our method can generate realistic novel view rendering. For invisible
regions such as the back of the subject, we can also obtain plausible results. Instead of limited 3D scans or multi-view images,
we only need monocular Internet videos for supervision, which enables it generalizable to in-the-wild images. The code and
dataset are available at https://zju3dv.github.io/ivsnet/.

1. Introduction

Abstract
Recent advances in implicit neural representations make
it possible to generate free-viewpoint videos of the human
from sparse view images. To avoid the expensive training
for each person, previous methods adopt the generalizable
human model and demonstrate impressive results. However, these methods usually rely on limited multi-view images typically collected in the studio or commercial highquality 3D scans for training, which heavily prohibits their
generalization capability for in-the-wild images. To solve
this problem, we propose a new approach to learn a generalizable human model from a new source of data, i.e.,
Internet videos. These videos capture various human appearances and poses and record the performers from abundant viewpoints. To exploit the Internet data, we present a
video self-supervised pipeline to enforce the local appearance consistency of each body part over different frames
of the same video. Once learned, the human model enables
realistic novel view synthesis from a single input image. Experiments show that our method can generate high-quality
view synthesis on in-the-wild images while only training on
monocular videos.
† Corresponding author: Sida Peng.

22942

Generating free-viewpoint videos of a human performer
is a core technology in various applications such as AR/VR,
telepresence, and gaming. While traditional methods have
demonstrated impressive results in free-viewpoint rendering, they typically rely on hundreds of calibrated and synchronized cameras [6, 12] or multiple RGBD sensors [8],
which makes them impractical to create free-viewpoint
videos for general users.
To make free-viewpoint video creation more accessible,
many approaches propose to reconstruct the human model
from sparse view or even single view RGB inputs. Given
sparse view videos as input (e.g. four views), recent works
[37, 36] have achieved photo-realistic novel view synthesis based on the neural radiance ﬁeld (NeRF) [32] in a
per-scene optimization setting. To avoid the expensive perscene optimization, some works [25, 53, 5] propose generalizable radiance ﬁelds conditioned on extracted image features and volumetric features. However, the training of all
these methods requires multi-view images usually collected
in the studio, which makes them have difﬁculty in generalizing to in-the-wild images. Instead of using multi-view images, some works [39, 54] achieve remarkable single-image
human geometry and appearance reconstruction by super-

