This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MotionDeltaCNN: Sparse CNN Inference of Frame Differences in Moving Camera
Videos with Spherical Buffers and Padded Convolutions
Mathias Parger1 Chengcheng Tang2 Thomas Neff1 Christopher D. Twigg2
Cem Keskin2 Robert Wang2
Markus Steinberger1
1
Graz University of Technology, 2 Meta Reality Labs
1

{mathias.parger, thomas.neff, steinberger}@icg.tugraz.at
2

{chengcheng.tang, cdtwigg, cemkeskin, rywang}@meta.com

Figure 1: MotionDeltaCNN leverages temporal continuity to accelerate CNN inference for videos with moving cameras
(bottom) by processing only the sparse frame differences based on a two-dimensional ring buffer, spherical buffer (top).
Instead of computing each frame individually, we process only the changes (row b) between the aligned current (row a) and
previous frames. Our padded convolution creates dilated values (top) which allow for seamless attachment of newly unveiled
tiles onto the existing spherical buffer (row c). With these concepts, MotionDeltaCNN speeds up inference by processing only
new regions or updated pixels (white areas in row d) without additional memory allocation.

Abstract
Convolutional neural network inference on video input is
computationally expensive and requires high memory bandwidth. Recently, DeltaCNN[26] managed to reduce the cost
by only processing pixels with significant updates over the
previous frame. However, DeltaCNN relies on static camera input. Moving cameras add new challenges in how to
fuse newly unveiled image regions with already processed
regions efficiently to minimize the update rate - without increasing memory overhead and without knowing the camera
extrinsics of future frames. In this work, we propose MotionDeltaCNN, a sparse CNN inference framework that supports
moving cameras. We introduce spherical buffers and padded
convolutions to enable seamless fusion of newly unveiled regions and previously processed regions – without increasing
memory footprint. Our evaluation shows that we outperform
DeltaCNN by up to 90% for moving camera videos.

1. Introduction
Real-time inference of convolutional neural networks
(CNN) with video streams remains a power-consuming task
and is often infeasible on mobile devices due to hardware
and thermal limitations, despite recent efforts aiming at efficient CNN inference through pruning [19, 14], quantization
[16, 24, 22], specialized hardware [6, 13, 5] or network
optimization [28, 31] Video input allows for performance
optimization through temporal similarity between frames.
One common method is to use large, slow networks for accurate predictions at key frames, updated with small, fast
networks at intermediate frames [34, 33, 20, 18, 9, 21, 12].
However, this approach requires special network design and
training and is not suitable for significant frame changes.
Sparse convolutions, on the other hand, can be used with
existing pre-trained models, accelerating the large network to
the speed of a smaller network without impacting prediction
accuracy significantly [25, 26]. The linearity of convolutions

17292

