This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FLatten Transformer: Vision Transformer using Focused Linear Attention
Dongchen Han* Xuran Pan∗ Yizeng Han Shiji Song Gao Huang†
Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University

Abstract
The quadratic computation complexity of self-attention
has been a persistent challenge when applying Transformer
models to vision tasks. Linear attention, on the other hand,
offers a much more efficient alternative with its linear complexity by approximating the Softmax operation through
carefully designed mapping functions. However, current
linear attention approaches either suffer from significant
performance degradation or introduce additional computation overhead from the mapping functions. In this paper,
we propose a novel Focused Linear Attention module to
achieve both high efficiency and expressiveness. Specifically, we first analyze the factors contributing to the performance degradation of linear attention from two perspectives: the focus ability and feature diversity. To overcome these limitations, we introduce a simple yet effective
mapping function and an efficient rank restoration module to enhance the expressiveness of self-attention while
maintaining low computation complexity. Extensive experiments show that our linear attention module is applicable to a variety of advanced vision Transformers, and
achieves consistently improved performances on multiple
benchmarks. Code is available at https://github.
com/LeapLabTHU/FLatten-Transformer.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the vast development of
Transformer and self-attention in the field of computer vision. With the advent of Vision Transformer [11, 39],
self-attention techniques have shown great potential in a
variety of vision tasks including image classification [41,
43, 30, 46], semantic segmentation [6, 49], object detection [4, 61, 22], and multi-modal tasks [35, 31].
However, applying Transformer to vision models is a
non-trivial task. Unlike lightweight convolution neural networks [37, 16, 44, 33], the quadratic computation complexity O(n2 ) with respect to sequence length n leads to
high computation costs when employing self-attention with
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

𝑻

𝑻

𝑻

𝑻

Figure 1. Difference between Softmax attention and Linear attention. Q, K, V ∈ RN×d denote query, key and value matrix
respectively. Softmax attention compels to compute the pairwise
similarity between queries and keys, and results in the complexity
of O(N 2 d). Linear attention manages to decouple the Softmax
operation with proper approximation and change the computation
order by computing K T V first, which leads to the complexity of
O(N d2 ). Considering that channel dimension d is usually smaller
than token number N in modern vision Transformer designs, e.g.,
d = 64, N = 196 in DeiT [39] and d = 32, N = 49 in Swin Transformer [24], linear attention modules practically save the overall
computation cost while can also enjoy the benefits of a larger receptive field and higher throughput.

a global receptive field. Previous works have sought to mitigate this challenge by confining the global receptive field
to a smaller region, such as designing sparse global attention patterns [41, 46] or applying smaller attention windows [24, 17]. Albeit effective, these methods are either
prone to disregarding informative features in other regions
due to their attention patterns or inevitably sacrifice the ability to model long-range dependencies.
Linear attention, on the other hand, has been considered
a simple yet effective alternative to address the computation dilemma by reducing the general complexity. Early
research leverages a locally-sensitive hashing scheme [21]
that compresses the computation complexity from O(n2 ) to
O(nlog(n)). Nevertheless, it introduces a large constant before the complexity term, which makes it still unaffordable
under common cases. More recent studies have noticed that
the utilization of Softmax function in the self-attention operation practically compels a pairwise computation between
all queries and keys, resulting in the predominant O(n2 )
complexity. To tackle this, several approaches adopt sim-

5961

