This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adversarial Bayesian Augmentation for Single-Source Domain Generalization
Sheng Cheng 1
Tejas Gokhale 1,2
Yezhou Yang 1
1
Arizona State University 2 University of Maryland, Baltimore County
scheng53@asu.edu, gokhale@umbc.edu, yz.yang@asu.edu

Abstract
Generalizing to unseen image domains is a challenging
problem primarily due to the lack of diverse training data,
inaccessible target data, and the large domain shift that may
exist in many real-world settings. As such data augmentation is a critical component of domain generalization methods that seek to address this problem. We present Adversarial Bayesian Augmentation (ABA), a novel algorithm that
learns to generate image augmentations in the challenging
single-source domain generalization setting. ABA draws on
the strengths of adversarial learning and Bayesian neural
networks to guide the generation of diverse data augmentations – these synthesized image domains aid the classifier in generalizing to unseen domains. We demonstrate the
strength of ABA on several types of domain shift including style shift, subpopulation shift, and shift in the medical imaging setting. ABA outperforms all previous stateof-the-art methods, including pre-specified augmentations,
pixel-based and convolutional-based augmentations. Code:
https://github.com/shengcheng/ABA.

1. Introduction
Improving the generalization of deep neural networks
to out-of-distribution samples is a fundamental yet challenging problem in machine learning and computer vision [48, 25, 34]. Typically, neural networks are trained and
tested on data samples from the same distribution (under the
i.i.d. assumption); under this setting, image classifiers have
achieved impressive performances. However, in real-world
applications, the distribution of test samples can drastically
differ from the training samples [47, 37]. This is especially
problematic when the process of acquiring labeled samples
from the target test domain is expensive or infeasible, making it difficult to apply semi-supervised learning for domain
adaptation [55, 53]. Therefore, there is a need to develop
techniques that enable deep neural networks to capture the
domain-invariant patterns in the data [34, 51], facilitating
improved generalization to out-of-distribution samples.
In the multi-source domain generalization (MSDG) set-

Source

Target

Figure 1: An illustration of the diversity introduced by Adversial Bayesian Augmentations. The blue and orange surfaces represent the source (seen) and target (unseen) domains respectively. The red dots represent the samples augmented by ABA; these augmentations expose the classifier
to regions closer to the target domain, thereby improving
image classifiers’ generalization to unseen domains.

ting, where there are multiple source domains for training,
domain label information can be leveraged to learn the domain shift [34, 7, 51]. Prior information about the target
domain is also useful to design specific data augmentation methods to tackle domain shift. For instance, if it is
known that the target domain contains sketches, skeletonizing the source images is a good solution [13]; if it is known
that the target domain contains geometric transformations,
rotation/translation/scaling would be a suitable augmentation [21]; or if attributes of the target domain are known they
can be used for learning data augmentations [14]. However, these methods assume that we know the properties of
the target domain – such knowledge is not available in the
single-source domain generalization (SSDG) setting. In the
SSDG setting, where only one domain is available for training, it is more challenging to address the domain shift issue.
In this paper, we focus on the strict SSDG setting, where
only one source domain is available for training and no prior
knowledge is available about the target domain.
Recent work in SSDG focuses on augmenting the data
in order to simulate the presence of out-of-distribution do-

11400

