This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LiDAR-Camera Panoptic Segmentation via Geometry-Consistent and
Semantic-Aware Alignment
Zhiwei Zhang1† Zhizhong Zhang2,3† Qian Yu2 Ran Yi1 Yuan Xie2,3∗ Lizhuang Ma1,2∗
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiaotong Univeristy, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, East China Normal University, China
3
Chongqing Institute of East China Normal University, China

1

{zhangzw12319, ranyi, lzma}@sjtu.edu.cn, {qianyu, zzzhang, yxie}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
3D panoptic segmentation is a challenging perception
task that requires both semantic segmentation and instance
segmentation. In this task, we notice that images could
provide rich texture, color, and discriminative information,
which can complement LiDAR data for evident performance
improvement, but their fusion remains a challenging problem. To this end, we propose LCPS, the first LiDAR-Camera
Panoptic Segmentation network. In our approach, we conduct LiDAR-Camera fusion in three stages: 1) an Asynchronous Compensation Pixel Alignment (ACPA) module
that calibrates the coordinate misalignment caused by asynchronous problems between sensors; 2) a Semantic-Aware
Region Alignment (SARA) module that extends the oneto-one point-pixel mapping to one-to-many semantic relations; 3) a Point-to-Voxel feature Propagation (PVP) module that integrates both geometric and semantic fusion information for the entire point cloud. Our fusion strategy
improves about 6.9% PQ performance over the LiDAR-only
baseline on NuScenes dataset. Extensive quantitative and
qualitative experiments further demonstrate the effectiveness of our novel framework. The code will be released at
https://github.com/zhangzw12319/lcps.git.

1. Introduction
3D scene perception has become an increasingly important task for a wide range of applications, including selfdriving and robotic navigation. Lying in the heart of 3D vision, 3D panoptic segmentation is a comprehensive perception task composed of semantic and instance segmentation
[15]. This is still challenging since it not only requires predicting semantic labels of each point for Stuff classes, such
as tree, road, but also needs recognizing instances for Thing
classes, e.g., car, bicycle, and pedestrian simultaneously.
* Corresponding authors; † equal contributions

Figure 1. The distinctions between LiDAR point cloud and images. (a) The red box displays a vehicle segment (orange points)
in the point cloud, where points are sparsely and unevenly distributed. (b) The lower-right green mask demonstrates a vehicle
with dense texture and color features, effectively detected via [40].
The upper-left blue mask (partly occluded) shows image features
that help detect small objects in the distance. Better zoomed in.

Currently, the leading 3D panoptic methods use LiDARonly data as input sources. However, We have observed that
using only LiDAR data for perception has some insufficiencies: 1) LiDAR point cloud is usually sparse and unevenly
distributed, as illustrated in Figure 1 (a), making it challenging for 3D networks to capture the notable difference
between the foreground and the background; 2) distant objects that occupy just a few points appear to be small in
the view and cannot be effectively detected. On the contrary, images provide rich texture and color information, as
shown in Figure 1 (b). This observation motivates us to use
images as an additional input source to complement LiDAR
sensors for scene perception. Moreover, most autonomous
driving systems come equipped with RGB cameras, which
makes LiDAR-Camera fusion studies more feasible.
Although LiDAR sensors and cameras complement each
other, their fusion strategy remains challenging. Existing
fusion strategy could be generally split into proposal-level
fusion [16], result-level fusion [27], and point-level fusion
[33, 12, 34], as summarized in PointAugmenting [35]. Yet,
proposal-level and result-level fusion focus on integrating

3662

