This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diff-Retinex: Rethinking Low-light Image Enhancement with A Generative
Diffusion Model
Xunpeng Yi1 , Han Xu1 , Hao Zhang, Linfeng Tang, and Jiayi Ma*
Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
{yixunpeng, xu han}@whu.edu.cn, {zhpersonalbox, linfeng0419, jyma2010}@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we rethink the low-light image enhancement task and propose a physically explainable and generative diffusion model for low-light image enhancement,
termed as Diff-Retinex. We aim to integrate the advantages
of the physical model and the generative network. Furthermore, we hope to supplement and even deduce the information missing in the low-light image through the generative network. Therefore, Diff-Retinex formulates the lowlight image enhancement problem into Retinex decomposition and conditional image generation. In the Retinex
decomposition, we integrate the superiority of attention
in Transformer and meticulously design a Retinex Transformer decomposition network (TDN) to decompose the
image into illumination and reflectance maps. Then, we
design multi-path generative diffusion networks to reconstruct the normal-light Retinex probability distribution and
solve the various degradations in these components respectively, including dark illumination, noise, color deviation,
loss of scene contents, etc. Owing to generative diffusion
model, Diff-Retinex puts the restoration of low-light subtle detail into practice. Extensive experiments conducted
on real-world low-light datasets qualitatively and quantitatively demonstrate the effectiveness, superiority, and generalization of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Images taken in low-light scenes are usually affected by
a variety of degradations, such as indefinite noise, low contrast, variable color deviation, etc. Among these degradations, the loss of scene structures is the most thorny. As
shown in Fig. 1, the loss of scene structures is not only
limited to affecting the visual effect but also reducing the
amount of information. Image enhancement is an effective approach to reduce the interference of degradations on
* Corresponding author
1 These authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1. Example of URetinex [40] and Diff-Retinex for LLIE.
Diff-Retinex can repair some missing scene contents by rethinking
LLIE through the generative diffusion model.

human perception and subsequent vision tasks, and finally
present high-quality images.
To handle these degradations, many low-light image enhancement (LLIE) methods have been proposed [20, 26].
Besides, a series of research on contrast enhancement,
noise removal, and texture preservation have been carried out. The mainstream LLIE methods can be roughly
divided into traditional [35, 3] and learning-based methods [22, 15, 25, 23, 18]. Traditional algorithms are usually
based on the image prior or simple physical models. For
instance, gray transform [35, 14] and histogram equalization [5, 34] adjust the intensity distribution by linear or nonlinear means. The Retinex model [12, 16, 24] decomposes
the image into illumination and reflectance images, and

12302

