This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-Vocabulary Object Detection With an Open Corpus
Jiong Wang1

Huiming Zhang2 Haiwen Hong2 Xuan Jin2
Yuan He2 Hui Xue2 Zhou Zhao1 *
1
Zhejiang University, China 2 Alibaba Group
1

2

{liubinggunzu, zhaozhou}@zju.edu.cn

{zhm220845, honghaiwen.hhw, jinxuan.jx, heyuan.hy, hui.xueh}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
As a fundamental task in computer vision community,
object detection is previously bounded in a close-set vocabulary to localize and categorize objects in images. Extending to new categories requires exhaustive human annotated
* corresponding author

Normalized Objectness Comparison
0.583
0.512
0.488

0.5
0.4
Ratio

Existing open vocabulary object detection (OVD) works
expand the object detector toward open categories by replacing the classifier with the category text embeddings and
optimizing the region-text alignment on data of the base categories. However, both the class-agnostic proposal generator and the classifier are biased to the seen classes as
demonstrated by the gaps of objectness and accuracy assessment between base and novel classes. In this paper,
an open corpus, composed of a set of external object concepts and clustered to several centroids, is introduced to improve the generalization ability in the detector. We propose
the generalized objectness assessment (GOAT) in the proposal generator based on the visual-text alignment, where
the similarities of visual feature to the cluster centroids are
summarized as the objectness. This simple heuristic evaluates objectness with concepts in open corpus and is thus
generalized to open categories. We further propose category expanding (CE) with open corpus in two training tasks,
which enables the detector to perceive more categories in
the feature space and get more reasonable optimization direction. For the classification task, we introduce an open
corpus classifier by reconstructing original classifier with
similar words in text space. For the image-caption alignment task, the open corpus centroids are incorporated to enlarge the negative samples in the contrastive loss. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of GOAT and CE,
which greatly improve the performance on novel classes
and get new state-of-the-art on the OVD benchmarks.

0.6

0.626

0.3

Novel
Base
Background

0.5060.494

0.417
0.374
0.304
0.248

0.2
0.1
0.0

COCO-RPN LVIS-CenterHead COCO-GOAT

LVIS-GOAT

Figure 1: Illustration of the objectness comparison between
the base and novel objects assessed by the proposal generators and the proposed GOAT. Conventional proposal generators prefer base categories and the proposed GOAT is
generalized for open categories. The objectness scores after sigmoid function are summarized for all base and novel
categories and normalized for comparison.

data and specific retraining strategies. Inspired by success
of the large-scale visual-language (VL) models [28, 18] applied to open vocabulary recognition, recent open vocabulary object detection (OVD) works transfer the multi-modal
capabilities of pre-trained VL models to object detection.
The semantic categories are represented as text embeddings
and the alignment of region-text feature space enables to
detect novel categories described by text inputs.
OVD expands traditional object detection to open categories and frees the requirement of costly human annotations, which has recently attracted growing interest. In the
seminal work, OVR-CNN [37] defines the notion of OVD
and adapts a trained VL model on a Faster-RCNN architecture to align visual features with the category embeddings

6759

