This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AdVerb: Visually Guided Audio Dereverberation
Sanjoy Chowdhury1 * Sreyan Ghosh1∗
Anton Ratnarajah1
Utkarsh Tyagi1
1

2

University of Maryland, College Park

Subhrajyoti Dasgupta2
Dinesh Manocha1

Mila and Université de Montréal

{sanjoyc,sreyang,jeran,utkarsht,dmanocha}@umd.edu

subhrajyoti.dasgupta@umontreal.ca

Project page - https://gamma.umd.edu/researchdirections/speech/adverb

Reverberant Environment

Abstract

1. Introduction
Reverberation occurs when an audio signal reﬂects from
multiple surfaces and objects in the environment to alter the
dry sound thereby degrading its quality. Far-ﬁeld speech
recorded at a considerable distance from the speaker is
signiﬁcantly degraded by the strong reverberation effects
caused by the environment. The amount of reverberation
is highly correlated to the geometry of the surroundings and
the materials present in the vicinity [9, 11]. For instance, the
auditory experience changes drastically when listening to a
pleasant symphony in a large empty hallway vs. a relatively
small furnished living room (Fig. 2). Recent studies have
* Equal contribution.

`

We present AdVerb, a novel audio-visual dereverberation framework that uses visual cues in addition to the reverberant sound to estimate clean audio. Although audioonly dereverberation is a well-studied problem, our approach incorporates the complementary visual modality to
perform audio dereverberation. Given an image of the environment where the reverberated sound signal has been
recorded, AdVerb employs a novel geometry-aware crossmodal transformer architecture that captures scene geometry and audio-visual cross-modal relationship to generate a
complex ideal ratio mask, which, when applied to the reverberant audio predicts the clean sound. The effectiveness
of our method is demonstrated through extensive quantitative and qualitative evaluations. Our approach signiﬁcantly outperforms traditional audio-only and audio-visual
baselines on three downstream tasks: speech enhancement,
speech recognition, and speaker veriﬁcation, with relative
improvements in the range of 18% - 82% on the LibriSpeech
test-clean set. We also achieve highly satisfactory RT60 error scores on the AVSpeech dataset.

Anechoic Environment

AdVerb

Reverberant Audio

Estimated Clean Audio

Figure 1: We present AdVerb, a novel audio-visual dereverberation framework that leverages visual cues of the environment to estimate clean audio from reverberant audio.
E.g, given a reverberant sound produced in a large hall, our
model attempts to remove the reverb effect to predict the
anechoic or clean audio.
shown that the reverberation effects can be estimated from
a single image of the environment with reasonable accuracy
[69, 46, 36]. Removal of reverberation in recorded speech
signals is highly desirable and would help improve the performance of several other auxiliary downstream tasks like
automatic speech recognition (ASR), speaker veriﬁcation
(SV), source separation (SP), speech enhancement (SE),
etc., which are widely used in several day-to-day tools.
Audio-only dereverberation is a well-studied problem
with various systems achieving encouraging results [53, 34,
99, 91, 90]. In contrast, using the visual stream as an additional cue to solve this task is a particularly understudied
problem. We attribute the lack of research in this space to
the scarcity of datasets. Most open-source datasets, both
real and synthetic, contain only room impulse responses
(RIRs) with no information about their source of origin
[77, 83]. Note that obtaining such RIRs can be challenging as doing so requires access to the physical environment,
thereby limiting their applicability. However, in real-world
settings, reverberant audio is naturally accompanied by a
visual stream; video conferencing, augmented reality (AR),
17884

