This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

March in Chat: Interactive Prompting for
Remote Embodied Referring Expression
Yanyuan Qiao1 Yuankai Qi1 Zheng Yu1 Jing Liu2 3 Qi Wu1 *
1
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{yanyuan.qiao,zheng.yu,qi.wu01}@adelaide.edu.au, qykshr@gmail.com,jliu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

REVERIE Instruction:
Clean the small picture in front of the large mirror.

Many Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) tasks
have been proposed in recent years, from room-based to
object-based and indoor to outdoor. The REVERIE (Remote Embodied Referring Expression) is interesting since
it only provides high-level instructions to the agent, which
are closer to human commands in practice. Nevertheless,
this poses more challenges than other VLN tasks since it
requires agents to infer a navigation plan only based on
a short instruction. Large Language Models (LLMs) show
great potential in robot action planning by providing proper
prompts. Still, this strategy has not been explored under the
REVERIE settings. There are several new challenges. For
example, the LLM should be environment-aware so that the
navigation plan can be adjusted based on the current visual
observation. Moreover, the LLM planned actions should be
adaptable to the much larger and more complex REVERIE
environment. This paper proposes a March-in-Chat (MiC)
model that can talk to the LLM on the ﬂy and plan dynamically based on a newly proposed Room-and-Object Aware
Scene Perceiver (ROASP). Our MiC model outperforms
the previous state-of-the-art by large margins by SPL and
RGSPL metrics on the REVERIE benchmark. The source
code is available at https://github.com/YanyuanQiao/MiC

1. Introduction
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN), which lies at
the intersection of computer vision, natural language processing and robotics, has aroused great attention from research communities in the past few years. Given instructions in natural language, the VLN agent should navigate
to the target location based on the dynamic observations
in the 3D simulated environments. Since VLN has great
* Corresponding author

15758

The target object is: ____
A small picture

I am in hallway, I can see sofa,
table,…
What should I do?

LLM

Walk through the hallway

LLM

Figure 1: Our March-in-Chat (MiC) model is talking to a
Large Language Model (LLM) to generate navigation plans
on the ﬂy, with the REVERIE instruction and the dynamic
room-and-object information as inputs.
potential in real-world applications such as domestic assistant robots, a large amount of speciﬁc VLN tasks have
been proposed, including R2R [4] and RxR [21] that ask
the agent to navigate from one room to another in a photorealistic environment according to the ﬁne-grained instruction, NDH [36] provides detailed dialogues which imply the
instruction, TouchDown [7] extends the task into an outdoor
environment, REVERIE [27] and SOON [39] that additionally require the agent’s ability of remote object grounding
and ALFRED [33] that asks the agent to interact with the
target object in a single room of the synthetic environment.
Most of these VLN tasks provide detailed step-by-step
instructions to the agent, such as “Go up the stairs and then
walk the length of the couch. Walk past the dining area
and into the kitchen. Stop in front of the refrigerator.” in
R2R. Although detailed instructions can help the agent better achieve the navigation goal in the simulated environments, it has a big gap towards real applications where human beings tend to give coarse-grained high-level instructions such as “Go to the refrigerator on the second ﬂoor”.

