This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TMR: Text-to-Motion Retrieval Using Contrastive 3D Human Motion Synthesis
Mathis Petrovich1,2 Michael J. Black2 Gül Varol1
1
LIGM, École des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, France
2
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
https://mathis.petrovich.fr/tmr

Abstract
In this paper, we present TMR, a simple yet effective approach
for text to 3D human motion retrieval. While previous work has
only treated retrieval as a proxy evaluation metric, we tackle
it as a standalone task. Our method extends the state-of-theart text-to-motion synthesis model TEMOS, and incorporates a
contrastive loss to better structure the cross-modal latent space.
We show that maintaining the motion generation loss, along
with the contrastive training, is crucial to obtain good performance. We introduce a benchmark for evaluation and provide
an in-depth analysis by reporting results on several protocols.
Our extensive experiments on the KIT-ML and HumanML3D
datasets show that TMR outperforms the prior work by a significant margin, for example reducing the median rank from 54
to 19. Finally, we showcase the potential of our approach on
moment retrieval. Our code and models are publicly available
at https://mathis.petrovich.fr/tmr.

1. Introduction
The language of movement cannot be translated into words.
Barbara Mettler

We ask the question whether a cross-modal space exists
between 3D human motions and language. Our goal is to
retrieve the most relevant 3D human motion from a gallery,
given a natural language query that describes the desired motion
(as illustrated in Figure 1). While text-to-image retrieval is a
well-established problem within the broader vision & language
field [39], there has been less focus on the related task of text-tomotion retrieval. Searching an existing motion capture dataset
based on text input can often serve as a viable alternative to textto-human-motion synthesis in many applications, while also
providing the added benefit that the retrieved motion is guaranteed to be realistic. Additionally, once a cross-modal embedding
is built to map text and motions into a joint representation space,
both of the symmetrical text-to-motion and motion-to-text tasks

e
A person is stretching legs

rank 1

rank 2

rank 3

rank 4

rank 5

rank 6

rank 7

rank 8

Figure 1. Text-to-motion retrieval: We illustrate the task of text-based
motion retrieval where the goal is to rank a gallery of motions
according to their similarity to the given query in the form of a natural
language description.

can be performed. Such a retrieval-based solution has a range of
applications, including automatically indexing large motion capture collections, and helping to initialize the cumbersome text
labeling process, by assigning the nearest text to each motion.
Let us first differentiate text-to-motion retrieval from textto-motion synthesis. Motion synthesis [5, 9, 36, 49] involves
generating new data samples that go beyond the existing training
set, while motion retrieval searches through existing motion
capture collections. For certain applications, reusing motions
from a collection may be sufficient, provided the collection is
large enough to contain what the user is searching for. Unlike
generative models for motion synthesis, which struggle to
produce physically plausible, realistic sequences [5, 35, 36], a
retrieval model has the advantage that it always returns a realistic
motion. With this motivation, we pose the problem as a nearest
neighbor search through a cross-modal text-motion space.
Early work performs search through motion databases to
build motion graphs [4, 23] by finding paths between existing
motions and synthesizing new motions by stitching motions
together with generated transitions. If the motion database is

9488

