This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D3G: Exploring Gaussian Prior for Temporal Sentence Grounding with
Glance Annotation
Hanjun Li1 , Xiujun Shu1 , Sunan He2 , Ruizhi Qiao1 , Wei Wen1 , Taian Guo1 , Bei Gan1 , Xing Sun1 *
1
Youtu Lab, Tencent 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{hanjunli, xiujunshu, ruizhiqiao, jawnrwen, taianguo, stylegan, winfredsun}@tencent.com
sunan.he@connect.ust.hk

Abstract
Temporal sentence grounding (TSG) aims to locate a
specific moment from an untrimmed video with a given natural language query. Recently, weakly supervised methods
still have a large performance gap compared to fully supervised ones, while the latter requires laborious timestamp
annotations. In this study, we aim to reduce the annotation
cost yet keep competitive performance for TSG task compared to fully supervised ones. To achieve this goal, we
investigate a recently proposed glance-supervised temporal
sentence grounding task, which requires only single frame
annotation (referred to as glance annotation) for each
query. Under this setup, we propose a Dynamic Gaussian
prior based Grounding framework with Glance annotation
(D3G), which consists of a Semantic Alignment Group Contrastive Learning module (SA-GCL) and a Dynamic Gaussian prior Adjustment module (DGA). Specifically, SA-GCL
samples reliable positive moments from a 2D temporal map
via jointly leveraging Gaussian prior and semantic consistency, which contributes to aligning the positive sentencemoment pairs in the joint embedding space. Moreover, to alleviate the annotation bias resulting from glance annotation
and model complex queries consisting of multiple events,
we propose the DGA module, which adjusts the distribution dynamically to approximate the ground truth of target moments. Extensive experiments on three challenging
benchmarks verify the effectiveness of the proposed D3G.
It outperforms the state-of-the-art weakly supervised methods by a large margin and narrows the performance gap
compared to fully supervised methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/solicucu/D3G.

1. Introduction
Temporal sentence grounding is a fundamental problem in computer vision and receives an increasing atten* Corresponding author

Query: person pours some water into a glass.
5.9 s 𝑔 (8.0 s) 15.4 s

slide window

Duration: 21.96 s

5.9 s 𝑔(8.0 s) 15.4 s

DGA

positive pair
negative pair

2d map
positive pair
negative pair

ViGA
D3G

Figure 1. Illustration of glance annotation g (red dashed line) and
simple comparison between ViGA and D3G. The red rectangle
indicates the boundary of target moment.

tion in recent years. Given the query sentence and an
untrimmed video, the goal of TSG is to localize the start and
end timestamps of specific moment that semantically corresponds to the query. In recent years, full supervised temporal sentence grounding (FS-TSG) has achieved tremendous achievements [9, 1, 41, 43, 34, 29, 33, 42]. However,
obtaining accurate timestamps for each sentence is laborintensive and subjective, which prevents it from scaling to
large-scale video-sentence pairs and practical applications.
Weakly supervised temporal sentence grounding (WSTSG), which requires only the video and query pairs, receives an increasing attention recently. Although great advances [19, 32, 12, 45, 43, 44] have been achieved in recent
years, there still remains a huge performance gap between
WS-TSG and FS-TSG. WS-TSG suffers from severe localization issues due to the large discrepancy between videolevel annotations and clip-level task.
Recently, Cui et al. [6] propose a new annotating
paradigm called glance annotation for TSG, requiring the
timestamp of only random single frame within the temporal boundary of the target moment. It is noted that such
annotation only increases trivial annotating cost compared
to WS-TSG. Figure 1 illustrates the details of glance annotation. With glance annotation, Cui et al. propose the

13734

