This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ord2Seq: Regarding Ordinal Regression as Label Sequence Prediction
Jinhong Wang1 *, Yi Cheng1∗ , Jintai Chen1† , TingTing Chen1 , Danny Chen2 , Jian Wu1†
1

Zhejiang University

2

University of Notre Dame

{wangjinhong, chengy1, wujian2000}@zju.edu.cn
{jtchen721, ttchen0603}@gmail.com

dchen@nd.edu

Abstract
Ordinal regression refers to classifying object instances
into ordinal categories. It has been widely studied in many
scenarios, such as medical disease grading and movie rating. Known methods focused only on learning inter-class
ordinal relationships, but still incur limitations in distinguishing adjacent categories thus far. In this paper, we
propose a simple sequence prediction framework for ordinal regression called Ord2Seq, which, for the first time,
transforms each ordinal category label into a special label sequence and thus regards an ordinal regression task
as a sequence prediction process. In this way, we decompose an ordinal regression task into a series of recursive binary classification steps, so as to subtly distinguish adjacent categories. Comprehensive experiments
show the effectiveness of distinguishing adjacent categories
for performance improvement and our new approach exceeds state-of-the-art performances in four different scenarios. Codes are available at https://github.com/
wjh892521292/Ord2Seq.

1. Introduction
Ordinal regression, a.k.a. ordinal classification, aims to
classify object instances into ordinal categories. Since such
categories follow a natural order, an ordinal regression task
is typically treated as a classification problem with a few
regression properties. Common applications are medical
image grading [9, 23] (e.g., cataract can be graded from
0 to 6, representing normal to severe states), age estimation [29, 32, 21, 44], historical image dating [30, 28], and
image aesthetic grading [15, 16, 31].
Unlike general classification tasks, it is challenging to
distinguish the adjacent categories due to their confusing
data patterns and blurred boundaries in ordinal regression
tasks. Previous works often highlighted the ordering re* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

Aesthetics
score?
Above 3?

1

2

No

Yes

3

4

Above 4?

Above 2?
No

1

No

Yes

2

5

3

4

Yes

5

Above 1?
No

1

Yes

2

Figure 1. Our motivation. The dichotomic search (binary search)
aims to repeatedly divide the half portion of a sorted array to find
the target item. It can be utilized in ordinal regression tasks since
the ordinal candidate labels can be regarded as a finite sorted array. Thus, an ordinal regression task is decomposed into multiple
recursive dichotomic classification sub-problems. For example,
when scoring an aesthetic image (e.g., from 1 to 5, the ground
truth is 4), we can first estimate whether the score is above or below average (i.e., 3
⃝). Next, if it is above average, then we can
further determine the score to be 4
⃝ or 5
⃝.

lations by introducing K-rank algorithms [12, 19, 29, 6],
ordinal distribution constraint assumptions [22, 26, 17,
20], soft labels [13, 10], or multi-instance comparing approaches [24, 25, 20, 38]. However, these methods failed to
specifically tackle the “adjacent categories distinction” and
hinder the model performances.
In this paper, we argue and validate the importance of
the “adjacent categories distinction” in ordinal regression
tasks. To this end, we propose to distinguish the adjacent
categories gradually in processing. Motivated by the dichotomic search (binary search) [45], which repeatedly divides the half portion of a sorted array to gradually find the
target item, we decompose an ordinal regression problem
into a series of dichotomic classification steps. In each step,
we can only focus on dealing with a boundary of a pair of
adjacent categories. An example is given in Fig. 1. The
aesthetics score of an image is gradually distinguished via
recursive dichotomic classification. In this way, an ordi-

5865

