This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Unsupervised Visual Program Inference with
Code Rewriting Families
Aditya Ganeshan

R. Kenny Jones
Brown University

Daniel Ritchie

adityaganeshan@gmail.com

1. Introduction
Visual data is often highly structured: manufactured
shapes are produced by assembling parts; vector graphics
images are built from layers of primitives; detailed textures
can be created via intricate compositions of noise functions.
Visual programs, i.e. programs that produce visual outputs when executed, are a natural approach to capturing this
complexity in a structure-aware fashion. Access to wellwritten visual programs supports downstream applications
across visual computing domains, including editing, generative modeling, and structural analysis. But how can we
obtain a program which generates a given visual datum?
Project page: https://bardofcodes.github.io/coref/

N. Prim: 12

N. Prim: 11

N. Prim: 159

N. Prim: 249

N. Prim: 243

GT

N. Prim: 8

CSG-Stump

Programs offer compactness and structure that makes
them an attractive representation for visual data. We explore how code rewriting can be used to improve systems
for inferring programs from visual data. We first propose
Sparse Intermittent Rewrite Injection (SIRI), a framework
for unsupervised bootstrapped learning. SIRI sparsely applies code rewrite operations over a dataset of training programs, injecting the improved programs back into the training set. We design a family of rewriters for visual programming domains: parameter optimization, code pruning,
and code grafting. For three shape programming languages
in 2D and 3D, we show that using SIRI with our family
of rewriters improves performance: better reconstructions
and faster convergence rates, compared with bootstrapped
learning methods that do not use rewriters or use them
naively. Finally, we demonstrate that our family of rewriters can be effectively used at test time to improve the output
of SIRI predictions. For 2D and 3D CSG, we outperform
or match the reconstruction performance of recent domainspecific neural architectures, while producing more parsimonious programs, that use significantly fewer primitives.

Ours

Abstract

Figure 1. Our method SIRI (top row) generates highly compact
yet accurate programs, in contrast to CSG-Stump [24] (bottom
row), which generates programs with numerous primitives. Here,
we show shapes rendered with colored primitives.

Visual Program Inference (VPI) methods aim to solve
this problem by automatically inferring programs that represent visual inputs. Solving this search problem is very
difficult: the space of possible programs is often vast, even
when constrained by a domain-specific language (DSL). To
overcome this challenge, recent works have investigated
learning-based solutions, where a neural network is employed to guide the search. When a dataset of visual programs exist, such networks can be trained in a supervised
fashion [36, 33, 37, 38, 13]. Unfortunately, most domains
lack such data, so recent works have investigated how to
train VPI networks in an unsupervised fashion.
Learning to infer visual programs without supervision is
challenging: programs usually contain discrete and continuous elements, which complicates end-to-end learning. Various solutions have been proposed to work around this issue: end-to-end learning is possible with neural architectures that act as a smooth relaxations of program executors [24], while policy gradient reinforcement learning [26]

15791

