This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scene Matters: Model-based Deep Video Compression
Lv Tang Xinfeng Zhang* Gai Zhang Xiaoqi Ma
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
luckybird1994@gmail.com, xfzhang@ucas.ac.cn, zhanggai16@mails.ucas.ac.cn, maxiaoqi197@gmail.com

Abstract

BDBR(%)
50.00

Video compression has always been a popular research
area, where many traditional and deep video compression
methods have been proposed. These methods typically rely
on signal prediction theory to enhance compression performance by designing high efficient intra and inter prediction
strategies and compressing video frames one by one. In this
paper, we propose a novel model-based video compression
(MVC) framework that regards scenes as the fundamental
units for video sequences. Our proposed MVC directly models the intensity variation of the entire video sequence in one
scene, seeking non-redundant representations instead of reducing redundancy through spatio-temporal predictions. To
achieve this, we employ implicit neural representation as
our basic modeling architecture. To improve the efficiency
of video modeling, we first propose context-related spatial
positional embedding and frequency domain supervision
in spatial context enhancement. For temporal correlation
capturing, we design the scene flow constrain mechanism
and temporal contrastive loss. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves up to a 20%
bitrate reduction compared to the latest video coding standard H.266 and is more efficient in decoding than existing
video coding strategies.

1. Introduction
Recently, videos have become ubiquitous in people’s
daily lives, from short-form videos to conference and
surveillance videos. Efficiently storing and transmitting
video data has become a significant challenge due to the
vast amounts and explosive growth of such data. To address
this challenge, multiple video compression standards have
been developed based on traditional hybrid video coding
frameworks, such as H.264/AVC [64], H.265/HEVC [55],
and H.266/VVC [4], as well as deep-learning based video
compression (DLVC) methods [11, 18, 21, 29, 33, 36, 66].
* Corresponding author. This work was supported by the National Nat-

ural Science Foundation under Grant 62071449 and U20A20184, and the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities.

DVC
DCVC

H.265(HM16.21)

15.00

CANFVC

H.266(VTM12.0)

0.00

Ours
-22.97
2019

2021

2022

2023

Year

Figure 1. BDBR(%) [3] performances of different methods when
compared with H.266 on the real-world surveillance video sequences in terms of PSNR. DVC [36], DCVC [29] and CANFVC [18] are three DLVC methods.

Both traditional hybrid video coding frameworks and
existing deep learning-based video compression (DLVC)
methods follow the same approach of compressing videos
by designing various technique modules to reduce spatial
and temporal redundancy. In traditional hybrid video coding, each video frame is divided into blocks, and intra- and
inter-prediction techniques [63, 72] are used to reduce spatial and temporal redundancy. On the other hand, DLVC
methods [18, 21, 33, 36], unlike traditional compression
methods, use neural networks to design end-to-end intraand inter-prediction modules for the entire frame. Despite
the careful design of these techniques, both traditional and
DLVC methods compress a video sequence progressively
in a block-by-block or frame-by-frame style and only use
neighboring pixels in the same frame or neighboring frames
as reference to derive intra- or inter-prediction values. Since
video sequences are captured at high framerates, such as
30fps or 60fps, the same scene may appear in hundreds
of frames that are highly correlated in the temporal domain. However, existing compression strategies are not
well-equipped to remove scene redundancy in the block- or
frame-level prediction. As demonstrated in Fig. 1, the performance of existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) DLVC methods still lags behind that of the traditional H.266 standard.
To overcome the performance bottleneck in video compression, this paper proposes an innovative video coding
paradigm that seeks to find a compact subspace for a video

12481

