This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Adversarial Transferability via Gradient Relevance Attack
Hegui Zhu1 , Yuchen Ren1∗, Xiaoyan Sui1 , Lianping Yang1 , Wuming Jiang2
1
College of Sciences, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China
2
Beijing EyeCool Technology, Beijing, China
{zhuhegui,yanglp}@mail.neu.edu.cn,{ryc 981015,suixy0926}@163.com,{jiangwuming}@eyecool.cn

Abstract
Plentiful adversarial attack researches have revealed the
fragility of deep neural networks (DNNs), where the imperceptible perturbations can cause drastic changes in the output. Among the diverse types of attack methods, gradientbased attacks are powerful and easy to implement, arousing
wide concern for the security problem of DNNs. However, under the black-box setting, the existing gradient-based
attacks have much trouble in breaking through DNN models with defense technologies, especially those adversarially trained models. To make adversarial examples more
transferable, in this paper, we explore the ﬂuctuation phenomenon on the plus-minus sign of the adversarial perturbations’ pixels during the generation of adversarial examples, and propose an ingenious Gradient Relevance Attack
(GRA). Speciﬁcally, two gradient relevance frameworks are
presented to better utilize the information in the neighborhood of the input, which can correct the update direction
adaptively. Then we adjust the update step at each iteration
with a decay indicator to counter the ﬂuctuation. Experiment results on a subset of the ILSVRC 2012 validation
set forcefully verify the effectiveness of GRA. Furthermore,
the attack success rates of 68.7% and 64.8% on Tencent Cloud and Baidu AI Cloud further indicate that GRA can
craft adversarial examples with the ability to transfer across
both datasets and model architectures. Code is released at
https://github.com/RYC-98/GRA.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have made numerous
achievements [13, 14, 10, 3, 32, 6, 35]. However, especially
in the computer vision ﬁeld, recent researches on the model robustness verify that DNNs are extremely susceptible to
human-imperceptible malicious perturbations [1, 11, 31, 4],
attracting many researchers to dive into the generation of
adversarial examples [7, 5, 22, 20]. Furthermore, crafting
∗ Corresponding author: Yuchen Ren

Predict: Cart (99.7%)

Predict: Fountain (52.6%)

Figure 1. Attention maps [28] of a clean image and its adversarial
example crafted by GRA on Inc-v3. The target model is Res-152.

adversarial examples with strong transferability can expose
security defects and explore the inner mechanism of current
DNNs [11, 23, 33], and it has become a vital task in computer vision.
From the perspective of the attackers’ knowledge, there
are two types of attack settings, i.e., black-box setting and
white-box setting. In the white-box setting, all information about the target model can be acquired by the attackers, and many previous attack methods can already hoax the
source model with a nearly 100% attack success rate under
this setting [16]. Conversely, in the black-box setting, only the model output is available, which will often degrade
the attacking performance on target models, especially for
models with defense mechanisms [26, 15, 12, 21, 24]. To
deal with this issue, diverse gradient-based attack methods [18, 7, 9, 36, 39], input augmentation transformations [8, 38, 37], and ensemble strategy [19] are presented in
recent years. Among them, variance tuning (VT) [36] is
one of the most promising attack methods, which introduces
neighborhood information of the input at the last iteration to
stabilize the current update direction. Unfortunately, it ignores the gradient relevance between the input and its neigh-

4741

