This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation under Label Noise
via Diverse Learning Groups

Abstract
Semi-supervised semantic segmentation methods use a
small amount of clean pixel-level annotations to guide the
interpretation of a larger quantity of unlabelled image data.
The challenges of providing pixel-accurate annotations at
scale mean that the labels are typically noisy, and this contaminates the final results. In this work, we propose an approach that is robust to label noise in the annotated data.
The method uses two diverse learning groups with different
network architectures to effectively handle both label noise
and unlabelled images. Each learning group consists of a
teacher network, a student network and a novel filter module. The filter module of each learning group utilizes pixellevel features from the teacher network to detect incorrectly
labelled pixels. To reduce confirmation bias, we employ the
labels cleaned by the filter module from one learning group
to train the other learning group. Experimental results on
two different benchmarks and settings demonstrate the superiority of our method over state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a critical step in many computer vision tasks, and one that, like so many, is now predominantly achieved through deep learning [5, 35]. A key
factor in the success of these methods has been access to
high-quality annotated datasets. Pixel-accurate annotation
of segmentation data is challenging, and becomes impractical as datasets grow. Unlabelled data is abundant and
thus semi-supervised semantic segmentation has received
increasing attention [15, 20, 8]. The predominant semisupervised approach employs a teacher-student framework
to allocate pseudo labels to unlabelled data [11, 23, 36, 40].
These methods rely on the availability of a small but perfectly annotated dataset, however. This is a challenge in
many practical situations where annotations are collected
via crowd-sourcing (e.g., Sagemaker MTurk), or automated
labelling techniques [31, 3], and are thus inevitably noisy.

Pascal VOC mIoU (%)

Peixia Li1,2 , Pulak Purkait2 , Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan 2 , Majid Abdolshah 2 , Ravi Garg2,4 ,
Hisham Husain 2 , Chenchen Xu2,3 , Stephen Gould3 , Wanli Ouyang 1 , Anton van den Hengel 2,4
1
The University of Sydney, 2 Amazon,
3
Australian National University, 4 The University of Adelaide

Ours-PL

75

Ours-RDE

70

Ours-SCP

65
60

Base-PL

55

Base-RDE

50
0

1/16

1/8

1/4

Labelled data ratio

1/2

Base-SCP

Figure 1: Existing semi-supervised semantic segmentation
models are vulnerable to the inevitable label noise in the
pixel-level annotations. The proposed method performs significantly better than the current state-of-the-art [20] in the
presence label noise. We apply three types of noise (labelled
PL, RDE and SCP in Sec. 5.2) to achieve a 9% error rate in
the labelled data.
We consider here the practically important case whereby
semi-supervised semantic segmentation is to be applied despite the fact that the provided pixel labels contain noise.
We propose an approach that is robust to this noise to the extent that it outperforms the baselines by a significant margin
(see Fig. 1), despite being relatively simple to implement
and incurring no extra computation cost at test time.
It has been shown recently [19] that supervised segmentation models trained on noisy pixel-level labels first fit the
clean labels during an “early-learning” phase before eventually memorizing the noisy labels. The above learning dynamics are exploited in [19] for weakly supervised segmentation by adding a multi-scale consistency loss. However,
no noise detection module is used in [19] and the effect of
unsupervised consistency loss on the label noise is weak.
Recently there has been a surge of interest in data-centric
methods [38, 39] that utilize the k-NN of the feature representation of the data-points to detect annotation noise in
classification datasets. A straightforward extension of this
approach to semantic segmentation would lead to computing the k-NN of the feature representation at pixel-level
over all images, which would be infeasible. In this work, we
11229

