This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EMMN: Emotional Motion Memory Network for Audio-driven
Emotional Talking Face Generation

Shuai Tan, Bin Ji , and Ye Pan *
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{tanshuai0219,bin.ji,whitneypanye}@sjtu.edu.cn

Neutral
GT

Contempt Surprised

Angry

Targets

Figure 1: Example animations generated by our EMMN. Given a reference image, EMMN is capable of generating
emotional talking face driven by an emotional audio clip. The lip motions are synchronized with the contents of the audio,
while the facial emotion dynamics are controlled by the emotion embedding in audio.

Abstract
Synthesizing expression is essential to create realistic
talking faces. Previous works consider expressions and
mouth shapes as a whole and predict them solely from audio
inputs. However, the limited information contained in audio, such as phonemes and coarse emotion embedding, may
not be suitable as the source of elaborate expressions. Besides, since expressions are tightly coupled to lip motions,
generating expression from other sources is tricky and always neglects expression performed on mouth region, lead*Corresponding author.

ing to inconsistency between them. To tackle the issues, this
paper proposes Emotional Motion Memory Net (EMMN)
that synthesizes expression overall on the talking face via
emotion embedding and lip motion instead of the sole audio. Specifically, we extract emotion embedding from audio and design Motion Reconstruction module to decompose ground truth videos into mouth features and expression features before training, where the latter encode all
facial factors about expression. During training, the emotion embedding and mouth features are used as keys, and
the corresponding expression features are used as values to
create key-value pairs stored in the proposed Motion Memory Net. Hence, once the audio-relevant mouth features

22146

