This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIPN for Zero-Shot OOD Detection: Teaching CLIP to Say No
Hualiang Wang, Yi Li, Huifeng Yao, Xiaomeng Li*
Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{hwangfd, ylini, yhfpro, eexmli}@ust.hk

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection refers to training
the model on an in-distribution (ID) dataset to classify
whether the input images come from unknown classes. Considerable effort has been invested in designing various
OOD detection methods based on either convolutional neural networks or transformers. However, zero-shot OOD detection methods driven by CLIP, which only require class
names for ID, have received less attention. This paper presents a novel method, namely CLIP saying “no”
(CLIPN), which empowers the logic of saying “no” within
CLIP. Our key motivation is to equip CLIP with the capability of distinguishing OOD and ID samples using positivesemantic prompts and negation-semantic prompts. Specifically, we design a novel learnable “no” prompt and a “no”
text encoder to capture negation semantics within images.
Subsequently, we introduce two loss functions: the imagetext binary-opposite loss and the text semantic-opposite
loss, which we use to teach CLIPN to associate images with
“no” prompts, thereby enabling it to identify unknown samples. Furthermore, we propose two threshold-free inference
algorithms to perform OOD detection by utilizing negation
semantics from “no” prompts and the text encoder. Experimental results on 9 benchmark datasets (3 ID datasets and 6
OOD datasets) for the OOD detection task demonstrate that
CLIPN, based on ViT-B-16, outperforms 7 well-used algorithms by at least 2.34% and 11.64% in terms of AUROC
and FPR95 for zero-shot OOD detection on ImageNet-1K.
Our CLIPN can serve as a solid foundation for effectively
leveraging CLIP in downstream OOD tasks. The code is
available on https://github.com/xmed-lab/CLIPN.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models [12, 6] have demonstrated excellent versatility and performance when the classes in the
training and test datasets remain the same [32]. This is facilitated by the fact that the models are trained under com* Corresponding author.

pletely closed-world conditions, meaning all encountered
classes are in-distribution (ID) ones [7]. Nevertheless, these
models tend to suffer from poor generalization and undesirable performance when deployed in real-world applications.
This frustrating phenomenon is partially attributed to the
existence of an enormous number of unknown classes distributed in the real world, which is challenging to detect as
they have not been explicitly seen during the training stage.

class 1

class 1
class 2
class 3

class 4
class n

(a) feature space of standard methods

class 2
class 3

class 4
class n

(b) feature space of CLIPN

hard-distinguish easy-distinguish feature space of
feature space
OOD samples
OOD samples in-domain classes of the “no” logit

Figure 1. A toy comparison illustration of feature spaces between
standard OOD detection algorithms and the proposed CLIPN. Our
method involves a “no” logic, which provides a new feature space
(yellow region) to directly identify OOD samples. The qualitative
experiment visualization is shown in Figure. 5.

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection task [2, 3, 9] has
been raised and promptly attracted considerable interest
from researchers. Briefly, the OOD detection task aims to
empower the model to distinguish if the input images come
from unknown classes. One of the mainstream OOD detection methods is to learn ID-specific features and classifiers, then develop the scoring function [42, 14] to metric
how closely the input data matches the ID classes, which is
measured by ID-ness [42] (or OOD-ness, an opposite case).
For instance, MSP [14], MaxLogit [13], energy-based [27]
and gradient-based [25] have been extensively employed to
measure the ID-ness. Better ID-ness brings better OOD results. In summary, the key idea of these methods is to teach
ID knowledge to the model and then detect the dis-matched

1802

