This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning from Semantic Alignment between Unpaired Multiviews for
Egocentric Video Recognition
Qitong Wang1 , Long Zhao2 , Liangzhe Yuan2 , Ting Liu2 , Xi Peng1
1
University of Delaware, 2 Google Research

Abstract
We are concerned with a challenging scenario in unpaired multiview video learning. In this case, the model
aims to learn comprehensive multiview representations
while the cross-view semantic information exhibits variations. We propose Semantics-based Unpaired Multiview
Learning (SUM-L) to tackle this unpaired multiview learning problem. The key idea is to build cross-view pseudopairs and do view-invariant alignment by leveraging the
semantic information of videos. To facilitate the data efficiency of multiview learning, we further perform video-text
alignment for first-person and third-person videos, to fully
leverage the semantic knowledge to improve video representations. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmark
datasets verify the effectiveness of our framework. Our
method also outperforms multiple existing view-alignment
methods, under the more challenging scenario than typical paired or unpaired multimodal or multiview learning. Our code is available at https://github.com/
wqtwjt1996/SUM-L.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a tremendous increase in
the research regarding egocentric video understanding and
learning [22, 26, 20, 41, 29, 30, 14, 42, 7, 31, 46, 9]. In
parallel, a recent study [22] verifies that the activity of thirdperson videos in fact positively inform first-person video
learning. Early works [39, 51] of egocentric video learning
and understanding pay a lot of attention to paired multiview
data representation learning. However, synchronized firstperson and third-person video pairs are difficult to collect.
This severely limits the data scale and scope of multiview
learning for egocentric data.
Recently, egocentric video datasets [4, 5, 10] with larger
scale have become available. However, since head-mounted
cameras were not available until recent years, very few
first-person videos have paired third-person videos [15].

First-person Video

{longzh,lzyuan,liuti}@google.com

“holding some food”

Align
Third-person Video

{wqtwjt,xipeng}@udel.edu

“close closet”

Align

“pour flour”

“take container”

Align (Ours)

Align (Ours)

“holding some food”

“close closet”

“pour water-pot”

“fill container”

Same Sematics? ✓
(a) Paired Views?
✓

Same Sematics? ✓
(b) Paired Views? ✗

Same Sematics? ✗
(c) Paired Views?
✗

Same Sematics? ✗
(d) Paired Views? ✗

Figure 1. (a) The typical multiview video learning method learns
view-invariant representations from paired first-person and thirdperson videos. (b) Recent multimodal study [19] is interested in
the alignment between unpaired samples which share identical semantics. In this paper, we study a more challenging scenario than
existing works: unpaired multiview samples alignment with partially similar semantics, such as videos with (c) the same verb only,
or (d) the same object only. The verb-object phrases above the
video clips denote the semantic information of videos.

Fortunately, there exist third-person videos from different
datasets [12, 16]. It is worth noting that unpaired thirdperson videos are relatively easier to capture and obtain
compared with paired ones. Therefore, in this paper, we
study an interesting yet seldom investigated problem: how
to leverage unpaired third-person videos to help egocentric
video learning?
Unpaired multiview learning is rarely studied. While recent works [28, 27, 38, 53] study the scenario where paired
modalities are missing. But they do not leverage the potential of unpaired data from diverse datasets. Moreover, to
align the unpaired multimodal samples, Kundu et al. [19]
propose one relation distillation method to align the unpaired samples. They assume that unpaired data need to
share identical semantic information. However, in the unpaired first-person and third-person video learning scenario,
for the vast majority of egocentric videos, it is almost impossible to mine the third-person samples with identical

3307

