This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seeing Beyond the Patch: Scale-Adaptive Semantic Segmentation of
High-resolution Remote Sensing Imagery based on Reinforcement Learning
Yinhe Liu, Sunan Shi, Junjue Wang, Yanfei Zhong*
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
{liuyinhe, shisunan, kingdrone, zhongyanfei}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
In remote sensing imagery analysis, patch-based methods have limitations in capturing information beyond the
sliding window. This shortcoming poses a significant
challenge in processing complex and variable geo-objects,
which results in semantic inconsistency in segmentation results. To address this challenge, we propose a dynamic
scale perception framework, named GeoAgent, which adaptively captures appropriate scale context information outside the image patch based on the different geo-objects. In
GeoAgent, each image patch’s states are represented by a
global thumbnail and a location mask. The global thumbnail provides context beyond the patch, and the location
mask guides the perceived spatial relationships. The scaleselection actions are performed through a Scale Control
Agent (SCA). A feature indexing module is proposed to enhance the ability of the agent to distinguish the current image patch’s location. The action switches the patch scale
and context branch of a dual-branch segmentation network
that extracts and fuses the features of multi-scale patches.
The GeoAgent adjusts the network parameters to perform
the appropriate scale-selection action based on the reward
received for the selected scale. The experimental results,
using two publicly available datasets and our newly constructed dataset WUSU, demonstrate that GeoAgent outperforms previous segmentation methods, particularly for
large-scale mapping applications.

1. Introduction
The acquisition of high spatial resolution (HSR) remote
sensing images has become possible with the advancement of sensors [4]. These images enable the extraction
of geospatial objects, such as buildings, roads, and aircraft,
through image interpretation [47, 45, 22, 53]. Furthermore,
HSR remote sensing images facilitate the determination of
more semantic land use/ land cover (LULC) categories, including industrial land, cropland, and residential land [8].
Such LULC mapping is critical in urban management, plan* corresponding author.

Figure 1: Illustration of the scale problem for HSR remote
sensing image LULC segmentation. The sliding window
is enlarged for a better view. Legend:
river, lake,
pond.
ning, and ecological conservation [3, 16, 30].
The task of LULC mapping requires the semantic categorization of each pixel, also known as semantic segmentation. Recently, Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs)
[25] have achieved significant progress for natural images in
computer vision [43, 49, 17, 33, 50, 5]. Deep learning techniques have also shown success in the automatic interpretation of HSR remote sensing images [15, 10, 51, 21, 29].
In contrast to conventional ground-based images, HSR
remote sensing images have a large length and width that
can encompass thousands of objects in a single image.
However, distinguishing LULC (Land Use and Land Cover)
geo-objects that vary greatly at different scales using a
fixed, finite size image patch is challenging. Although Fully
Convolutional Networks (FCNs) can theoretically receive
input of arbitrary size, when processing HSR remote sensing images, a sliding window (SW) of a specific size is often used to generate image patches [41, 40, 9]. In small
patches, different LULC classes may consist of the same
objects with similar patterns, making them almost indistinguishable [52, 48]. For instance, the same water may appear in rivers, lakes, and ponds, and the same dense housing may belong to rural or urban residential land. Moreover, some cultivated land and meadows may have similar

16868

