This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

How Much Temporal Long-Term Context is Needed for Action Segmentation?
Emad Bahrami1

Gianpiero Francesca2

Juergen Gall1,3

1

3

2
University of Bonn, Germany
Toyota Motor Europe, Belgium
Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence, Germany

Abstract
Modeling long-term context in videos is crucial for many
fine-grained tasks including temporal action segmentation.
An interesting question that is still open is how much longterm temporal context is needed for optimal performance.
While transformers can model the long-term context of a
video, this becomes computationally prohibitive for long
videos. Recent works on temporal action segmentation
thus combine temporal convolutional networks with selfattentions that are computed only for a local temporal window. While these approaches show good results, their performance is limited by their inability to capture the full
context of a video. In this work, we try to answer how much
long-term temporal context is required for temporal action
segmentation by introducing a transformer-based model that
leverages sparse attention to capture the full context of a
video. We compare our model with the current state of the art
on three datasets for temporal action segmentation, namely
50Salads, Breakfast, and Assembly101. Our experiments
show that modeling the full context of a video is necessary
to obtain the best performance for temporal action segmentation.

1. Introduction
Temporal action segmentation can be used in many realworld applications such as monitoring production lines or
studying animal behavior. In these settings, the videos can
be very long and it is required to recognize the start and end
of all actions that occur in a video as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Recently, combinations of temporal convolutional networks [1, 27] with self- and cross-attention from transformers [61, 4] have shown impressive results for temporal action
segmentation. These works are in line with other hybrid
models [15, 9, 61, 58] that combine the attention modules
with convolutions to compensate for the lack of strong inductive bias of pure transformers. However, the emergence
of datasets like Assembly101 [41], where subjects perform
assembly tasks, poses a new challenge in the area of temporal action segmentation due to the existence of long videos

Ground
Truth
LTContext
100%
50%
25%
12%

Figure 1: Datasets like Assembly101 contain long videos
of assembly tasks and an action label needs to be predicted
for each frame. The first row shows some frames of a video.
The second row shows the ground-truth labels for all frames
of the video where different colors correspond to different
action labels. Rows 3-6 show the predictions of the proposed
model for different amounts of long-term context where
100% means the temporal context of the full video.

that can last up to 25 minutes. Since modeling the long-term
context of such a video is very expensive, Yi et al. [61] proposed to compute the attention for a local temporal window.
In order to understand the impact of the window size on
the temporal action segmentation accuracy, we analyze the
impact of the window size on two datasets with long videos
in Section 4.1. Fig. 1 shows some qualitative results of this
study on Assembly101. Indeed, the results show that modeling the long-term context of an entire video is very important
for temporal action segmentation.
Based on this finding, we revisit how temporal attention
is modeled in transformer architectures for temporal action
segmentation. [61, 4] use a hierarchy of temporal windows,
which makes the training on long video sequences as they
occur in Assembly101 [41] very expensive. Inspired by
works that decompose attention over the spatial and temporal
domain for short video clips [6, 62], we propose to iterate
between computing windowed local attention and sparse
long-term context attention such that both short and longterm context are modeled. This approach is particularly
suitable for temporal action segmentation since the local
attentions focus on the similarity or dissimilarity of features
within an action segment or between neighboring action

10351

