This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Ordering Point Clouds
Pengwan Yang, Cees G. M. Snoek* , Yuki M. Asano*
University of Amsterdam
p.yang3@uva.nl

In this paper we address the task of finding representative subsets of points in a 3D point cloud by means of a
point-wise ordering. Only a few works have tried to address this challenging vision problem, all with the help of
hard to obtain point and cloud labels. Different from these
works, we introduce the task of point-wise ordering in 3D
point clouds through self-supervision, which we call selfordering. We further contribute the first end-to-end trainable network that learns a point-wise ordering in a selfsupervised fashion. It utilizes a novel differentiable point
scoring-sorting strategy and it constructs an hierarchical
contrastive scheme to obtain self-supervision signals. We
extensively ablate the method and show its scalability and
superior performance even compared to supervised ordering methods on multiple datasets and tasks including zeroshot ordering of point clouds from unseen categories.

1. Introduction
The goal of this paper is to order the points in a
3D point cloud, so as to enable compute-, memory- and
communication-efficient deployment. This is relevant for
autonomous driving [11, 44], scene understanding [4, 29],
and virtual reality [42, 16], to name just three of the many
applications. The key problem of this modality of data
is the sheer dimensionality of the input: while each point
is usually only 3-dimensional, the number of points per
scene or object can easily range from thousands to even
millions [13, 43]. As even the original data often contains
highly redundant points, methods have been employed to
reduce the number of points for particular tasks to a more
manageable size. These include simple heuristics such as
picking random points [31] or selecting the ones with large
Euclidean distances [24, 30, 32]. More recently, methods
have been proposed that order points based on their importance [46, 14, 22]. For example, Lang et al. [22] utilize a supervised network to optimize for smaller subsets of
* Equal last authors.

Our Self-Ordering Method

Downstream Tasks
Classifcation
(accuracy)

Hierarchical
contrastive learning

Ordered points

86.2%

our
ran
64
do
pts 1K p
m
ts
64
pts

Abstract

Point Sorter

29.9%

30.4% 9.9

Point Scorer

62.2%
71.3%

Unordered points

80.2%

pick top 64 pts

Retrieval
(mAP)

7.3
6.1

Reconstruction
(error)

Figure 1: Self-supervised learning to order point clouds.
We develop the first self-supervised method to order 3D
points in terms of their importance. By utilizing a novel
Point Scorer and differentiable Point Sorter module, we
leverage a hierarchical contrastive loss for training to output a point-wise ordering without the need for any labels.
This can be used to select subsets that not only outperform
previous heuristic methods but even the current, supervised,
state of the art on downstream tasks.

point clouds that can still yield good performance on various tasks. However, this method requires supervised annotations in the form of labels, which carry with it two main
disadvantages. First, is the limited scalability – as obtaining
human-annotations, as well as developing a systematic annotation scheme – is expensive. Second, labelling data captured in-the-wild (such as from a vehicle-mounted LiDAR
sensor) is highly ambiguous if there is more than one object
present: given a point cloud with 10K points, finding which
one belongs to the street, a car, or another car is both difficult and tedious. To avoid the label-dependency of existing
work, we propose in this paper the first self-supervised point
cloud sorter (see Figure 1).
For self-supervised learning in the image domain, techniques such as clustering [6, 3] and contrastive learning [40, 19, 8] have recently shown great potential in learn-

15813

