This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Building a Winning Team: Selecting Source Model Ensembles using a
Submodular Transferability Estimation Approach
Vimal K B*1 , Saketh Bachu*1,3 , Tanmay Garg1 , Niveditha Lakshmi Narasimhan2 , Raghavan Konuru2 ,
and Vineeth N Balasubramanian1
1

Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad 2 KLA 3 University of California, Riverside
* Equal Contribution. Corresponding author: vimalkb96@gmail.com

Abstract
Estimating the transferability of publicly available pretrained models to a target task has assumed an important
place for transfer learning tasks in recent years. Existing efforts propose metrics that allow a user to choose one
model from a pool of pre-trained models without having to
fine-tune each model individually and identify one explicitly.
With the growth in the number of available pre-trained models and the popularity of model ensembles, it also becomes
essential to study the transferability of multiple-source models for a given target task. The few existing efforts study
transferability in such multi-source ensemble settings using
just the outputs of the classification layer and neglect possible domain or task mismatch. Moreover, they overlook
the most important factor while selecting the source models, viz., the cohesiveness factor between them, which can
impact the performance and confidence in the prediction of
the ensemble. To address these gaps, we propose a novel
Optimal tranSport-based suBmOdular tRaNsferability metric (OSBORN) to estimate the transferability of an ensemble of models to a downstream task. OSBORN collectively
accounts for image domain difference, task difference, and
cohesiveness of models in the ensemble to provide reliable
estimates of transferability. We gauge the performance of
OSBORN on both image classification and semantic segmentation tasks. Our setup includes 28 source datasets, 11
target datasets, 5 model architectures, and 2 pre-training
methods. We benchmark our method against current stateof-the-art metrics MS-LEEP and E-LEEP, and outperform
them consistently using the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
In computer vision, transfer learning is a go-to strategy to
train Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) on newer domains and

datasets across tasks such as image classification [30, 21],
image segmentation [44, 60] and object detection [16, 42].
This widespread usage is due to the easy availability of
a large pool of open-sourced pre-trained models (trained
on large-scale datasets such as ImageNet [31, 3]), which,
when fine-tuned, achieve faster convergence and better performance than training from scratch. However, every time
a user wants to employ transfer learning, the question that
has increasingly grown relevant with an increased number
of source models is: “Which combination of dataset and
architecture should I pick to fine-tune to achieve the best
performance on my target dataset?”. To solve this, we need
a tool that helps us choose a source or set of source models,
which require minimal fine-tuning and achieves maximal
performance.
Transferability estimation (TE) metrics have been proposed in recent years to tackle this problem [48, 36, 58, 47,
39]. With these metrics, a particular source model can be selected without conducting expensive fine-tuning of all available source models on the target training set. Most efforts
in this direction are, however limited by their capability of
selecting only a single source model, thus restricting their
use in an ensemble learning setting. There has been only
one work so far [1] which extends an existing single-source
transferability estimation method [36] to an ensemble setting. While this work showed promising results, it did not
consider the similarity between source and target datasets
in the latent representation space, or account for the relationships between individual models in the ensemble. This
problem space remains nascent at this time, necessitating
more efforts to estimate transferability reliably in different
conditions.
Ensemble models have been popular for a few decades
now in machine learning [14, 7, 51]. Ensemble models are
known to increase task accuracy, decrease overall predictive
variance and increase robustness against out-of-distribution

11609

