This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DreamPose: Fashion Image-to-Video Synthesis via Stable Diffusion
Johanna Karras1 , Aleksander Holynski2,3 , Ting-Chun Wang4 , Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman1
1

University of Washington, 2 UC Berkeley, 3 Google Research, 4 NVIDIA

Figure 1: Given an image of a person and a sequence of body poses, DreamPose synthesizes a photorealistic video.

Abstract
We present DreamPose, a diffusion-based method for
generating animated fashion videos from still images.
Given an image and a sequence of human body poses,
our method synthesizes a video containing both human
and fabric motion. To achieve this, we transform a pretrained text-to-image model (Stable Diffusion [16]) into
a pose-and-image guided video synthesis model, using a
novel finetuning strategy, a set of architectural changes to
support the added conditioning signals, and techniques to
encourage temporal consistency. We fine-tune on a collection of fashion videos from the UBC Fashion dataset
[50]. We evaluate our method on a variety of clothing styles and poses, and demonstrate that our method
produces state-of-the-art results on fashion video animation. Video results are available on our project page:
https://grail.cs.washington.edu/projects/dreampose

1. Introduction
Fashion photography is incredibly prevalent online, from
social media platforms to online retail sites. Unfortunately, these still photographs are limited in the information they convey, and fail to capture many of the crucial nuances of a garment, such as how it drapes and flows when
worn. Fashion videos, on the other hand, do showcase all
these details, and for this reason are highly informative for
consumer decision-making. Despite this benefit, however,
these videos are a relatively rare commodity.
In this paper, we introduce DreamPose, a method that
turns fashion photographs into realistic, animated videos,
using a driving pose sequence. Our method is a diffusion
video synthesis model based upon Stable Diffusion [16].
Given one or more images of a human and a pose sequence,
DreamPose generates a high-quality video of the input sub-

22680

