This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Online Prototype Learning for Online Continual Learning
Yujie Wei1
Jiaxin Ye1
Zhizhong Huang2
Junping Zhang2
Hongming Shan1,3,4 *
1
Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-inspired Intelligence, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science
Fudan University
3
MOE Frontiers Center for Brain Science, Fudan University
4
Shanghai Center for Brain Science and Brain-inspired Technology
{yjwei22, jxye22}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {zzhuang19, jpzhang, hmshan}@fudan.edu.cn
Input

Abstract

ER

DVC

OnPro

1.0
0.8

Online continual learning (CL) studies the problem of
learning continuously from a single-pass data stream while
adapting to new data and mitigating catastrophic forgetting. Recently, by storing a small subset of old data, replaybased methods have shown promising performance. Unlike
previous methods that focus on sample storage or knowledge distillation against catastrophic forgetting, this paper
aims to understand why the online learning models fail to
generalize well from a new perspective of shortcut learning. We identify shortcut learning as the key limiting factor for online CL, where the learned features may be biased, not generalizable to new tasks, and may have an adverse impact on knowledge distillation. To tackle this issue,
we present the online prototype learning (OnPro) framework for online CL. First, we propose online prototype
equilibrium to learn representative features against shortcut learning and discriminative features to avoid class confusion, ultimately achieving an equilibrium status that separates all seen classes well while learning new classes. Second, with the feedback of online prototypes, we devise a
novel adaptive prototypical feedback mechanism to sense
the classes that are easily misclassified and then enhance
their boundaries. Extensive experimental results on widelyused benchmark datasets demonstrate the superior performance of OnPro over the state-of-the-art baseline methods. Source code is available at https://github.
com/weilllllls/OnPro.

1. Introduction
Current artificial intelligence systems [30, 36, 52, 16]
have shown excellent performance on the tasks at hand;
however, they are prone to forget previously learned knowl* Corresponding author

0.6
0.4
0.2
0

Figure 1. The visual explanations by GradCAM++ on the training
set of CIFAR-10 (image size 32 × 32). Although all methods predict the correct class, shortcut learning still exists in ER and DVC.

edge while learning new tasks, known as catastrophic forgetting [20, 23, 9]. Continual learning (CL) [46, 44, 14,
19] aims to learn continuously from a non-stationary data
stream while adapting to new data and mitigating catastrophic forgetting, offering a promising path to human-like
artificial general intelligence. Early CL works consider the
task-incremental learning (TIL) setting, where the model
selects the task-specific component for classification with
task identifiers [1, 41, 50, 14]. However, this setting lacks
flexibility in real-world scenarios. In this paper, we focus on
a more general and realistic setting—the class-incremental
learning (CIL) in the online CL mode [42, 13, 27, 51]—
where the model learns incrementally classes in a sequence
of tasks from a single-pass data stream and cannot access
task identifiers at inference.
Various online CL methods have been proposed to mitigate catastrophic forgetting [51, 43, 25, 28, 11, 5, 13].
Among them, replay-based methods [11, 43, 26, 2, 25] have
shown promising performance by storing a subset of data
from old classes as exemplars for experience replay. Unlike
previous methods that focus on sample storage [51, 3], we
are interested in how generalizable the learned features are
to new classes, and aim to understand why the online learning models fail to generalize well from a new perspective of
shortcut learning.

18764

