This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prototypical Kernel Learning and Open-set Foreground Perception for
Generalized Few-shot Semantic Segmentation
Kai Huang, Feigege Wang, Ye Xi, Yutao Gao
Alibaba Group
zhouwan.hk, feigege.wfgg, yx150449, yutao.gao@alibaba-inc.com

1. Introduction
Few-shot semantic segmentation [25, 39, 2, 15] aims to
handle the situation of only sparse annotated data available,
which perplexes most normal semantic segmentation methods. Inherited from the superiority of few-shot learning, the
FSS methods can quickly be expended to unseen domains
with only few labeled samples. Typically, most FSS methods are built on episode-based meta-learning [27], each
episode data contains a support set and a query set shared

(a)

Feature Map

Base-class Image

(b)

Pixel
Similarity

ℒ

Prediction

Learnable Vectors

Backbone

Generalized Few-shot Semantic Segmentation (GFSS)
extends Few-shot Semantic Segmentation (FSS) to simultaneously segment unseen classes and seen classes during
evaluation. Previous works leverage additional branch or
prototypical aggregation to eliminate the constrained setting of FSS. However, representation division and embedding prejudice, which heavily results in poor performance
of GFSS, have not been synthetical considered. We address
the aforementioned problems by jointing the prototypical
kernel learning and open-set foreground perception. Specifically, a group of learnable kernels is proposed to perform
segmentation with each kernel in charge of a stuff class.
Then, we explore to merge the prototypical learning to the
update of base-class kernels, which is consistent with the
prototype knowledge aggregation of few-shot novel classes.
In addition, a foreground contextual perception module cooperating with conditional bias based inference is adopted
to perform class-agnostic as well as open-set foreground
detection, thus to mitigate the embedding prejudice and prevent novel targets from being misclassified as background.
Moreover, we also adjust our method to the Class Incremental Few-shot Semantic Segmentation (CIFSS) which takes
the knowledge of novel classes in a incremental stream. Extensive experiments on PASCAL-5i and COCO-20i datasets
demonstrate that our method performs better than previous
state-of-the-art.

Backbone

Abstract

Feature
Pooling
Feature Map

Aggregated Prototypes

Novel-class Image

(c)
Representation Division

Embedding Prejudice

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation. (a) shows the generation
of base-class representation vectors, it learns from abundant baseclass images. (b) is the process of novel-class prototypes, which
are aggregated by the lightweight feature pooling since few samples available. (c) demonstrates the representation division and
embedding prejudice problem existed in current GFSS.

with same classes. In general, the support set consists of
few support images with pixel-wise annotations. The models are supported to learn a generic meta-learner with abundant episodic data sampled from the base classes, and adopt
to novel classes with the guidance of the support set. However, the majority of current FSS methods can not escape
from the limitation of support set, in which specific as well
as single novel class annotations are needed corresponding
to query images during the inference. Another weakness
is that models can only segment the specific novel class of
support set while lack the identification of base classes or
multi-novel classes. The recent work [15] leverages the prediction of base classes with a base learner, and thus gives a
mask region, which instructs the area does not need to be
segmented, to guide the recognition of novel concepts. Despite the significant improvement has been made in base
classes, the issue of heavily relying on the support samples
with the same classes for each query image still exists.
To this end, Generalized Few-shot Semantic Segmentation (GFSS) was proposed [28] where novel classes are

19256

