This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PARTNER: Level up the Polar Representation for LiDAR 3D Object Detection
Ming Nie1 * Yujing Xue2,5∗ Chunwei Wang3∗ Chaoqiang Ye3 Hang Xu3
Xinge Zhu4 Qingqiu Huang4 Michael Bi Mi5 Xinchao Wang2 Li Zhang1†
1
School of Data Science, Fudan University 2 National University of Singapore
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 4 Huawei ADS 5 Huawei International Pte Ltd

Abstract
Recently, polar-based representation has shown promising properties in perceptual tasks. In addition to Cartesianbased approaches, which separate point clouds unevenly,
representing point clouds as polar grids has been recognized as an alternative due to (1) its advantage in robust
performance under different resolutions and (2) its superiority in streaming-based approaches. However, stateof-the-art polar-based detection methods inevitably suffer
from the feature distortion problem because of the nonuniform division of polar representation, resulting in a nonnegligible performance gap compared to Cartesian-based
approaches. To tackle this issue, we present PARTNER, a
novel 3D object detector in the polar coordinate. PARTNER
alleviates the dilemma of feature distortion with global representation re-alignment and facilitates the regression by
introducing instance-level geometric information into the
detection head. Extensive experiments show overwhelming
advantages in streaming-based detection and different resolutions. Furthermore, our method outperforms the previous
polar-based works with remarkable margins of 3.68% and
9.15% on Waymo and ONCE validation set, thus achieving
competitive results over the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
3D object detection serves as an indispensable component in 3D scene understanding for autonomous driving.
With increased affordability and accessibility, LiDAR sensors are now widely adopted for accurate localization. Unlike regular camera images, LiDAR point cloud has its own
unordered, unstructured and sparse nature, thus requiring an
effective representation for 3D object detection algorithms
in real world.
Prior arts have explored a variety of representations for
point clouds. Point-based approaches [24, 31, 30] directly
* Equally contributed.
† Li Zhang (lizhangfd@fudan.edu.cn) is the corresponding author at

School of Data Science, Fudan University

70

67

65

65

60

63

55

61

50

59

45

57

40
35

PARTNER Cartesian

1x

2x

3x
voxel size
(a)

Polar

4x

5x

1

PARTNER

Cartesian

Polar

PolarStream

HAN

STROBE

2
4
6
8
the number of LiDAR sector
(b)

55
53

Figure 1. The superiority of polar representation. Experiments
are conducted on Waymo val. set. (a) Performance comparison between different volumetric representations. When enlarging
the voxel size of 3D detector CenterPoint [32], replacing cuboidshaped voxelization with a polar-based one could significantly reduce the performance drop, indicating the accuracy robustness of
polar representation. (b) Performance in a streaming-based architecture. Our PARTNER outperforms the state-of-the-art streaming
detector PolarStream [3] with remarkable margins.

process raw points by PointNet and its variants [20, 21],
which also suffer from time-consuming neighbor sampling
and grouping operations. Range-based methods [13, 7, 2]
represent the LiDAR points in a 2.5D manifold structure.
Its compactness enables fast neighbor queries and avoids
computation on the empty zone, yet its performance still
falls behind other representations. Alternatively, grid-based
methods [36, 12, 29, 32, 28] generally transform irregular point clouds into 2D pillars or 3D voxels, and generate 3D boxes in bird’s-eye-view (BEV). Due to their
reasonable computation cost and high performance, these
methods have currently dominated the 3D detection benchmark on large-scale datasets [1, 25]. Nevertheless, popular
Cartesian-based volumetric representation encounters the
problem of non-uniform density distribution over distances,
where nearby region has much greater density than the distant. To guarantee affordable memory cost, cells close to
sensors have to discard many points during encoding, thus

3801

