This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ElasticViT: Conflict-aware Supernet Training for Deploying Fast Vision
Transformer on Diverse Mobile Devices
Chen Tang∗1,2§ Li Lyna Zhang∗2‡ Huiqiang Jiang2 Jiahang Xu2 Ting Cao2
Quanlu Zhang2 Yuqing Yang2 Zhi Wang1 Mao Yang2
1 Tsinghua University

2 Microsoft Research

genprtung@gmail.com; {lzhani, hjiang, jiahangxu, ticao, quzha, yuqyang, maoyang}@microsoft.com; wangzhi@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

https://github.com/microsoft/Moonlit/tree/main/ElasticViT

Abstract
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has shown promising
performance in the automatic design of vision transformers
(ViT) exceeding 1G FLOPs. However, designing lightweight
and low-latency ViT models for diverse mobile devices remains a big challenge. In this work, we propose ElasticViT,
a two-stage NAS approach that trains a high-quality ViT
supernet over a very large search space for covering a wide
range of mobile devices, and then searches an optimal subnetwork (subnet) for direct deployment. However, current
supernet training methods that rely on uniform sampling
suffer from the gradient conflict issue: the sampled subnets can have vastly different model sizes (e.g., 50M vs. 2G
FLOPs), leading to different optimization directions and inferior performance. To address this challenge, we propose two
novel sampling techniques: complexity-aware sampling and
performance-aware sampling. Complexity-aware sampling
limits the FLOPs difference among the subnets sampled
across adjacent training steps, while covering different-sized
subnets in the search space. Performance-aware sampling
further selects subnets that have good accuracy, which can
reduce gradient conflicts and improve supernet quality. Our
discovered models, ElasticViT models, achieve top-1 accuracy from 67.2% to 80.0% on ImageNet from 60M to 800M
FLOPs without extra retraining, outperforming all prior
CNNs and ViTs in terms of accuracy and latency. Our tiny
and small models are also the first ViT models that surpass
state-of-the-art CNNs with significantly lower latency on mobile devices. For instance, ElasticViT-S1 runs 2.62× faster
than EfficientNet-B0 with 0.1% higher accuracy.

* Equal contribution
§Work was done during the internship at Microsoft Research
‡ Corresponding author (lzhani@microsoft.com)

Figure 1: We train a high-quality ViT supernet for a wide range of
mobile devices. Our discovered ViTs outperform SOTA CNNs and
ViTs with higher accuracy, fewer FLOPs and faster speed.

1. Introduction
Vision Transformers (ViTs) have achieved remarkable
success in various computer vision tasks [14, 31, 51, 5, 64].
However, the success comes at a significant cost - ViTs are
heavy-weight and have high inference latency costs, posing
a great challenge to bring ViTs to resource-limited mobile
devices [56]. Designing accurate and low-latency ViTs becomes an important but challenging problem.
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) provides a powerful
tool for automating efficient DNN design. Recently, twostage NAS such as BigNAS [59] and AutoFormer [7], decouple training and searching process and achieves remarkable search efficiency and accuracy. The first stage trains
a weight-shared supernet assembling all candidate architectures in the search space, and the second stage uses typical
search algorithms to find best sub-networks (subnets) under
various resource constraints. The searched subnets can directly inherit supernet weights for deployment, achieving
comparable accuracy to those retrained from scratch. Such
two-stage NAS can eliminate the prohibitively expensive
cost for traditional NAS to retrain each subnet, making it a
practical approach for efficient deployment.
The success of two-stage NAS heavily relies on the quality of the supernet training in the first stage. However, it’s
extremely challenging to train a high-quality ViT supernet

5829

