This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAGA: Spectral Adversarial Geometric Attack on 3D Meshes
Tomer Stolik*
Tel Aviv University

Itai Lang*
Tel Aviv University

Shai Avidan
Tel Aviv University

tomerstolik@mail.tau.ac.il

itailang@mail.tau.ac.il

avidan@eng.tau.ac.il

Abstract
A triangular mesh is one of the most popular 3D data
representations. As such, the deployment of deep neural
networks for mesh processing is widely spread and is increasingly attracting more attention. However, neural networks are prone to adversarial attacks, where carefully
crafted inputs impair the model’s functionality. The need
to explore these vulnerabilities is a fundamental factor in
the future development of 3D-based applications. Recently,
mesh attacks were studied on the semantic level, where classiﬁers are misled to produce wrong predictions. Nevertheless, mesh surfaces possess complex geometric attributes
beyond their semantic meaning, and their analysis often includes the need to encode and reconstruct the geometry of
the shape.
We propose a novel framework for a geometric adversarial attack on a 3D mesh autoencoder. In this setting, an adversarial input mesh deceives the autoencoder by forcing it
to reconstruct a different geometric shape at its output. The
malicious input is produced by perturbing a clean shape in
the spectral domain. Our method leverages the spectral decomposition of the mesh along with additional mesh-related
properties to obtain visually credible results that consider
the delicacy of surface distortions1 .

1. Introduction
A triangular mesh is the primary representation of 3D
shapes, with applications in many safety-critical realms. In
the medical ﬁeld, incorrect perception of the geometric subtleties of an organ can lead to life-threatening errors. In
robotics and automotive, a precise understanding of the geometry of obstacles is essential to prevent accidents. The
security of facial modeling is also dependent on the accuracy of the processed geometry of the mesh.
Autoencoders (AEs) are one of the most prominent deeplearning tools to process the mesh’s geometry. They are designed to capture geometric features which enable dimen1 https://github.com/StolikTomer/SAGA
* Equal contribution

Attack

AE

AE

Figure 1. A result of our geometric mesh attack. A mesh of
a sphere (top left) is perturbed into an adversarial example (top
right). While the original mesh is accurately reconstructed by
an autoencoder (AE) (bottom left), our attack fools the AE and
changes the output geometry to a cube! (bottom right).

sionality reduction for both storage and communication purposes [6, 4]. Mesh AEs are also used for segmentation, selfsupervised learning, and denoising tasks [16, 19, 7].
Despite their tremendous achievements, neural networks
are often found vulnerable to adversarial attacks. These attacks craft inputs that impair the victim network’s behavior.
Adversarial attacks were extensively studied in recent years,
focusing especially on the semantic level, where the input to
a classiﬁer is carefully modiﬁed in an imperceivable manner to mislead the network to an incorrect prediction. Semantic adversarial attacks are abundant in the case of 2D
images [8, 20, 3], and recently, semantic attacks on 3D representations have also drawn much attention, both on point
clouds [29, 10, 28] and meshes [30, 14, 23, 1].
Nonetheless, the vulnerabilities of networks that process
geometric attributes, such as AEs, have not been thoroughly
investigated. AEs may be imperative to many practical
mesh deployments and their credibility and robustness depend on the study of geometric adversarial attacks.
We propose a framework of a geometric adversarial attack on 3D meshes. Our attack, named SAGA, is exempliﬁed in Figure 1. The input mesh of the sphere is perturbed
and fed into an AE that reconstructs a geometrically different output, i.e., a cube! Ideally, the deformation of the input

4284

