This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Discriminative Class Tokens for Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Idan Schwartz1 * Vésteinn Snæbjarnarson2 * Hila Chefer1
Serge Belongie2 Lior Wolf1
Sagie Benaim2
1
2
Tel Aviv University University of Copenhagen

Abstract

wish to render an image of a clothes ‘iron’, but could instead be presented with an image of the elemental metal.

Recent advances in text-to-image diffusion models have
enabled the generation of diverse and high-quality images.
While impressive, the images often fall short of depicting
subtle details and are susceptible to errors due to ambiguity in the input text. One way of alleviating these issues is
to train diffusion models on class-labeled datasets. This approach has two disadvantages: (i) supervised datasets are
generally small compared to large-scale scraped text-image
datasets on which text-to-image models are trained, affecting the quality and diversity of the generated images, or (ii)
the input is a hard-coded label, as opposed to free-form text,
limiting the control over the generated images.
In this work, we propose a non-invasive fine-tuning technique that capitalizes on the expressive potential of freeform text while achieving high accuracy through discriminative signals from a pretrained classifier. This is done
by iteratively modifying the embedding of an added input
token of a text-to-image diffusion model, by steering generated images toward a given target class according to a
classifier. Our method is fast compared to prior fine-tuning
methods and does not require a collection of in-class images or retraining of a noise-tolerant classifier. We evaluate our method extensively, showing that the generated images are: (i) more accurate and of higher quality than standard diffusion models, (ii) can be used to augment training data in a low-resource setting, and (iii) reveal information about the data used to train the guiding classifier. The
code is available at https://github.com/idansc/
discriminative_class_tokens.

To alleviate these issues, pretrained classifiers have been
used to guide the denoising process. One such method
mixes the score estimate of a diffusion model with the gradient of the log probability of a pre-trained classifier [10].
However, this approach has the downside of requiring a
classifier that works on both real and noisy data. Others
have conditioned the diffusion on class labels using a curated dataset [24] . While effective, this approach does not
lead to the full expressive power of models trained on huge
collections of web-scale image-text pairs.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image diffusion models [37, 10] have shown remarkable success in generating diverse and high-quality images conditioned on input text. However, they often fall
short when the input text contains lexical ambiguity or when
generating fine-grained details. For instance, one might
* Equal contribution.

A different line of work fine-tunes a diffusion model, or
some of its input tokens, using a small (∼5) collection of
images [15, 26, 38]. These methods have the following
drawbacks: (i) training new concepts can be slow, taking
upwards of a few hours, (ii) the method may change the distribution of the generated images (as compared to the original diffusion model) to fit only the new label or concept,
and (iii) the generated images are based on features from a
small group of images and may not capture the diversity of
the entire class.
This work introduces a method that more accurately captures the desired class, avoiding lexical ambiguity while
more accurately portraying fine-grained details. It does so
while retaining the full expressive power of the original pretrained diffusion model without the above-mentioned drawbacks. Instead of guiding the diffusion process or updating
the entire model with the classifier, we only update the representation of a single added token, corresponding to each
class of interest. We do this without tuning the model on
labeled images. To learn the token representation corresponding to a given target class, we iteratively generate new
images with a higher class probability according to the pretrained classifier. At each iteration, feedback from the classifier steers the designated discriminative class token to this
end. Our optimization process uses a new technique, gradient skipping, which only propagates the gradient through
the final stage of the diffusion process. The optimized token
is then used as part of the conditioning text-input to generate
images using the original diffusion model.

22725

