This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Examining Autoexposure for Challenging Scenes
SaiKiran Tedla*

Beixuan Yang*

Michael S. Brown

York University
[tedlasai, beixuan, mbrown]@yorku.ca

Abstract
Autoexposure (AE) is a critical step applied by camera
systems to ensure properly exposed images. While current AE algorithms are effective in well-lit environments
with constant illumination, these algorithms still struggle
in environments with bright light sources or scenes with
abrupt changes in lighting. A significant hurdle in developing new AE algorithms for challenging environments, especially those with time-varying lighting, is the lack of suitable image datasets. To address this issue, we have captured a new 4D exposure dataset that provides a large so1
lution space (i.e., shutter speed range from 500
to 15 seconds) over a temporal sequence with moving objects, bright
lights, and varying lighting. In addition, we have designed
a software platform to allow AE algorithms to be used in
a plug-and-play manner with the dataset. Our dataset and
associate platform enable repeatable evaluation of different
AE algorithms and provide a much-needed starting point to
develop better AE methods. We examine several existing AE
strategies using our dataset and show that most users prefer a simple saliency method for challenging lighting conditions.

1. Introduction and Motivation
This paper is focused on auto exposure (AE) for scenes
with challenging lighting. A camera’s AE subsystem is responsible for determining capture-time settings to ensure a
properly exposed image. Exposure is attributed to the lens
aperture, shutter speed, and sensor ISO gain; however, it
is often the case that some of these parameters are fixed at
capture time. For example, this paper focuses on the most
common form of AE, known as aperture-priority AE, where
the aperture (and ISO) are fixed to avoid changes in the
depth of field. In aperture-priority, AE algorithms are responsible for choosing the appropriate shutter speed based
on information gleaned from the current captured image.
AE is inherently a dynamic process, where the algorithm
* Equal contribution.

4D temporal exposure dataset

...

...

...
time step 0

...
time step 99

time step 50

Result from different AE algorithms at time step 99

Global AE

Entropy-based AE

Saliency-based AE

Semantic-based AE

Figure 1. An example scene from our new 4D exposure dataset. A
moving object (globe) has a light source that is periodically turned
on and off, causing an abrupt change in lighting. Using our dataset
and AE platform, we can evaluate different AE algorithms. Here
we show four different AE algorithms which select different exposures as their solution for a particular time step.

constantly predicts changes in shutter speed to account for
a changing environment. While AE is a long-standing and
well-researched problem in low-level computer vision, AE
algorithms, including those on commercial cameras, still
struggle in challenging lighting environments.
Two primary factors make scenes challenging for AE algorithms. The first is when the scene’s dynamic range surpasses the capability of the imaging sensor. In such cases,
the AE algorithm must determine which part of the scene
will be over- or underexposed. For this problem, it is easy
to construct 3D datasets comprised of a stack of 2D images
of a stationary scene captured under intense lighting with
different shutter speeds. Several such exposure datasets exist, providing a complete solution space with fixed lighting and objects. The second challenging factor for AE is
when there is an abrupt change in the environment lighting, such as lights switching on and off or objects moving
under bright lights. Capturing datasets for this scenario is

13076

