ser V3

This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MasaCtrl: Tuning-Free Mutual Self-Attention Control for Consistent
Image Synthesis and Editing
Mingdeng Cao1,2∗

Xintao Wang2
1

Zhongang Qi2

Ying Shan2
2

The University of Tokyo

Xiaohu Qie2

Yinqiang Zheng1

ARC Lab, Tencent PCG

https://github.com/TencentARC/MasaCtrl

Input real image

“… jumping …”

“Elon Musk” → “… side view …”

“A sitting boy” → “… standing …”

Input real image “… , giving a thumbs up”

“An apple” → “Two apples”

“A standing bird” → “… , spreading wings”

Figure 1: Our method MasaCtrl can perform text-based non-rigid image synthesis and real image editing without fine-tuning.
Meanwhile, our method can be easily integrated into controllable diffusion models, like T2I-Adapter [17] or ControlNet [45],
to perform more consistent and faithful synthesis and editing (last column).

Abstract
Despite the success in large-scale text-to-image generation and text-conditioned image editing, existing methods
still struggle to produce consistent generation and editing
results. For example, generation approaches usually fail to
synthesize multiple images of the same objects/characters
but with different views or poses. Meanwhile, existing editing methods either fail to achieve effective complex nonrigid editing while maintaining the overall textures and
identity, or require time-consuming fine-tuning to capture
the image-specific appearance. In this paper, we develop
MasaCtrl, a tuning-free method to achieve consistent image generation and complex non-rigid image editing simultaneously. Specifically, MasaCtrl converts existing selfattention in diffusion models into mutual self-attention, so
that it can query correlated local contents and textures from
source images for consistency. To further alleviate the query
*Work done during an internship at ARC Lab, Tencent PCG.

confusion between foreground and background, we propose a mask-guided mutual self-attention strategy, where
the mask can be easily extracted from the cross-attention
maps. Extensive experiments show that the proposed MasaCtrl can produce impressive results in both consistent image generation and complex non-rigid real image editing.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in text-to-image (T2I) generation [25,
19, 41, 24, 27] have achieved great success. Those largescale T2I models, such as Stable Diffusion [27], can generate diverse and high-quality images conforming to given
text prompts. When leveraging the T2I models, we can also
perform promising text-conditioned image editing [19, 10,
35, 21]. However, there is still a large gap between our
needs and existing methods in terms of consistent generation and editing.
1
22560

