This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

I-ViT: Integer-only Quantization for Efficient Vision Transformer Inference
Zhikai Li1,2 , Qingyi Gu1, *
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{lizhikai2020, qingyi.gu}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract

Input (INT8)

Input (INT8)

Vision Transformers (ViTs) have achieved state-of-theart performance on various computer vision applications.
However, these models have considerable storage and computational overheads, making their deployment and efficient
inference on edge devices challenging. Quantization is a
promising approach to reducing model complexity, and the
dyadic arithmetic pipeline can allow the quantized models
to perform efficient integer-only inference. Unfortunately,
dyadic arithmetic is based on the homogeneity condition in
convolutional neural networks, which is not applicable to
the non-linear components in ViTs, making integer-only inference of ViTs an open issue. In this paper, we propose IViT, an integer-only quantization scheme for ViTs, to enable
ViTs to perform the entire computational graph of inference
with integer arithmetic and bit-shifting, and without any
floating-point arithmetic. In I-ViT, linear operations (e.g.,
MatMul and Dense) follow the integer-only pipeline with
dyadic arithmetic, and non-linear operations (e.g., Softmax,
GELU, and LayerNorm) are approximated by the proposed
light-weight integer-only arithmetic methods. More specifically, I-ViT applies the proposed Shiftmax and ShiftGELU,
which are designed to use integer bit-shifting to approximate the corresponding floating-point operations. We evaluate I-ViT on various benchmark models and the results
show that integer-only INT8 quantization achieves comparable (or even slightly higher) accuracy to the full-precision
(FP) baseline. Furthermore, we utilize TVM for practical hardware deployment on the GPU’s integer arithmetic
units, achieving 3.72∼4.11× inference speedup compared
to the FP model. Code of both Pytorch and TVM is released
at https://github.com/zkkli/I-ViT.

Dequantization
FP32
Floating-point arithmetic
FP32
Quantization

Integer-only arithmetic
Shiftmax ≈ Softmax
ShiftGELU ≈ GELU
I-LayerNorm ≈ LayerNorm

1. Introduction
Vision Transformers (ViTs) have recently achieved great
success on a variety of computer vision tasks [13, 10, 4].
* Corresponding author.

output (INT8)

output (INT8)

(a) FasterTransformer [34]

(b) I-ViT (ours)

Figure 1. Computation flows of Softmax, GELU, and LayerNorm
in FasterTransformer [34] and our proposed I-ViT. I-ViT realizes
the entire computational graph with integer-only arithmetic, which
is more promising and practical for low-cost model deployment
and efficient inference.

Nevertheless, as compared to convolutional neural networks (CNNs), ViTs suffer from higher memory footprints,
computational overheads, and power consumption, hindering their deployment and real-time inference on resourceconstrained edge devices [25, 17, 15, 37]. Thus, compression approaches for ViTs are being widely researched.
Model quantization, which reduces the representation
precision of weight/activation parameters, is an effective
and hardware-friendly way to improve model efficiency
[12, 20, 7, 35]. With the quantized low-precision parameters, previous work [18] presents the dyadic arithmetic
pipeline to realize integer-only inference, where the quantization scaling factors are collapsed into the integer multiplication and bit-shifting in the requantization process. This
can enable the quantized models to fully benefit from the
fast and efficient low-precision integer arithmetic units and
thus provides promising speedup effects [41, 44]. For instance, the edge processor core in ARM Cortex-M family
only support the deployment of the integer-only kernels; the
recent Turing Tensor Cores in GPU server class also add
support for integer logical units, and their high throughput capability enables notably lower latency compared to
floating-point arithmetic.
However, the above integer-only pipeline is designed for

17065

