This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Emotional Listener Portrait: Realistic Listener Motion Simulation in Conversation
Luchuan Song1
Guojun Yin2
Zhenchao Jin3
Xiaoyi Dong4
Chenliang Xu1
1
University of Rochester 2 University of Science and Technology of China
3
University of Hong Kong 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{lsong11@ur., chenliang.xu@}rochester.edu, gjyin@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
blwx96@connect.hku.hk, dongxiaoyi@pjlab.org.cn

Figure 1: Illustration of our method on listener motion synthesis with the ternary emotional value as an example. Given
different emotional speakers (e.g. neutral, positive, and negative), our approach generates corresponding listeners under the
different emotional latent spaces.

Abstract
Listener head generation centers on generating nonverbal behaviors (e.g., smile) of a listener in reference to the
information delivered by a speaker. A significant challenge
when generating such responses is the non-deterministic nature of fine-grained facial expressions during a conversation,
which varies depending on the emotions and attitudes of
both the speaker and the listener. To tackle this problem, we
propose the Emotional Listener Portrait (ELP), which treats
each fine-grained facial motion as a composition of several
discrete motion-codewords and explicitly models the probability distribution of the motions under different emotion in
conversation. Benefiting from the “explicit” and “discrete”
design, our ELP model can not only automatically generate
natural and diverse responses toward a given speaker via
sampling from the learned distribution but also generate
controllable responses with a predetermined attitude. Under
several quantitative metrics, our ELP exhibits significant
improvements compared to previous methods.

1. Introduction
Listener Head Generation (LHG) technology aims to synthesize the motion of the listener in response to the speaker.

In contrast to speaker head generation (SHG) [10, 44, 21,
13, 35, 47, 9, 53, 45], which focuses on generating lipspeech synchronized portrait videos, LHG analyzes the talking semantics of the speaker automatically, without explicit
guidance, to synthesize corresponding interactive motions
of the listener. As shown in Figure 1, the listener reacts
positively when the speaker shares happy, and vice versa.
LHG can be employed in many applications, e.g. humancomputer interaction [57, 25, 60], virtual reality [22, 24],
metaverse [8, 7, 46] and media forensics [42, 37, 43, 17] etc.
The distinct nature of LHG, which necessitates a comprehensive modeling of the speaker’s motion [32], presents a
significant hurdle in yielding realistic listener head. In the
absence of audio-to-mouth matching evaluation, audiences
are more inclined to discern subtle changes in facial expressions and head movements. However, the existing methods Responsive Listening Head Generation (RLHG) [61]
and Learning2Listen [31] have ignored these key components. Specifically, RLHG [61] has replicated the regression experience from SHG [10], which weakens the nondeterministic properties and smoothes the listener motion.
Meanwhile, although the motion categories in codebook proposed by Learning2Listen [31] alleviate this problem, the
one-dimensional codebook from VQ-VAE [29] limits the

20839

