This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-Ray Neural Radiance Fields for Novel-view Synthesis
from Unconstrained Image Collections

1

Yifan Yang1,2 * Shuhai Zhang1,2 Zixiong Huang1 Yubing Zhang3 Mingkui Tan1,2,4†
South China University of Technology 2 Pazhou Lab 3 Guangzhou Shiyuan Electronics Co., Ltd
4
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education
{seyoungyif, mszhangshuhai, sesmilhzx}@mail.scut.edu.cn, zhangyubing@cvte.com
mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) is a revolutionary approach for rendering scenes by sampling a single ray per
pixel and it has demonstrated impressive capabilities in
novel-view synthesis from static scene images. However,
in practice, we usually need to recover NeRF from unconstrained image collections, which poses two challenges: 1)
the images often have dynamic changes in appearance because of different capturing time and camera settings; 2)
the images may contain transient objects such as humans
and cars, leading to occlusion and ghosting artifacts. Conventional approaches seek to address these challenges by
locally utilizing a single ray to synthesize a color of a pixel.
In contrast, humans typically perceive appearance and objects by globally utilizing information across multiple pixels.
To mimic the perception process of humans, in this paper, we
propose Cross-Ray NeRF (CR-NeRF) that leverages interactive information across multiple rays to synthesize occlusionfree novel views with the same appearances as the images.
Specifically, to model varying appearances, we first propose
to represent multiple rays with a novel cross-ray feature
and then recover the appearance by fusing global statistics,
i.e., feature covariance of the rays and the image appearance. Moreover, to avoid occlusion introduced by transient
objects, we propose a transient objects handler and introduce a grid sampling strategy for masking out the transient
objects. We theoretically find that leveraging correlation
across multiple rays promotes capturing more global information. Moreover, extensive experimental results on large
real-world datasets verify the effectiveness of CR-NeRF. The
code and data can be found at https://github.com/
YifYang993/CR-NeRF-PyTorch.git.

2 Corresponding author.
1 This work was done when Yifan Yang was a research intern at
Guangzhou Shiyuan Electronics Co., Ltd.

1. Introduction
Novel-view synthesis is a long-standing problem in computer vision that has paved the way for numerous applications such as virtual reality and digital humans [13, 45].
More recently, the emergence of Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) has driven the field forward, as it has shown significant performance in reconstructing 3D geometry [50] and
recovering the appearance [3, 35, 1] from multi-view image
sets. However, NeRF assumes that the images do not have
variable appearances and moving objects [31] (called the
static scene assumption c.f. Sec. 3), which leads to significant performance degradation on large-scale Internet image
collections. To expand the scope of NeRF, we aim to exploit the collections and provide a 3D immersive experience
through which we can visit international landmarks such as
the Brandenburg Gate, and the Trevi Fountain from different
viewpoints and times of one day.
To achieve this, we address the problem of recovering
an appearance-controllable and anti-occlusion NeRF from
unconstrained image collections. In other words, by reconstructing the NeRF representation, we control the appearance
of the scene based on photos with various photometric conditions, while eliminating occlusions caused by the images.
Although providing a sense of immersion, reconstructing
NeRF with these images faces the following two challenges.
1) Varying appearances: Imaging two tourists who take
photos in the same viewpoint but under various conditions,
e.g., different capturing times, diverse weather (e.g., sunny,
rainy, and foggy), and different camera settings (e.g., aperture, shutter, and ISO). This varying condition causes that
although multiple photographs are taken of the same scene,
they look dramatically different. 2) Transient occlusion:
Even with a constant appearance, transient objects such as
cars and Pedestrians may obscure the scene. Since these
objects are usually captured by only one photographer, it
is usually impractical to reconstruct these objects in high
quality. The above challenges conflict with the static-scene

15901

