This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhanced Soft Label for Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Jie Ma1 Chuan Wang1 Yang Liu1 Liang Lin1 Guanbin Li1,2 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Research Institute, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
majie25@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, cwang.hkucs@gmail.com, liuy856@mail.sysu.edu.cn,
linliang@ieee.org, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
As a mainstream framework in the field of semisupervised learning (SSL), self-training via pseudo labeling
and its variants have witnessed impressive progress in semisupervised semantic segmentation with the recent advance
of deep neural networks. However, modern self-training
based SSL algorithms use a pre-defined constant threshold to select unlabeled pixel samples that contribute to the
training, thus failing to be compatible with different learning difficulties of variant categories and different learning
status of the model. To address these issues, we propose Enhanced Soft Label (ESL), a curriculum learning approach
to fully leverage the high-value supervisory signals implicit
in the untrustworthy pseudo label. ESL believes that pixels with unconfident predictions can be pretty sure about
their belonging to a subset of dominant classes though being arduous to determine the exact one. It thus contains a
Dynamic Soft Label (DSL) module to dynamically maintain
the high probability classes, keeping the label “soft” so as
to make full use of the high entropy prediction. However,
the DSL itself will inevitably introduce ambiguity between
dominant classes, thus blurring the classification boundary.
Therefore, we further propose a pixel-to-part contrastive
learning method cooperated with an unsupervised object
part grouping mechanism to improve its ability to distinguish between different classes. Extensive experimental results on Pascal VOC 2012 and Cityscapes show that our
approach achieves remarkable improvements over existing
state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the powerful feature representation capability of deep learning has allowed us to witness tremendous progress in visual understanding tasks represented by
semantic segmentation [5, 6, 13, 28, 34, 48, 50]. How* Corresponding author

Figure 1. (a) An unlabeled image with entropy map, where warm
color means high entropy. (b) The prediction of a high entropy
pixel marked in the white cross in (a). As seen, despite the difficulty to distinguish this pixel between dominant classes (person,
background and boat), the model is pretty sure that it belongs to
one of the dominant classes.

ever, as a notorious “data hungry” model, deep learning’s
powerful feature representation relies on a large amount of
high-quality annotated data. For semantic segmentation,
the acquisition of pixel-level data annotations is unbearably time-consuming and labor-intensive. Therefore, with
the development of semantic segmentation, the need for
data-efficient semantic segmentation methods is extremely
urgent. With the development of semi-supervised learning [3, 29, 32, 39, 42, 47], semi-supervised semantic segmentation [7, 24, 27, 30, 43] which focuses on the study of
using massive unlabeled images to assist a small amount of
labeled data to improve the performance of semantic segmentation, has thus emerged as promising approaches to
reduce the need for annotations and has gained extensive
research attention.
The core challenge of semi-supervised semantic segmentation is to make full use of unlabeled images. Self-training
via pseudo labeling [15, 25, 43, 44, 45] and its variants have
developed into a mainstream learning paradigm in this field.
These methods usually leverage all labeled images to train
a model in a fully-supervised manner and generate pseudo
labels for all unlabeled images based on the trained model.
Then, they re-train the model from scratch using all labeled
images with ground-truth labels and unlabeled images with

1185

