This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Coordinate Transformer: Achieving Single-stage Multi-person
Mesh Recovery from Videos
Haoye Dong2 * Hanchao Jia3 Dong Huang2 Michael C. Kampffmeyer4
Liang Lin5† Xiaodan Liang1,6†
1
Shenzhen campus of Sun Yat-sen University 2 Carnegie Mellon University
3
Samsung Research China – Beijing (SRC-B) 4 UiT The Arctic University of Norway
5
Sun Yat-sen University 6 Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI

Haoyuan Li1∗

lihy285@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, donghaoye@cmu.edu, hanchao.jia@samsung.com, donghuang@cmu.edu
michael.c.kampffmeyer@uit.no, linliang@ieee.org, xdliang328@gmail.com

Abstract
Multi-person 3D mesh recovery from videos is a critical
first step towards automatic perception of group behavior
in virtual reality, physical therapy and beyond. However,
existing approaches rely on multi-stage paradigms, where
the person detection and tracking stages are performed in
a multi-person setting, while temporal dynamics are only
modeled for one person at a time. Consequently, their performance is severely limited by the lack of inter-person interactions in the spatial-temporal mesh recovery, as well as
by detection and tracking defects. To address these challenges, we propose the Coordinate transFormer (CoordFormer) that directly models multi-person spatial-temporal
relations and simultaneously performs multi-mesh recovery in an end-to-end manner. Instead of partitioning the
feature map into coarse-scale patch-wise tokens, CoordFormer leverages a novel Coordinate-Aware Attention to
preserve pixel-level spatial-temporal coordinate information. Additionally, we propose a simple, yet effective Body
Center Attention mechanism to fuse position information.
Extensive experiments on the 3DPW dataset demonstrate
that CoordFormer significantly improves the state-of-theart, outperforming the previously best results by 4.2%, 8.8%
and 4.7% according to the MPJPE, PAMPJPE, and PVE
metrics, respectively, while being 40% faster than recent
video-based approaches. The released code can be found at
https://github.com/Li-Hao-yuan/CoordFormer.

1. Introduction
Considerable progress has been made on monocular 3D
human pose and shape estimation from images [5, 35,
17, 22, 39] due to extensive efforts of computer graph* Both authors contributed equally to this work as co-first authors.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparison of video-based multi-person mesh recovery pipelines. (a) Multi-stage pipelines [20, 8, 44, 38, 40] explicitly generate tracklets and model single-person temporal mesh
sequences independently. (b) Our single-stage CoordFormer implicitly matches persons across frames and simultaneously models
multi-person mesh sequences in an end-to-end manner.

ics and augmented/virtual reality researchers. However,
while frame-wise body mesh detection is feasible, many
applications require direct video-based pipelines to avoid
spatial-temporal incoherence and missing frame-based detections [20, 8, 38].
Existing video-based methods follow a multi-stage design that involves using a 2D person detector and tracker
to obtain the image sequences of a single-person for pose
and shape estimation [18, 20, 38, 41, 40]. More specifically, these methods first detect and crop image patches that
contain persons, then track these individuals across frames,
and associate each cropped image sequence with a person. The frame-level or sequence-level features are then
extracted and used to regress 3D human mesh sequences
under spatial and temporal constraints. However, the accuracy of the detection and tracking stage greatly affects the
performance of these multi-stage approaches, making them
particularly sensitive to false, overlapping, and missing detections. Moreover, these multi-stage approaches have a
considerable computation cost and lack real-time perspec-

8744

