This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DDFM: Denoising Diffusion Model for Multi-Modality Image Fusion
Zixiang Zhao1,2 Haowen Bai1 Yuanzhi Zhu2 Jiangshe Zhang1∗ Shuang Xu3
Yulun Zhang2 Kai Zhang2 Deyu Meng1,5 Radu Timofte2,4 Luc Van Gool2
1
3

Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich
Northwestern Polytechnical University 4 University of Würzburg
5
Macau University of Science and Technology
zixiangzhao@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, jszhang@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

(a) Vanilla GAN-based Fusion Model

Abstract

“Real”

∗ Corresponding author.

Second
level

“Fake”

Hierarchical
Bayesian
Model

First level

Discriminator 2

“Fake”

(c) Our DDFM
Likelihood
Rectification

Likelihood
Rectification

...

...

...

...

Figure 1: (a) Existing GAN-based fusion method workflow. (b)
Graph of the hierarchical Bayesian model in likelihood rectification,
linking the MMIF loss and our statistical inference model. (c) Our
DDFM workflow: the unconditional diffusion sampling (UDS)
module generates f t , while the likelihood rectification module,
based on (b), rectifies UDS output with source image information.
Quantitative Fusion Results for 6 Metrics

Dataset: MSRS

SD
FusionGAN
(IF'19)
GANMcC
(TIM'20)
U2Fusion
(TPAMI'20)
RFNet
(CVPR'22)
TarDAL
(CVPR'22)
DeFusion
(ECCV'22)
UMFusion
(IJCAI'22)
DDFM
(Ours)

1. Introduction
Image fusion integrates essential information from multiple source images to create high-quality fused images [37,
70, 27, 42], encompassing various source image types like
digital [20, 67, 74], multi-modal [58, 72], and remote sensing [62, 76]. This technology provides a clearer representation of objects and scenes, and has diverse applica-

Discriminator 1

Generator

Multi-modality image fusion aims to combine different
modalities to produce fused images that retain the complementary features of each modality, such as functional
highlights and texture details. To leverage strong generative priors and address challenges such as unstable training and lack of interpretability for GAN-based generative
methods, we propose a novel fusion algorithm based on
the denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM). The
fusion task is formulated as a conditional generation problem under the DDPM sampling framework, which is further divided into an unconditional generation subproblem
and a maximum likelihood subproblem. The latter is modeled in a hierarchical Bayesian manner with latent variables and inferred by the expectation-maximization (EM)
algorithm. By integrating the inference solution into the
diffusion sampling iteration, our method can generate highquality fused images with natural image generative priors
and cross-modality information from source images. Note
that all we required is an unconditional pre-trained generative model, and no fine-tuning is needed. Our extensive
experiments indicate that our approach yields promising
fusion results in infrared-visible image fusion and medical
image fusion. The code is available at https://github.
com/Zhaozixiang1228/MMIF-DDFM .

“Real”

(b) Likelihood Rectification

EN
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

MI

VIF

Dataset: RoadScene

SSIM

SD

Qabf

MI

EN
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

SSIM

Qabf

VIF

Figure 2: Visualization of results on MSRS [51] and RoadScene [59] in Tab. 1. Hexagons formed by lines of different colors
represent the values of different methods across six metrics. Our
DDFM (marked in yellow) outperforms all other methods.

tions such as saliency detection [43, 40, 41], object detection [12, 2, 10, 55], and semantic segmentation [28, 11, 56].
Among the different subcategories of image fusion, Infrared-

8082

