This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TransTIC: Transferring Transformer-based Image Compression
from Human Perception to Machine Perception
Yi-Hsin Chen

Ying-Chieh Weng Chia-Hao Kao Cheng Chien
Wei-Chen Chiu Wen-Hsiao Peng
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taiwan

{yhchen12101.cs09@, wengyc.cs09@, chiahaok.cs10@, cchien1999@cs.}nycu.edu.tw
{walon, wpeng}@cs.nctu.edu.tw

Abstract
This work aims for transferring a Transformer-based image compression codec from human perception to machine
perception without fine-tuning the codec. We propose a
transferable Transformer-based image compression framework, termed TransTIC. Inspired by visual prompt tuning,
TransTIC adopts an instance-specific prompt generator to
inject instance-specific prompts to the encoder and taskspecific prompts to the decoder. Extensive experiments
show that our proposed method is capable of transferring
the base codec to various machine tasks and outperforms
the competing methods significantly. To our best knowledge, this work is the first attempt to utilize prompting on
the low-level image compression task.

(a) Visual Prompt Tuning (VPT) [17]

(b) Ours (TransTIC)

Figure 1. Comparison of VPT [17] and our proposed TransTIC.

1. Introduction
End-to-end learned image compression systems [8, 12,
42] have recently attracted lots of attention due to their
competitive compression performance to traditional image coding methods, such as intra coding in VVC [4]
and HEVC [39]. Among them, transformer-based autoencoders [45, 31, 30, 40] emerge as attractive alternatives to
convolutional neural networks (CNN)-based solutions because of their high content adaptivity. Some even feature
lower computational cost than CNN-based autoencoders. In
common, most learned image compression systems are designed primarily for human perception.
Recently, image coding for machine perception becomes
an active research area due to the rising demands for transmitting visual data across devices for high-level recognition
tasks. Coding techniques in this area mainly include approaches that produce multi-task or single-task bitstreams.
The methods with the multi-task bitstream feature one single compressed bitstream that is able to serve multiple
downstream tasks, such as human perception and machine

perception. Most of them [6, 11, 9, 27, 44] aim to learn a
robust, general image representation via multi-task or contrastive learning. However, a general bitstream can hardly
be rate-distortion optimal from the perspective of each individual task.
The methods with the single-task bitstream allow the image codec to be tailored for individual downstream tasks,
thereby generating multiple task-specific bitstreams. One
straightforward approach is to optimize a codec end-toend for each task [5]. However, given the sheer amount
of machine tasks and their recognition networks, along
with the ongoing developments of new machine tasks and
models, customizing a neural codec, particularly hardwarebased, for every one-off machine application would be
prohibitively expensive even if not impossible. Regionof-interest (ROI)-based [38] and transferring-based methods [26] are two preferred solutions. The former performs
spatially adaptive coding of images according to an importance map, which can be optimized for different down-

23297

