This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bird’s-Eye-View Scene Graph for Vision-Language Navigation
Rui Liu

Xiaohan Wang

Wenguan Wang* Yi Yang

ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University
https://github.com/DefaultRui/BEV-Scene-Graph

Abstract

Instruction: Go to the dining room by front door and push in the chair furthest from the front door.

Vision-language navigation (VLN), which entails an
agent to navigate 3D environments following human instructions, has shown great advances. However, current
agents are built upon panoramic observations, which hinders their ability to perceive 3D scene geometry and easily
leads to ambiguous selection of panoramic view. To address
these limitations, we present a BEV Scene Graph (BSG),
which leverages multi-step BEV representations to encode
scene layouts and geometric cues of indoor environment under the supervision of 3D detection. During navigation,
BSG builds a local BEV representation at each step and
maintains a BEV-based global scene map, which stores and
organizes all the online collected local BEV representations
according to their topological relations. Based on BSG, the
agent predicts a local BEV grid-level decision score and
a global graph-level decision score, combined with a subview selection score on panoramic views, for more accurate action prediction. Our approach signiﬁcantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods on REVERIE, R2R, and R4R,
showing the potential of BEV perception in VLN.

1. Introduction
Vision-language navigation (VLN) task [1] requires an
agent to navigate through a 3D environment [2] to a target
location, according to natural language instructions. Existing work has made great advances in cross-modal reasoning [3–8], path planning [9–13], and auxiliary tasks for
pretraining [14–18]. Their core ideas are learning to relate
the language instructions to panoramic images of the environment. Though straightforward, these approaches heavily rely on 2D panoramic observations. As a result, they
lack the capacity to preserve scene layouts and 3D structure,
which are critical for navigation decision-making in embodied scenes. Moreover, indoor environments [2, 19–21] are
characterized by substantial occlusion [22–24], posing challenges for the agent to accurately identify the objects and
landmarks referenced by the instructions [1, 25].
* Corresponding author: Wenguan Wang.

10968

ϭ

ϯ
Ϯ

ϰ

(a) Previous Methods with Panoramic Decision Space.
BEV grid
current node
ϭ candidate node

ϯ

ϯ

Ϯ

ϰ

ϰ
Ϯ

ϭ
(b) Our Method with BEV Decision Space.

ϭ

Figure 1: For panoramic view (a), two candidate nodes ( ϭ & Ϯ )
correspond to the same image leading to ambiguity. For Bird’sEye-View (b), they are represented by discriminative grids ( ).

For example (Fig. 1(a)), given the instruction “Go to the
dining room by front door and push in the chair furthest
from the front door”, previous approaches [3–5, 14, 15,
17, 26–30] formulate VLN as a sequential text-to-image
grounding problem by matching navigable candidate nodes
with adjacent panoramic views. At each time step, given a
set of subviews captured from different directions, the agent
selects a navigable direction as the next step for navigation.
However, this strategy tends to introduce ambiguity, when
the agent needs to discriminate between multiple candidate
nodes corresponding to the same subview. In addition, the
agent struggles to ground the associated objects and explore
their spatial relation in 3D scene, such as identifying “the
chair furthest from the front door”. Consequently, relying
solely on panoramic view presents difﬁculties in both comprehensive scene perception and efﬁcient navigation.
To address the challenges encountered by panoramic
methods, Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) perception emerges as a
viable solution, employing discriminative grid representations to model the 3D environment. Meanwhile, BEV grid
representation effectively captures spatial context and scene
layouts [31, 32], facilitating both perception [33–36] and
planning [37–40]. Building upon these insights, we present
a BEV Scene Graph (BSG), which harnesses the power of

