This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EMDB: The Electromagnetic Database of Global 3D Human
Pose and Shape in the Wild
Manuel Kaufmann1 Jie Song1 Chen Guo1 Kaiyue Shen1 Tianjian Jiang1
Chengcheng Tang2 Juan José Zárate1 Otmar Hilliges1
1

ETH Zürich, Department of Computer Science

2

Meta Reality Labs

Figure 1: EMDB is a novel dataset that provides accurate SMPL pose and shape parameters including global camera and body
trajectories for in-the-wild videos. (left and middle) Challenging example poses taken from EMDB. (right, 1-4) Visualization
of global body center trajectory and the corresponding 3D poses projected into the camera view.

Abstract
We present EMDB, the Electromagnetic Database of
Global 3D Human Pose and Shape in the Wild. EMDB is
a novel dataset that contains high-quality 3D SMPL pose
and shape parameters with global body and camera trajectories for in-the-wild videos. We use body-worn, wireless
electromagnetic (EM) sensors and a hand-held iPhone to
record a total of 58 minutes of motion data, distributed over
81 indoor and outdoor sequences and 10 participants. Together with accurate body poses and shapes, we also provide global camera poses and body root trajectories. To
construct EMDB, we propose a multi-stage optimization
procedure, which first fits SMPL to the 6-DoF EM measurements and then refines the poses via image observations. To
achieve high-quality results, we leverage a neural implicit
avatar model to reconstruct detailed human surface geometry and appearance, which allows for improved alignment and smoothness via a dense pixel-level objective. Our
evaluations, conducted with a multi-view volumetric capture system, indicate that EMDB has an expected accuracy
of 2.3 cm positional and 10.6 degrees angular error, surpassing the accuracy of previous in-the-wild datasets. We
evaluate existing state-of-the-art monocular RGB methods
for camera-relative and global pose estimation on EMDB.
EMDB is publicly available under https://ait.ethz.ch/emdb.

1. Introduction
3D human pose and shape estimation from monocular RGB images is a long-standing computer vision problem with many applications in AR/VR, robotics, assisted
living, rehabilitation, or sports analysis. Much progress
has been made in estimating camera-relative poses, typically assuming a weak-perspective camera model, e.g.,
[7, 25, 29, 30, 51]. However, this setting is too restrictive
for many applications that involve a moving camera. Such
applications must estimate a) human poses in-the-wild, under occlusion and encountering uncommon poses; and b)
global locations of humans and the camera. Compared to
the camera-relative setting, there is relatively little work on
global pose estimation [65, 69]. This is in part due to the
lack of comprehensive datasets that contain accurate 3D human pose and shape with global trajectories in a fully in-thewild setting.
To overcome this bottleneck, in this paper we propose a
novel dataset, called EMDB, short for the ElectroMagnetic
DataBase of Global 3D Human Pose and Shape in the Wild.
EMDB consists of 58 minutes (105k frames) of challenging 3D human motion recorded in diverse scenes. We provide high-quality pose and shape annotations, as well as
global body root and camera trajectories. The dataset contains 81 sequences distributed over 10 participants that were
recorded with a hand-held mobile phone.

14632

