This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fan-Beam Binarization Difference Projection (FB-BDP): A Novel Local Object
Descriptor for Fine-Grained Leaf Image Retrieval
Xin Chen1 , Bin Wang2,1, *, Yongsheng Gao1
1
Griffith University, Brisbane, Australia
2
Nanjing University of Finance and Economics, Nanjing, China
xin.chen12@griffithuni.edu.au,

wangbin@nufe.edu.cn,

yongsheng.gao@griffith.edu.au

Abstract
Fine-grained leaf image retrieval (FGLIR) aims to
search similar leaf images in subspecies level which involves very high interclass visual similarity and accordingly poses great challenges to leaf image description. In
this study, we introduce a new concept, named fan-beam binarization difference projection (FB-BDP) to address this
challenging issue. It is designed based on the theory of
fan-beam projection (FBP) which is a mathematical tool
originally used for computed tomographic reconstruction of
objects and has the merits of capturing the inner structure
information of objects in multiple directions and excellent
ability to suppress image noise. However, few studies have
been made to apply FBP to the description of texture patterns. Rather than calculating ray integrals over the whole
object area, FB-BDP restricts its ray integrals calculated
over local patches to guarantee the locality of the extracted
features. By binarizing the intensity-differences between the
off-center and center rays, FB-BDP enable its ray integrals
insensitive to illumination change and more discriminative
in the characterization of texture patterns. In additional,
due to inheriting the merits of FBP, the proposed FB-BDP is
superior over the existing local image descriptors by its invariance to scaling transformation, robustness to noise, and
strong ability to capture direction and structure texture patterns. The results of extensive experiments on FGLIR show
its higher retrieval accuracy over the benchmark methods,
promising generalization power and strong complementarity to deep features.

1. Introduction
Leaf image patterns have been extensively researched
and considerable leaf image descriptors [12, 15, 21, 28,
34, 35] have achieved encouraging performance on plant
species recognition in the computer vision and image pro* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Coarse-grained (species) versus fine-grained (cultivars)
interclass variation in leaf image patterns.

cessing community. Recently, increasing concerns have
been paid on whether leaf image patterns are also informative enough for plant cultivar identification which is essential for crops introduction, genetic improvement, breeders’
intellectual property protection, and early identification of
seedlings in modern agriculture systems [14]. As shown in
Figure 1, leaf image patterns have great difference across
coarse-grained categories (species), while have high similarity across fine-grained categories (cultivars).
With the quick growth of new cultivars developed by
human experts in modern agriculture, there is a growing
need to develop effective fine-grained leaf image retrieval
(FGLIR) systems for managing the existing cultivars and
breeding new ones. In the content-based image retrieval
(CBIR) research community, it is commonly known that
characterizing image patterns to yield quantized feature representation are essential to the construction of a CBIR system. In this study, we focus on the description of leaf image
patterns for addressing the challenging FGLIR issue.
In the past decades, many feature descriptors have been
proposed for depicting leaf image patterns. Most of them
are designed for coarse-grained (species level) leaf image
identification. Considering the large varieties in leaf shape
patterns across different species, many efforts have been
made on the extraction of leaf shape features such as the leaf
boundary curvatures [5, 8, 15, 21], the relative spatial distribution of leaf contour points [12, 19, 34], the geometrical

11102

