This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PivotNet: Vectorized Pivot Learning for End-to-end HD Map Construction

Wenjie Ding*

Limeng Qiao* Xi Qiu† Chi Zhang
MEGVII Technology

{dingwenjie, qiaolimeng, qiuxi, zhangchi}@megvii.com

Abstract
Vectorized high-definition map online construction has
garnered considerable attention in the field of autonomous
driving research. Most existing approaches model changeable map elements using a fixed number of points, or predict local maps in a two-stage autoregressive manner, which
may miss essential details and lead to error accumulation.
Towards precise map element learning, we propose a simple yet effective architecture named PivotNet, which adopts
unified pivot-based map representations and is formulated
as a direct set prediction paradigm. Concretely, we first
propose a novel Point-to-Line Mask module to encode both
the subordinate and geometrical point-line priors in the network. Then, a well-designed Pivot Dynamic Matching module is proposed to model the topology in dynamic point sequences by introducing the concept of sequence matching.
Furthermore, to supervise the position and topology of the
vectorized point predictions, we propose a Dynamic Vectorized Sequence loss. Extensive experiments and ablations
show that PivotNet is remarkably superior to other SOTAs
by 5.9 mAP at least. The code will be available soon.

1. Introduction
High-definition map (HD map) is one of the most critical components in many autonomous driving modules, including simulation, localization, and planning. Typical HD
map construction relies on manual annotation on lidar point
clouds, which is time-consuming and labor-intensive. Recent works explore the map learning problems to reduce the
labeling costs [8, 10, 18, 23, 36]. Given data from onboard
sensors, map learning aims to construct local map within a
predefined bird’s-eye-view (BEV) range.
Most existing works view the map construction as a semantic learning problem [8, 18, 23, 36]. They represent
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

Corner
Friendly
Geometry
Robust
Geometry
Robust
Expression
Compact
Origin HD-map

Evenly-based

Pivot-based

Advantages

Figure 1: Illustration of our motivation for pivot-based vectorization. Given an original HD map example from nuScenes, there are
two different ways to construct a vectorized map, i.e. evenly-based
and pivot-based. Comparison shows that pivot-based vectorization is more corner-friendly, geometry-robust, and expressioncompact. Circles on the lines denote the real vectorization GT.

a map within certain range as an evenly spaced field and
predict the class label for each grid, generating a rasterized
map. However, there are obvious limitations of rasterized
representation in map learning. First, rasterized maps are
composed of dense semantic pixels that contain redundant
information, requiring large amounts of memory and transmission bandwidth, especially if the map extent is large.
Second, the rasterized representation assumes the independence of map grids, which ignores the geometric relationship between and within map elements. Third, complex
post-processing [10] is required to obtain vectorized maps
for downstream tasks, which brings additional computation,
time consumption, and accumulated errors.
To address the limitations of current semantic learning
methods, there have been proposals for generating vectorized representations in an end-to-end manner. One such
method is MapTR [13], which uses a fixed number of points
to represent a map element, regardless of its shape complexity. However, this approach has two drawbacks. First,
the evenly-based representation contains redundant points
that have little effect on the geometry. Second, representing a dynamically shaped line with a fixed number of points

3672

