This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CROSSFIRE: Camera Relocalization On Self-Supervised Features from an
Implicit Representation
Arthur Moreau1,2 , Nathan Piasco1 , Moussab Bennehar1 , Dzmitry Tsishkou1
Bogdan Stanciulescu2 , Arnaud de La Fortelle2
1
Noah’s Ark IoV team, Huawei France, 2 Mines Paris, PSL University, Centre for robotics
arthur.moreau2@huawei.com

Abstract
Beyond novel view synthesis, Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) are useful for applications that interact with the real
world. In this paper, we use them as an implicit map of a
given scene and propose a camera relocalization algorithm
tailored for this representation. The proposed method enables to compute in real-time the precise position of a device using a single RGB camera, during its navigation. In
contrast with previous work, we do not rely on pose regression or photometric alignment but rather use dense local
features obtained through volumetric rendering which are
specialized on the scene with a self-supervised objective.
As a result, our algorithm is more accurate than competitors, able to operate in dynamic outdoor environments with
changing lightning conditions and can be readily integrated
in any volumetric neural renderer.

1. Introduction
Visual localization, i.e. the problem of camera pose
estimation in a known environment [36], enables to build
camera-based positioning systems for various applications
such as autonomous driving [28], robotics [2] or augmented
reality [24]. Map-based navigation systems for such applications operate with a reference map of the environment, built from previously collected data. These maps
are commonly defined with explicit 3D scenes representations (point cloud, voxels, meshes, etc.), which only store
discrete information while the underlying environment they
represent is continuous.
Recently, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [26] and related volumetric-based approaches [31, 53] have emerged
as a new way to implicitly represent a scene. 3D coordinates
are mapped to volume density and radiance in a neural network. NeRF is trained with a sparse set of posed images of
a scene and learns its 3D geometry via differentiable rendering. The resulting model is continuous, i.e. the radiance of

Query image

Rendered pose Estimated pose
Localization prior
1st iteration

Estimated pose
2nd iteration

Figure 1: Visual localization in a neural renderer. Starting from a coarse localization prior, our algorithm estimates
the pose of a query image by comparing image features to
descriptors rendered from a neural scene representation.

all 3D points in the scene can be computed, which enables
the rendering of photorealistic views from any viewpoint.
Beyond their rendering ability, implicit scene representations are actively investigated to be used as the map representation for navigation systems [1, 35, 20, 17]. This
work focuses on one aspect of the navigation pipeline, understudied in the specific case of implicit scene representation, the image localization problem. Our motivation is to
provide a camera relocalization algorithm (i.e. 6-DoF pose
estimation) from one RGB image based only on a learned
volumetric-based implicit map. We aim to design a method
for robotics applications: it must be fast to compute, robust
to outdoor conditions and could be deployed in dynamic environments. Existing localization methods that use implicit
maps either have limited accuracy by lack of geometric reasoning [29, 7], or do not meet the aforementioned requirements because photometric alignment [55, 19] can be slow
and assumes constant lightning conditions.
Contribution. In this paper, we introduce local descriptors in NeRF’s implicit formulation and we use the resulting model, named CROSSFIRE, as the scene representation
of a 2D-3D features matching method. We train simultaneously a CNN feature extractor and a neural renderer
to provide consistent scene-specific descriptors in a selfsupervised way. During training, we leverage the 3D in-

252

