This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fcaformer: Forward Cross Attention in Hybrid Vision Transformer
Haokui Zhang1,2 , Wenze Hu1 , Xiaoyu Wang3
1
Intellifusion 2 Yan‘an University
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)

Abstract
Currently, one main research line in designing a more
efficient vision transformer is reducing the computational
cost of self attention modules by adopting sparse attention
or using local attention windows. In contrast, we propose a different approach that aims to improve the performance of transformer-based architectures by densifying
the attention pattern. Specifically, we proposed forward
cross attention for hybrid vision transformer (FcaFormer),
where tokens from previous blocks in the same stage are
secondary used. To achieve this, the FcaFormer leverages
two innovative components: learnable scale factors (LSFs)
and a token merge and enhancement module (TME). The
LSFs enable efficient processing of cross tokens, while the
TME generates representative cross tokens. By integrating these components, the proposed FcaFormer enhances
the interactions of tokens across blocks with potentially different semantics, and encourages more information flows
to the lower levels. Based on the forward cross attention
(Fca), we have designed a series of FcaFormer models
that achieve the best trade-off between model size, computational cost, memory cost, and accuracy. For example,
without the need for knowledge distillation to strengthen
training, our FcaFormer achieves 83.1% top-1 accuracy
on Imagenet with only 16.3 million parameters and about
3.6 billion MACs. This saves almost half of the parameters
and a few computational costs while achieving 0.7% higher
accuracy compared to distilled EfficientFormer. Code is
available at https://github.com/hkzhang-git/
FcaFormer

1. Introduction
With the rapid adoption of transformer structures in
the computer vision community, several types of attention patterns have been proposed to enhance the performance or speed of transformer models. For instance,
ViT [5] employs the vanilla global multi-head self-attention,
Swin Transformers [20] uses local windowed attention,
MaxViT [32] incorporates grid attention across interleaved

tokens, and Dynamic ViT [28] utilizes attention on progressively pruned tokens. These approaches aim to sparsify the
attention patterns of the original ViT to achieve a better
trade-off between speed and accuracy.
In contrast, we propose a new model block as well as
a family of models called FcaFormer, which improves the
performance of vision transformers by further densifying
the attention patterns at a limited extra cost. Specifically, we
propose to connect the input of the standard multi-head attention (MHA) module with extra tokens transformed from
previous blocks in the same stage, while still restricting the
attention module to output the original amount of tokens. To
further reduce the computational cost, we merge the tokens
from previous blocks by using depthwise convolutions with
large strides. These tokens are further calibrated by scaling
them with learned parameters, before being taken into the
attention units in subsequent blocks.
The new forward cross attention connection has several
advantages: 1) it helps transformers further exploit the interactions of tokens across different levels; 2) it reuses the
previously generated tokens so that some of the information no longer needs to be preserved by the subsequent
transformer operations, leading to potentially smaller models with similar accuracy; 3) similar to the residual connections in ResNet, this extra cross layer connection encourages more information flows to the lower levels of the network, which further accelerate the convergence.
The newly densified connections come with a limited increase in computational cost. As explained in Section 3.3,
this cost increase is linear rather than quadratic, since we
keep the number of output tokens the same as in standard
ViTs. Furthermore, most of the computation cost in most
hybrid vision transformer architectures is in the feed forward network (FFN) rather than the MHA part of transformer blocks. Thus, the linear growth of computational
complexity from densified connections does not significantly affect the overall computation cost. Finally, to further
reduce the number of extra inputs, we use depthwise convolutions with large kernels and long strides to aggregate
tokens from previous blocks.
We have incorporated the proposed Fca design into two

6060

