This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AdaNIC: Towards Practical Neural Image Compression via
Dynamic Transform Routing

1

Lvfang Tao1,2 *, Wei Gao1†, Ge Li1 , Chenhao Zhang1
SECE, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University,
2
Tencent AI Lab

luistao@tencent.com gaowei262@pku.edu.cn geli@ece.pku.edu.cn chenhaozhang@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Compressive autoencoders (CAEs) play an important
role in deep learning-based image compression, but largescale CAEs are computationally expensive. We propose a
framework with three techniques to enable efficient CAEbased image coding: 1) Spatially-adaptive convolution
and normalization operators enable block-wise nonlinear
transform to spend FLOPs unevenly across the image to
be compressed, according to a transform capacity map.
2) Just-unpenalized model capacity (JUMC) optimizes the
transform capacity of each CAE block via rate-distortioncomplexity optimization, finding the optimal capacity for
the source image content. 3) A lightweight routing agent
model predicts the transform capacity map for the CAEs
by approximating JUMC targets. By activating the bestsized sub-CAE inside the slimmable supernet, our approach
achieves up to 40% computational speed-up with minimal
BD-Rate increase, validating its ability to save computational resources in a content-aware manner.

1. Introduction
In recent years, neural image compression (NIC) is being actively investigated, which reveals its great potential
in terms of compression efficiency and capacity for perceptual optimization [2, 3, 6, 24]. After initial attempts,
the specific variants of autoencoders, namely compressive
autoencoders (CAEs), have become a popular architecture
choice in follow-up studies. The adoption of CAE for
learning compact nonlinear representation of image signals
* The majority of the work was done when L. Tao was studying at
SECE, PKUSZ. His current affiliation is with Tencent AI Lab.
† Corresponding Author: Wei Gao. This work was supported by
Natural Science Foundation of China (62271013, 62031013), Shenzhen Fundamental Research Program (GXWD2020123116580700720200806163656003), Shenzhen Science and Technology Plan Basic Research Project (JCYJ20190808161805519), and was sponsored by CAAIHuawei MindSpore Open Fund (CAAIXSJLJJ-2022-002C).

leads to great success, yielding comparable or superior ratedistortion trade-offs when compared with the existing stateof-the-art codecs. Due to the learning-based nature of NIC,
the number of incurred floating-point operations (FLOPs) is
higher than those of legacy algorithms by orders of magnitude. By replacing traditional linear transforms (i.e., DCT,
DST) with neural network-based nonlinear transforms, the
inference computational costs will be huge although with
much better representation capacity. Such a dilemma hinders the practical deployment of NIC codecs, which calls
for an efficient way to reduce the computational overhead
of CAEs without harming their performance advantages.
Early works have demonstrated that the scale of CAEs
is highly related to the image quality or bitrate [3]. The
more radical quality objective in loss function will demand more latent channels allocated. Therefore, the converged model with inadequate channels will suffer from
rate-distortion degradation. A larger redundant model carries no penalty or reward in terms of rate-distortion criteria. In this case, the well-studied channel pruning methods may fit the needs for complexity-mitigation. However,
since neural image codecs are originally trained with diversified picture and block content and involve distortionsensitive reconstruction, the contribution of each channel
takes effect on individual inputs. Henceforth, when channel pruning approaches are applied to remove unimportant channels [12, 23, 41], excessive channel elimination
can lead to severely-degraded rate-distortion performance.
Therefore, the static way of one-shot channel pruning may
not be suitable for further rate-distortion-complexity optimization, which can be crucial to the coding performance.
Conversely, we would like to investigate the dynamic routing solution to benefit the underexplored rate-distortioncomplexity (RDC) trade-off-oriented optimization.
In this paper, we emphasize the importance of employing content-adaptive optimization at run-time. The overall
framework of AdaNIC is illustrated in Figure 1. By designing and training a lightweight adaptive routing agent
under the rate-distortion lossless objective, and proposing

16879

