This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GRAM-HD: 3D-Consistent Image Generation at High Resolution with
Generative Radiance Manifolds
Jianfeng Xiang*1,2 Jiaolong Yang2 Yu Deng∗1,2 Xin Tong2
1
Tsinghua University 2 Microsoft Research Asia
{t-jxiang,jiaoyan,xtong}@microsoft.com

dengyu2008@hotmail.com

Figure 1: Curated generation samples of 10242 human faces 5122 cats from GRAM-HD. Our method can generate highresolution, high-quality and strict 3D-consistent images with explicitly controllable poses. Note the realistic geometry details
such as the whisker of cats. (Best viewed with zoom-in; see also the project page for more results with videos.)

Abstract
Recent works have shown that 3D-aware GANs trained
on unstructured single image collections can generate multiview images of novel instances. The key underpinnings
to achieve this are a 3D radiance field generator and a
volume rendering process. However, existing methods either cannot generate high-resolution images (e.g., up to
256×256) due to the high computation cost of neural volume rendering, or rely on 2D CNNs for image-space upsampling which jeopardizes the 3D consistency across different
views. This paper proposes a novel 3D-aware GAN that
can generate high resolution images (up to 1024×1024)
while keeping strict 3D consistency as in volume rendering. Our motivation is to achieve super-resolution directly
in the 3D space to preserve 3D consistency. We avoid the
otherwise prohibitively-expensive computation cost by applying 2D convolutions on a set of 2D radiance manifolds
* Work done when JX and YD were interns at MSRA.
1 Project page: https://jeffreyxiang.github.io/GRAM-HD/

defined in the recent generative radiance manifold (GRAM)
approach, and apply dedicated loss functions for effective
GAN training at high resolution. Experiments on FFHQ
and AFHQv2 datasets show that our method can produce
high-quality 3D-consistent results that significantly outperform existing methods. It makes a significant step towards
closing the gap between traditional 2D image generation
and 3D-consistent free-view generation. 1

1. Introduction
While generative modeling of 2D images have achieved
tremendous success [5, 22–24] with generative adversarial
networks (GANs) [17], 3D-aware GANs that aims to generate photorealistic multiview images begun to emerge in
recent years [8, 12, 41, 47, 54, 67]. Despite both being
trained on unstructured 2D image collections, the latter is
capable of synthesizing the images of an object at different
3D viewpoints. The key to achieve this is to generate an un-

2195

