This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CancerUniT: Towards a Single Unified Model for Effective Detection,
Segmentation, and Diagnosis of Eight Major Cancers Using a Large Collection of
CT Scans
Jieneng Chen1,2 * Yingda Xia1 * Jiawen Yao1,3 Ke Yan1,3 Jianpeng Zhang1,3 Le Lu1 Fakai Wang1
Bo Zhou1 Mingyan Qiu1,3 Qihang Yu2 Mingze Yuan1,3 Wei Fang1,3 Yuxing Tang 1 Minfeng Xu1,3
Jian Zhou4 Yuqian Zhao5 Qifeng Wang5 Xianghua Ye6 Xiaoli Yin7 Yu Shi7 Xin Chen8,9
Jingren Zhou1,3 Alan Yuille2 Zaiyi Liu8,9 * Ling Zhang1
1
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 2 Johns Hopkins University
3
Hupan Lab, 310023, Hangzhou, China 4 Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center
6
The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University 7 Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University
5
Sichuan Cancer Hospital 8 Guangdong Provincial People’s Hospital
9
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence in Medical Image Analysis and Application

Cancer

Non-Cancer

Lung

Liver
Hemangioma

Colorectum

Liver
Metastasis

Liver

Stomach
Lymphoma

Stomach

Esophagus
leiomyoma

Breast

Pancreas MCN

Esophagus

Pancreas SCN

Esophagus
Lung

Breast
Stomach

Liver
Pancreas
Kidney
Colorectum

6th

7th

Other cancer

Pancreas

5th

Kidney

4th

Breast

3rd

Esophagus

Liver

2nd

Stomach

Lung
Rank 1st

Colorectum

Cancer Mortality
(9.9 million deaths in 2020)

Pancreas

…

Human readers or radiologists routinely perform fullbody multi-organ multi-disease detection and diagnosis in
clinical practice, while most medical AI systems are built
to focus on single organs with a narrow list of a few diseases. This might severely limit AI’s clinical adoption. A
certain number of AI models need to be assembled nontrivially to match the diagnostic process of a human reading a CT scan. In this paper, we construct a Unified Tumor Transformer (CancerUniT) model to jointly detect tumor existence & location and diagnose tumor characteristics for eight major cancers in CT scans. CancerUniT is
a query-based Mask Transformer model with the output of
multi-tumor prediction. We decouple the object queries into
organ queries, tumor detection queries and tumor diagnosis queries, and further establish hierarchical relationships
among the three groups. This clinically-inspired architecture effectively assists inter- and intra-organ representation
learning of tumors and facilitates the resolution of these
complex, anatomically related multi-organ cancer image
reading tasks. CancerUniT is trained end-to-end using a
curated large-scale CT images of 10,042 patients including eight major types of cancers and occurring non-cancer
tumors (all are pathology-confirmed with 3D tumor masks
annotated by radiologists). On the test set of 631 patients,
CancerUniT has demonstrated strong performance under
a set of clinically relevant evaluation metrics, substantially
outperforming both multi-disease methods and an assembly of eight single-organ expert models in tumor detection,

Tumor Segmentation & Diagnosis

Cancer Detection in 8 Organs

Abstract

Figure 1. We aim at cancer and non-cancer detection, segmentation, and diagnosis in eight major organs via CT scan. Seven of
our eight targeted cancers rank the top seven in terms of mortality.

segmentation, and diagnosis. This moves one step closer towards a universal high performance cancer screening tool.

1. Introduction
* Correspondence

Yingda
Xia
(zyliu@163.com)

to Jieneng Chen (jienengchen01@gmail.com),
(yingda.xia@alibaba-inc.com),
and
Zaiyi
Liu

Cancer, a leading cause of death in the world, continues to thwart human life expectancy and cause huge soci1
21327

