This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Get the Best of Both Worlds: Improving Accuracy and Transferability by
Grassmann Class Representation
Haoqi Wang2 * Zhizhong Li1 * Wayne Zhang13†
SenseTime Research 2 EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Digital Grid Technology
1

haoqi.wang@epfl.ch

{lizz,wayne.zhang}@sensetime.com

Abstract
We generalize the class vectors found in neural networks
to linear subspaces (i.e., points in the Grassmann manifold)
and show that the Grassmann Class Representation (GCR)
enables simultaneous improvement in accuracy and feature
transferability. In GCR, each class is a subspace, and the
logit is defined as the norm of the projection of a feature
onto the class subspace. We integrate Riemannian SGD into
deep learning frameworks such that class subspaces in a
Grassmannian are jointly optimized with the rest model parameters. Compared to the vector form, the representative
capability of subspaces is more powerful. We show that on
ImageNet-1K, the top-1 errors of ResNet50-D, ResNeXt50,
Swin-T, and Deit3-S are reduced by 5.6%, 4.5%, 3.0%, and
3.5%, respectively. Subspaces also provide freedom for features to vary, and we observed that the intra-class feature
variability grows when the subspace dimension increases.
Consequently, we found the quality of GCR features is better
for downstream tasks. For ResNet50-D, the average linear
transfer accuracy across 6 datasets improves from 77.98% to
79.70% compared to the strong baseline of vanilla softmax.
For Swin-T, it improves from 81.5% to 83.4% and for Deit3,
it improves from 73.8% to 81.4%. With these encouraging
results, we believe that more applications could benefit from
the Grassmann class representation. Code is released at
https://github.com/innerlee/GCR.

success, yet it is not without imperfections. In the study
of transferable features, researchers noticed a dilemma that
representations with higher classification accuracy lead to
less transferable features for downstream tasks [19]. This
is connected to the fact that they tend to collapse intra-class
variability of features, resulting in loss of information in the
logits about the resemblances between instances of different
classes [29]. The neural collapse phenomenon [34] indicates
that as training progresses, the intra-class variation becomes
negligible, and features collapse to their class means. As
such, this dilemma inherently originates from the practice of
representing classes by a single vector. This motivates us to
study representing classes by high-dimensional subspaces.
Representing classes as subspaces in machine learning
can be dated back, at least, to 1973 [49]. This core idea is reemerging recently in various contexts such as clustering [54],
few-shot classification [12, 41] and out-of-distribution detection [47], albeit in each case a different concrete instantiation
was proposed. However, very few works study the subspace
representation in large-scale classification, a fundamental
computer vision task that benefits numerous downstream
tasks. We propose the Grassmann Class Representation
(GCR) to fill this gap and study its impact on classification
and feature transferability via extensive experiments. To be
specific, each class i is associated with a linear subspace Si ,
and for any feature vector x, the i-th logit li is defined as the
norm of its projection onto the subspace Si ,
li := projSi x .

1. Introduction
The scheme deep feature→fully-connected
→softmax→cross-entropy loss has been the
standard practice in deep classification networks. Columns
of the weight parameter in the fully-connected layer are the
class representative vectors and serve as the prototype for
classes. The vector class representation has achieved huge
* Equal contribution. Work is done when Haoqi was at SenseTime.
† Corresponding author: Wayne Zhang.

(1)

In the following, we answer the two critical questions,
1. How to effectively optimize the subspaces in training?
2. Is Grassmann class representation useful?
Several drawbacks and important differences in previous
works make their methodologies hard to generalize to the
large-scale classification problem. Firstly, their subspaces
might be not learnable. In ViM [47], DSN [41] and the
SVD formulation of [54], subspaces are obtained post hoc

22478

