This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-supervised Learning to Bring Dual Reversed Rolling Shutter Images Alive
Wei Shang1,2 , Dongwei Ren1 *, Chaoyu Feng, Xiaotao Wang, Lei Lei, Wangmeng Zuo1,3
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
2
City University of Hong Kong 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen

Abstract
Modern consumer cameras usually employ the rolling
shutter (RS) mechanism, where images are captured by
scanning scenes row-by-row, yielding RS distortions for dynamic scenes. To correct RS distortions, existing methods adopt a fully supervised learning manner, where high
framerate global shutter (GS) images should be collected
as ground-truth supervision. In this paper, we propose a
Self-supervised learning framework for Dual reversed RS
distortions Correction (SelfDRSC), where a DRSC network
can be learned to generate a high framerate GS video only
based on dual RS images with reversed distortions. In particular, a bidirectional distortion warping module is proposed for reconstructing dual reversed RS images, and then
a self-supervised loss can be deployed to train DRSC network by enhancing the cycle consistency between input and
reconstructed dual reversed RS images. Besides start and
end RS scanning time, GS images at arbitrary intermediate scanning time can also be supervised in SelfDRSC,
thus enabling the learned DRSC network to generate a high
framerate GS video. Moreover, a simple yet effective selfdistillation strategy is introduced in self-supervised loss for
mitigating boundary artifacts in generated GS images. On
synthetic dataset, SelfDRSC achieves better or comparable quantitative metrics in comparison to state-of-the-art
methods trained in the full supervision manner. On realworld RS cases, our SelfDRSC can produce high framerate GS videos with finer correction textures and better temporary consistency. The source code and trained models
are made publicly available at https://github.com/
shangwei5/SelfDRSC.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed an increasing demand for
imaging sensors, due to the widespread applications of
digital cameras and smartphones. Although the ChargeCoupled Device (CCD) has been the dominant technol* Corresponding author: rendongweihit@gmail.com.

ogy for imaging sensors, it is recently popular that modern consumer cameras choose the Complementary MetalOxide Semiconductor (CMOS) as an alternative due to its
many merits, e.g., easy integration with image processing
pipeline and communication circuits, and low power consumption [14]. In CMOS sensors, rolling shutter (RS) scanning mechanism is generally deployed to capture images,
i.e., each row of CMOS array is exposed in the sequential
time, which is different from CCD with global shutter (GS)
scanning at one instant. Therefore, RS images suffer from
distortions when capturing dynamic scenes, which not only
affect human visual perception but also yield performance
degradation or even failure in computer vision tasks [2, 13].
To correct RS distortions, pioneering works usually reconstruct GS images from a single RS image [20, 32] or
multiple consecutive RS images [15, 6], where the latter
ones usually have better performance. But consecutive RS
images setting is ambiguous [30], e.g., two RS cameras,
moving horizontally at the same speed but with different
readout time, can produce the same RS images. Most recently, a new RS acquisition setting, i.e., dual RS images
with reversed scanning directions (see Fig. 1), is proposed
in [1, 30] to address this ambiguity. In [1], one GS image
is reconstructed from dual RS images with reversed distortions, while in [30], Zhong et al. devote efforts to reconstruct high framerate GS videos. Nevertheless, both of them
adopt a fully supervised learning manner, i.e., ground-truth
GS supervision is required to learn RS correction networks.
Especially in [30], high framerate GS videos should be collected to serve as ground-truth. In the supervised learning
manner, it is not easy to collect real-world training samples,
while synthetic training samples would yield poor generalization ability when handling real-world RS cases.
In this paper, we aim ambitiously for the more challenging and practical task, i.e., self-supervised learning to invert dual reversed RS images to a high framerate GS video,
dubbed SelfDRSC, which to the best of our knowledge is
studied for the first time. The primary design philosophy
of our SelfDRSC is that latent GS images predicted by the
DRSC network can be used to reconstruct dual RS images
with reversed distortions, and then the DRSC network can

13086

