This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Temporal Frequency Spectrum in Deep Video Deblurring
Qi Zhu 1 ,* Man Zhou 1 ,* Naishan Zheng 1 , Chongyi Li 2 , Jie Huang 1 , Feng Zhao 1†
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Nankai University
{zqcrafts,manman,nszheng,hj0117}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,lichongyi25@gmail.com,
fzhao956@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Video deblurring aims to restore the latent video frames
from their blurred counterparts. Despite the remarkable
progress, most promising video deblurring methods only
investigate the temporal priors in the spatial domain and
rarely explore their its potential in the frequency domain.
In this paper, we revisit the blurred sequence in the Fourier
space and figure out some intrinsic frequency-temporal priors that imply the temporal blur degradation can be accessibly decoupled in the potential frequency domain. Based on
these priors, we propose a novel Fourier-based frequencytemporal video deblurring solution, where the core design accommodates the temporal spectrum to a popular
video deblurring pipeline of feature extraction, alignment,
aggregation, and optimization. Specifically, we design a
Spectrum Prior-guided Alignment module by leveraging enlarged blur information in the potential spectrum to mitigate the blur effects on the alignment. Then, Temporal Energy prior-driven Aggregation is implemented to replenish
the original local features by estimating the temporal spectrum energy as the global sharpness guidance. In addition,
the customized frequency loss is devised to optimize the proposed method for decent spectral distribution. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our model performs favorably
against other state-of-the-art methods, thus confirming the
effectiveness of frequency-temporal prior modeling.

1. Introduction
Video deblurring, as a fundamental vision task, aims to
recover the latent frame from the blurred sequence by leveraging intrinsic temporal information. Therefore, many research efforts have been advocated to explore the potential
of hidden temporal information in blurred sequences, which
can be categorized into two groups: traditional optimization
and deep learning-based methods.
* Both authors contributed equally to this research.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. (a) Clustering blurry and sharp frames in the spatial
domain and frequency domain via t-SNE, respectively. The blurry
and sharp frames in the frequency domain are separated while they
are tangly in the spatial domain. (b) Unfolding the sets of the frequency domain in (a) along the temporal dimension. The blurred
video appears to have greater temporal fluctuation than the sharp
one in terms of the L2 norm of spectrums.

Traditional optimization methods often highlight the assumptions over the blur degradation process and apply some
hand-crafted temporal priors to alleviate the video deblurring, e.g., temporal sharpness prior [2], motion-blurred prior
[1], and temporal coherence prior [6]. However, these priors are difficult to design and the methods are also difficult
to optimize, limiting their practical usage.
In recent years, we have witnessed explosive deep

12428

