This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Adversarial Robustness in Low-Label Regime
via Adaptively Weighted Regularization and Knowledge Distillation
Dongyoon Yang
Seoul National University
Department of Statistics

Insung Kong
Seoul National University
Department of Statistics

Yongdai Kim
Seoul National University
Department of Statistics

ydy0415@gmail.com

ggong369@snu.ac.kr

ydkim0903@gmail.com

Abstract
Adversarial robustness is a research area that has recently received a lot of attention in the quest for trustworthy
artificial intelligence. However, recent works on adversarial robustness have focused on supervised learning where
it is assumed that labeled data is plentiful. In this paper,
we investigate semi-supervised adversarial training where
labeled data is scarce. We derive two upper bounds for
the robust risk and propose a regularization term for unlabeled data motivated by these two upper bounds. Then,
we develop a semi-supervised adversarial training algorithm that combines the proposed regularization term with
knowledge distillation using a semi-supervised teacher (i.e.,
a teacher model trained using a semi-supervised learning
algorithm). Our experiments show that our proposed algorithm achieves state-of-the-art performance with significant margins compared to existing algorithms. In particular, compared to supervised learning algorithms, performance of our proposed algorithm is not much worse even
when the amount of labeled data is very small. For example, our algorithm with only 8% labeled data is comparable
to supervised adversarial training algorithms that use all
labeled data, both in terms of standard and robust accuracies on CIFAR-10.

such as [19, 36, 30, 37, 38, 26].
Learning accurate prediction models typically requires a
large amount of labeled data, which can be expensive and
time-consuming to collect. In contrast, obtaining unlabeled
data is relatively easier. Semi-supervised learning is a research area that focuses on effectively utilizing unlabeled
data [20, 2, 32, 27, 35]. Because adversarial training algorithms also require labeled data, semi-supervised adversarial training (SS-AT) has become a crucial research area for
reliable artificial intelligence [3, 29, 34, 18].
The aim of this paper is to develop a new SS-AT algorithm that is theoretically well motivated and empirically
superior to existing competitors when the amount of labeled data is insufficient. We propose an objective function for SS-AT, which consists of three key components one for generalization of labeled data, a regularization term
with unlabeled data for adversarial robustness, and a knowledge distillation term for improving generalization ability
of unlabeled data. Our regularization term is motivated by
two new upper bounds of the boundary risk. The knowledge distillation term is added to estimate soft pseudo labels
of unlabeled data, which contrasts with existing algorithms
[29, 3, 34] that use hard pseudo labels. Using soft pseudo
labels instead of hard pseudo labels improves the performance significantly.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We derive two upper bounds of the robust risk for
semi-supervised adversarial training, providing theoretical insights into the performance of proposed
method.

1. Introduction
Neural network models used for image classification are
vulnerable to adversarial perturbations that are imperceptible to humans [28]. These perturbed images are called
adversarial examples, and they can be generated without
any knowledge of the underlying model, leading to security
concerns [23, 24, 4, 14, 25]. Adversarial examples can also
cause problems in real-world scenarios, where printed images with adversarial perturbations can easily fool the classification model [17]. To defend against adversarial attacks,
many adversarial learning algorithms have been proposed,

• We propose a novel semi-supervised adversarial training algorithm, called Semisupervised-Robust-SelfTraining with Adaptively Weighted Regularization
(SRST-AWR), that combining an adaptively weighted
regularization and knowledge distillation with a semisupervised teacher to put soft pseudo labels in adversarial training.

4552

