This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Robust Representations with Information Bottleneck
and Memory Network for RGB-D-based Gesture Recognition
Yunan Li1,2,3

Huizhou Chen1,2

Guanwen Feng1,2

Qiguang Miao1,2,3 *

1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, China
2
Xi’an Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Vision, China
3
Key Laboratory of Smart Human-Computer Interaction and Wearable Technology of Shaanxi Province, China
{yunanli, qgmiao}@xidian.edu.cn, {huizhouchen, gwfeng 1}@stu.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Although previous RGB-D-based gesture recognition
methods have shown promising performance, researchers
often overlook the interference of task-irrelevant cues like
illumination and background. These unnecessary factors
are learned together with the predictive ones by the network and hinder accurate recognition. In this paper, we
propose a convenient and analytical framework to learn a
robust feature representation that is impervious to gestureirrelevant factors. Based on the Information Bottleneck
theory, two rules of Sufficiency and Compactness are derived to develop a new information-theoretic loss function,
which cultivates a more sufficient and compact representation from the feature encoding and mitigates the impact
of gesture-irrelevant information. To highlight the predictive information, we further integrate a memory network.
Using our proposed content-based and contextual memory
addressing scheme, we weaken the nuisances while preserving the task-relevant information, providing guidance
for refining the feature representation. Experiments conducted on three public datasets demonstrate that our approach leads to a better feature representation and achieves
better performance than state-of-the-art methods. The code
of our method is available at: https://github.com/
Carpumpkin/InBoMem.

1. Introduction
Gesture recognition based on RGB-D video has raised
much attention of researchers since it has many applications, such as visual surveillance, intelligent transportation,
and particularly, human-computer interaction (HCI) [48].
The development of CNN family [35, 5, 26], RNN family [27, 11], and Transformer-based methods [15, 57, 54]
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Diagram of our principle. The feature of a gesture
sample can be decomposed into the essential gesture feature and
gesture-irrelevant ones, such as the background, illumination, and
the performer’s appearance. The former provides predictive information whereas the latter is superfluous. Based on the information
bottleneck theory, we can eliminate these disturbing nuisances by
minimizing the superfluous information. Meanwhile, as the predictive feature in different samples is all the same, we leverage the
memory network to store and “overlay” them, and then highlight
the gesture-relevant predictive feature as the guidance for learning
a robust feature representation.

promote the improvement of recognition performance significantly.
Although great progress has been made in this field, the
attention has always been drawn to boost performance via
better network structure [50, 48, 55, 56] or by introducing extra modalities of data [6, 18, 23, 19]. The interference of gesture-irrelevant factors is hardly noticed. In most
real-world gesture recognition scenarios, the dynamic variations are in two aspects. One is based on the motion of
the gesture itself like trajectories of hands/arms, and is crucial to the recognition task. The other is related to environmental influences like illumination, backgrounds, and the
performers’ appearances as depicted in Fig.1. The gesture
performing-related factors, such as the velocity, performer’s

20968

