This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-Modal Translation and Alignment for Survival Analysis
Fengtao Zhou1
Hao Chen1,2,∗
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
2
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
fzhouaf@connect.ust.hk

Abstract
With the rapid advances in high-throughput sequencing
technologies, the focus of survival analysis has shifted from
examining clinical indicators to incorporating genomic profiles with pathological images. However, existing methods
either directly adopt a straightforward fusion of pathological features and genomic profiles for survival prediction,
or take genomic profiles as guidance to integrate the features of pathological images. The former would overlook
intrinsic cross-modal correlations. The latter would discard
pathological information irrelevant to gene expression. To
address these issues, we present a Cross-Modal Translation and Alignment (CMTA) framework to explore the intrinsic cross-modal correlations and transfer potential complementary information. Specifically, we construct two parallel encoder-decoder structures for multi-modal data to integrate intra-modal information and generate cross-modal
representation. Taking the generated cross-modal representation to enhance and recalibrate intra-modal representation can significantly improve its discrimination for comprehensive survival analysis. To explore the intrinsic crossmodal correlations, we further design a cross-modal attention module as the information bridge between different
modalities to perform cross-modal interactions and transfer
complementary information. Our extensive experiments on
five public TCGA datasets demonstrate that our proposed
framework outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. The
source code has been released † .

1. Introduction
Survival analysis is a crucial topic in clinical prognosis research, which aims to predict the time elapsed from a
known origin to an event of interest, such as death, relapse
of disease, and development of an adverse reaction. Ac* Corresponding author
† https://github.com/FT-ZHOU-ZZZ/CMTA

jhc@cse.ust.hk

curate survival prediction is essential for doctors to assess
the clinical outcomes for disease progression and treatment
efficiency. Traditionally, survival analysis relies on shortterm clinical indicators [15, 44] and long-term follow-up
reports [1, 4], which are time-consuming and impractical in
clinical applications. In recent years, medical image analysis has made significant progress, driven by the success
of deep learning techniques. Consequently, an increasing
number of researchers are working to model the connection
between imaging features and survival events.
Radiology involves the use of medical imaging technologies such as X-rays, CT (Computerized Tomography) scans,
MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) scans, and ultrasound
to visualize internal structures and detect abnormalities. Radiological images can provide valuable macroscopic information such as lesion location, morphological texture, and
tumor metastasis, which can help predict the prognosis for
the patient [14, 32, 28]. However, due to its lower sensitivity, radiology is not widely considered as the gold standard in cancer diagnosis. To improve diagnosis accuracy,
the pathological examination will be conducted to sample
lesion tissues and acquire pathological images, also known
as whole slide images (WSIs). Pathological images can
provide information about microscopic changes in tumor
cells and their microenvironment. Generally, multi-instance
learning (MIL) is the most commonly used paradigm in
pathology-based survival analysis [46, 40, 42, 30, 7], which
can identify and highlight important regions within the
pathological image that contribute to the survival event,
revealing insights into the underlying pathological phenotypes of disease. Recently, with the rapid advances in highthroughput sequencing technologies, more and more accessible large-scale genomics datasets provide an unprecedented opportunity to deeply understand the survival events
from the molecular perspective [21, 12, 13].
Although survival analysis using single-modality has
achieved promising results, combining multi-modal data
from different perspectives can provide complementary information for each other. Intuitively, it can increase the sen-

21485

