This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MPI-Flow: Learning Realistic Optical Flow with Multiplane Images
Yingping Liang1

Jiaming Liu2
1
Beijing Institute of Technology

Debing Zhang2
2
Xiaohongshu Inc.

Ying Fu1 *

Abstract
The accuracy of learning-based optical flow estimation
models heavily relies on the realism of the training datasets.
Current approaches for generating such datasets either employ synthetic data or generate images with limited realism. However, the domain gap of these data with real-world
scenes constrains the generalization of the trained model to
real-world applications. To address this issue, we investigate generating realistic optical flow datasets from realworld images. Firstly, to generate highly realistic new images, we construct a layered depth representation, known
as multiplane images (MPI), from single-view images. This
allows us to generate novel view images that are highly realistic. To generate optical flow maps that correspond accurately to the new image, we calculate the optical flows of
each plane using the camera matrix and plane depths. We
then project these layered optical flows into the output optical flow map with volume rendering. Secondly, to ensure
the realism of motion, we present an independent object motion module that can separate the camera and dynamic object motion in MPI. This module addresses the deficiency
in MPI-based single-view methods, where optical flow is
generated only by camera motion and does not account
for any object movement. We additionally devise a depthaware inpainting module to merge new images with dynamic objects and address unnatural motion occlusions. We
show the superior performance of our method through extensive experiments on real-world datasets. Moreover, our
approach achieves state-of-the-art performance in both unsupervised and supervised training of learning-based models. The code will be made publicly available at: https:
//github.com/Sharpiless/MPI-Flow.

1. Introduction
Optical flow refers to the precise calculation of per-pixel
motion between consecutive video frames. Its applications span a wide range of fields, including object tracking
[10, 51], robot navigation [23, 41], three-dimensional (3D)
* Corresponding Author: fuying@bit.edu.cn

(a) Depthstill. [1]

(b) RealFlow [12]

(c) Ours

(d) Source image and details of generated flows from our method

Figure 1: Visual comparison of images reveals that our
method, when compared with those based on real-world
images [1, 12], demonstrates superior image realism. Our
method also achieves fine optical flows by employing volume rendering in MPI and separate motions of the camera
and object with the independent object motion module.

reconstruction [24, 14], and visual simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) [52, 8, 29]. In recent years, with
the rapid development of neural networks, learning-based
methods [44, 45] have demonstrated significant advances
compared to traditional model-based algorithms [3, 49, 50].
Conventional practices primarily rely on synthetic data, as
demonstrated by [9, 18, 4]. Synthetic data contains exact
optical flow labels and animated images. However, the domain gap between synthetic and real data hinders its further
improvements in real-world applications.
Recent studies have aimed to extract optical flow from
real-world data by employing hand-made special hardware
[2, 11, 34]. However, the rigidly controlled and inefficient
collection procedure limits their applicability. To address
this issue, Depthstillation [1], and RealFlow [12] have been
proposed, which project each pixel in the real-world image
onto the novel view frame with the help of random motions

13857

