This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

G E PSA N: Generative Procedure Step Anticipation in Cooking Videos
Mohamed A. Abdelslam1 , Samrudhdhi B. Rangrej1* , Isma Hadji1* , Nikita Dvornik2* ,
Konstantinos G. Derpanis1,3 , Afsaneh Fazly1
1
Samsung AI Centre , 2 Waabi , 3 York University
{m.abdelsalam, s.rangrej, isma.hadji, a.fazly}@samsung.com ,
dvornik.nikita@gmail.com , kosta@yorku.ca

Abstract
We study the problem of future step anticipation in procedural videos. Given a video of an ongoing procedural activity, we predict a plausible next procedure step described in
rich natural language. While most previous work focuses on
the problem of data scarcity in procedural video datasets,
another core challenge of future anticipation is how to account for multiple plausible future realizations in natural
settings. This problem has been largely overlooked in previous work. To address this challenge, we frame future step
prediction as modelling the distribution of all possible candidates for the next step. Specifically, we design a generative model that takes a series of video clips as input, and
generates multiple plausible and diverse candidates (in natural language) for the next step. Following previous work,
we side-step the video annotation scarcity by pretraining
our model on a large text-based corpus of procedural activities, and then transfer the model to the video domain.
Our experiments, both in textual and video domains, show
that our model captures diversity in the next step prediction
and generates multiple plausible future predictions. Moreover, our model establishes new state-of-the-art results on
YouCookII, where it outperforms existing baselines on the
next step anticipation. Finally, we also show that our model
can successfully transfer from text to the video domain zeroshot, i.e., without fine-tuning or adaptation, and produces
good-quality future step predictions from video.

1. Introduction
Anticipating future steps while performing a task is a
natural human behaviour necessary to successfully accomplish a task and cooperate with other humans. Thus, it is
important for a smart AI agent to exhibit this behaviour too,
in order to assist humans in performing procedural tasks
*Equal Contribution

Video Input

Probabilistic Future Prediction

Text Output

A sequence of past procedure steps

Models distribution of future steps

Next feasible procedure step(s)

t-k

t-2

…

Add salt, pepper and freshly
chopped cilantro

Sampling
Add cheese and fold the
omelette in half

t-1

t

GEPSAN

Cover with the lid and
reduce heat to minimum

Figure 1. Summary of the proposed G E PSA N model. Our
model, given an initial video stream representing a sequence of
past procedural steps, predicts multiple feasible alternatives for the
next step in natural language. We first train our model on text-only
data, followed by zero-shot transfer to the video domain.

(e.g., cooking, assembling furniture or setting up an electronic device). For example, consider a cooking AI assistant
that observes a user as they cook a dish. To be useful, this
assistant needs to anticipate possible next steps in order to
provide timely support with ingredients, cooking tools and
actions. Anticipating future steps from a video stream is a
challenging task, where simply recognizing the current action or objects is not sufficient. To anticipate future actions,
one needs to parse and recognize the human-object interactions from an unstructured and cluttered environment in
the current frame, predict the possible task being performed
(possibly leveraging the past observations) and finally anticipate plausible next steps. Given the importance and challenges associated with this task, several research efforts targeted this application in the recent years [24, 25, 9, 37].
We follow recent work [24] and tackle future anticipation in the realm of cooking activities. Given visual observations of the first t steps, our task is to predict the next
step to be executed. This task entails recognizing the current step and the recipe being made, which is particularly
challenging given the modest size of cooking video datasets

2988

