This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Versatile Diffusion: Text, Images and Variations All in One Diffusion Model
Xingqian Xu1 , Zhangyang Wang2,3 , Eric Zhang1 , Kai Wang1 , Humphrey Shi1,3
1

SHI Labs @ Georgia Tech & UIUC & Oregon, 2 UT Austin, 3 Picsart AI Research (PAIR)
https://github.com/SHI-Labs/Versatile-Diffusion

 There are stars that a child is
watching about.
 Two young girls and a boy standing
near a star.
 Two young girls are watching a star.
 Kids standing for their stars.

A dream of a
village in China, by
Caspar David
Friedrich, matte
painting trending
on artstation-HQ.

 Houses on the lake with boats and
trees beside there with the mountains
on the background.
 House, mountain, boat, somewhere
near lake
 House on the cliff near the lake.
 Houses on the lake with the trees.

Grand nebula
in the universe.

(a) Text-to-Image

Semantic

(b) Image-Variation

Style

(d) Disentanglement

A picture in oil
painting style.

(c) Image-to-Text

A painting of an elegant woman in front
of the moon

(e) Dual-Context Blender

(f) Multi-Context Blender

Figure 1: Demo results of our Versatile Diffusion (VD) framework on three out of all primary tasks (i.e. Figures a, b, and c) and three
derived tasks (i.e. Figure d, e, and f). As shown in the captions, the three primary tasks are text-to-image, image-variation, and imageto-text. Figure d demonstrates the disentanglement between image semantics and style. Figure e shows the demo of dual-context blender
using one image and one text. Figure f shows the demo of the multi-context blender using multiple images and one text.

Abstract
Recent advances in diffusion models have set an impressive milestone in many generation tasks, and trending works such as DALL-E2, Imagen, and Stable Diffusion have attracted great interest. Despite the rapid landscape changes, recent new approaches focus on extensions
and performance rather than capacity, thus requiring separate models for separate tasks. In this work, we expand
the existing single-flow diffusion pipeline into a multi-task
multimodal network, dubbed Versatile Diffusion (VD), that
handles multiple flows of text-to-image, image-to-text, and
variations in one unified model. The pipeline design of
VD instantiates a unified multi-flow diffusion framework,
consisting of sharable and swappable layer modules that
enable the crossmodal generality beyond images and text.

Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that VD
successfully achieves the following: a) VD outperforms the
baseline approaches and handles all its base tasks with
competitive quality; b) VD enables novel extensions such
as disentanglement of style and semantics, dual- and multicontext blending, etc.; c) The success of our multi-flow
multimodal framework over images and text may inspire
further diffusion-based universal AI research. Our code
and models are open-sourced at https://github.com/SHILabs/Versatile-Diffusion.

1. Introduction
Multi-modality is the “crown jewel” for achieving universal AI. With the attributes of deep learning, methods
designed for traditional tasks such as classification, detection, segmentation, etc., have reached near-human level

7754

