This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DINAR: Diffusion Inpainting of Neural Textures for One-Shot Human Avatars
David Svitov
Samsung AI Center

Dmitrii Gudkov
Samsung AI Center

Renat Bashirov
Samsung AI Center

d.svitov@samsung.com

d.gudkov@samsung.com

r.bashirov@samsung.com

Victor Lempitsky
Cinemersive Labs
victor@cinemersivelabs.com

Abstract
We present DINAR, an approach for creating realistic
rigged fullbody avatars from single RGB images. Similarly to previous works, our method uses neural textures
combined with the SMPL-X body model to achieve photorealistic quality of avatars while keeping them easy to animate and fast to infer. To restore the texture, we use a
latent diffusion model and show how such model can be
trained in the neural texture space. The use of the diffusion model allows us to realistically reconstruct large unseen regions such as the back of a person given the frontal
view. The models in our pipeline are trained using 2D images and videos only. In the experiments, our approach
achieves state-of-the-art rendering quality and good generalization to new poses and viewpoints. In particular, the
approach improves state-of-the-art on the SnapshotPeople
public benchmark.

1. Introduction
The use of fullbody avatars in the virtual and augmented reality applications [34] is one of the drivers behind the recent surge of interest in fullbody photorealistic
avatars [42, 4, 40]. Apart from the realism and fidelity of
avatars, the ease of acquisition of new personalized avatars
is of paramount importance. Towards this end, several
works propose methods to restore 3D textured model of a
human from a single image [48, 49, 19, 4] but such models
require additional efforts to produce rigging for animation.
The use of additional rigging methods significantly complicates the process of obtaining an avatar and often restricts
the poses that can be handled. At the same time, some of
the recent methods use textured parametric models of human body [56, 28] while applying inpainting in the texture
space. Current texture-based methods, however, lack photorealism and rendering quality.

An alternative to using classical RGB textures directly
is to use deferred neural rendering [53]. Such approaches
make it possible to create human avatars controlled by the
parametric model [29, 40]. The resulting avatars are more
photo-realistic and easier to animate. However, existing approaches require a video sequence to create an avatar [41].
The StylePeople system [16], which is also based on deferred neural rendering and parametric model, provides an
opportunity to create avatars from single images, however
the quality of rendering for unobserved body parts is low.
We propose a new method to create photo-realistic animatable human avatars from a single photo. To make the
avatars animatable we leverage neural texture approach [53]
along with the SMPL-X parametric body model [40]. We
propose a new architecture for generating the neural textures, in which the texture comprises both the RGB part
explicitly extracted from the input photograph by warping and additional neural channels obtained by mapping
the image to a latent vector space and decoding the result
into the texture space. As is customary with neural rendering [53, 16, 41], the texture generation is trained in an
end-to-end fashion with the rendering network.
To restore the neural texture for unobserved parts of the
human body we develop a diffusion model [22]. This approach allows us to obtain photo-realistic human avatars
from single images. In the presence of multiple images, we can merge neural textures corresponding to different images while restoring parts that are still missing
by diffusion-based inpainting. The use of diffusion for
inpainting distinguishes our approach from several previous works [28, 20, 17] including StylePeople [16] that rely
on generative adversarial framework [15] to perform inpainting of human body textures. As in other image domains [10, 47], we found that the use of diffusion alleviates
problems with mode collapse and allows to obtain plausible
samples from complex multi-modal distributions. To the
best of our knowledge, we are the first to extend the diffusion models to the task of generating human body textures.

7062

