This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Concordant Attention via Target-aware Alignment
for Visible-Infrared Person Re-identification

†

Jianbing Wu1,† Hong Liu2,†,* Yuxin Su3,† Wei Shi4,† Hao Tang5,‡
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, China
‡
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich, Switzerland

1,3 {kimbing.ng,

yuxinsu}@stu.pku.edu.cn

2,4 {hongliu,

pkusw}@pku.edu.cn

5 hao.tang@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
(Style-sensitive)
Attention Bias

(b) Auxiliary-model-based methods
Distinct Region
Mining

(more descriptive)

Part Queries
Style-agnostic
Attention Adapter

Distinct Region
Mining

(c) Attention-based methods

Part Queries

Concordant Attention

Person Re-identification (Re-ID) aims to associate person identities across non-overlapping cameras. It has gained
increasing attention in recent years due to its practical applications in real-world surveillance systems. Conventional
person Re-ID methods mainly focus on retrieving the same
identity across visible (RGB) cameras [48, 29, 16, 23, 10].
Despite their remarkable success, they have limited applicability since visible cameras cannot capture discriminative
information under poor-lighting conditions (e.g., at night).
To improve the illumination robustness, infrared (IR) cameras are widely applied to cooperate with visible ones in

Learnable prototypes
(less descriptive)

Knowledge
Exchange

1. Introduction

Attention
Module

(a) Splitting-based methods

Matching

Owing to the large distribution gap between the heterogeneous data in Visible-Infrared Person Re-identification
(VI Re-ID), we point out that existing paradigms often
suffer from the inter-modal semantic misalignment issue
and thus fail to align and compare local details properly.
In this paper, we present Concordant Attention Learning
(CAL), a novel framework that learns semantic-aligned
representations for VI Re-ID. Specifically, we design the
Target-aware Concordant Alignment paradigm, which allows target-aware attention adaptation when aligning heterogeneous samples (i.e., adaptive attention adjustment according to the target image being aligned). This is achieved
by exploiting the discriminative clues from the modality
counterpart and designing effective modality-agnostic correspondence searching strategies. To ensure semantic concordance during the cross-modal retrieval stage, we further
propose MatchDistill, which matches the attention patterns
across modalities and learns their underlying semantic correlations by bipartite-graph-based similarity modeling and
cross-modal knowledge exchange. Extensive experiments
on VI Re-ID benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed CAL.

(more descriptive)
(d) Concordant Attention Learning (Ours)

Figure 1. A high-level overview of typical local feature learning
paradigms. (a) Splitting-based: The semantics of the hand-craft
stripes are not always properly aligned. (b) Auxiliary-modelbased: Pretrained auxiliary models are often error-prone due to
the domain shifts (especially for infrared image). (c) Attentionbased: Due to the inter-modal distribution gap, existing stylesensitive attention module with less descriptive learnable prototypes often fails to attend semantically consistent regions.
(d) CAL (Ours): Our method can learn concordant attention by
discriminative region mining, target-aware style-agnostic attention, and part-aligned knowledge exchange.

real-world surveillance systems. This increases the need
to explore the Visible-Infrared Person Re-identification (VI
Re-ID) problem, which aims to associate the person images
taken by different spectrum cameras to achieve long-term
person tracking in 24-hour surveillance systems.
Compared to traditional RGB-based re-identification, VI
Re-ID is much more challenging due to the differences
in spectral properties between visible and infrared images.
This data heterogeneity can lead to severe misalignment in
the feature space and large intra-class discrepancy, resulting in significant degradation in performance. In addition,
similarly to RGB-based Re-ID tasks, VI Re-ID can also be

11122

