This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mixed Neural Voxels for Fast Multi-view Video Synthesis
Feng Wang1
1

Sinan Tan1

Xinghang Li1

Zeyue Tian2

Yafei Song3

Huaping Liu1 *

Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology(BNRist),
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
XR Lab, DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
wang-f20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, hpliu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Synthesizing high-fidelity videos from real-world multiview input is challenging due to the complexities of realworld environments and high-dynamic movements. Previous works based on neural radiance fields have demonstrated high-quality reconstructions of dynamic scenes.
However, training such models on real-world scenes is timeconsuming, usually taking days or weeks. In this paper,
we present a novel method named MixVoxels to efficiently
represent dynamic scenes, enabling fast training and rendering speed. The proposed MixVoxels represents the 4D
dynamic scenes as a mixture of static and dynamic voxels
and processes them with different networks. In this way,
the computation of the required modalities for static voxels can be processed by a lightweight model, which essentially reduces the amount of computation as many daily
dynamic scenes are dominated by static backgrounds. To
distinguish the two kinds of voxels, we propose a novel
variation field to estimate the temporal variance of each
voxel. For the dynamic representations, we design an inner product time query method to efficiently query multiple
time steps, which is essential to recover the high-dynamic
movements. As a result, with 15 minutes of training for dynamic scenes with inputs of 300-frame videos, MixVoxels
achieves better PSNR than previous methods. For rendering, MixVoxels can render a novel view video with 1K resolution at 37 fps. Codes and trained models are available at
https://github.com/fengres/mixvoxels.

1. Introduction
Dynamic scene reconstruction from multi-view videos
is a critical and challenging problem, with many potential applications such as interactively free-viewpoint control
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Our method enables rapid reconstruction of 4D dynamic
scenes. We visualize the rendering results with different training schedules. With only 15 minutes of training, our approach
achieves comparable PSNRs to other methods. Increasing the
training time further enhances the ability to recover fine details.

for movies, cinematic effects like freeze-frame bullet time,
novel view replays for sporting events, and various potential VR/AR applications. Recently, neural radiance fields
[26] have demonstrated the possibility of rendering photorealistic novel views for static scenes, with physically motivated 3D density and radiance modelling. Many methods
[19, 20, 49, 13, 10, 31, 28, 29, 44] extend the neural radiance
fields to dynamic scenes with additional time queries or an
explicit deformation field. Many of these methods focus on
the monocular input video setting on relatively simple dynamic scenes. To model more complex real-world dynamic
scenes, a more practical solution is to use multi-view synchronized videos to provide dense spatial-temporal supervisions [55, 23, 3, 19].
Recently, Li et al. [19] propose a real-world dynamic
scene dataset including many challenging situations such as
objects of high specularity, topology changes, and volumetric effects. They address the problem by a hierarchical training scheme and the ray importance sampling strategies. Although significant improvements have been achieved, some
challenges still exist: (1) The training and rendering take a

19706

