This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instance Neural Radiance Field
Yichen Liu1 * Benran Hu2 * Junkai Huang2 * Yu-Wing Tai3 Chi-Keung Tang1
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Carnegie Mellon University 3 Dartmouth College

Abstract
This paper presents one of the first learning-based NeRF
3D instance segmentation pipelines, dubbed as Instance
Neural Radiance Field, or Instance-NeRF. Taking a NeRF
pretrained from multi-view RGB images as input, InstanceNeRF can learn 3D instance segmentation of a given scene,
represented as an instance field component of the NeRF
model. To this end, we adopt a 3D proposal-based mask
prediction network on the sampled volumetric features from
NeRF, which generates discrete 3D instance masks. The
coarse 3D mask prediction is then projected to image space
to match 2D segmentation masks from different views generated by existing panoptic segmentation models, which are
used to supervise the training of the instance field. Notably, beyond generating consistent 2D segmentation maps
from novel views, Instance-NeRF can query instance information at any 3D point, which greatly enhances NeRF object segmentation and manipulation. Our method is also
one of the first to achieve such results in pure inference.
Experimented on synthetic and real-world NeRF datasets
with complex indoor scenes, Instance-NeRF surpasses previous NeRF segmentation works and competitive 2D segmentation methods in segmentation performance on unseen views. Code and data are available at https://
github.com/lyclyc52/Instance_NeRF.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [32] has become the
mainstream approach to novel view synthesis nowadays.
Given multi-view images with camera poses only, NeRF
encodes the underlying scene in a multi-layer perceptron
(MLP) by radiance propagation and generates very impressive results. Thus, subsequent to NeRF’s debut in [32] lot
of works have made great progress in improving the quality [10, 45], efficiency [33, 53, 3] and generality [55, 49].
* Equal contribution.
† This research is supported in part by the Research Grant Council of

the Hong Kong SAR under grant no. 16201420.

Input NeRF

Extracted RGB
Density

Instance Field

2D Segmentation
Matching

Figure 1: Pipeline of Instance-NeRF, demonstrated on the 3DFRONT dataset. Instance-NeRF takes a pre-trained NeRF as input
to detect objects within the scene and utilizes existing 2D panoptic
segmentation to generate 2D segmentation maps, which are then
matched and used to supervise the instance field training.

This excellent approach to associate 2D with 3D through
radiance field leads us to rethink the 3D instance segmentation problem. Unlike the 2D counterpart operating on plenty
of training images, 3D instance segmentation is limited by
both the quantity and quality of the available data. Previously, 3D segmentation still relies on RGB-D images [21]
or point clouds [36, 37, 46, 50, 41] captured by depth sensors or custom equipment as input, which are inconvenient
to obtain and contain a variety of noises. To mitigate the
dependence on explicit 3D geometry, there have been several investigations on embedding NeRF for addressing fundamental problems such as 3D semantic segmentation [56]
and scene manipulation [26]. Existing unsupervised methods such as [30, 54, 39] also involve 3D scene decomposition and instance segmentation, but it is hard to apply them
on complex and large scenes akin to real world cases.

787

