This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stable Cluster Discrimination for Deep Clustering
Qi Qian
Alibaba Group, Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
qi.qian@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Deep clustering can optimize representations of instances (i.e., representation learning) and explore the inherent data distribution (i.e., clustering) simultaneously,
which demonstrates a superior performance over conventional clustering methods with given features. However, the
coupled objective implies a trivial solution that all instances
collapse to the uniform features. To tackle the challenge,
a two-stage training strategy is developed for decoupling,
where it introduces an additional pre-training stage for representation learning and then fine-tunes the obtained model
for clustering. Meanwhile, one-stage methods are developed mainly for representation learning rather than clustering, where various constraints for cluster assignments are
designed to avoid collapsing explicitly. Despite the success
of these methods, an appropriate learning objective tailored
for deep clustering has not been investigated sufficiently. In
this work, we first show that the prevalent discrimination
task in supervised learning is unstable for one-stage clustering due to the lack of ground-truth labels and positive
instances for certain clusters in each mini-batch. To mitigate the issue, a novel stable cluster discrimination (SeCu)
task is proposed and a new hardness-aware clustering criterion can be obtained accordingly. Moreover, a global entropy constraint for cluster assignments is studied with efficient optimization. Extensive experiments are conducted on
benchmark data sets and ImageNet. SeCu achieves stateof-the-art performance on all of them, which demonstrates
the effectiveness of one-stage deep clustering.

1. Introduction
Clustering is a fundamental task in unsupervised learning. Given features of instances, the unlabeled data set will
be partitioned into multiple clusters, where instances from
the same cluster are similar according to the measurement
defined by a distance function. With fixed features, most
of research efforts focus on studying appropriate distance
functions and ingenious algorithms have been proposed by
different measurements, e.g., k-means clustering [24], spec-

k-means in CoKe: acc=0.9

our proposal SeCu: acc=1.0

Figure 1: An illustration of the proposed method. 10 data
points are randomly sampled from two different Gaussian
distributions, respectively. Points with the same color are
from the same distribution, while squares denote the corresponding cluster centers obtained by different methods. Star
indicates the mis-classified data. Unlike k-means that assigns the uniform weight for different instances, our method
considers the hardness of instances and is better for discrimination based clustering.

tral clustering [28], subspace clustering [13], etc.
With the development of deep neural networks, deep
learning is capable of learning representations from raw
materials and demonstrates the dominating performance on
various supervised tasks [22]. Thereafter, it is also introduced to clustering recently [4, 11, 14, 19, 20, 23, 29, 30,
32]. Unlike the conventional clustering, representations of
instances are learned with cluster assignments and centers
simultaneously in deep clustering, which is more flexible to
capture the data distribution. However, the coupled objective can result in a trivial solution that all instances collapse
to the uniform features [4] and designing appropriate clustering criterion in the new scenario becomes challenging.
Many deep clustering algorithms [11, 14, 32] exploit a
two-stage training strategy to decouple representation learning and clustering to avoid collapsing. The recent progress
in unsupervised representation learning [2, 4, 7, 16, 17, 26]
shows that informative features capturing the semantic similarity between instances without collapsing can be obtained
by pre-training a large set of unlabeled data. Inspired by
the observation, those methods leverage a pre-training stage
and then focus on developing algorithms to optimize clus-

16645

