This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Variational Causal Inference Network for Explanatory Visual Question
Answering

1

Dizhan Xue1,2 Shengsheng Qian1,2 Changsheng Xu1,2,3
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
xuedizhan17@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {shengsheng.qian, csxu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Explanatory Visual Question Answering (EVQA) is a recently proposed multimodal reasoning task that requires answering visual questions and generating multimodal explanations for the reasoning processes. Unlike traditional Visual Question Answering (VQA) which focuses solely on answering, EVQA aims to provide user-friendly explanations
to enhance the explainability and credibility of reasoning
models. However, existing EVQA methods typically predict
the answer and explanation separately, which ignores the
causal correlation between them. Moreover, they neglect
the complex relationships among question words, visual regions, and explanation tokens. To address these issues, we
propose a Variational Causal Inference Network (VCIN)
that establishes the causal correlation between predicted
answers and explanations, and captures cross-modal relationships to generate rational explanations. First, we utilize a vision-and-language pretrained model to extract visual features and question features. Secondly, we propose a
multimodal explanation gating transformer that constructs
cross-modal relationships and generates rational explanations. Finally, we propose a variational causal inference
to establish the target causal structure and predict the answers. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of VCIN over state-of-the-art EVQA methods.

1. Introduction
Multimodal reasoning is a vital ability for humans and
a fundamental problem for artificial intelligence [27, 39, 8].
Despite the promising performance of deep neural networks
on various multimodal reasoning tasks [35, 37, 47, 34, 36],
existing models typically generate reasoning results without
explaining the rationale behind their results. Consequently,
the low explainability of the generated results severely re-

Figure 1. An example of Visual Question Answering (VQA) and
Explanatory Visual Question Answering (EVQA): VQA requires
answering the question with a related image, while EVQA additionally requires explaining the reasoning process.

duces the credibility and restricts the application of reasoning models. To address this issue, Chen and Zhao [11] recently proposed Explanatory Visual Question Answering
(EVQA) task, which expands upon Visual Question Answering (VQA) [5, 15] by requiring multimodal reasoning
explanations. As shown in Figure 1, while traditional VQA
aims to answer a question with a related image, EVQA goes
further by demanding an explanation of the reasoning process. This extension creates the possibility for improved
explainability and credibility of reasoning models.
Due to the definition of EVQA that the generated explanation should interpret the reasoning process of the inference model, it is crucial to maintain consistency between
the predicted answer and explanation, or the inferred results
can be incredible for users. However, existing methods for
EVQA [11] predict the answer and the explanation separately based on the input multimodal information, which ignore the consistency relation between two outputs and may
infer inconsistent results. As shown in Figure 2, the state-

2515

