This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sample4Geo: Hard Negative Sampling For Cross-View Geo-Localisation
Fabian Deuser

Konrad Habel

Norbert Oswald

Institute for Distributed Intelligent Systems
University of the Bundeswehr Munich
Munich, Germany
{fabian.deuser, konrad.habel, norbert.oswald}@unibw.de

Abstract
Cross-View Geo-Localisation is still a challenging task
where additional modules, specific pre-processing or zooming strategies are necessary to determine accurate positions of images. Since different views have different geometries, pre-processing like polar transformation helps to
merge them. However, this results in distorted images which
then have to be rectified. Adding hard negatives to the
training batch could improve the overall performance but
with the default loss functions in geo-localisation it is difficult to include them. In this work, we present a simplified but effective architecture based on contrastive learning with symmetric InfoNCE loss that outperforms current
state-of-the-art results. Our framework consists of a narrow training pipeline that eliminates the need of using aggregation modules, avoids further pre-processing steps and
even increases the capacity of generalisation of the model
to unknown regions. We introduce two types of sampling
strategies for hard negatives. The first explicitly exploits geographically neighboring locations to provide a good starting point. The second leverages the visual similarity between the image embeddings in order to mine hard negative
samples. Our work shows excellent performance on common cross-view datasets like CVUSA, CVACT, University1652 and VIGOR. A comparison between cross-area and
same-area settings demonstrate the good generalisation capability of our model.

1. Introduction
Determining a geo-location from images without metadata is one of the puzzles yet to be solved in the computer
vision community. Solving this problem can help in areas
such as agriculture and automotive. For example, a robotic
agent in agriculture for spraying fertiliser requires a high
precision location. This can be achieved with a real-time

Geographical Distance:

Visual Similarity:

Positive Pair
Negative Examples
Sampled Batch
Hard Negative

Figure 1: Our two sampling strategies. The first is based on
the geographical distance between the satellite images. The
second uses the cosine similarity between the street-view
and satellite view embeddings to find hard negatives within
a margin.

kinematic (RTK) GPS, but these sensors are expensive and
short-time signal outages can obstruct workflows. Therefore aerial image based localisation in these highly repetitive environments can further enhance positioning [4]. Another challenge in cities is the so-called urban canyon effect,
which blocks signals such as GPS or reduces their accuracy.
Especially in large cities, GPS signals are noisy due to tall
buildings. The evaluation of 250,000 driving hours in New
York City traffic by Brosh et al. showed an error of 10 me-

16847

