This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multiple Instance Learning Framework with Masked Hard Instance Mining for
Whole Slide Image Classification
Wenhao Tang1 Sheng Huang1 * Xiaoxian Zhang1 Fengtao Zhou2 Yi Zhang1 Bo Liu3
1
Chongqing University 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Walmart Global Tech
{whtang, huangsheng, zhangxiaoxian, zhangyii}@cqu.edu.cn
fzhouaf@connect.ust.hk, kfliubo@gmail.com

Abstract
The whole slide image (WSI) classification is often formulated as a multiple instance learning (MIL) problem.
Since the positive tissue is only a small fraction of the gigapixel WSI, existing MIL methods intuitively focus on identifying salient instances via attention mechanisms. However, this leads to a bias towards easy-to-classify instances
while neglecting hard-to-classify instances. Some literature has revealed that hard examples are beneficial for
modeling a discriminative boundary accurately. By applying such an idea at the instance level, we elaborate a
novel MIL framework with masked hard instance mining
(MHIM-MIL), which uses a Siamese structure (TeacherStudent) with a consistency constraint to explore the potential hard instances. With several instance masking strategies based on attention scores, MHIM-MIL employs a momentum teacher to implicitly mine hard instances for training the student model, which can be any attention-based
MIL model. This counter-intuitive strategy essentially enables the student to learn a better discriminating boundary.
Moreover, the student is used to update the teacher with an
exponential moving average (EMA), which in turn identifies new hard instances for subsequent training iterations
and stabilizes the optimization. Experimental results on the
CAMELYON-16 and TCGA Lung Cancer datasets demonstrate that MHIM-MIL outperforms other latest methods in
terms of performance and training cost. The code is available at: https://github.com/DearCaat/MHIM-MIL.

1. Introduction
Histopathological image analysis plays a crucial role in
modern medicine, particularly in the treatment of cancer,
where it serves as the gold standard for diagnosis [18, 20,
24,45]. Digitalizating pathological images into Whole Slide
* Corresponding Author.

Mined Positive (Negative) Instance

Masked Instance

Better
Boundary

Previous MIL Model

Masked Hard Instance Mining

Figure 1: Left: Previous MIL models focus on the more
salient instances. Right: MHIM-MIL mines an amount of
hard-to-classify instances to learn a better boundary.
Images (WSIs) through digital slide scanner has opened
new avenues for computer-aided analysis [9, 26]. Due to
the huge size of a WSI and the lack of pixel-level annotations, histopathological image analysis is commonly formulated as a multiple instance learning (MIL) task [10, 23, 31].
In MIL, each WSI (or slide) is a bag containing thousands
of unlabeled instances (patches) cropped from the slide.
With at least one instance being disease positive, the bag
is deemed positive, otherwise negative.
However, the number of slides is limited and each slide
contains a mass of instances with a low positive proportion. This imbalance would hinder the inference of bag labels [16, 43]. To alleviate this issue, several WSI classification methods [6, 16–18, 26] employ an attention mechanism
to aggregate salient instance features into a bag-level feature for WSI classification. Furthermore, some MIL frameworks [17, 21, 40, 43] focus on the more salient instances in
the bag and leverage them to facilitate WSI classification.
For instance, existing frameworks [40, 43] propose to only
select the instances that correspond to the top K highest or
lowest attention scores [17, 40] or patch probabilities [43]
for yielding high-quality bag embedding for both training
and testing.

4078

