This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Group Pose: A Simple Baseline for End-to-End Multi-person Pose Estimation
Huan Liu1,3 * Qiang Chen2 * Zichang Tan2 Jiang-Jiang Liu2 Jian Wang2 Xiangbo Su2
Xiaolong Li1,3 Kun Yao2 Junyu Han2 Errui Ding2 Yao Zhao1,3† Jingdong Wang2
1
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University 2 Baidu VIS
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology, Beijing, China

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of end-to-end multiperson pose estimation. State-of-the-art solutions adopt the
DETR-like framework, and mainly develop the complex decoder, e.g., regarding pose estimation as keypoint box detection and combining with human detection in ED-Pose [38],
hierarchically predicting with pose decoder and joint (keypoint) decoder in PETR [27].
We present a simple yet effective transformer approach,
named Group Pose. We simply regard K-keypoint pose estimation as predicting a set of N × K keypoint positions,
each from a keypoint query, as well as representing each
pose with an instance query for scoring N pose predictions.
Motivated by the intuition that the interaction, among
across-instance queries of different types, is not directly
helpful, we make a simple modification to decoder selfattention. We replace single self-attention over all the
N × (K + 1) queries with two subsequent group selfattentions: (i) N within-instance self-attention, with each
over K keypoint queries and one instance query, and (ii)
(K +1) same-type across-instance self-attention, each over
N queries of the same type. The resulting decoder removes the interaction among across-instance type-different
queries, easing the optimization and thus improving the performance. Experimental results on MS COCO and CrowdPose show that our approach without human box supervision is superior to previous methods with complex decoders,
and even is slightly better than ED-Pose that uses human
box supervision. Paddle 1 and PyTorch 2 codes are available.

1. Introduction
Multi-person pose estimation aims to detect the corresponding human keypoints for all human instances in an
* Equal Contribution. Work done when H. Liu is an intern at Baidu.
† Corresponding author. Email: yzhao@bjtu.edu.cn
1 Code of Paddle: https://github.com/Michel-liu/GroupPose-Paddle
2 Code of PyTorch: https://github.com/Michel-liu/GroupPose

pose
queries

set of poses
pose decoder

joint decoder

kpts

human-to-keypoint
detection decoder

box
kpts

kpt queries
(a) PETR

box
queries

human
detection decoder

boxes
kpt queries
(b) ED-Pose

inst & kpt
queries

transformer decoder

kpts

(c) Group Pose

Figure 1: Comparison of transformer decoders. Here we mainly
illustrate the overview of the decoder part of PETR [27], EDPose [38], and our Group Pose. The three end-to-end frameworks
differ in query design and decoder architecture. Group Pose only
uses a simple transformer decoder rather than developing complex
decoders. ‘inst’ and ‘kpt’ represent for instance and keypoint.

image. Previous frameworks include top-down [25, 6, 35,
4, 29, 33] and bottom-up methods [1, 24, 12, 5] that divide the task into two sequential sub-tasks: human detection with single-person pose estimation or human-agnostic
keypoint detection with human instance grouping [24].
Another line in previous frameworks is one-stage methods [22, 26, 31, 34], which directly predict instance-aware
keypoints. These frameworks rely on non-differentiable
hand-crafted post-processes [10, 24], which complicate the
pipelines and challenge the optimizations. Inspired by the
success of DETR [2] in object detection, building an endto-end framework for multi-person pose estimation has seen
significant interest.
Recent approaches follow the DETR framework [2,
41, 39], with the transformer encoder-decoder architecture
for multi-person pose estimation, as shown in Figure 1.
PETR [27] hierarchically predicts the keypoint positions
and uses two subsequent decoders, pose decoder and joint
decoder, with two different queries, pose query (a person
has one pose query) for pose decoder, and keypoint queries
for joint decoder. ED-Pose [38] transfers pose estimation
to a keypoint box detection problem, and learns a content
query and a box query for each keypoint position prediction

15029

