This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Traffic Knowledge Graph Generation from Scene Images
Yunfei Guo1, 2 , Fei Yin1, 2 , Xiao-hui Li1, 2 , Xudong Yan3 , Tao Xue3 , Shuqi Mei3 , Cheng-Lin Liu1, 2
1
MAIS, Institute of Automation of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
T Lab, Tencent Map, Tencent Technology (Beijing) Co., Ltd.
guoyunfei2019@ia.ac.cn, {fyin,xiaohui.li}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn,
{owenyan,emmaxue,shawnmei}@tencent.com, liucl@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

1. Introduction
Traffic scene understanding [26, 3, 5, 34] plays an important role in auto drive systems. Some of its subtasks, such as
road segmentation [11, 2], lane detection [43, 36], and traffic sign detection [32, 22], have made significant progress in
the recent years. However, such low-level output with limited information is far from sufficient for auto drive. In this
work, we introduce Visual Traffic Knowledge Graph Generation (VTKGG), a high-level traffic scene understanding
task to provide comprehensive and well-formatted traffic
scene information for not only auto drive, but also position-

(b)

L1

L2

S0

S1

(d)
S2

To

R1

涪滨路

R0

R1
Info
出口,116

G207

R1
白坪

R0

Turn
right

L2

学府一路

汝州

(c)

L1

Circular sign(S1),
07:00-22:00

Info

Right front to

R1

R0

L0

L0

Go straight to

S1
S2

R0

Go straight to

S0

Go straight to

Although previous works on traffic scene understanding
have achieved great success, most of them stop at a lowlevel perception stage, such as road segmentation and lane
detection, and few concern high-level understanding. In
this paper, we present Visual Traffic Knowledge Graph Generation (VTKGG), a new task for in-depth traffic scene understanding that tries to extract multiple kinds of information and integrate them into a knowledge graph. To achieve
this goal, we first introduce a large dataset named CASIATencent Road Scene dataset (RS10K) with comprehensive
annotations to support related research. Secondly, we propose a novel traffic scene parsing architecture containing
a Hierarchical Graph ATtention network (HGAT) to analyze the heterogeneous elements and their complicated relations in traffic scene images. By hierarchizing the heterogeneous graph and equipping it with cross-level links, our
approach exploits the correlation among various elements
completely and acquires accurate relations. The experimental results show that our method can effectively generate visual traffic knowledge graphs and achieve state-of-the-art
performance. The dataset RS10K is available at http:
//www.nlpr.ia.ac.cn/pal/RS10K.html.

(a)

大峪

Abstract

Figure 1. Traffic knowledge graphs for scene images in RS10K.
Roads, lanes, and signs are noted with “R”, “L”, and “S”, respectively. The current roads are masked by red and right roads by
green. For better visualization, some annotations are simplified.

ing assistance and map correction.
VTKGG aims to extract traffic information from traffic
scene images and organize the information into a knowledge graph. Considering that the relevant techniques are
quite developed, VTKGG is carried out on the positionknown traffic signs, roads, and lanes. As shown in Figure 1, the traffic knowledge graph is a graph connecting
roads, lanes, locations, warnings, etc. To accomplish this,
we must parse the content of traffic signs and identify relations between sign components (i.e., texts, symbols, and
arrowheads on signs) and their correspondence to traffic elements (i.e., roads and lanes), which is complicated, however. First, relations exist between traffic signs (S-S relations), which indicate one sign is a supplement to another,
e.g., “S1” and “S2” in Figure 1(a) and Figure 1(c). Second,
relations exist between sign components (C-C relations),
which has been demonstrated in [12]. Third, relations exist

21604

