This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Divide and Conquer: 3D Point Cloud Instance Segmentation With Point-Wise
Binarization
Weiguang Zhao1 , Yuyao Yan2 , Chaolong Yang1 , Jianan Ye2 , Xi Yang2 , Kaizhu Huang1 *
1

Duke Kunshan University

2

Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University

{weiguang.zhao, chaolong.yang, kaizhu.huang}@dukekunshan.edu.cn
{jianan.ye20}@student.xjtlu.edu.cn {yuyao.yan, xi.yang01}@xjtlu.edu.cn

Abstract
Instance segmentation on point clouds is crucially important for 3D scene understanding. Most SOTAs adopt
distance clustering, which is typically effective but does not
perform well in segmenting adjacent objects with the same
semantic label (especially when they share neighboring
points). Due to the uneven distribution of offset points, these
existing methods can hardly cluster all instance points. To
this end, we design a novel divide-and-conquer strategy
named PBNet that binarizes each point and clusters them
separately to segment instances. Our binary clustering divides offset instance points into two categories: high and
low density points (HPs vs. LPs). Adjacent objects can
be clearly separated by removing LPs, and then be completed and refined by assigning LPs via a neighbor voting
method. To suppress potential over-segmentation, we propose to construct local scenes with the weight mask for each
instance. As a plug-in, the proposed binary clustering can
replace the traditional distance clustering and lead to consistent performance gains on many mainstream baselines.
A series of experiments on ScanNetV2 and S3DIS datasets
indicate the superiority of our model. In particular, PBNet
ranks first on the ScanNetV2 official benchmark challenge,
achieving the highest mAP . Code will be available publicly at https://github.com/weiguangzhao/PBNet.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider instance segmentation for 3D
point clouds that aims to classify each point of 3D clouds
as well as separating objects from each class. While a large
body of successful algorithms have been developed for 2D
images [28, 13, 2, 29], most of these methods are not par* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Distance clustering vs. the proposed PBNet. Points
dropped in the distance clustering are called ignored points. Clustering based on HPs can better segment adjacent instances ( highlighted in rectangular boxes), while the neighbor voting based on
LPs can complete the instance (highlighted in ellipses).

ticularly effective for 3D point clouds due to the inherent
irregularity and sparsity in 3D data [7, 11, 48].
In 3D point cloud segmentation, PointGroup [21] proposed a distance clustering framework to generate preliminary instance proposals. Although this framework is still
being adopted by most SOTAs [14, 27, 3, 41, 45], it may
usually have the following shortcomings: (1) distance clustering is limited to segment the adjacent objects with the
same semantic label, especially when neighboring points
are sticking together; (2) distance clustering only considers points within a distance threshold, which may generate
incomplete instances.
To alleviate these drawbacks, we propose a novel proposal generation framework to better segment adjacent objects and complete instances. Inspired by DBSCAN algorithm [10], we divide foreground points into two categories:
high and low density points (HPs vs. LPs), depending on
the density of each point on the offset branch. As such,
neighbor points between adjacent objects are binarized to
LPs. Without the interference of neighbor points, grouping HPs can effectively separate adjacent objects. After
that, we combine semantic prediction and neighbor voting

562

