This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adverse Weather Removal with Codebook Priors
Tian Ye1,3∗ Sixiang Chen1,3∗ Jinbin Bai2 * Jun Shi4 Chenghao Xue3
Jingxia Jiang3 Junjie Yin3 Erkang Chen3 Yun Liu5†
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
3
4

2

National University of Singapore

School of Ocean Information Engineering, Jimei University

Xinjiang University

5

College of Artificial Intelligence, Southwest University

{owentianye, sixiangchen} @hkust-gz.edu.cn jinbin.bai@u.nus.edu, junshi2022@gmail.com,
{202021115097, 202021114006, 202021112006, ekchen} @jmu.edu.cn, yunliu@swu.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite recent advancements in unified adverse weather
removal methods, there remains a significant challenge of
achieving realistic fine-grained texture and reliable background reconstruction to mitigate serious distortions.
Inspired by recent advancements in codebook and vector
quantization (VQ) techniques, we present a novel Adverse
Weather Removal network with Codebook Priors (AWRCP)
to address the problem of unified adverse weather removal.
AWRCP leverages high-quality codebook priors derived
from undistorted images to recover vivid texture details and
faithful background structures. However, simply utilizing
high-quality features from the codebook does not guarantee
good results in terms of fine-grained details and structural
fidelity. Therefore, we develop a deformable cross-attention
with sparse sampling mechanism for flexible perform feature interaction between degraded features and high-quality
features from codebook priors. In order to effectively incorporate high-quality texture features while maintaining
the realism of the details generated by codebook priors, we
propose a hierarchical texture warping head that gradually fuses hierarchical codebook prior features into highresolution features at final restoring stage.
With the utilization of the VQ codebook as a feature dictionary of high quality and the proposed designs, AWRCP
can largely improve the restored quality of texture details,
achieving the state-of-the-art performance across multiple
adverse weather removal benchmark.

* Equal contributions.
† Yun Liu is the corresponding author.

1. Introduction
The restoration of images under adverse weather conditions, such as heavy haze or rain, is a major topic of research
in the field of computer vision. The original images may
suffer from severe weather-induced distortions, like intense
rain streaks or dense hazing effects, which obscure the true
background and deteriorate the performance of high-level
vision tasks. Therefore, a difficult inverse problem arises,
whereby degraded images are likely to experience significant losses of detail and structure, requiring restoration.
With the advent of deep learning techniques, adverse
weather removal methods [33, 49, 41, 10] has achieved remarkable progress. An increasing number of studies are focusing on achieving all-in-one adverse weather removal in
one go as a primary objective. This entails the elimination
of all weather-related degradation through the utilization of
a single, unified model. Classical adverse weather removal
methods employ neural architecture search to find an optimal network design [33], use advanced decoders with learnable weather queries to decode clean features in solving this
task [49], explore diffusion model for adverse weather removal [41]. However, these methods are still limited in their
performance due to their inability to robustly capture highquality clear background features from seriously degraded
images. The only feature source that them can employed
is only from degraded images, which obviously is a huge
drawback in structure rebuilding and realist texture restoring by these models. Additionally, it should be noted that
the irreversible nature of severe texture loss poses a significant challenge for these methods. Previous methods almost all pay more attention on reconstruct clean features
in multi-scale feature stage, ignoring the benefits of restoring fine-grained details in the final high-resolution feature
level. In conclusion, recent methods for mitigating adverse
weather conditions have demonstrated impressive perfor12653

