This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Few shot font generation via transferring similarity guided global style and
quantization local style

1

Wei Pan1 Anna Zhu1 * Xinyu Zhou1 Brian Kenji Iwana2 Shilin Li1
School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University of Technology
2
Human Interface Laboratory, Kyushu University
{aaawei, annazhu, 297932, shilinli}@whut.edu.cn

Abstract
Automatic few-shot font generation (AFFG), aiming at
generating new fonts with only a few glyph references, reduces the labor cost of manually designing fonts. However,
the traditional AFFG paradigm of style-content disentanglement cannot capture the diverse local details of different
fonts. So, many component-based approaches are proposed
to tackle this problem. The issue with component-based
approaches is that they usually require special pre-defined
glyph components, e.g., strokes and radicals, which is infeasible for AFFG of different languages. In this paper, we
present a novel font generation approach by aggregating
styles from character similarity-guided global features and
stylized component-level representations. We calculate the
similarity scores of the target character and the referenced
samples by measuring the distance along the corresponding channels from the content features, and assigning them
as the weights for aggregating the global style features. To
better capture the local styles, a cross-attention-based style
transfer module is adopted to transfer the styles of reference
glyphs to the components, where the components are selflearned discrete latent codes through vector quantization
without manual definition. With these designs, our AFFG
method could obtain a complete set of component-level style
representations, and also control the global glyph characteristics. The experimental results reflect the effectiveness
and generalization of the proposed method on different linguistic scripts, and also show its superiority when compared with other state-of-the-art methods. The source code
can be found at https://github.com/awei669/VQ-Font.

1. Introduction
Font design techniques can benefit many critical applications, such as logo designs, data augmentation for textrelated tasks, handwriting imitation and identification, etc.
* Corresponding author

iwana@ait.kyushu-u.ac.jp

However, traditional font design heavily depends on expert
designers rendering the glyph styles for each character manually, making the creation of fonts extremely expensive and
labor-intensive, especially for glyph-rich scripts.
Recently, with the development of deep learning techniques, many automatic few-shot font generation (AFFG)
methods have been proposed. They have been created using Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs) [22], Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [27], Transformers [32],
etc. The AFFG methods use only a few reference font
images for generating different glyphs automatically. The
typical strategy follows the style and content disentanglement and combination paradigm [38, 23], and either adopts
global style representation or component-wise style representation. The global style representation [13, 38] is learned
and extracted from all the references of each style, which
could capture the global characteristics, such as character
size and stroke space. However, it lacks the representation
of diverse local details, such as the shape and length of local strokes and serif size. On the contrary, the componentwise style representation category [11, 6, 20] generally decomposes each reference sample sharing the same font into
pre-defined components and radicals. It either conditions
the style encoders jointly on the glyph image and the corresponding component labels or adopts component-label classification losses to train the style encoder. This can be infeasible because each character should be manually associated with a certain set of components, which requires more
preparation when applying for new scripts. Additionally,
for different content images, their local relations with reference samples can vary. That means the local style representations for different content characters are required to
be recomputed when given fixed reference samples, which
increases the computational cost.
To tackle the above issue, we propose a hybrid global
and local style transferring approach for AFFG in this paper.
Since the global style representation of fonts controls more
intra-style consistent properties, e.g., the locations, sizes,
stroke thickness, and spaces of characters, while the lo-

19506

