This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UrbanGIRAFFE: Representing Urban Scenes as Compositional
Generative Neural Feature Fields
Yuanbo Yang, Yifei Yang, Hanlei Guo, Rong Xiong, Yue Wang, Yiyi Liao*
Zhejiang University
{yybbb, yfyang2018, guohl77701, rxiong, ywang24, yiyi.liao}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Generating photorealistic images with controllable camera pose and scene contents is essential for many applications including AR/VR and simulation. Despite the fact that
rapid progress has been made in 3D-aware generative models, most existing methods focus on object-centric images
and are not applicable to generating urban scenes for free
camera viewpoint control and scene editing. To address this
challenging task, we propose UrbanGIRAFFE, which uses
a coarse 3D panoptic prior, including the layout distribution of uncountable stuff and countable objects, to guide a
3D-aware generative model. Our model is compositional
and controllable as it breaks down the scene into stuff, objects, and sky. Using stuff prior in the form of semantic
voxel grids, we build a conditioned stuff generator that effectively incorporates the coarse semantic and geometry information. The object layout prior further allows us to learn
an object generator from cluttered scenes. With proper loss
functions, our approach facilitates photorealistic 3D-aware
image synthesis with diverse controllability, including large
camera movement, stuff editing, and object manipulation.
We validate the effectiveness of our model on both synthetic
and real-world datasets, including the challenging KITTI360 dataset.

1. Introduction
Generating photorealistic urban scenes has many applications in simulation, gaming and virtual reality. Unfortunately, designing diverse urban scenes with novel 3D visual
content is typically expensive and time-consuming as it requires the expertise of professional artists.
Recent advances in generative models have demonstrated a promising direction to reduce the cost via learning
to generate images from data. Ideally, the generated scenes
should be controllable in terms of camera pose and 3D con* Corresponding author.

Panoptic
Prior

Camera Move
Forward

Object
Editing

Stuff
Editing

Figure 1: Illustration. UrbanGIRAFFE generates a photorealistic image given a sampled panoptic prior in the form
of a semantic voxel grid and object layout. Our method
enables diverse controllability regarding camera pose, instance, and stuff.
tent. For example, the camera should be able to move freely
in the scene with six degrees of freedom. The poses of instantiated objects (e.g., cars) should be able to be manipulated independently. Furthermore, the layout of the scene
should be controllable.
There are many attempts to generate photorealistic urban images. Several methods study semantic image synthesis to transfer a 2D semantic segmentation map to an RGB
urban scene image [25, 53, 57]. However, when changing the camera poses, the generated images across multiple frames may not be consistent using such 2D generative
models. Recently, 3D-aware generative models have witnessed rapid progress by lifting the generation process to the
3D space. Despite achieving multi-view consistency, most
existing 3D-aware generative models are limited to objectcentric images, e.g., faces and cars [58, 10, 9]. There are
a few attempts to generate scene images in a compositonal
manner [36, 49, 47, 69]. However, all these methods struggle to learn a good geometry of the background and hence

9199

