This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Introducing Language Guidance in Prompt-based Continual Learning
Muhammad Gul Zain Ali Khan1,2 Muhammad Ferjad Naeem3 Luc Van Gool3
Federico Tombari4,5 Muhammad Zeshan Afzal1,2
1

RPTU

2

DFKI

3

ETH Zürich

4

TUM

5

Didier Stricker1,2

Google

Abstract
Continual Learning aims to learn a single model on a
sequence of tasks without having access to data from previous tasks. The biggest challenge in the domain still remains catastrophic forgetting: a loss in performance on
seen classes of earlier tasks. Some existing methods rely
on an expensive replay buffer to store a chunk of data from
previous tasks. This, while promising, becomes expensive
when the number of tasks becomes large or data can not be
stored for privacy reasons. As an alternative, prompt-based
methods have been proposed that store the task information
in a learnable prompt pool. This prompt pool instructs a
frozen image encoder on how to solve each task. While the
model faces a disjoint set of classes in each task in this setting, we argue that these classes can be encoded to the same
embedding space of a pre-trained language encoder. In this
work, we propose Language Guidance for Prompt-based
Continual Learning (LGCL) as a plug-in for prompt-based
methods. LGCL is model agnostic and introduces language
guidance at the task level in the prompt pool and at the class
level on the output feature of the vision encoder. We show
with extensive experimentation that LGCL consistently improves the performance of prompt-based continual learning
methods to set a new state-of-the art. LGCL achieves these
performance improvements without needing any additional
learnable parameters.

1. Introduction
In Class Incremental Continual Learning, we task a model
to learn a sequence of non-overlapping tasks consisting of
new classes being introduced at each task. This presents a
challenge different from the common supervised learning
setting as the data distribution is continuously changing, and
the independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data assumption does not hold. As a result, a model trained with our
usual training recipe of optimising a loss function on incoming data leads to catastrophic forgetting [33] i.e., the model
forgets the previously seen classes since the loss only incentivises performance on the current task. There have been

Cat

Car

Task 1

Task 2

Dog

Truck

Semantic Space of Language
Ocean
Office Building

Task 3

Task N

Hospital

Pasture

Figure 1: In Computer Vision, Continual Learning in the
class incremental setting aims to learn a single model on
a sequence of tasks where each task consists of disjoint
classes. While each task represents a disjoint set of classes,
we argue that they can be mapped to the same semantic space
of a pretrained language encoder. Based on this principle,
we propose to introduce language guidance in a continual
learner to mitigate catastrophic forgetting.

several attempts to address this challenge. One popular line
of works aims to identify model parameters most important
for performance on each task and prevent them from changing too much through subsequent tasks [19, 65, 25, 1]. These
regularization-based methods, however, achieve sub-optimal
performance as we move to very complex tasks where the
model needs to share parameters between different tasks to
learn a robust representation.
Another line of work takes a very simple but effective approach of storing a chunk of training data. Rehearsal-based
methods [7, 8, 12] maintain a rehearsal buffer which is a
finite set of training data stored across each task. The key intuition is that to prevent forgetting on previously seen classes,
the model simply uses the examples in the rehearsal buffer
when optimising for new tasks. However, these methods
require large buffer sizes as the number of tasks increases

11463

