This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DALL-E VAL: Probing the Reasoning Skills and Social Biases of
Text-to-Image Generation Models
Jaemin Cho

Abhay Zala
Mohit Bansal
UNC Chapel Hill

{jmincho, aszala, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Recently, DALL-E [45], a multimodal transformer language model, and its variants including diffusion models
have shown high-quality text-to-image generation capabilities. However, despite the realistic image generation results, there has not been a detailed analysis of how to evaluate such models. In this work, we investigate the visual
reasoning capabilities and social biases of different text-toimage models, covering both multimodal transformer language models and diffusion models. First, we measure three
visual reasoning skills: object recognition, object counting, and spatial relation understanding. For this, we propose PAINT S KILLS, a compositional diagnostic evaluation
dataset that measures these skills. Despite the high-fidelity
image generation capability, a large gap exists between the
performance of recent models and the upper bound accuracy in object counting and spatial relation understanding
skills. Second, we assess the gender and skin tone biases
by measuring the gender/skin tone distribution of generated images across various professions and attributes. We
demonstrate that recent text-to-image generation models
learn specific biases about gender and skin tone from web
image-text pairs. We hope our work will help guide future
progress in improving text-to-image generation models on
visual reasoning skills and learning socially unbiased representations.1

1. Introduction
Generating images from textual descriptions based on
machine learning is an active research area [21]. Recently,
DALL-E [45], a 12B parameter transformer [60] trained to
generate images from text, has shown a diverse set of generation capabilities, including creating anthropomorphic objects, editing images, and rendering text, which previous
models have never shown. Even though DALL-E and its
variants have gained much attention, there has not been a
1 Code and data: https://github.com/j-min/DallEval

Ours

Previous Evaluations
Image-Text
Alignment

Image
Quality

Visual
Reasoning
Skills

Social
Bias

Can the original caption
be inferred from images?

Do images look
realistic?

Does model understand
objects, counts, and
spatial relations?

Does model have
gender / skin tone /
attribute bias?

“a bicycle parked on
a street”

“a photo of a dog”

“two dogs”

“a person who works
as a doctor”

Text-to-Image Generation Model

Captioning
/ Retrieval

Distance from
Real Images

Object
Detection

Gender / Skin tone /
Attribute Detection

CIDEr /
R-precision

FID

Skill-based
Accuracy

Gender / Skin tone
/ Attribute Bias

Figure 1. Overview of our proposed evaluation process for text-toimage generation models. In addition to conventional image-text
alignment and image quality evaluation, we propose to measure
visual reasoning skills (Sec. 4.1) and social biases (Sec. 4.2) of
models. The example images are generated with Stable Diffusion.

concrete quantitative analysis of what they can do.
Most works have only evaluated their text-to-image generation models with two types of automated metrics [21]: 1)
image-text alignment [69, 30, 26] - whether the generated
images align with the semantics of the text descriptions;
2) image quality [52, 25] - whether the generated images
look similar to images from training data. Hence, to provide novel insights into the abilities and limitations of textto-image generation models, we propose to evaluate their
visual reasoning skills and social biases, in addition to the
previously proposed image-text alignment and image quality metrics. Since the original DALL-E checkpoint is not
available, in our experiments, we choose four popular textto-image generation models that publicly release their code
and checkpoints: DALL-ESmall [64], minDALL-E [33], Stable Diffusion [49], and Karlo [35].
First, we introduce PAINT S KILLS, a compositional di-

3043

