This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ELITE: Encoding Visual Concepts into Textual Embeddings
for Customized Text-to-Image Generation
Yuxiang Wei1,2
1

Yabo Zhang1

Harbin Institute of Technology

2

Zhilong Ji3

Jinfeng Bai3

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

Lei Zhang2

3

Tomorrow Advancing Life

Abstract
In addition to the unprecedented ability in imaginary
creation, large text-to-image models are expected to take
customized concepts in image generation. Existing works
generally learn such concepts in an optimization-based
manner, yet bringing excessive computation or memory burden. In this paper, we instead propose a learning-based encoder, which consists of a global and a local mapping networks for fast and accurate customized text-to-image generation. In specific, the global mapping network projects
the hierarchical features of a given image into multiple
“new” words in the textual word embedding space, i.e.,
one primary word for well-editable concept and other auxiliary words to exclude irrelevant disturbances (e.g., background). In the meantime, a local mapping network injects
the encoded patch features into cross attention layers to
provide omitted details, without sacrificing the editability
of primary concepts. We compare our method with existing
optimization-based approaches on a variety of user-defined
concepts, and demonstrate that our method enables highfidelity inversion and more robust editability with a significantly faster encoding process. Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/csyxwei/ELITE.

1. Introduction
Recently, large-scale diffusion models [3, 29, 32, 34]
have demonstrated impressive superiority in text-to-image
generation. By training with billions of image-text pairs,
large text-to-image diffusion models have exhibited excellent semantic understanding ability, and generate diverse
and photo-realistic images being accordant to the given text
prompts. Owning to their unprecedentedly creative capabilities, these models have been applied to various tasks, such
as image editing [16, 23], data augmentation [24], and even
artistic creation [26].
However, despite diverse and general generation, users
may expect to create imaginary instantiates with undescribable personalized concepts [18], e.g., “corgi” in Fig. 1.

Wangmeng Zuo1,4( )
4

Peng Cheng Lab

A photo of a S*

A S* wearing sunglasses

Input

invert

S*
Ours
0.05s

Custom Diffusion
6min

Dreambooth
15min

Textual Inversion
50 min

Figure 1. Given an input image, customized text-to-image generation learns a pseudo-word (S*) in word embedding space to represent the target concept. With S*, one can flexibly synthesize or
edit the concept with text prompts. The running time to learn a
new concept is also listed, and our method learns the new concept
much faster than others.

To this end, many recent studies have been conducted for
customized text-to-image generation [9, 15, 18, 33], which
aims to learn a specific concept from a small set of userprovided images (e.g., 3∼5 images). Then, users can flexibly compose the learned concepts into new scenes, e.g., A
S* wearing sunglasses in Fig. 1. Given a small image set depicting the target concept, Textual Inversion [15]
learned a new pseudo-word (i.e., S*) in the well-editable
textual word embedding space of text encoder to represent
the user-defined concept. DreamBooth [33] finetuned the
entire diffusion model to accurately align the target concept
with a unique identifier. Custom Diffusion [18] balanced
the fidelity and memory by selectively finetuning K, V mapping parameters in cross attention layers.
Albeit flexible generation has been achieved by [15, 18,
33], the computational efficiency remains a challenge to obtain the textual embedding of a visual concept. Existing
methods usually adopt the per-concept optimization formulation, which requires several or tens of minutes to learn
a single concept. As shown in Fig. 1, the Custom Diffusion [18], which is among the fastest existing algorithms,
still takes around 6 minutes to learn one concept, which is
infeasible for online applications. In contrast, in GAN inversion, many efficient learning-based methods [31] have

15943

