This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PIRNet: Privacy-Preserving Image Restoration Network via Wavelet Lifting
Xin Deng1 , Chao Gao1 , Mai Xu* 2
1

2

School of Cyber Science and Technology, Beihang University, Beijing, China
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{cindydeng, EsthetGao, MaiXu}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
The cloud-based multimedia service becomes increasingly popular in the last decade, however, it poses a serious
threat to the client’s privacy. To address this issue, many
methods utilized image encryption as a defense mechanism.
However, the encrypted images look quite different from
the natural images, making them vulnerable to attackers.
In this paper, we propose a novel method namely PIRNet,
which operates privacy-preserving image restoration in the
steganographic domain. Compared to existing methods, our
method offers significant advantages in terms of invisibility and security. Specifically, we first propose a wavelet
Lifting-based Invertible Hiding (LIH) network to conceal
the secret image into the stego image. Then, a Lifting-based
Secure Restoration (LSR) network is utilized to perform image restoration in the steganographic domain. Since the
secret image remains hidden throughout the whole image
restoration process, the privacy of clients can be largely ensured. In addition, since the stego image looks visually the
same as the cover image, the attackers can hardly discover
it, which significantly improves the security. The experimental results on different datasets show the superiority of
our PIRNet over the existing methods on various privacypreserving image restoration tasks, including image denoising, deblurring and super-resolution.

1. Introduction
Recently, the cloud-based multimedia services have developed rapidly with the fast growing cloud computing
technology. The Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) [5] such as
Amazon Web Service (AWS) [1] and Google Cloud Platform (GCP) [2] provides strong computing resource to the
clients, which allows them to perform efficient image processing online. However, image processing in the cloud
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. An illustration of the working process of the proposed
method for privacy-preserving image restoration over cloud. The
low-quality (LQ) secret image is first concealed into a stego image.
Then, the secure image restoration is operated on the stego image
to preserve privacy. Finally, the high-quality (HQ) secret image
can be revealed from the processed stego image.

poses a serious threat to the client’s privacy. A hacker or
a malicious service provider can easily access the clients’
private photos, and discover their personal identity, social
connections, and visited places for unauthorized uses.
To tackle the security and privacy issue, many researchers have dived into the area of privacy-preserving image processing [17][34][28]. In these methods, image encryption is regarded as an important line of defense for privacy protection. They first utilized the homomorphic encryption [23] method to encrypt images. Then, the image processing is operated in the encrypted domain without
decrypting the source image to achieve privacy protection.
However, these encryption based methods have a big disadvantage, i.e., the encrypted images look quite different from
the original images, making them more vulnerable to the attackers. Additionally, they rely on complex homomorphic
crypto-system for encryption, which can be computationally heavy for real-time applications.
Different from the existing methods, we propose a novel
method to operate privacy-preserving image restoration in
the steganographic domain, which has a significant advan-

22368

