This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SEFD: Learning to Distill Complex Pose and Occlusion
ChangHee Yang∗1
Kyeongbo Kong∗2
SungJun Min∗1,3
Dongyoon Wee4
Ho-Deok Jang4
Geonho Cha4
SukJu Kang†1
1
2
Sogang University , Pusan National University , Samsung Electronics3 , NAVER Cloud Corp4
{yangchanghee2251, kkb4723}@gmail.com, sung98.min@samsung.com
{dongyoon.wee, hodeok.jang, geonho.cha}@navercorp.com, sjkang@sogang.ac.kr

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of three-dimensional
(3D) human mesh estimation in complex poses and occluded situations. Although many improvements have
been made in 3D human mesh estimation using the twodimensional (2D) pose with occlusion between humans,
occlusion from complex poses and other objects remains
a consistent problem. Therefore, we propose the novel
Skinned Multi-Person Linear (SMPL) Edge Feature Distillation (SEFD) that demonstrates robustness to complex
poses and occlusions, without increasing the number of parameters compared to the baseline model. The model generates an SMPL overlapping edge similar to the ground
truth that contains target person boundary and occlusion
information, performing subsequent feature distillation in
a simple edge map. We also perform experiments on various benchmarks and exhibit fidelity both qualitatively and
quantitatively. Extensive experiments prove that our method
outperforms the state-of-the-art method by 2.8% in MPJPE
and 1.9% in MPVPE on a benchmark 3DPW dataset in the
presence of domain gap. Also, our method is superior in
3DPW-OCC, 3DPW-PC, RH-Dataset, OCHuman, CrowdPose, and LSP dataset in which occlusion, complex pose,
and domain gap exist. The code and occlusion & complex
pose annotation will be available at https://github.
com/YangChangHee/ICCV2023_SEFD_RELEASE/.

1. Introduction
Human mesh estimation, which has been used recently
in various applications such as digital human and action
recognition, targets to generate a 3D mesh by estimating
3D semantic human joints and human mesh vertex locations
from 2D input images. However, directly estimating 3D
mesh information from input 2D images poses a significant
* These authors contributed equally to this work
† Corresponding author

challenge due to the ambiguity in estimating body part exact locations. Especially in complex pose cases (e.g., yoga,
crouching, twist) or those where occlusion between humans
occur, the performance deteriorates. To address these problems, recent studies [1, 3] employ additional information
predicted by 2D pose detectors. Specifically, Choi et al.
[1] illustrated the problem of global average pooling and
utilized 2D pose information that includes the target person in the feature map as a resolution. Khirodkar et al.
[3] proposed the center map, modularized in the encoder,
as well as two losses specifically, the interpenetration loss
and depth ordering loss to solve the occlusion between humans. These studies have improved 3D mesh estimation accuracy by incorporating the prior 2D pose knowledge, but
they still struggle with occlusions and complex poses in the
wild datasets containing a large domain gap.
First, a problem with the baseline 3D mesh (3DCrowdNet [1]) is that it cannot be properly extracted as in Figs. 1
(a) and (b). The 2D pose for each image is estimated properly, but the 3D mesh estimate is inaccurate. Therefore, additional structural information is essential to estimate complex poses. Second, if an object is occluded by other people
or objects, the 3D mesh estimation accuracy decreases. In
Figs. 1 (c) and (d), the baseline model cannot estimate an
appropriate mesh due to severe occlusion, necessitating additional guidance on occlusion.
To avoid ambiguioty, we define ”complex pose” as cases
which the movement of a joint is large. More specifically, a
pose in which a joint exceeds its Range of Motion (ROM)
[2] with a margin as shown in Fig. 2. ROM denotes the
extent or limit to which a part of the body can move around
a joint or a fixed point; the totality of capable movements of
a joint.
This paper proposes a novel methodology, SMPL Edge
Feature Distillation (SEFD) which can solve occlusion and
complex poses as limitations of 3D pose estimation. To
this end, Fig. 3 displays a novel SMPL overlapping edge
serving as a ground-truth (GT) edge map. To exploit this

14941

