This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DQS3D: Densely-matched Quantization-aware Semi-supervised 3D Detection
Huan-ang Gao1,2

Beiwen Tian1,2 Pengfei Li1,2 Hao Zhao1 Guyue Zhou1
1
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), THU
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, THU

{gha20, tbw18, li-pf22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

{zhaohao, zhouguyue}@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of semi-supervised
3D object detection, which is of great importance considering the high annotation cost for cluttered 3D indoor scenes.
We resort to the robust and principled framework of selfteaching, which has triggered notable progress for semisupervised learning recently. While this paradigm is natural for image-level or pixel-level prediction, adapting it
to the detection problem is challenged by the issue of proposal matching. Prior methods are based upon two-stage
pipelines, matching heuristically selected proposals generated in the first stage and resulting in spatially sparse
training signals. In contrast, we propose the first semisupervised 3D detection algorithm that works in the singlestage manner and allows spatially dense training signals. A
fundamental issue of this new design is the quantization error caused by point-to-voxel discretization, which inevitably
leads to misalignment between two transformed views in
the voxel domain. To this end, we derive and implement
closed-form rules that compensate this misalignment onthe-fly. Our results are significant, e.g., promoting ScanNet mAP@0.5 from 35.2% to 48.5% using 20% annotation.
Codes and data are publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
3D object detection (and reconstruction/tracking) [3, 25,
28, 37, 42, 62] is a fundamental problem in 3D scene understanding [17, 26, 51, 57, 59, 63], but its progress still lags
behind 2D detection due to a high annotation cost. As
such, semi-supervised 3D object detection [48, 56, 60] has
recently attracted much attention as it holds the promise to
improve accuracy using enormous unlabeled data. These
semi-supervised 3D detectors are trained with a widely recognized framework called mean teachers (MT) [44]. While
semi-supervised image classification [52] and semantic segmentation [2] using MT boil down to pairing predictions at
1 Code: https://github.com/AIR-DISCOVER/DQS3D

Comparison between Dense Matching and Proposal Matching
45
(PM+PLF)

PM
PLF

Proposal Matching
Pseudo Label Filtering
Pseudo Label Spatial
PLSE
Ensembling
DM
Dense Matching

128
(PM)
768
(PM+PLSE)
23288
(DM+PLF)
23288
(DM+PLF)

Figure 1: This figure demonstrates the average count of box
pairs in representative proposal matching methods SESS
[60], 3DIoUMatch [48] and Proficient Teachers [56]. Our
dense matching formulation (DQS3D) allows significantly
more box pairs and spatially dense training signals. The xaxis is distorted according to a squared root mapping.
the image or pixel level, how to pair predictions between
two sets of 3D boxes remains an open question.
This open question is not yet well answered by prior
methods [48, 56, 60], as demonstrated by the analysis in
Fig. 1. Shown by the upper three bars, they only exploit
a very limited number of box pairs for MT training and we
attribute this limitation to the two-stage architecture (i.e.,
VoteNet [37]) they are built upon. VoteNet makes final box
predictions using seed proposals extracted by the first stage
and only a limited number of proposal pairs are aligned.
Being densely-matched. The emergence of fully convolutional 3D detection [39] inspires us to address the aforementioned issue using densely matched boxes, and it turns
out fruitful. As shown by the lower two bars in Fig. 1, our
method allows much more box pairs for MT training even
after label filtering. This change leads to spatially dense
training signals that translate to notable performance improvement (Table. 1). In one word, our method predicts
one 3D box for each voxel, getting rid of the intermediate
proposal generation stage. Thus pairing teacher and stu-

21905

