This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fast and Accurate Transferability Measurement by Evaluating Intra-class
Feature Variance
Huiwen Xu
Seoul National University
Seoul, Republic of Korea

U Kang
Seoul National University
Seoul, Republic of Korea

xuhuiwen33@snu.ac.kr

ukang@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Given a set of pre-trained models, how can we quickly
and accurately find the most useful pre-trained model for a
downstream task? Transferability measurement is to quantify how transferable is a pre-trained model learned on a
source task to a target task. It is used for quickly ranking pre-trained models for a given task and thus becomes
a crucial step for transfer learning. Existing methods measure transferability as the discrimination ability of a source
model for a target data before transfer learning, which cannot accurately estimate the fine-tuning performance. Some
of them restrict the application of transferability measurement in selecting the best supervised pre-trained models
that have classifiers. It is important to have a general
method for measuring transferability that can be applied
in a variety of situations, such as selecting the best selfsupervised pre-trained models that do not have classifiers,
and selecting the best transferring layer for a target task.
In this work, we propose TMI (T RANSFERABILITY
M EASUREMENT WITH I NTRA - CLASS FEATURE VARI ANCE ), a fast and accurate algorithm to measure transferability. We view transferability as the generalization of a
pre-trained model on a target task by measuring intra-class
feature variance. Intra-class variance evaluates the adaptability of the model to a new task, which measures how
transferable the model is. Compared to previous studies
that estimate how discriminative the models are, intra-class
variance is more accurate than those as it does not require
an optimal feature extractor and classifier. Extensive experiments on real-world datasets show that TMI outperforms
competitors for selecting the top-5 best models, and exhibits
consistently better correlation in 13 out of 17 cases.

1. Introduction
Transfer learning is an important concept in the field
of machine learning, revolutionizing the way models are

Figure 1: Illustration of selecting the best pre-trained model
for a given target task.

trained and applied to various domains. Transfer learning
has proven to be particularly valuable when labeled data
in the target domain are scarce or costly to obtain. Within
the broader scope of transfer learning, several variants have
emerged, such as source-free domain adaptation [10, 27, 23,
7], multi-source transfer learning [16, 14, 7, 9], heterogeneous transfer learning [11, 15], and open-set domain adaptation [6, 21].
In transfer learning, fine-tuning a pre-trained model becomes a simple and effective way to improve the performance of a downstream task. A crucial step in transfer
learning is to quickly and accurately select the most helpful pre-trained model in a set of given pre-trained models.
Transferability measurement is to quantify how transferable
is a pre-trained model learned on a source task to a target
task. As shown in Figure. 1, transferability measurement is
used for ranking pre-trained models for a given task, and is
a crucial step for transfer learning.

11474

