This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Conditional Cross Attention Network for Multi-Space Embedding without
Entanglement in Only a SINGLE Network
Chull Hwan Song1

Taebaek Hwang1
1

Jooyoung Yoon1

Dealicious Inc.

2

Shunghyun Choi1

Yeong Hyeon Gu2 *

Sejong University

Abstract
Many studies in vision tasks have aimed to create effective embedding spaces for single-label object prediction
within an image. However, in reality, most objects possess
multiple specific attributes, such as shape, color, and length,
with each attribute composed of various classes. To apply
models in real-world scenarios, it is essential to be able
to distinguish between the granular components of an object. Conventional approaches to embedding multiple specific attributes into a single network often result in entanglement, where fine-grained features of each attribute cannot
be identified separately. To address this problem, we propose a Conditional Cross-Attention Network that induces
disentangled multi-space embeddings for various specific
attributes with only a single backbone. Firstly, we employ
a cross-attention mechanism to fuse and switch the information of conditions (specific attributes), and we demonstrate its effectiveness through a diverse visualization example. Secondly, we leverage the vision transformer for
the first time to a fine-grained image retrieval task and
present a simple yet effective framework compared to existing methods. Unlike previous studies where performance
varied depending on the benchmark dataset, our proposed
method achieved consistent state-of-the-art performance
on the FashionAI, DARN, DeepFashion, and Zappos50K
benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
ImageNet [2] is a representative benchmark dataset to
verify the visual feature learning effects of deep learning
models in the vision domain. However, each image has only
one label, which cannot fully explain the various features
of real objects. For example, a car can be identified with
various attributes such as category, color, and length, as in
Figure 1. As shown in Figure 1 (a), the general method of
forming embeddings for objects’ various attributes involves
constructing neural networks equal to the number of spe* Corresponding author

Figure 1: Multiple Networks vs Single Network for Multispace embedding. CCA means our proposed Conditional
Cross Attention Network.

cific attributes, and creating multiple embeddings for vision
tasks such as image classification [6, 22, 8] and retrieval
[10, 20]. Unlike conventional methods, this study presents
a technique that embeds various attributes into a single network. We refer to this technique as multi-space attributespecific embedding Figure 1 (b).
Embedding space aims to encapsulate feature similarities by mapping similar features to close points and dissimilar ones to farther points. However, when the model
attempts to learn multiple visual and semantic concepts simultaneously, the embedding space becomes complex, resulting in entanglement; thus, points corresponding to the
same semantic concept can be mapped in different regions.
Consequently, embedding multiple concepts in an image
into a single network is very challenging. Although previous studies attempted to solve this problem using convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [26, 13, 4, 20], they have
required intricate frameworks, such as the incorporation of
multiple attention modules or stages, in order to identify
specific local regions that contain attribute information.
Recently, there has been an increase in research related
to ViT [11], which outperforms existing CNN-based mod-

11112

