This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NLOS-NeuS: Non-line-of-sight Neural Implicit Surface
Yuki Fujimura1

Takahiro Kushida2
Takuya Funatomi1
Yasuhiro Mukaigawa1
1
2
Nara Institute of Science and Technology
Ritsumeikan University
{fujimura.yuki,funatomi,mukaigawa}@is.naist.jp, tkushida@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp

Abstract

1. Introduction
Many computer-vision applications are being integrated
into society. However, most are intended for visible scenes
from cameras. Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging [16, 38]
is used to infer invisible scenes occluded from the cameras. Figure 1(a) shows a typical confocal NLOS setup
[31], in which an ultra-fast light source and time-resolved
detector are collocated and the detector can only see a diffuse wall. Pulsed light from the light source is emitted
into the visible wall, and reflected light on the wall reaches
an NLOS scene. Reflected light in the NLOS scene then
bounces back to the detector via the relay wall. A timeresolved detectors for such NLOS imaging is a single photon avalanche diode (SPAD) [5] (top in Fig 1(b)). A SPAD
is capable of time-correlated single photon counting with

NLOS scene

Collocated
light source and detector

(a) NLOS setup

# of photons

Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging is conducted to infer invisible scenes from indirect light on visible objects.
The neural transient field (NeTF) was proposed for representing scenes as neural radiance fields in NLOS scenes.
We propose NLOS neural implicit surface (NLOS-NeuS),
which extends the NeTF to neural implicit surfaces with
a signed distance function (SDF) for reconstructing threedimensional surfaces in NLOS scenes. We introduce two
constraints as loss functions for correctly learning an SDF
to avoid non-zero level-set surfaces. We also introduce
a lower bound constraint of an SDF based on the geometry of the first-returning photons. The experimental results indicate that these constraints are essential for learning a correct SDF in NLOS scenes. Compared with previous methods with discretized representation, NLOS-NeuS
with the neural continuous representation enables us to reconstruct smooth surfaces while preserving fine details in
NLOS scenes. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first study on neural implicit surfaces with volume rendering
in NLOS scenes. Project page: https://yfujimura.
github.io/nlos-neus/

Relay wall

Arrival time

(b) SPAD

(c) DLCT

(d) NLOS-NeuS

Figure 1. (a) Confocal NLOS setup, (b) SPAD system and measured transients, (c) NLOS surface reconstruction with DLCT
[45] and (d) with our NLOS-NeuS. Neural implicit surface representation can enhance quality of reconstructed surfaces in NLOS
scenes.

pico-second resolution [40]. Measured data with such a
time-resolved detector are called transients, in which the
number of counted photons or intensity is recorded at each
arrival time (bottom in Fig. 1(b)). One approach for NLOS
imaging is to use the transients on the relay wall as input.
We aim to reconstruct three-dimensional (3D) surfaces in
NLOS scenes from the transients, similar to previous studies [13, 34, 36, 37, 42, 45].
We extend the neural transient field (NeTF) [35] for neural implicit surface representation in NLOS scenes. The
neural radiance field (NeRF) [26] is a powerful paradigm
for scene representation, in which density and viewdependent color at each scene position are continuously pa-

10532

