This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FULLER: Unified Multi-modality Multi-task 3D Perception via Multi-level
Gradient Calibration
Zhijian Huang1 * Sihao Lin2 * Guiyu Liu3 *
Xiaojun Chang5,6
1

Mukun Luo4 Chaoqiang Ye3
Xiaodan Liang1,6†

Hang Xu3

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University 2 RMIT University 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 5 University of Technology Sydney 6 MBZUAI

huangzhj56@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {linsihao6,guiyuliou,chromexbjxh,cxj273,xdliang328}@gmail.com,
luomukun@sjtu.edu.cn, yechaoqiang@huawei.com

Abstract
Multi-modality fusion and multi-task learning are becoming trendy in 3D autonomous driving scenario, considering robust prediction and computation budget. However,
naively extending the existing framework to the domain of
multi-modality multi-task learning remains ineffective and
even poisonous due to the notorious modality bias and task
conflict. Previous works manually coordinate the learning
framework with empirical knowledge, which may lead to
sub-optima. To mitigate the issue, we propose a novel yet
simple multi-level gradient calibration learning framework
across tasks and modalities during optimization. Specifically, the gradients, produced by the task heads and used to
update the shared backbone, will be calibrated at the backbone’s last layer to alleviate the task conflict. Before the
calibrated gradients are further propagated to the modality branches of the backbone, their magnitudes will be calibrated again to the same level, ensuring the downstream
tasks pay balanced attention to different modalities. Experiments on large-scale benchmark nuScenes demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed method, e.g., an absolute
14.4% mIoU improvement on map segmentation and 1.4%
mAP improvement on 3D detection, advancing the application of 3D autonomous driving in the domain of multimodality fusion and multi-task learning. We also discuss
the links between modalities and tasks.

1. Introduction
3D perception task plays an important role in autonomous driving. Previous works are mainly developed
on single modality [44, 20, 16, 43, 7, 35, 21, 41, 27, 28] and
different perception tasks are separated into individual mod* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Images

Images

Point cloud

Fusion

Map segmentation 3D Detection

(a) BEVFormer

3D Detection

(b) Transfusion

Images

Point cloud

Fusion

Map segmentation 3D Detection

(c) Fuller (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparison of paradigms on 3D perception. (a)
BEVFormer [21] focuses on multi-task learning, which could save
the computation burden and thus facilitate the depolyment of realworld application. (b) Transfusion [2] is proposed for multimodality fusion for robust prediction since point cloud and images
are complementary. (c) Our proposed Fuller is a unified framework that integrates these ingredients organically by solving the
notorious problems of modality bias and task conflict.

els [2, 19, 18, 45, 5]. Often we wish to leverage complementary modalities to produce robust prediction and integrate
multiple tasks within a model for the sake of computation
budget. For instance, with the development of hardware,
it is affordable to deploy both LiDAR and camera on a car,
which are responsible to provide spatial information and semantic information. Integrating semantic-complementary
vision tasks within a framework would greatly facilitate the
deployment of real-world application [3].
Recent advances have stayed tuned for multi-modality
fusion [30, 23] and multi-task learning [47, 21] in the applications of 3D autonomous driving scenario. Meanwhile, it
is of great interest to unify multi-modality fusion and multitask learning within a framework. In fact, it is unlikely to
expect that dumping all the individual components into one
framework and they would function organically. We build
up a competitive baseline based on BEVFusion [30], which

3502

