This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ALIP: Adaptive Language-Image Pre-training with Synthetic Caption
Kaicheng Yang1 , Jiankang Deng* 2 , Xiang An1 , Jiawei Li1 , Ziyong Feng1 ,
Jia Guo3 , Jing Yang3 , Tongliang Liu4
1
2
3
4
DeepGlint
Huawei UKRD
InsightFace
University of Sydney
{kaichengyang,xiangan,jiaweili,ziyongfeng}@deepglint.com, tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au
{jiankangdeng,guojia,y.jing2016}@gmail.com

Abstract
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) has
significantly boosted the performance of various visionlanguage tasks by scaling up the dataset with image-text
pairs collected from the web. However, the presence of intrinsic noise and unmatched image-text pairs in web data
can potentially affect the performance of representation
learning. To address this issue, we first utilize the OFA
model to generate synthetic captions that focus on the image content. The generated captions contain complementary information that is beneficial for pre-training. Then, we
propose an Adaptive Language-Image Pre-training (ALIP),
a bi-path model that integrates supervision from both raw
text and synthetic caption. As the core components of ALIP,
the Language Consistency Gate (LCG) and Description
Consistency Gate (DCG) dynamically adjust the weights
of samples and image-text/caption pairs during the training process. Meanwhile, the adaptive contrastive loss
can effectively reduce the impact of noise data and enhances the efficiency of pre-training data. We validate
ALIP with experiments on different scales of models and
pre-training datasets. Experiments results show that ALIP
achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple downstream tasks including zero-shot image-text retrieval and
linear probe. To facilitate future research, the code and pretrained models are released at https://github.com/
deepglint/ALIP.

1. Introduction
With the development of mobile networks and social
platforms, there has been an explosion in the production
of image-text pairs on a massive scale [3, 13]. This unprecedented abundance of data has laid a solid foundation
for vision-language pre-training [32, 15]. Through imagetext alignment on large-scale data, the Contrastive Lan* corresponding author.

Figure 1. Examples from the YFCC15M dataset to illustrate the
mismatched (left) and matched (right) image-text pairs. The synthetic caption is generated from the OFA [37] model. The raw text
description “Leisure Sunday” is less aligned with the raw image in
the left sample, while the synthetic caption “A woman sitting on a
step reading a book” is a more accurate representation.

guage–Image Pre-training (CLIP) method [32] has demonstrated huge success in multi-modal learning. Specifically,
CLIP learns two separate unimodal encoders for image and
text using a contrastive loss, one of the most effective losses
for representation learning [36, 14, 5, 7]. Nevertheless, the
negative impact of the noise in the web-crawled data has
been largely overlooked, shadowed by the performance gain
achieved from scaling up the training data [31, 1].
To facilitate research on large-scale multi-modal models,
LAION400M [34] and LAION5B [33] were released, comprising 400 million and 5 billion image-text pairs respectively, which were filtered using the CLIP model. However, the current offline filtering approach results in a substantial loss of training data, as the original dataset contains 5 billion image-text pairs. Furthermore, this approach may introduce biases due to the limited representation power of the pre-trained model used for filtering.
Despite efforts to curate data for high-quality image-text
pairs (e.g., LAION [34, 33] and YFCC100M [35]), noisy
and poorly-aligned pairs still exist in existing image-text
datasets, which can potentially impact the performance of
representation learning.
In Fig. 1, we present two samples from YFCC15M. The
raw text of the right sample (“Drink beer”) is correct and

2922

