This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Equivariance in State-of-the-Art Supervised
Depth and Normal Predictors
Yuanyi Zhong, Anand Bhattad, Yu-Xiong Wang, David Forsyth
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{yuanyiz2, bhattad2, yxw, daf}@illinois.edu

Image Crops

Abstract
Dense depth and surface normal predictors should possess the equivariant property to cropping-and-resizing –
cropping the input image should result in cropping the same
output image. However, we find that state-of-the-art depth
and normal predictors, despite having strong performances,
surprisingly do not respect equivariance. The problem exists even when crop-and-resize data augmentation is employed during training. To remedy this, we propose an
equivariant regularization technique, consisting of an averaging procedure and a self-consistency loss, to explicitly
promote cropping-and-resizing equivariance in depth and
normal networks. Our approach can be applied to both
CNN and Transformer architectures, does not incur extra
cost during testing, and notably improves the supervised
and semi-supervised learning performance of dense predictors on Taskonomy tasks. Finally, finetuning with our
loss on unlabeled images improves not only equivariance
but also accuracy of state-of-the-art depth and normal predictors when evaluated on NYU-v2.

1. Introduction
Depth regression [2, 14, 24, 29, 38, 40, 42, 43, 69, 71, 72]
and surface normal regression [1, 12, 22, 57] are image-toimage dense prediction tasks that involve predicting an output image of the same size as the input image. This contrasts with image classification, where only one or a few
category labels are predicted per image. A shared feature
among depth and normal prediction tasks is that they naturally require equivariance, such that a geometric transform
(e.g., random cropping) applied to the input image results in
the same transform to the output image [8, 15, 28, 30], when
the effect (scale of the depth prediction) of camera intrinsic
change due to cropping is accounted for. This is because the
relative depths and normals are derived from the underlying
geometrical and physical properties of the scene that are not
affected by viewport changes. Consequently, a good depth

Depth

Surface Normal

Figure 1. State-of-the-art depth and surface normal predictors fail
to capture equivariance, while we know equivariance needs to hold
for an ideal depth/normal predictor (when adjusted for prediction
scale and offset). We crop and resize two patches (red & blue)
from the same scene, then extract depths/normals with pre-trained
models from [42] (MiDaS-v3) and [1]. We notice clear discrepancies between the predictions of the two crops, as highlighted by
the yellow boxes. The same issue exists in other depth predictors
(Figure 2) and dense prediction tasks as well (supplementary).

or normal predictor must have the equivariant property.
To our surprise, we find state-of-the-art well-engineered
depth and normal predictors often fail at equivariance. We
investigate two recent models: the MiDaS CNN-based
(v2.1) and Transformer-based (v3.0) depth predictors from
[42,43] and the uncertainty-guided CNN-based surface normal predictor from [1]. We generate a pair of resized crops
of the same test image from NYU-v2 [49], extract predictions with the networks, and measure equivariance by comparing and computing the mean errors between the predictions of the two crops. A more equivariant network would
produce smaller errors from this procedure. We discover
that the examined depth and surface normal predictors do
not handle equivariance to cropping very well, as shown in
Figure 1. There are prominent, sometimes structural, inconsistencies in the predictions of the two crops. For this
particular scene, the mean error induced by cropping is significant – as large as 12.6% absolute relative error (AbsRel)
between crops for depth prediction, making it compara-

21775

