This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PADDLES: Phase-Amplitude Spectrum Disentangled Early Stopping for
Learning with Noisy Labels
Huaxi Huang1 *† , Hui Kang2† , Sheng Liu3 , Olivier Salvado1 ,
Thierry Rakotoarivelo1 , Dadong Wang1 , Tongliang Liu2‡
1
Data61, CSIRO, 2 The University of Sydney, 3 NYU Center for Data Science

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are powerful in
learning patterns of different vision tasks, but they are sensitive to label noise and may overfit to noisy labels during
training. The early stopping strategy averts updating CNNs
during the early training phase and is widely employed in
the presence of noisy labels. Motivated by biological findings that the amplitude spectrum (AS) and phase spectrum
(PS) in the frequency domain play different roles in the animal’s vision system, we observe that PS, which captures
more semantic information, can increase the robustness of
CNNs to label noise, more so than AS can. We thus propose early stops at different times for AS and PS by disentangling the features of some layer(s) into AS and PS using Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) during training. Our
proposed Phase-AmplituDe DisentangLed Early Stopping
(PADDLES) method is shown to be effective on both synthetic and real-world label-noise datasets. PADDLES outperforms other early stopping methods and obtains stateof-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Learning from noisy labels (LNL) [1, 34] is an active
area of research within the deep learning community [45,
13, 38, 15, 67, 64, 69, 21]. Noisy labels are common in
real-world applications [61, 56, 66, 49], and trustworthy AI
should be robust to mislabelling.
It has been argued that CNNs learn first the actual pattern
before overfitting the noise [3], which inspired many works
in LNL [15, 58, 27, 28, 63, 32, 31]. A training strategy is
early stopping (ES), which stops the gradient-based optimization at a specific early training step. Due to its effectiveness, ES is widely applied in current LNL models and
has achieved promising performance [53, 27, 39, 4, 31].
* Project lead. † Co-first authors. ‡ Corresponding Author: Tongliang
Liu (tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au). Our codes are available at
https://github.com/CoderHHX/PADDLES.

The frequency and spatial domains are alternative codes
for depicting signal data such as images and text [42, 50].
Different frequency components contain different information [7]. The amplitude spectrum (AS) quantifies how much
of each sinusoidal component is present, while the phase
spectrum (PS) reveals the location of each sinusoidal component within an image. Biological justification and psychological patterns testing [6, 47, 14] demonstrate that the
response of cells in the primary visual cortex (V1) is closely
related to the local AS for specific image patterns (frequency and orientation). That is, the AS component usually represents the intensity of the patterns in the image. On
the other hand, previous qualitative and quantitative studies [7, 14] indicate that the PS is the key to locating salient
object areas and holds visible structured information for vision recognition [41, 12, 26], thus contains more semantic
information than the AS.
As a robust vision system, human vision focuses on semantic parts during object recognition, and relies more on
the image components related to the PS than the AS [41, 14,
26, 8]. This system builds a strong connection between semantic feature space and label space, helping humans ‘understand’ the actual correlation between objects and their
corresponding identifiers (labels). The human visual system
is very robust to label noise. However, CNNs profit from
human unperceivable high-frequency information in images [22, 57]. Without adequate regulations, CNNs model
the correlation of objects and their labels mainly based on
the connection between AS and the given annotations. Such
over-dependence is demonstrated as the leading cause of
their sensitivity to image perturbation and overconfidence in
out-of-distribution (OOD) detection [8, 20]. We argue that
CNNs’ over-dependence of connection between the less semantic AS and labels may spoil their recognition robustness, resulting in their vulnerability to label noise.
To investigate the impact of label noise on deep models trained with different image components, we used DFT
to transform raw images from CIFAR-10 [25] into AS and
PS. Then, three ResNet-18 models [17] were trained using
standard cross-entropy loss with raw images, AS, and PS

16719

