This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BallGAN: 3D-aware Image Synthesis with a Spherical Background

FG reconstruction

Real Image

Minjung Shin1* Yunji Seo1 Jeongmin Bae1 Young Sun Choi1
Hyunsu Kim2 Hyeran Byun1 Youngjung Uh1†
Yonsei University1 NAVER AI Lab2

Rendered image

Novel view-synthesis
with different BG

Rendered
image

(a) Motivation

(b) Results on FFHQ/ AFHQv2-Cats

(c) Application

Figure 1: (a) 3D space (top) and an image rendered from the white camera (bottom). We are inspired by a 3D graphics
technique in which the foreground is represented as a 3D model and the background is approximated as a 2D surface, yet
resulting in a realistic appearance on the rendered image. (b) Our method produces high-quality 3D shapes, images, and
foreground alpha masks without extra supervision. (c) Realistic novel view rendering on arbitrary backgrounds, even on real
image inversion.

Abstract
3D-aware GANs aim to synthesize realistic 3D scenes
that can be rendered in arbitrary camera viewpoints, generating high-quality images with well-defined geometry.
As 3D content creation becomes more popular, the ability
to generate foreground objects separately from the background has become a crucial property. Existing methods
have been developed regarding overall image quality, but
they can not generate foreground objects only and often
show degraded 3D geometry. In this work, we propose to
represent the background as a spherical surface for multiple reasons inspired by computer graphics. Our method
naturally provides foreground-only 3D synthesis facilitating easier 3D content creation. Furthermore, it improves
the foreground geometry of 3D-aware GANs and the training stability on datasets with complex backgrounds. Project
page: https://minjung-s.github.io/ballgan/
*Part of the work was done during an internship at NAVER AI Lab.
†Corresponding author

1. Introduction
Traditional generative adversarial networks (GANs) synthesize realistic images. Although they provide some control over the camera poses [36, 37, 15, 38], they lack explicit
3D understanding of the scenes. Recently, 3D-aware GANs
[27, 6, 35, 53] reformulate the generative procedure as modeling the potential 3D scenes and rendering them to images.
The state-of-the-art 3D-aware GANs [5, 14, 47] rely on neural radiance fields or their variants to represent 3D scenes.
Note that they can generate 3D scenes even without 3D supervision or multi-view supervision, rendering realistic images across different viewpoints. Although the quality of
images generated by 3D-aware GANs continues to improve,
their practical usage has been less explored.
Solely generating foreground objects is an important element for the practical use of generative models, especially for content creation. In this context, the diffusionbased methods have grown popular for 3D object synthesis despite their lack of realism [18, 32, 24, 39, 44]. Some

7268

