This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Data-Driven Vector-Quantized Degradation Model
for Animation Video Super-Resolution
Zixi Tuo*1 , Huan Yang†2 , Jianlong Fu2 , Yujie Dun1 , Xueming Qian1,3
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 Microsoft Research Asia
3
Shaanxi Yulan Jiuzhou Intelligent Optoelectronic Technology Co., Ltd
zixit99@gmail.com, {huayan, jianf}@microsoft.com, {dunyj, qianxm}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing real-world video super-resolution (VSR) methods focus on designing a general degradation pipeline for
open-domain videos while ignoring data intrinsic characteristics which strongly limit their performance when applying to some specific domains (e.g., animation videos). In
this paper, we thoroughly explore the characteristics of animation videos and leverage the rich priors in real-world
animation data for a more practical animation VSR model.
In particular, we propose a multi-scale Vector-Quantized
Degradation model for animation video Super-Resolution
(VQD-SR) to decompose the local details from global structures and transfer the degradation priors in real-world
animation videos to a learned vector-quantized codebook
for degradation modeling. A rich-content Real Animation
Low-quality (RAL) video dataset is collected for extracting
the priors. We further propose a data enhancement strategy for high-resolution (HR) training videos based on our
observation that existing HR videos are mostly collected
from the Web which contains conspicuous compression artifacts. The proposed strategy is valid to lift the upper bound
of animation VSR performance, regardless of the specific
VSR model. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of the proposed VQD-SR over state-of-the-art methods, through extensive quantitative and qualitative evaluations of the latest animation video super-resolution benchmark. The code and pre-trained models can be downloaded
at https://github.com/researchmm/VQD-SR.

1. Introduction
Animation video super-resolution (VSR) [35], which is
a subdiscipline of video super-resolution (VSR) [1, 2, 3, 19,
28, 37], aims to restore high-resolution (HR) videos from
their low-resolution (LR) counterparts in animation domain.
As a special type of visual art, animation video shows great
* This work was done while Zixi Tuo was a research intern at Microsoft
Research Asia.
† Corresponding author.

pokemon/100

(a) RealBasicVSR*

(b) AnimeSR

(c) VQD-SR (Ours)

Figure 1. A comparison between our proposed VQD-SR and
other SOTA VSR methods in real scenario. As indicated by
the red dotted circles, our VQD-SR could restore more appealing details by considering the degradation priors in real animation
videos. (‘∗’ denotes fine-tune on animation videos).

entertainment, cultural, educational and commercial values.
However, most of them available on the Web are in limited resolutions and have visually unappealing artifacts due
to the passing ages, lossy compression and transmission.
Dedicated to real applications, animation VSR is a blind
SR [21, 32, 46, 40, 43] task which is more challenging than
conventional VSR tasks [1, 2, 14, 19, 28, 36], because of the
complicated and agnostic real-world degradations. Thus,
practical VSR methods for improving real-world LR animation videos are in highly demanded.
Blind SR model for open-domain has long been the focus. As it’s hard to collect LR-HR pairs in real scenarios, recent learning-based approaches try to model the realworld degradations from HR to LR, thus generating pseudo
LR-HR pairs to train SR models. These approaches can

13179

