This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One-Shot Generative Domain Adaptation
Ceyuan Yang1,2,†
1

Shanghai AI Laboratory

Yujun Shen3,4,† Zhiyi Zhang3 Yinghao Xu2
Zhirong Wu6 Bolei Zhou7
2

CUHK

3

ByteDance Inc.

Large-scale pre-training

Synthesis

G

Sunglasses

Adaptor

Learnable

5

HKUST

6

MSRA

7

UCLA

One-shot adaptation

D

Generative domain adaptation
Latent space

Ant Group
Kid

Source

Latent space

4

Jiapeng Zhu5

Van Gogh’s
Classifier

Synthesis

Fixed

Figure 1. Diagram of one-shot generative domain adaptation. Left: The overall framework, where a GAN model pre-trained on the
large-scale source data is transferred to the target domain with as few as only one training sample. A lightweight attribute adaptor and
attribute classifier are introduced to the frozen generator and discriminator, respectively. Right: Realistic and highly diverse synthesis
results after adapting the pre-trained model to two reference images of a kid and Van Gogh’s self portrait.

Abstract
This work aims to transfer a Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN) pre-trained on one image domain to another domain referred to as few as just one reference
image. The challenge is that, under limited supervision,
it is extremely difficult to synthesize photo-realistic and
highly diverse images while retaining the representative
characters of the target domain. Different from existing
approaches that adopt the vanilla fine-tuning strategy, we
design two lightweight modules in the generator and the
discriminator respectively. We first introduce an attribute
adaptor in the generator and freeze the generator’s original
parameters, which can reuse the prior knowledge to the
most extent and maintain the synthesis quality and diversity.
We then equip the well-learned discriminator with an
attribute classifier to ensure that the generator with the
attribute adaptor captures the appropriate characters of
the reference image. Furthermore, considering the very

limited diversity of the training data (i.e., as few as only
one image), we propose to constrain the diversity of the
latent space through truncation in the training process,
alleviating the optimization difficulty. Our approach brings
appealing results under various settings, substantially surpassing state-of-the-art alternatives, especially in terms of
synthesis diversity. Noticeably, our method works well even
with large domain gaps and robustly converges within a
few minutes for each experiment. Code and models are
available at https://genforce.github.io/genda/.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [4], consisting
of a generator and a discriminator, has significantly advanced image synthesis yet relies on training with a large
number of images [5, 7, 8, 1]. Many attempts have been
† Equal contribution.

17733

