This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Multidimensional Analysis of Social Biases in Vision Transformers
Jannik Brinkmann* Paul Swoboda
Christian Bartelt
University of Mannheim
{jannik.brinkmann, paul.swoboda, christian.bartelt}@uni-mannheim.de

Abstract

1. Introduction
In recent studies, state-of-the-art self-supervised image
models such as SimCLR [9] and iGPT [8] have been shown
to encode a range of social biases, such as racism and sexism [34]. This can lead to representational harm [4] and
ethical concerns in different socio-technical application scenarios [41]. The distributional nature of these models is
suspected to be an important factor contributing to the emergence of social biases, as it has been demonstrated that these
models tend to encode common co-occurrences of objects
associated with social biases (e. g. women are more often set
in “home or hotel” scenes, whereas men are more often depicted in “industrial and construction” scenes [36]). Moreover, it has been demonstrated that self-supervised training objectives can impact the distribution of social biases in
models that share the same ResNet50 [14] architecture [33].
* Corresponding author.
The associated code is available at
github.com/jannik-brinkmann/social-biases-in-vision-transformers.

)

ily

,
ale

m
fa

fem

cos(

m

e
s(f

co

r)

ree

ale
,

fam

ily
)

, ca

co
s(m

The embedding spaces of image models have been shown
to encode a range of social biases such as racism and sexism. Here, we investigate specific factors that contribute to
the emergence of these biases in Vision Transformers (ViT).
Therefore, we measure the impact of training data, model
architecture, and training objectives on social biases in the
learned representations of ViTs. Our findings indicate that
counterfactual augmentation training using diffusion-based
image editing can mitigate biases, but does not eliminate
them. Moreover, we find that larger models are less biased
than smaller models, and that models trained using discriminative objectives are less biased than those trained using
generative objectives. In addition, we observe inconsistencies in the learned social biases. To our surprise, ViTs can
exhibit opposite biases when trained on the same data set
using different self-supervised objectives. Our findings give
insights into the factors that contribute to the emergence of
social biases and suggests that we could achieve substantial
fairness improvements based on model design choices.

Component 2

le
ma

ale,

r)

e
care

Component 1

(
cos

Male
Female
Career
Family

Figure 1: Gender bias in image embedding from ViTMAE:
t-SNE (n=2) reveals that “female” is more closely associated with “family” rather than “career”, whereas “male” has
a comparable association with both attributes.
However, existing work has done little investigation into
other factors that contribute to the emergence of social biases in image models.
Contributions Here, we seek to better understand the factors that contribute to the emergence of social biases in
image models. Therefore, we investigate social biases in
embedding spaces, which, despite not being observable for
end-users, could propagate into downstream tasks during
fine-tuning. This can help to make informed choices about
the model to select for a downstream task, and to develop
effective strategies to mitigate social biases. In detail, the
contributions of our work are:
• Training ViTs with counterfactual data augmentation using diffusion-based image editing can reduce social biases, but is not sufficient to eliminate them.
• ViTs trained using discriminative objectives are less biased than those trained using generative objectives.
• Scaling ViTs can help to mitigate social biases.
• ViTs can exhibit opposite biases despite being trained on
the same data set, which indicates that biases are not just
a result of simple object co-occurrences.

4914

