This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAFE: Machine Unlearning With Shard Graphs
Yonatan Dukler1⇤ , Benjamin Bowman1,2†⇤ , Alessandro Achille1⇤ , Aditya Golatkar1,2† ,
Ashwin Swaminathan1 , Stefano Soatto1
AWS AI Labs1 , UCLA2
{dukler,bowmaben,aachille,agolatka,swashwin,soattos}@amazon.com
Abstract
We present Synergy Aware Forgetting Ensemble (SAFE), a
method to adapt large models on a diverse collection of data
while minimizing the expected cost to remove the influence
of training samples from the trained model. This process,
also known as selective forgetting or unlearning, is often
conducted by partitioning a dataset into shards, training
fully independent models on each, then ensembling the resulting models. Increasing the number of shards reduces
the expected cost to forget but at the same time it increases
inference cost and reduces the final accuracy of the model
since synergistic information between samples is lost during the independent model training. Rather than treating
each shard as independent, SAFE introduces the notion of
a shard graph, which allows incorporating limited information from other shards during training, trading off a modest increase in expected forgetting cost with a significant
increase in accuracy, all while still attaining complete removal of residual influence after forgetting. SAFE uses a
lightweight system of adapters which can be trained while
reusing most of the computations. This allows SAFE to be
trained on shards an order-of-magnitude smaller than current state-of-the-art methods (thus reducing the forgetting
costs) while also maintaining high accuracy, as we demonstrate empirically on fine-grained computer vision datasets.

1. Introduction
Large-scale neural networks are typically trained on large
monolithic datasets. However, real world data often comes
from many different sources which may require different
treatment depending on their terms of use. In some cases,
the terms can change, triggering the need to not just erase
a portion of the data, but also remove its influence on the
trained model. If the model is trained with the entire dataset
in an undifferentiated fashion, even a request to remove a
* Equal contributions
† Work done during an internship at AWS AI Labs.

small fraction of the data may result in re-training the entire
model on the complement. Considering the scale of large
neural networks currently in use, re-training the model after
each data erasure is costly. Thus, it is beneficial to develop
methods to trace the influence of various segments of data
onto the trained model, and to remove their effect if needed,
especially as the scale of production models and the amount
of training data continues to grow.
One simple and robust approach to forgetting is compartmentalizing the information of different subsets of data into
distinct model parameters. In this scenario, the training
data is split into disjoint shards, and different parameters
or “adapters” are trained separately on each shard, and then
ensembled to obtain a final model. The advantage of this
approach is that, if the influence of a sample needs to be
removed, only the parameters corresponding to its shard
have to be retrained. Moreover if an entire source of data
needs to be dropped, one can simply drop all the adapters
corresponding to the shards containing its samples. There
are, however, two main disadvantages to this approach.
On the implementation side, there is an increase in storage/inference scaling with the multitude of adapters to ensemble. On a more fundamental level, since each adapter
is trained independently on a fraction of the available data,
it forfeits synergistic information that may be present in
data stored in different shards. As the number of shards
grows, adapters are trained on increasingly impoverished
samples, leading to degraded performance relative to monolithic training (see Fig. 2).
Thus, practitioners have to choose a trade-off between increasing the accuracy of the model and minimizing the expected cost of forgetting a sample. In this work, we show
that naive sharding, that is uniform partitioning of the training set, is suboptimal in many realistic use cases. Instead,
shards should be constructed to maximize synergistic information available at training time. To that end, we introduce
SAFE (Synergy Aware Forgetting Ensemble), an algorithm
that leverages synergistic information between data shards
to maximize accuracy for a given forgetting cost. We show
that SAFE allows training on highly sharded data (with as

17108

