This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Range View Representation for LiDAR Segmentation
Lingdong Kong1,2 Youquan Liu1,3 Runnan Chen1,4
Yikang Li1 Yuenan Hou1,B Yu Qiao1
1

Shanghai AI Laboratory
5

2

National University of Singapore

ShanghaiTech University

6

3

Yuexin Ma5 Xinge Zhu6
Ziwei Liu7,B

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

7

LiDAR segmentation is crucial for autonomous driving
perception. Recent trends favor point- or voxel-based methods as they often yield better performance than the traditional range view representation. In this work, we unveil
several key factors in building powerful range view models. We observe that the “many-to-one” mapping, semantic
incoherence, and shape deformation are possible impediments against effective learning from range view projections. We present RangeFormer – a full-cycle framework
comprising novel designs across network architecture, data
augmentation, and post-processing – that better handles the
learning and processing of LiDAR point clouds from the
range view. We further introduce a Scalable Training from
Range view (STR) strategy that trains on arbitrary lowresolution 2D range images, while still maintaining satisfactory 3D segmentation accuracy. We show that, for the
first time, a range view method is able to surpass the point,
voxel, and multi-view fusion counterparts in the competing
LiDAR semantic and panoptic segmentation benchmarks,
i.e., SemanticKITTI, nuScenes, and ScribbleKITTI.

ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg
road
car

Cylindrical Coordinate

𝜃
𝜙
Many-to-One
Adjacent points
are mapped to
the same grid

𝑧

𝑥
𝑦

Cartesian Coordinate

Empty Grid
Void cells in the
range image due
to 3D sparsity

Deformation
Shapes are
distorted due to
limited FOVs

Figure 1: Three detrimental factors observed in the LiDAR
range view representation: 1) the “many-to-one” problem;
2) “holes” or empty grids; and 3) shape distortions.
Table 1: Comparisons for different LiDAR representations.

1. Introduction
LiDAR point clouds have unique characteristics. As the
direct reflections of real-world scenes, they are often diverse
and unordered and thus bring extra difficulties in learning
[26, 40]. Inevitably, a good representation is needed for
efficient and effective LiDAR point cloud processing [64].
Although there exist various LiDAR representations as
shown in Tab. 1, the prevailing approaches are mainly based
on point view [32, 61], voxel view [15, 60, 81, 28], and
multi-view fusion [41, 72, 51]. These methods, however, require computationally intensive neighborhood search [50],
3D convolution operations [43], or multi-branch networks
[2, 24], which are often inefficient during both training
and inference stages. The projection-based representations,
such as range view [68, 46] and bird’s eye view [78, 80],

The University of Hong Kong

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

{konglingdong,liuyouquan,chenrunnan,houyuenan}@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract

4

Hochschule Bremerhaven

View

Formation

Complexity

Representative

Raw Points
Range View
Bird’s Eye View
Voxel (Dense)
Voxel (Sparse)
Voxel (Cylinder)
Multi-View

Bag-of-Points
Range Image
Polar Image
Voxel Grid
Sparse Grid
Sparse Grid
Multiple

O(N · d)
O( H·W
r 2 · d)
O( H·W
r 2 · d)
H·W ·L
O( r3 · d)
O(N · d)
O(N · d)
O((N + H·W
r 2 ) · d)

RandLA-Net, KPConv
SqueezeSeg, RangeNet++
PolarNet
PVCNN
MinkowskiNet, SPVNAS
Cylinder3D
AMVNet, RPVNet

are more tractable options. The 3D-to-2D rasterizations and
mature 2D operators open doors for fast and scalable invehicle LiDAR perception [46, 71, 64]. Unfortunately, the
segmentation accuracy of current projection-based methods
[79, 13, 78] is still far behind the trend [73, 72, 75].
The challenge of learning from projected LiDAR scans
comes from the potential detrimental factors of the LiDAR
data representation [46]. As shown in Fig. 1, the range view
projection1 often suffers from several difficulties, including 1) the “many-to-one” conflict of adjacent points, caused
1 We show a frustum of the LiDAR scan for simplicity; the complete
range view projection is a cylindrical panorama around the ego-vehicle.

228

