This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MI-GAN: A Simple Baseline for Image Inpainting on Mobile Devices
Andranik Sargsyan1 , Shant Navasardyan1 , Xingqian Xu1,2 , Humphrey Shi1,2
1

Picsart AI Research (PAIR), 2 SHI Labs @ Georgia Tech, Oregon & UIUC

100

9
8
7
6

2.7M

HiFill

Model size (# params)
small model (<10M)
medium model (25M-100M)
large model (100M+)

5
4

FID

3

LaMa

LDM/
Stable Diffusion

ZITS

27M

2

MAT

78.5M

59.7M

MI-GAN

387M

5.9M

79.1M Co-Mod-GAN

10

9
8
7
6

79.2M

SH-GAN

5

10

2

5

100

2

5

1000

2

5

10k

2

FLOPs (GFLOPs)

Figure 1. The proposed approach can produce plausible results both on complex scene images as well as on face images. The scene image
inputs are taken from the Places 2 [67] dataset and the face image input is from FFHQ [27] dataset. The bubble chart on the right shows
the advantage of our network over state-of-the-art approaches. The size of the bubble signifies the relative number of parameters of each
approach and the number inside of the bubble shows the absolute number of model parameters. Our approach achieves a low FID, while
being one order of magnitude smaller and faster than recent SOTA approaches.

Abstract
In recent years, many deep learning based image inpainting methods have been developed by the research community. Some of those methods have shown impressive image completion abilities. Yet, to the best of our knowledge, there is no image inpainting model designed to run
on mobile devices. In this paper we present a simple image inpainting baseline, Mobile Inpainting GAN (MI-GAN),
which is approximately one order of magnitude computationally cheaper and smaller than existing state-of-the-art
inpainting models, and can be efficiently deployed on mobile devices. Excessive quantitative and qualitative evaluations show that MI-GAN performs comparable or, in
some cases, better than recent state-of-the-art approaches.
Moreover, we perform a user study comparing MI-GAN results with results from several commercial mobile inpainting applications, which clearly shows the advantage of
MI-GAN in comparison to existing apps. With the purpose of high quality and efficient inpainting, we utilize an
effective combination of adversarial training, model reparametrization, and knowledge distillation. Our models
and code are publicly available at https://github.
com/Picsart-AI-Research/MI-GAN .

1. Introduction
The task of image inpainting is to complete the missing
regions in images in a realistic and visually plausible way.
Image inpainting algorithms have found their applications
in such problems as image restoration, removal of unwanted
objects, etc.
Nowadays, in the era of fast evolving gadgets, particularly smartphones, image/video editing applications are
growing furiously. The usage of mobile devices for making creative visual content by professionals as well as by
consumers shows a great increasing tendency. A lot of mobile applications such as Photoshop Express [24], Picsart
[25], Snapseed [39], TouchRetouch [18] empower the users
to create awesome content utilizing AI-powered tools. One
of the most popular such tools, object remover, allows its
users to remove unwanted objects (e.g. watermarks, lines,
people or random objects in the background, etc.) from their
photos. So millions of users every day benefit from image
inpainting technologies integrated in various mobile applications.
Current AI-based state-of-the-art inpainting algorithms

7335

