This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UMC: A Unified Bandwidth-efficient and Multi-resolution based Collaborative
Perception Framework
Tianhang Wang1 , Guang Chen1,B *, Kai Chen1 , Zhengfa Liu1 , Bo Zhang2 , Alois Knoll3 , Changjun Jiang1
1
Tongji University, 2 Shanghai Westwell Technology Co., Ltd, 3 Technische Universität München
{tianya wang,guangchen,14sdck,1811466,cjjiang}@tongji.edu.cn
bob.zhang@westwell-lab.com knoll@in.tum.de

Abstract

Communication Region
Encoder

Multi-agent collaborative perception (MCP) has recently attracted much attention. It includes three key processes: communication for sharing, collaboration for integration, and reconstruction for different downstream tasks.
Existing methods pursue designing the collaboration process alone, ignoring their intrinsic interactions and resulting in suboptimal performance. In contrast, we aim
to propose a Unified Collaborative perception framework
named UMC, optimizing the communication, collaboration, and reconstruction processes with the Multi-resolution
technique. The communication introduces a novel trainable multi-resolution and selective-region (MRSR) mechanism, achieving higher quality and lower bandwidth. Then,
a graph-based collaboration is proposed, conducting on
each resolution to adapt the MRSR. Finally, the reconstruction integrates the multi-resolution collaborative features
for downstream tasks. Since the general metric can not reflect the performance enhancement brought by MCP systematically, we introduce a brand-new evaluation metric
that evaluates the MCP from different perspectives. To verify our algorithm, we conducted experiments on the V2XSim and OPV2V datasets. Our quantitative and qualitative
experiments prove that the proposed UMC outperforms the
state-of-the-art collaborative perception approaches.

1. Introduction
Single-vehicle perception has made remarkable achievements in object detection[20, 30, 31], segmentation[28, 32],
and other tasks with the advent of deep learning. However,
single-vehicle perception often suffers from environmental
conditions such as occlusion[38, 49] and severe weather[4,
16, 52], making accurate recognition challenging. To overcome these issues, several appealing studies have been de* Corresponding author: guangchen@tongji.edu.cn. Our code is available at:https://github.com/ispc-lab/UMC.

SingleFeatures

Coarse
Single-resolution

No Selection

(a) Existing SRAR communication mechanism
Fine
Encoder

MultiFeatures

Intermediate
Coarse
Collaborative Process
Multi-resolution Entropy-based Selection

(b) Our proposed MRSR communication mechanism

Figure 1. The SRAR versus the proposed MRSR mechanism.
(a) The existing single-resolution and all-region (SRAR) method
utilizes the coarse-grained feature with bandwidth inefficient allregion transmission. (b) The proposed MRSR mechanism incorporates bandwidth-efficient entropy-based selection with multiresolution features.

voted to collaborative perception[1, 2, 7, 41, 48], which take
advantage of sharing the multiple-viewpoint of the same
scene with the Vehicle-to-Vehicle(V2V) communication[3].
To design a collaborative perception algorithm, current
approaches[39, 23, 44, 18, 43] mainly focus on the collaboration process alone, aiming to design a high-performance
collaboration strategy. Nevertheless, such a strategy ignores intrinsic interactions with two critical processes:
communication[22, 12] and reconstruction[9]. This kind
of collaboration strategy will inherently cause suboptimal
performance because the quality of communication directly
determines the performance of collaboration[18], and the
reconstruction influences the quality of feature maps for
downstream tasks. Meanwhile, the collaboration can also
affect the design of communication and reconstruction.
Hence, failing to optimize these three processes will degrade the system.
In this paper, to the best of our knowledge, we are the
first to propose a unified collaborative perception framework that optimizes the communication, collaboration, and
reconstruction processes with multi-resolution technique.

8187

