This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Minimal Solutions to Generalized Three-View Relative Pose Problem
Yaqing Ding1† , Chiang-Heng Chien2† , Viktor Larsson1 , Karl Åström1 , Benjamin Kimia2
1
Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Lund University
2
School of Engineering, Brown University

Abstract
For a generalized (or non-central) camera model, the
minimal problem for two views of six points has efficient
solvers. However, minimal problems of three views with
four points and three views of six lines have not yet been
explored and solved, despite the efforts from the computer
vision community. This paper develops the formulations of
these two minimal problems and shows how state-of-theart GPU implementations of Homotopy Continuation solver
can be used effectively. The proposed methods are evaluated on both synthetic and real datasets, demonstrating that
they are fast, accurate and that they improve on structure
from motion estimations, when employed in an hypothesis
and test setting.

1. Introduction
In both the central and the non-central camera models, an
image point is in correspondence to a ray of a 3D point that
projects to that image point. In the central camera model,
each such ray goes through a common point, i.e., the camera
centre, whereas in the non-central camera model, two such
rays do not always intersect. One example of a non-central
camera is the catadioptric camera, where one or more lenses
and/or mirrors are combined in an optical system, [17]. Another example is a rig of multiple cameras, [20]. A typical
use-case is a car or drone equipped with several cameras.
Here it is possible to use all of the cameras as one generalized sensor. Generalized cameras offer several advantages
over the standard pinhole camera for relative pose estimation. As shown in previous works [20, 25, 10, 15], structure from motion estimation with a generalized camera also
gives the scale of the translation as well as the scale of the
3D model. In addition, since the system consists of multiple cameras, it is possible to configure the location of each
camera so that a maximal field-of-view can be achieved to
avoid blind spots. This, in turn, enables more robust image
† Equal contribution.

X

Figure 1. An example of a multi-camera system with four standard
pinhole cameras mounted on a car.

feature detection and matching, which is a crucial procedure in relative pose estimation. Fig. 1 shows an example
of a multi-camera system consisting of four pinhole cameras mounted on a car for relative pose estimation.
Unlike the standard pinhole camera, the light rays from
a generalized camera do not intersect at a single center of
projection. This property makes it non-trivial to estimate
the relative pose using a generalized camera. Pless [20]
first formulated the light rays in a generalized camera as
Plücker vectors and defined the generalized essential matrix. Based on the work of Pless, several solutions to the
two-view generalized relative pose estimation have been
proposed [26, 10, 25]. Among these solutions, the minimal solver with up to 64 solutions was proposed in [25].
This solver only needs 6 point correspondences which can
significantly reduce the number of RANSAC [7] iterations
than other solvers. Although the solvers to the two-view
generalized relative pose problem are already mature, there
are no solutions to the three-view case as the generalized
three-view relative pose problem is extremely difficult to
be formulated and solved. In general, three-view relative
pose estimation needs fewer point correspondence and suffers from fewer degenerate cases than the two-view case.
Moreover, three-view relative pose can be estimated only
using the line correspondences. Hence, it has a great po-

8156

