This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-supervised Pre-training for Mirror Detection
Jiaying Lin*
Rynson W.H. Lau∗
City University of Hong Kong
{jiayinlin5, rynson.lau}@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Existing mirror detection methods require supervised
ImageNet pre-training to obtain good general-purpose image features. However, supervised ImageNet pre-training
focuses on category-level discrimination and may not be
suitable for downstream tasks like mirror detection, due to
the overfitting upstream tasks (e.g., supervised image classification). We observe that mirror reflection is crucial to how
people perceive the presence of mirrors, and such mid-level
features can be better transferred from self-supervised pretrained models. Inspired by this observation, in this paper
we aim to improve mirror detection methods by proposing
a new self-supervised learning (SSL) pre-training framework for modeling the representation of mirror reflection
progressively in the pre-training process. Our framework
consists of three pre-training stages at different levels: 1)
an image-level pre-training stage to globally incorporate
mirror reflection features into the pre-trained model; 2)
a patch-level pre-training stage to spatially simulate and
learn local mirror reflection from image patches; and 3) a
pixel-level pre-training stage to pixel-wisely capture mirror
reflection via reconstructing corrupted mirror images based
on the relationship between the inside and outside of mirrors. Extensive experiments show that our SSL pre-training
framework significantly outperforms previous state-of-theart CNN-based SSL pre-training frameworks and even outperforms supervised ImageNet pre-training when transferred to the mirror detection task. Code and models are
available at https:// jiaying.link/ iccv2023-sslmirror/

1. Introduction
Mirrors are prevalent in our daily lives. As their appearances are largely determined by their surroundings, they
generally lack a consistent appearance, making it difficult
to separate them from their surroundings. This may affect
many computer vision tasks such as object detection [2],
vision-language navigation [1] and depth estimation [29].
* Corresponding authors.

(a) Image

(b) MirrorNet
on ImageNet

(c) VCNet (d) Ours (MirrorNet
on ImageNet
on our SSL)

(e) GT

Figure 1. State-of-the-art mirror detection methods [37, 30] are
based on costly supervised ImageNet pre-training. They may fail
even in obvious cases, e.g., (a) when the mirror clearly reflects a
real object outside of the mirror. (b) and (c) are MirrorNet [37]
and VCNet [30], respectively, pre-trained on ImageNet with full
supervision. (c) is MirrorNet with our proposed SSL framework
and without supervised ImageNet pre-training. Our SSL scheme
leverages the mirror reflection cue and avoids feature redundancy
in the pre-training stage. It outperforms those pre-trained on ImageNet with full supervision (i.e., (b) and (c)).

It is therefore crucial to design high-performance mirror detection methods to facilitate computer vision applications.
Recently, a few methods [37, 23, 30] have been proposed for mirror detection, but they all require to be initialized with supervised ImageNet [8] pre-trained weights and
then fine-tuned on mirror detection datasets. While such
a transfer learning approach is common in general computer vision tasks (e.g., object detection [24] and semantic segmentation [7]) to utilize category-oriented features
from large-scale image datasets, we challenge if this strategy is necessary for the mirror detection task for two reasons. First, the supervised ImageNet pre-training process
involves high labelling costs, as it is very time-consuming
and labor-intensive to label such a large-scale image dataset
(∼1.3M images). Second, unlike general vision tasks, mirror detection does not require category-level object understanding. Instead, it requires an understanding of the relationship between inside and outside of mirrors (e.g., contrast [37], similarity [23], and visual chirality [30]). Thus,

12227

