This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Verbs in Action: Improving verb understanding in video-language models
Liliane Momeni1

Mathilde Caron2 Arsha Nagrani2 Andrew Zisserman1
1
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford, UK
2
Google Research

Original caption
Add prompt
two brown horses eating grass

LLM

two brown horses running on the grass
two brown horses ﬁghting on the grass
two brown horses sleeping on the grass
two brown horses playing on the grass

eating grass

eating grass

two brown horses lying on the grass

Verb phrase

Hard verb negative captions

two brown horses eating grass
two brown horses lying on the grass
Generated hard negative caption

Batch

squatting

person squatting at the gym

cleaning camera

a man cleaning his camera

standing

a woman standing in a post oﬃce

Negative verb phrases in the batch

Video

Cordelia Schmid2

Verb phrase loss

Negative captions in the batch

Hard negative loss

Figure 1. Verb-Focused Contrastive (VFC) learning: (Left): Given a video and its corresponding caption, we leverage a Large Language
Model (LLM) to output (1) hard negative captions, where only the verb has been changed while keeping the remaining context, and
(2) verb phrases which succinctly describe the action in the video. (Right): To encourage better verb reasoning, we subsequently enforce
(1) a calibrated hard negative loss, using our generated hard negative captions and other captions in the batch, and (2) a fine-grained, verb
phrase loss. We show that VFC improves verb understanding of video-language models compared to the standard contrastive loss.

Abstract
Understanding verbs is crucial to modelling how people and objects interact with each other and the environment through space and time. Recently, state-of-the-art
video-language models based on CLIP have been shown
to have limited verb understanding and to rely extensively
on nouns, restricting their performance in real-world video
applications that require action and temporal understanding. In this work, we improve verb understanding for CLIPbased video-language models by proposing a new VerbFocused Contrastive (VFC) framework. This consists of two
main components: (1) leveraging pretrained large language
models (LLMs) to create hard negatives for cross-modal
contrastive learning, together with a calibration strategy to
balance the occurrence of concepts in positive and negative
pairs; and (2) enforcing a fine-grained, verb phrase alignment loss. Our method achieves state-of-the-art results for
zero-shot performance on three downstream tasks that focus on verb understanding, including video-text matching,
video question-answering and video classification; while
maintaining performance on noun-focused settings. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first work which proposes
a method to alleviate the verb understanding problem, and
does not simply highlight it. Our code is publicly available
at [16] : scenic/projects/verbs in action.

1. Introduction
Large-scale visual-language models (VLMs) such as
CLIP [58] have shown strong performance on multiple
video-language tasks such as text-to-video retrieval [44],
video question-answering, and open-set action recognition [42]. These models perform surprisingly well on these
tasks in a zero-shot setting, despite being trained only on
image-language pairs (with no access to temporal data),
even outperforming strong video-specific models [5, 87].
A recently highlighted and well-documented problem
with such models, however, is their strong noun or object bias, as evidenced by their lower performance in distinguishing between verbs in natural language descriptions [31, 53, 93]. This was first studied in images alone
by the SVO-Probes benchmark [31], which shows that image-language models struggle to distinguish between different verbs, and often rely on the nouns instead. This
problem persists with video-language models that inherit
these VLMs, even after they are fine-tuned on video-text
datasets [62, 85]. For example, Park et al. [53] similarly
propose evaluation sets with hard verb negatives, and show
that CLIP-based models, even when fine-tuned on video
datasets, have difficulties discriminating verbs in a multichoice setting where the context remains unchanged. Yuksekgonul et al. [93] further highlight limitations of visionlanguage models at understanding attribute, relationship,

15579

