This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VAPCNet: Viewpoint-Aware 3D Point Cloud Completion
Zhiheng Fu1 , Longguang Wang2 , Lian Xu1 , Zhiyong Wang3 ,
Hamid Laga4 , Yulan Guo5∗ , Farid Boussaid1 , Mohammed Bennamoun1
1

3

The University of Western Australia 2 National University of Defense Technology
The University of Sydney 4 Murdoch University 5 The Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University

Abstract

1. Introduction
Incomplete shapes in 3D scans resulting from occlusion
(both self-occlusion and occlusion by other objects) and low
resolution of sensors often make them unsuitable for direct
use in practical applications such as object grasping and Virtual Reality (VR) [16, 9, 25, 10]. To remedy this, shape
completion aims to recover complete 3D shapes from partial 3D scans.
Current learning-based shape completion methods can
be classified into two categories: volumetric representation
The former category transforms a point cloud into 3D occupancy grids and uses 3D convolution operations to predict

Feature
extractor

Most existing learning-based 3D point cloud completion methods ignore the fact that the completion process
is highly coupled with the viewpoint of a partial scan.
However, the various viewpoints of incompletely scanned
objects in real-world applications are normally unknown
and directly estimating the viewpoint of each incomplete
object is usually time-consuming and leads to huge annotation cost. In this paper, we thus propose an unsupervised viewpoint representation learning scheme for
3D point cloud completion without explicit viewpoint estimation. To be specific, we learn abstract representations of partial scans to distinguish various viewpoints in
the representation space rather than the explicit estimation in the 3D space. We also introduce a ViewpointAware Point cloud Completion Network (VAPCNet) with
flexible adaption to various viewpoints based on the learned
representations. The proposed viewpoint representation
learning scheme can extract discriminative representations
to obtain accurate viewpoint information. Reported experiments on two popular public datasets show that our
VAPCNet achieves state-of-the-art performance for the
point cloud completion task. Source code is available at
https://github.com/FZH92128/VAPCNet.

ze
imi ty
min ilari
sim

ize
xim ty
ma ilari
sim

two-layer
MLP

partial scans of an object

Viewpoint
representations

"!

"

""

contrastive learning

Figure 1. Example of an unsupervised viewpoint representation
learning. In MVP dataset [30], all objects have been aligned, and
missing parts indicate various incomplete objects scanned from
varying viewpoints. In this context, incomplete objects marked
with orange and red boxes are scanned from the same viewpoint,
while those marked with black boxes have been scanned from different viewpoints.

the complete shapes of objects. However, these volumetric representations often come with high memory expenses
and restricted shape accuracy. The second category, on the
other hand, operates directly on point clouds, providing a
more memory-efficient way to represent 3D data. However,
these point cloud based methods are difficult to recover detailed structures of objects due to the irregular and disorder
nature of point clouds.
To recover the full shape of partial point cloud objects, most existing methods adopt a coarse-to-fine approach to firstly predict coarse full shapes and then recover detailed complete shapes using complex refinement
modules [54, 41, 52, 29, 30, 57]. More specifically, skipconnection is used to connect the detailed visible point-wise
features with the missing point-wise features to preserve
the detailed local patterns of objects [41]. In addition, attention mechanism is used to explore correlation between
(non-)local patterns to recover detailed structures [52]. Although existing methods have made a certain progress in
recovering the details of objects, they ignore the fact that
the completion process is highly coupled with the scanning
viewpoint.

12108

