This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

How to Boost Face Recognition with StyleGAN?
Artem Sevastopolsky1
Yury Malkov2,∗
Nikita Durasov3
Luisa Verdoliva1,4
Matthias Nießner1
1

2
Technical University of Munich, Germany
Twitter, US
3
École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland
4
University Federico II of Naples, Italy

Unlabeled set

Pretraining
Input
image

Backbone

StyleGAN

Pred
image

Labeled set

Finetuning
Input
image

Backbone

Face recognition

Figure 1: Our method is aimed at boosting the performance of face recognition. This is achieved by gathering a random
image collection without face recognition labels (unlabeled set) and then fitting a mapping from an image to the StyleGAN
latent space onto that collection. To learn this mapping, we use the pSp encoder architecture. For the downstream face
recognition task, the same encoder is then fine-tuned on a (potentially much smaller) face recognition dataset with identity
labels (labeled set).

Abstract
State-of-the-art face recognition systems require vast
amounts of labeled training data. Given the priority of
privacy in face recognition applications, the data is limited to celebrity web crawls, which have issues such as
limited numbers of identities. On the other hand, selfsupervised revolution in the industry motivates research
on the adaptation of related techniques to facial recognition. One of the most popular practical tricks is to augment
the dataset by the samples drawn from generative models
while preserving the identity. We show that a simple approach based on fine-tuning pSp encoder for StyleGAN allows to improve upon the state-of-the-art facial recognition
and performs better compared to training on synthetic face
identities. We also collect large-scale unlabeled datasets
with controllable ethnic constitution – AfricanFaceSet-5M
(5 million images of different people) and AsianFaceSet3M (3 million images of different people) – and we show
that pretraining on each of them improves recognition of
the respective ethnicities (as well as others), while combining all unlabeled datasets results in the biggest performance increase. Our self-supervised strategy is the
most useful with limited amounts of labeled training data,

which can be beneficial for more tailored face recognition
tasks and when facing privacy concerns. Evaluation is
based on a standard RFW dataset and a new large-scale
RB-WebFace benchmark. The code and data are made publicly available at https://github.com/seva100/
stylegan-for-facerec.

1. Introduction
Modern face recognition methods rely on deep convolutional networks trained on large-scale datasets [54, 7,
23, 60]. These methods are now being integrated into a
vast number of real-world applications, ranging from face
unlock for smartphones and photo organizers to law enforcement systems and border control. A typical open
face recognition dataset consists of web-crawled images
of celebrities, leading to limited size and lack of balance in subgroups, such as ethnicity, age, etc. Training a state-of-the-art solution, however, requires enormous
amounts of labeled data, scraping which may lead to privacy and legal issues. We suggest and study an alternative solution to using celebrity photos – pretraining the
face recognition backbone on a generative task. Specifically, we first train StyleGAN2-ADA [29] on collected

20924

