This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CAME: Contrastive Automated Model Evaluation
Ru Peng1 ,* Qiuyang Duan1 ,* Haobo Wang1 , Jiachen Ma1,2 , Yanbo Jiang1 ,
Yongjun Tu3 , Xiu Jiang3 , Junbo Zhao1†
1

Zhejiang University

2

DI-Lab, Zhejiang University

3

OPPO

{rupeng,duanqiuyang,wanghaobo,mjc zjdx,yanbojiang,j.zhao}@zju.edu.cn
{tuyongjun1,jiangxiu}@oppo.com

Abstract
The Automated Model Evaluation (AutoEval) framework
entertains the possibility of evaluating a trained machine
learning model without resorting to a labeled testing set.
Despite the promise and some decent results, the existing
AutoEval methods heavily rely on computing distribution
shifts between the unlabelled testing set and the training set.
We believe this reliance on the training set becomes another
obstacle in shipping this technology to real-world ML development. In this work, we propose Contrastive Automatic
Model Evaluation (CAME), a novel AutoEval framework
that is rid of involving training set in the loop. The core idea
of CAME bases on a theoretical analysis which bonds the
model performance with a contrastive loss. Further, with
extensive empirical validation, we manage to set up a predictable relationship between the two, simply by deducing
on the unlabeled/unseen testing set. The resulting framework CAME establishes a new SOTA results for AutoEval
by surpassing prior work significantly. 1

1. Introduction
During the last decade, the technological advancement
of artificial intelligence and machine learning has attained
unprecedented achievements, affecting a variety of domains
or verticals. Ubiquitously, off these milestones, to properly evaluate, assess and benchmark the trained models is
undoubtedly pivotal, particularly when considering the deployment towards the production in real-world scenarios.
To do that, the traditional means often relies on a presplit and static testing set for model evaluation, which is
principally left out of the sight during training or validation phase. However, several recent works has pointed out
* Both authors contributed equally to this research.
† Corresponding author.
1 Our code is publicly available at:
pengr/Contrastive_AutoEval

https://github.com/

the drawback of this standardized scheme due to its requirement of careful sample selection, randomization due
to the sample set split, the OOD gap between the deployment environment, and (somewhat) expensive label annotation [14, 13, 5], etc. Most recently, we see that Automated
Model Evaluation (AutoEval) has emerged to tackle these
problems [14].
In particular, the vanilla prototype of the Automated
Model Evaluation approaches aim at estimating a provided
model’s performance on an unlabeled testing set. Notably,
these approaches first generate a few meta-sets by adopting pre-selected data augmentations on the training set. In
what follows, one can estimate a certain distance — for instance, the Frechet distance [16] — averaged between the
meta-sets with the testing set. As a result, the prior work
has proactively shown that this averaged distance measurement is related to the final model performance on the testing
set. Indeed, we believe this setup of AutoEval on the testing
set possesses positive prospects because it manifests a high
similarity towards real production — where the testing set is
acquired on the fly in the real-world, leaving no time/space
for these samples to be annotated or persist. A graphical
illustration of the AutoEval against the conventional static
testing set evaluation is depicted in Figure 1.
Despite its promise and prospect, we realize that the current paradigm of AutoEval may still fail in its real-world
deployment, under certain conditions. On one hand, it is
widely acknowledged that the prior works are dedicated to
avoiding annotating the testing samples and to amortizing
the vexing randomness through the massive generation of
meta-sets offline. On the other hand, however, these techniques still demand the full presence of the sample input
from the training set, which in many — if not most — of the
occasions probably imply expensive storage and computation cost. Hence, we argue that this requirement cannot be
easily ensured in many scenarios, most notably on limitedcapacity, limited-storage, or low-power platforms such as
edge devises for IOT or autonomous driving. Hereby, we

20121

