This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UnLoc: A Unified Framework for Video Localization Tasks
Shen Yan1 * Xuehan Xiong1 * Arsha Nagrani1 Anurag Arnab1 Zhonghao Wang2†
Weina Ge1 David Ross1 Cordelia Schmid1
1
Google Research 2 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{shenyan, xxman, anagrani, aarnab, dross, cordelias}@google.com

Abstract
While large-scale image-text pretrained models such
as CLIP have been used for multiple video-level tasks
on trimmed videos, their use for temporal localization in
untrimmed videos is still a relatively unexplored task. We
design a new approach for this called UnLoc, which uses
pretrained image and text towers, and feeds tokens to a
video-text fusion model. The output of the fusion module
are then used to construct a feature pyramid in which each
level connects to a head to predict a per-frame relevancy
score and start/end time displacements. Unlike previous
works, our architecture enables Moment Retrieval, Temporal Localization, and Action Segmentation with a single
stage model, without the need for action proposals, motion
based pretrained features or representation masking. Unlike specialized models, we achieve state of the art results
on all three different localization tasks with a unified approach. Code is available at: https://github.com/
google-research/scenic.

1. Introduction
Contrastive vision-language pretraining has been shown
to learn powerful feature representations, and moreover enables open-set inference on a wide range of tasks [55, 27].
As a result, pretrained models such as CLIP [55] have been
adapted to multiple diverse tasks including video classification [52, 37], object detection [46] and segmentation [18].
In this paper, we study how to adapt large-scale, contrastively trained image-text models to untrimmed video
understanding tasks that involve localization. While CLIP
has been used widely for trimmed video tasks (classification [52, 37] or retrieval [4]), its use on long, untrimmed
video is still in a nascent stage. Long videos come with multiple challenges – CLIP is pretrained on images only, and
localization in untrimmed videos requires exploiting fine* Equal contribution.
† Work done while an intern at Google

{wzhonghao95}@gmail.com

41.2s

“The pans are filled with pastries
and loaded into the oven.”
“shape cookie”

0.0

46s
Moment Retrieval

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

106s Action Segmentation

38s
“baking cookie”

Temporal Action Localization
Text
Encoder

Video-text Fusion

Concat
Image-text space

Image
Encoder

Figure 1. Applying two-tower CLIP to video localization tasks:
We propose UnLoc, a single stage, unified model that achieves
state of the art results on 3 different video localization tasks - moment retrieval, temporal action localization and action segmentation. UnLoc leverages a two-tower model (with a vision and text
encoder) in conjunction with a video-text fusion module and feature pyramid to perform mid-level feature fusion without the need
for any temporal proposals.

grained temporal structured information in videos. In particular, it is challenging for image and language models to
learn properties of temporal backgrounds (with respective
to foreground actions) during training. In contrast, natural
videos often come with a large, variable proportion of background and detecting specific actions is critical for localization tasks [49]. Finally, localization in long untrimmed
videos also typically involves detecting events at multiple
temporal scales. Consequently, existing approaches that
use CLIP typically focus on a two-stage approach involving
off-the-shelf proposal generators [28], or use temporal features such as I3D [48] or C3D [60]. In contrast, we propose
an end-to-end trainable one-stage approach starting from a
CLIP two tower model only.
We focus specifically on three different video localization tasks - Moment Retrieval (MR) [29, 16], Temporal Action Localization (TAL) [21, 26] and Action Segmentation
(AS) [62]. These tasks have typically been studied separately, with different techniques proposed for each task. We
show how we can use a single, unified approach, to address

13623

