This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Randomized Quantization: A Generic Augmentation
for Data Agnostic Self-supervised Learning
Huimin Wu1 *
Qifeng Chen1
1

HKUST

2

Xiao Sun4
Peng-Shuai Wang3
Chenyang Lei2 *
1
Kwang-Ting Cheng
Stephen Lin5
Zhirong Wu5

CAIR, HKISI CAS

3

Peking University

4

Shanghai AI Lab

Abstract
Self-supervised representation learning follows a
paradigm of withholding some part of the data and
tasking the network to predict it from the remaining part.
Among many techniques, data augmentation lies at the
core for creating the information gap. Towards this end,
masking has emerged as a generic and powerful tool
where content is withheld along the sequential dimension,
e.g., spatial in images, temporal in audio, and syntactic
in language. In this paper, we explore the orthogonal
channel dimension for generic data augmentation by
exploiting precision redundancy. The data for each channel is quantized through a non-uniform quantizer, with
the quantized value sampled randomly within randomly
sampled quantization bins. From another perspective,
quantization is analogous to channel-wise masking, as it
removes the information within each bin, but preserves
the information across bins. Our approach significantly
surpasses existing generic data augmentation methods,
while showing on par performance against modalityspecific augmentations. We comprehensively evaluate
our approach on vision, audio, 3D point clouds, as well
as the DABS benchmark which is comprised of various
data modalities. The code is available at https:
//github.com/microsoft/random_quantize.

1. Introduction
We are witnessing a convergence of multi-modal AI [23,
6] where the architecture and the learning algorithm are
unified for various data modalities. This exciting direction
abandons the domain-specific knowledge for an individual
data modality, but rather pursues a solution far more generalizable.
For self-supervised representation learning, masked
modeling [23] or simply masking input as an augmentation [75] has emerged as an effective approach. The in* Equal contribution. Work done during an internship at MSRA.

5

Microsoft Research Asia

Sequential Dimension
Original
Sequential
Masking 1
Sequential
Masking 2
Randomized
Quantization 1
Randomized
Quantization 2

Figure 1. We represent data as a matrix with a sequential dimension and a channel dimension. As a generic data augmentation, masking drops tokens along the sequential dimension. The
proposed randomized quantization instead withholds information
along the channel dimension. In this figure, we use 1D data of
10 sequential tokens for illustration. Data values are coded in
grayscale.

put data is represented by a 2D tensor with a sequential dimension and a channel dimension in a modality-agnostic
way [3]. The sequential dimension can be spatial in images,
temporal in audio, and syntactic in languages. The masking
mechanism withholds information along the sequential dimension, and exploits it for supervision. As a result, models
learned from the masking supervision demonstrate strong
capability for capturing correlations between sequential tokens [38].
The channel dimension describes the data feature at each
sequential location, for example, RGB color at a spatial location or spectrogram frequency at a time step. Despite being generic, masking approaches have neglected to exploit
supervision along the channel dimension. While the number of channels for images is as small as three, the channels
for audio and tabular data can be as many as hundreds. Formulating the self-supervision from the channel dimension
holds much potential for representation learning.
In this paper, we draw a connection between the sequen-

16305

