This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Concept-wise Fine-tuning Matters in Preventing Negative Transfer
Yunqiao Yang1 *, Long-Kai Huang2 , Ying Wei1†
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 Tencent AI Lab
{hustyyq, hlongkai, judyweiying}@gmail.com

Abstract
A multitude of prevalent pre-trained models mark a major
milestone in the development of artificial intelligence, while
fine-tuning has been a common practice that enables pretrained models to figure prominently in a wide array of target
datasets. Our empirical results reveal that off-the-shelf finetuning techniques are far from adequate to mitigate negative
transfer caused by two types of underperforming features in
a pre-trained model, including rare features and spuriously
correlated features. Rooted in structural causal models of
predictions after fine-tuning, we propose a Concept-wise
fine-tuning (Concept-Tuning) approach which refines feature
representations in the level of patches with each patch encoding a concept. Concept-Tuning minimizes the negative
impacts of rare features and spuriously correlated features
by (1) maximizing the mutual information between examples
in the same category with regard to a slice of rare features (a
patch) and (2) applying front-door adjustment via attention
neural networks in channels and feature slices (patches).
The proposed Concept-Tuning consistently and significantly
(by up to 4.76%) improves prior state-of-the-art fine-tuning
methods on eleven datasets, diverse pre-training strategies
(supervised and self-supervised ones), various network architectures, and sample sizes in a target dataset.

1. Introduction
Pre-trained models, pre-trained by either conventional supervised [26] or resurgent self-supervised strategies [17, 20],
undoubtedly constitute a milestone in the artificial intelligence community. Such a resounding success stems from
the gap between the heavy reliance of deep neural networks
on extensive data on one side and the lack of annotated
data in many real-world applications on the other side. Pretrained models suffice to bridge this gap under the aegis of
the well-established fine-tuning paradigm [21].
The practice of fine-tuning, unfortunately but unsurprisingly, is not always outperforming; the notorious problem of
* Part of the work was done when the author interned at Tencent AI Lab.
† Corresponding Author

(a) Train from scratch

(b) Linear probing

(c) Fine-tuning

(d) Bi-tuning

Figure 1: Exemplar attentive regions of the model trained (a)
from scratch, by (b) linear probing, (c) vanilla fine-tuning,
and (d) bi-tuning via Eigen-Grad-CAM [38], where only (a)
predicts correctly.
negative transfer [8, 51] arises especially when downstream
tasks are out of the distribution of pre-training data. There
could be cases where the model trained from scratch outperforms fine-tuning. For example, there exist 3.08% testing
images of the downstream dataset CUB [50] on which the
model trained from scratch makes correct predictions while
fine-tuning the supervised pre-trained model misclassifies.
The issue remains even if we resort to one recent state-ofthe-art fine-tuning method named Bi-tuning [61], despite
offering a smaller percentage of 2.74%. Beyond such a prediction gap between the from-scratch model and fine-tuning
models, we do see a gap in attended regions. Fig. 1 shows
that the from-scratch model that predicts correctly pays attention to the feet, but fine-tuning models that misclassify
concentrate on body-related features, possibly mislead by
ImageNet pre-trained models. The devil that accounts for
such gaps lies in those underperforming features offered
by the pre-trained model, among which we focus on the
following two types based on our empirical studies.
Type I (Rare features): These undertrained features by
the pre-training dataset force the attention of the fine-tuned
model to be diverted to those well-trained features, although
the most discriminative features for the downstream dataset
are exactly those undertrained ones.
Fig. 2a demonstrates a slice of rare features, i.e., neck/tail
features. Concretely, we mask an original image via Gaussian blurring with two patches preserved, and retrieve its
most similar images. The five most similar images retrieved
by neck/tail are unfortunately distant (evidenced by colorful
necks instead of the expected dark neck) using either pretrained features (before fine-tuning) or fine-tuned features

18753

