This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CiT: Curation in Training for Effective Vision-Language Data
Hu Xu
Saining Xie
Po-Yao Huang
Licheng Yu
Russell Howes Gargi Ghosh Luke Zettlemoyer Christoph Feichtenhofer
Meta AI, FAIR
https://github.com/facebookresearch/CiT
Abstract
Large vision-language models are generally applicable
to many downstream tasks, but come at an exorbitant training cost that only large institutions can afford. This paper trades generality for efficiency and presents Curation
in Training (CiT), a simple and efficient vision-text learning
algorithm that couples a data objective into training. CiT
automatically yields quality data to speed-up contrastive
image-text training and alleviates the need for an offline
data filtering pipeline, allowing broad data sources (including raw image-text pairs from the web). CiT contains two
loops: an outer loop curating the training data and an inner
loop consuming the curated training data. The text encoder
connects the two loops. Given metadata for tasks of interest,
e.g., class names, and a large pool of image-text pairs, CiT
alternatively selects relevant training data from the pool by
measuring the similarity of their text embeddings and embeddings of the metadata. In our experiments, we observe
that CiT can speed up training by over an order of magnitude, especially if the raw data size is large.

1. Introduction
Vision-language models have demonstrated success for
fine-tuning and zero-shot transfer to downstream tasks[21,
12, 26] by training on a general-purpose large-scale dataset
instead of a small task-level dataset. While general,
large-scale pre-training is computationally expensive (e.g.
CoCa[36] trains on 2048 TPUs for 5 days) and typically performed on a pre-filtered dataset (e.g. WIT400M [21] used
by CLIP [21] is created by searching for image-text pairs
with text containing a set of 500,000 queries from WordNet (includes ImageNet taxonomy) and Wikipedia, and [24]
uses this model to create the LAION dataset).
Such filtering pipelines usually involve manual laborintensive efforts to remove data that is unlikely useful for
downstream tasks [12, 21]. Recent effort has been made
to curate data for high-quality image-text pairs (such as
CC3M[25], CC12M[3], YFCC15M[29, 21], WIT400M[21]

CLIP Pre-training
Raw Data

Text
Model
Static Training Data

Vision
Model

Filtering Pipeline

Training Loop

Curation in Training
Text
Model

Raw Data

Text
Model
Metadata

Data Curation Loop

Dynamic Training Data

Vision
Model

Training Loop

Figure 1: A conceptual illustration of CLIP/LiT training vs. CiT.
Vanilla CLIP training uses static data from offline human filtering (e.g. cleaned YFCC15M or WIT400M [21]) and optimizes the
model. Instead, our CiT incorporates dynamic data curation into
training in two loops: (i) an outer curation loop improving data (for
downstream tasks) given the current model; (ii) an inner loop optimizing the model given the curated data. The trained text model
connects the loops by providing embeddings for curation.

and LAION[24, 23]). Nevertheless, research is typically
tied to the static datasets or model weights (if the data is
not released) and is not able to access or change the data
pipelines or model architectures. Further, work is limited
by the prohibitive cost of training on these large image-text
datasets (e.g. the CLIP model is trained on WIT400M for
12 days using 256 GPUs).
In this work, our goal is to empower training with the capability of adjusting the data distribution. Our intention is to
dynamically curate the data during training and our key idea
is to use the learned text representation of vision-language
models to measure relevance of the data w.r.t. the task of interest. Given metadata (from downstream tasks e.g. a class
name such as “chicken”), we measure its embedding similarity to the training data. This similarity can guide us for
the decision of including this data into our training process.
For example a caption containing the word “giraffe” will

15180

