This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PETRv2: A Unified Framework for 3D Perception from Multi-Camera Images
Yingfei Liu†

Junjie Yan† ✉ Fan Jia†
Shuailin Li†
Tiancai Wang
Xiangyu Zhang
MEGVII Technology

Aqi Gao

{liuyingfei, yanjunjie, jiafan, lishuailin, gaoaqi, wangtiancai, zhangxiangyu}@megvii.com
z

z
3D boxes

anchor points

o

z
anchor lanes

BEV grids

o

y

o

y

y

unvisible points

x

x

(a)

BEV features
(b)

3D lanes
x

(c)

Figure 1. Three kinds of task-specific queries for multi-tasks: (a) 3D object detection (b) BEV segmentation (c) 3D lane detection. The
detection queries are defined in the whole 3D space and initialized with anchor points. The segmentation queries are initialized with BEV
grid points and represent different BEV patches. The lane queries are denoted as the anchor lanes constructed with several sample points.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose PETRv2, a unified framework for 3D perception from multi-view images. Based on
PETR [25], PETRv2 explores the effectiveness of temporal
modeling, which utilizes the temporal information of previous frames to boost 3D object detection. More specifically,
we extend the 3D position embedding (3D PE) in PETR
for temporal modeling. The 3D PE achieves the temporal
alignment on object position of different frames. To support
for multi-task learning (e.g., BEV segmentation and 3D lane
detection), PETRv2 provides a simple yet effective solution
by introducing task-specific queries, which are initialized
under different spaces. PETRv2 achieves state-of-the-art
performance on 3D object detection, BEV segmentation and
3D lane detection. Detailed robustness analysis is also conducted on PETR framework. Code is available at https:
//github.com/megvii-research/PETR.

1. Introduction
Recently, 3D perception from multi-camera images for
autonomous driving system has drawn a great attention.
The multi-camera 3D object detection methods can be divided into BEV-based [13, 12] and DETR-based [43, 25,
21] approaches. BEV-based methods (e.g., BEVDet [13])
explicitly transform the multi-view features into bird-eye† Equal Contribution. ✉ Corresponding author.

view (BEV) representation by LSS [34]. Different from
these BEV-based countparts, DETR-based approaches [43]
models each 3D object as an object query and achieve
the end-to-end modeling with Hungarian algorithm [17].
Among these methods, PETR [25], based on DETR [4],
converts the multi-view 2D features to 3D position-aware
features by adding the 3D position embedding (3D PE). The
sparse queries, initialized from 3D space (see Fig. 1(a)), can
directly perceive the 3D object information by interacting
with the produced 3D position-aware features.
Recently, several works [21, 12] explore the effectiveness of temporal cues to improve the speed estimation of
surrounding objects. Except for the 3D object detection,
some followers [50, 21] further extend the BEV representation for multi-task learning, e.g. BEV segmentation and
motion prediction. Considering the simplicity of PETR, we
wonder if it is possible for the sparse-query paradigm in
PETR to follow the success of BEV-based methods. In this
paper, we aim to build a strong and unified framework by
extending the PETR with temporal modeling and the support for multi-task learning.
For temporal modeling, the main problem is how to align
the object position of different frames in 3D space. Existing
works [12, 21] solved this problem from the perspective of
feature alignment. For example, BEVDet4D [12] explicitly
aligns the BEV feature of previous frame with current frame
by pose transformation. However, PETR implicitly encodes
the 3D position into the 2D image features and fails to perform the explicit feature transformation. Since PETR has

3262

