This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CBA: Improving Online Continual Learning via Continual Bias Adaptor
Quanziang Wang1
1

Renzhen Wang1*

Xi’an Jiaotong University
4

2

Yichen Wu2

Xixi Jia3

City University of Hong Kong

3

Deyu Meng1,4 *
Xidian University

Macau University of Science and Technology

quanziangwang@gmail.com, {rzwang, dymeng}@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Online continual learning (CL) aims to learn new knowledge and consolidate previously learned knowledge from
non-stationary data streams. Due to the time-varying training setting, the model learned from a changing distribution easily forgets the previously learned knowledge and biases toward the newly received task. To address this problem, we propose a Continual Bias Adaptor (CBA) module
to augment the classifier network to adapt to catastrophic
distribution change during training, such that the classifier network is able to learn a stable consolidation of previously learned tasks. In the testing stage, CBA can be
removed which introduces no additional computation cost
and memory overhead. We theoretically reveal the reason
why the proposed method can effectively alleviate catastrophic distribution shifts, and empirically demonstrate its
effectiveness through extensive experiments based on four
rehearsal-based baselines and three public continual learning benchmarks1 .

1. Introduction
Continual learning (CL) [40, 48] focuses on designing
a model that can learn continuously from streaming data
and accumulate new knowledge while consolidating previously learned knowledge. In the context of CL, the data
distribution of streaming tasks is in general non-stationary
and changes over time, which violates the independent and
identically distributed (i.i.d) assumption that is commonly
adopted in machine learning. Therefore, continual learning suffers from the notorious catastrophic forgetting problem [16], where the model severely forgets the previously
learned knowledge after being trained on a new task.
Traditional offline CL stores all training batches of the
current task and the model is trained on these samples for
* Corresponding author
1 Code is available at https://github.com/wqza/CBA-online-CL

multiple epochs with repeat shuffle. However, the availability of previously learned batches might be restricted due to
privacy concerns [14] or memory limitations. In this paper, we mainly focus on a more challenging and realistic
setting, online CL [28], where samples from each task can
be trained only single-pass (i.e., one epoch) and the past
batches are not accessible.
In online CL, the distribution of the training data changes
over time and it differs not only from the joint distribution
of all tasks (as in offline CL) but also from the distribution
of the task they belong to. Therefore, online CL commonly
causes an even more severe distribution shift, which further
intensifies catastrophic forgetting. To alleviate this problem, rehearsal-based algorithms [35, 48] employed a small
memory buffer to store examples of previous tasks so as to
approximate the joint distribution of all seen training data,
then collectively trained the model on the memory buffer
with the current task. Along this line, DER++ [7] utilized
an additional knowledge distillation to further reply logits
of old task samples, and RAR [46] used random augmentation to address the overfitting problem of the small memory buffer. In another vein, a wide range of works attribute
catastrophic forgetting to task-recency bias [30], i.e., the
classifiers tend to classify samples into currently received
classes. They in turn proposed to improve the original linear
classifier [1, 20, 44] or directly replace the classifier with the
nearest classifier [30, 35] to mitigate the adverse effects of
class imbalance between currently received classes and replayed classes. Despite the promising performance, almost
all of these methods implicitly view task-recency bias as a
label distribution shift and tackle it from the perspective of
class imbalance problem, which makes these methods suboptimal in practice [8].
In fact, the target of online CL is to accomplish a stable
consolidation of knowledge for all learned tasks, by training
a classifier to fit the posterior probability P(Y |X), where X
and Y represent stochastic variables of the input data and
the corresponding label, respectively. According to Bayes’s
rule P(Y |X) ∝ P(X|Y )P(Y ), the posterior probability de-

19082

