This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TiDAL: Learning Training Dynamics for Active Learning
Seong Min Kye1,† Kwanghee Choi2,† Hyeongmin Byun1 Buru Chang3,∗
1
Hyperconnect 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Sogang University

Abstract

Target
Classifier

Training Samples

1. Introduction
“There is a tide in the affairs of men. Which taken at the
flood, leads on to fortune.” — William Shakespeare
Active learning (AL) [5, 31] aims to solve the realworld problem of selecting the most useful data samples
from large-scale unlabeled data pools and annotating them
to expand labeled data under a limited budget. Since the
current deep neural networks are data-hungry, AL has increasingly gained attention in recent years. Existing AL
methods can be divided into two mainstream categories:
diversity- and uncertainty-based methods. Diversity-based
methods [42, 14] focus on constructing a subset that fol† Equal contribution.
∗ Corresponding author.

This work was done while all authors were affiliated with Hyperconnect.

Hard

Training Dynamics (TD)

TD Pred.
Module
Unlabeled Samples

Predict

Certain Uncertain

TD Pred.
Module

Hard

Easy

Epoch

Predicted TD
Certain
Skipped

Uncertain
Chosen

Class

Approximated by

If tracked

Actual TD
Certain

Uncertain

𝑝(𝑦|𝑥)

Active learning (AL) aims to select the most useful data
samples from an unlabeled data pool and annotate them to
expand the labeled dataset under a limited budget. Especially, uncertainty-based methods choose the most uncertain samples, which are known to be effective in improving
model performance. However, previous methods often overlook training dynamics (TD), defined as the ever-changing
model behavior during optimization via stochastic gradient descent, even though other research areas have empirically shown that TD provides important clues for measuring the data uncertainty. In this paper, we first provide theoretical and empirical evidence to argue the usefulness of
utilizing the ever-changing model behavior rather than the
fully trained model snapshot. We then propose a novel AL
method, Training Dynamics for Active Learning (TiDAL),
which efficiently predicts the training dynamics of unlabeled data to estimate their uncertainty. Experimental results show that our TiDAL achieves better or comparable
performance on both balanced and imbalanced benchmark
datasets compared to state-of-the-art AL methods, which estimate data uncertainty using only static information after
model training.

Easy

buru@sogang.ac.kr

𝑝(𝑦 ∗ |𝑥)

kwanghec@andrew.cmu.edu

𝑝(𝑦|𝑥)
ҧ

{harris,hyeongmin.byun}@hpcnt.com

Figure 1: Our proposed TiDAL. TD of training samples
x may differ even if they converge to the same final predicted probability p(y ∗ |x) (Upper row). Hence, we are motivated to utilize the readily available rich information generated during training, i.e., leveraging TD. We estimate TD
of large-scale unlabeled data using a prediction module instead of tracking the actual TD of all the unlabeled samples
to avoid the computational overhead (Lower row).

lows the target data distribution. Uncertainty-based methods [13, 6, 52] choose the most uncertain samples, which
are known to be effective in improving model performance.
Hence, the most critical question for the latter becomes,
“How can we quantify the data uncertainty?”
In this paper, we leverage training dynamics (TD) to
quantify data uncertainty. TD is defined as the everchanging model behavior on each data sample during optimization via stochastic gradient descent. Recent studies [9, 29, 48, 47] have provided empirical evidence that
TD provides important clues for measuring the contribution
of each data sample to model performance improvement.
Inspired by these studies, we argue that the data uncertainty

22335

