This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Frequency-aware GAN for Adversarial Manipulation Generation
Peifei Zhu, Genki Osada, Hirokatsu Kataoka, Tsubasa Takahashi
LINE Corporation
{peifei.zhu, genki.osada, jpz4219, tsubasa.takahashi}@linecorp.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of advanced editing software, manipulated images are becoming more common on
social media. Despite the positive aspects, there are possibilities that manipulated images are used to spread fake
news and misleading information. Therefore, it is important to develop methods that can automatically detect manipulated images.
Various image manipulation detectors [5, 20, 32, 4] have
been proposed and achieved high performance on manip-

Authentic

Detection

PGD

FGSM

Original

Detection

Ours AdvGAN

Image manipulation techniques have drawn growing
concerns as manipulated images might cause morality and
security problems. Various methods have been proposed to
detect manipulations and achieved promising performance.
However, these methods might be vulnerable to adversarial
attacks. In this work, we design an Adversarial Manipulation Generation (AMG) task to explore the vulnerability of
image manipulation detectors. We first propose an optimal
loss function and extend existing attacks to generate adversarial examples. We observe that existing spatial attacks
cause large degradation in image quality and find the loss
of high-frequency detailed components might be its major
reason. Inspired by this observation, we propose a novel
adversarial attack that incorporates both spatial and frequency features into the GAN architecture to generate adversarial examples. We further design an encoder-decoder
architecture with skip connections of high-frequency components to preserve fine details. We evaluated our method
on three image manipulation detectors (FCN, ManTra-Net
and MVSS-Net) with three benchmark datasets (DEFACTO,
CASIAv2 and COVER). Experiments show that our method
generates adversarial examples significantly fast (0.01s per
image), preserves better image quality (PSNR 30% higher
than spatial attacks), and achieves a high attack success
rate. We also observe that the examples generated by AMG
can fool both classification and segmentation models, which
indicates better transferability among different tasks.

Manipulated

Figure 1. Adversarial examples generated under the proposed
AMG task. For the manipulated image, the manipulations of the
original image can be detected by a detector named MVSS-Net
[5]. After applying attacks, the detector fails to correctly detect
manipulations. For the authentic image, attacking the original image results in false-positive detection. Compared to previous attack methods, the examples generated by our method have much
less noise and can successfully fool the detector at pixel-level.

ulated image datasets [26, 7, 36, 16]. However, existing
methods can be vulnerable to adversarial examples. For a
manipulated image, adding imperceptible adversarial perturbations might cause the detector to detect a completely
wrong result. Several works have already studied adversarial face forgery that fools the classification result of face
forgery detector by the adversarial examples [15, 19, 14].
Since the detectors developed recently not only focus on
classifying manipulated or authentic but also try to pinpoint the manipulated regions, we also go one step further
to generate adversarial examples for the detectors that apply semantic segmentation. We name this task Adversarial
Manipulation Generation (AMG). This topic has not been
studied before and it is more difficult because instead of
only fooling a class label, our target is to fool every pixel in
both manipulated and authentic regions. We further show

4315

