This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisit PCA-based technique for Out-of-Distribution Detection
Wei-Shi Zheng1,3
Yuren Zhou1†
Zhouwu Liu1,3 *
Ruixuan Wang1,2,3†
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen Univerisity, Guangzhou, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, MOE, Guangzhou, China
{guanxy36,liuzhw33}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org, {zhouyuren,wangruix5}@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Xiaoyuan Guan1,3 *

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is a desired ability
to ensure the reliability and safety of intelligent systems. A
scoring function is often designed to measure the degree of
any new data being an OOD sample. While most designed
scoring functions are based on a single source of information (e.g., the classifier’s output, logits, or feature vector),
recent studies demonstrate that fusion of multiple sources
may help better detect OOD data. In this study, after detailed analysis of the issue in OOD detection by the conventional principal component analysis (PCA), we propose
fusing a simple regularized PCA-based reconstruction error with other source of scoring function to further improve
OOD detection performance. In particular, when combined
with a strong energy score-based OOD method, the regularized reconstruction error helps achieve new state-ofthe-art OOD detection results on multiple standard benchmarks. The code is available at https://github.com/SYSUMIA-GROUP/pca-based-out-of-distribution-detection.

1. Introduction
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection refers to the ability
of a model to correctly detect samples that are from a different distribution compared to that of the in-distribution (ID)
training data [13, 35]. It is a crucial ability to ensure the
reliability and safety of machine learning systems. For instance, in autonomous driving, the system should be able to
detect previously unseen scenarios or objects and alert the
human operator when it cannot make a safe decision. However, current intelligent systems are often limited in OOD
detection.
Multiple approaches have been proposed to improve
model’s OOD detection ability [4, 9, 21, 26, 34]. The main
* Authors contributed equally
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. The OOD detection performance (AUROC) on two
benchmarks from our method and representative strong baselines.
The ImageNet-1K Benchmark includes the ID set ImageNet-1K
and four OOD sets iNaturalist, SUN, Places, and Textures. The
CIFAR-100 Benchmark includes the ID set CIFAR-100 and seven
OOD sets SVHN, Tiny-ImageNet, iSUN, LSUN-Crop, LSUNResize, Textures and Places365.

objective is to design or derive a scoring function whose
output is different between OOD input and ID input. For
deep learning classifier models, the scoring function is often designed based on three sources of information, i.e.,
the output probability of the classifier [7, 8, 15, 38], the
logit (i.e., input to the softmax function) at the last classifier
layer [6, 10, 16, 31], and the feature vector output from the
feature extractor part of the classifier [14, 18, 22, 29]. However, one source of information is often inherently limited.
For example, softmax output and logit often discard some of
the information in the feature vector even the discarded information might be helpful for OOD detection, while scoring function solely based the feature vector cannot utilize
the class-associated weight parameters at the last classifier
layer. Based on this observation, one recent study starts
to explore combination of multiple sources for further improving OOD detection performance [29, 40]. Specifically,

19431

