This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

T oo Large; Data Reduction for Vision-Language Pre-Training
Alex Jinpeng Wang, Kevin Qinghong Lin, David Junhao Zhang,
Stan Weixian Lei, Mike Zheng Shou*
Show Lab, National University of Singapore

Abstract
This paper examines the problems of severe imagetext misalignment and high redundancy in the widely-used
large-scale Vision-Language Pre-Training (VLP) datasets.
To address these issues, we propose an efficient and
straightforward Vision-Language learning algorithm called
TL;DR, which aims to compress the existing large VLP data
into a small, high-quality set. Our approach consists of two
major steps. First, a codebook-based encoder-decoder captioner is developed to select representative samples. Second, a new caption is generated to complement the original captions for selected samples, mitigating the text-image
misalignment problem while maintaining uniqueness. As
the result, TL;DR enables us to reduce the large dataset into
a small set of high-quality data, which can serve as an alternative pre-training dataset. This algorithm significantly
speeds up the time-consuming pretraining process. Specifically, TL;DR can compress the mainstream VLP datasets at
a high ratio, e.g., reduce well-cleaned CC3M dataset from
2.82M to 0.67M (∼24%) and noisy YFCC15M from 15M
to 2.5M (∼16.7%). Extensive experiments with three popular VLP models over seven downstream tasks show that
VLP model trained on the compressed dataset provided by
TL;DR can perform similar or even better results compared
with training on the full-scale dataset1 .

1. Introduction
The recent “scale-is-everything” viewpoint has become a
widely accepted notion in the Vision-language Pre-training
(VLP) communtity [40, 7, 34, 17, 1]. According to this
view, the scale of the data has increased from the original
tens of thousands-level (e.g., COCO [26] and VG [20]) to
millions-level (e.g., CC3M [40] and CC12M [7]), and even
up to billions-level (e.g., YFCC100M [43], WIT400M [34],
and LAION400M [39]). Approaches [57, 34, 17] trained
on these large-scale data show remarking performance im* Corresponding Author.
1 https://github.com/showlab/datacentric.vlp

Figure 1: Does using more data really lead to better performance in VLP? Instead of training on the full-scale
CC3M dataset, we delete data with low image-text matching score. We find that BLIP [22] model pretrained on
50% reserved data even obtains better result than full-scale
dataset on downstream COCO retrieval [26]. This observation exposes there exists serious misalignment between
text&visual modalities and data redundancy in dataset.
provement in various downstream tasks.
However, simply scaling-up data brings two critical challenges: i. Larger image-text datasets lead to more training
cost (e.g., Pretraining CoCa takes about 5 days on 2,048
CloudTPUv4 chips [57]) and storage overhead, which is
difficult to afford. ii. Obtaining high-quality VLP data requires massive data and well-designed collecting/filtering
pipeline, which is expensive. For instance, the CC3M [40]
data was obtained after filtering 5 billion collected images.
These challenges are daunting and may impede the participation of numerous researchers in the VLP community.
In this study, we stop hunting for larger-scale data
blindly and ask an important question: Does employing a
larger dataset always result in better performance in VLP?
To explore and answer this question, we begin with a simple
experiment. First, we utilize a pre-trained BLIP [22] model
to calculate the Image-Text Matching (ITM) scores for all
samples in the clean CC3M dataset. Subsequently, we remove a portion of the samples with the lowest ITM scores
and evaluate the transfer learning results, as shown in Figure 1. Surprisingly, discarding 50% of the samples slightly
improves performance. This remarkable finding challenges
the prevailing belief that employing larger amounts of data
invariably leads to superior VLP outcomes.

3147

