This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VLSlice: Interactive Vision-and-Language Slice Discovery
Eric Slyman
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR, USA

Minsuk Kahng
Google Research
Atlanta, GA, USA

Stefan Lee
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR, USA

slymane@oregonstate.edu

kahng@google.com

leestef@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
Recent work in vision-and-language demonstrates that
large-scale pretraining can learn generalizable models that
are efficiently transferable to downstream tasks. While this
may improve dataset-scale aggregate metrics, analyzing
performance around hand-crafted subgroups targeting specific bias dimensions reveals systemic undesirable behaviors. However, this subgroup analysis is frequently stalled
by annotation efforts, which require extensive time and resources to collect the necessary data. Prior art attempts
to automatically discover subgroups to circumvent these
constraints but typically leverages model behavior on existing task-specific annotations and rapidly degrades on more
complex inputs beyond “tabular” data, none of which study
vision-and-language models. This paper presents VLSlice,
an interactive system enabling user-guided discovery of coherent representation-level subgroups with consistent visiolinguistic behavior, denoted as vision-and-language slices,
from unlabeled image sets. We show that VLSlice enables
users to quickly generate diverse high-coherency slices in a
user study (n=22) and release the tool publicly1 .

1. Introduction
Large-scale vision-and-language models trained on curated [25, 9, 36] and web-scrapped [29, 18, 8] data have
led to significant improvements over task-specific models
when transferred to downstream tasks in terms of aggregate metrics. However, researchers probing these models on
hand-curated datasets have revealed problematic behaviors
and well-known biases [30, 33] learned during pretraining –
e.g. biases with respect to perceived gender, skin tone,2 and
occupation. These biases can lead to disparate representational performance for population subgroups, resulting in
1 https://github.com/slymane/vlslice
2 We use the term ‘skin tone’ rather than ‘race’ as race is a socially
constructed identity that can span a range of phenotypic features.

poor prediction quality for downstream applications such as
image captioning [15, 37] and search [28].
In the standard paradigm for bias analysis in vision-andlanguage models, researchers query and analyze a set of images that potentially exhibit bias. They often select a subject population of interest, some specific subgroups of those
subjects to analyze, and a bias dimension to measure against
the model [30, 33]. For example, Ross et al. [30] choose images of people as their subject population, label these based
on perceived gender and skin tone categories, and measure
model-predicted affinities between the labeled image subsets and text describing occupations or (un)pleasantness.
To effectively support analysis of such image sets for researchers, the set of images returned for the subject population subsets should be large, coherent, and representative
– i.e. containing enough images to make statistically significant statements, capturing a well-defined visual concept,
and covering the full diversity of visual presentation for the
selected concept rather than an arbitrary subset. Without
these, the biases may simply be noise (large), be obscured
by effects from images outside the intended subject group
being included (coherent), or be the result of some intersectional bias captured in the subset that is not consistent across
the whole expression of the visual concept (representative).
Collecting and labeling appropriate image sets that fulfill these properties can be an arduous task. Despite this,
manual annotation of static datasets along predefined subgroup and bias dimensions is the standard practice [19, 17].
This data collection methodology is expensive to perform
– effectively limiting broad bias-auditing to high-resource
institutions. Further, the one-off nature of this labeling process limits the scope of testing to pre-identified biases and
does not account for how concepts may shift in visual expression or cultural convention over time.
Several methods have been proposed to automatically
discover biased “slices” of data which share similar input
attributes and exhibit consistent responses from machine
learning models [10, 31, 14, 11, 32, 21]. These Slice Discovery Methods (SDMs) have typically been deployed in

15291

