This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FACET: Fairness in Computer Vision Evaluation Benchmark
Laura Gustafson

Chloe Rolland
Nikhila Ravi
Quentin Duval
Cheng-Yang Fu
Melissa Hall
Candace Ross
Meta AI Research, FAIR
facet@meta.com

Aaron Adcock

Abstract
Computer vision models have known performance disparities across attributes such as gender and skin tone. This
means during tasks such as classification and detection,
model performance differs for certain classes based on the
demographics of the people in the image. These disparities have been shown to exist, but until now there has not
been a unified approach to measure these differences for
common use-cases of computer vision models. We present a
new benchmark named FACET (FAirness in Computer Vision EvaluaTion), a large, publicly available evaluation set
of 32k images for some of the most common vision tasks
- image classification, object detection and segmentation.
For every image in FACET, we hired expert reviewers to
manually annotate person-related attributes such as perceived skin tone and hair type, manually draw bounding
boxes and label fine-grained person-related classes such
as disk jockey or guitarist. In addition, we use FACET
to benchmark state-of-the-art vision models and present
a deeper understanding of potential performance disparities and challenges across sensitive demographic attributes.
With the exhaustive annotations collected, we probe models
using single demographics attributes as well as multiple attributes using an intersectional approach (e.g. hair color
and perceived skin tone). Our results show that classification, detection, segmentation, and visual grounding models exhibit performance disparities across demographic attributes and intersections of attributes. These harms suggest that not all people represented in datasets receive fair
and equitable treatment in these vision tasks. We hope current and future results using our benchmark will contribute
to fairer, more robust vision models. FACET is available
publicly at https://facet.metademolab.com.

1. Introduction
The ability of computer vision models to perform a wide
range of tasks is due in no small part to large, widely used
datasets. These large-scale datasets containing millions of

Category:
Guitarist

Perceived skin tone:
3

4

4

5

5

5

6

Perceived Age:
Middle

Hair color:

Perceived gender presentation:

Photo is:

Black/Brown

With more maleness

Underexposed

Hair type:

Additional:

Visibility:

Wavy

Tattoo, facial hair

Face, torso visible

Figure 1: An example image and annotations from our
dataset FACET . Every image in FACET contains annotations from expert reviewers on the primary class, sensitive
attributes include perceived gender presentation, perceived
skin tone, and perceived age group and additional visual
attributes like hair color and type, visible tattoos, etc.
images often have image-level labels such as ImageNet [16]
or object-level annotations found in datasets such as MSCOCO [63] or Open Images [62]. Annotations are also used
at the person-level, in datasets such as CelebA [64], UTKFaces [98] and More Inclusive People Annotations (MIAP)
[84]. These person-level annotations in particular enable a
more fine-grained analysis and evaluation of model performance accross groups. Prior work using these person-level
annotations to evaluate model fairness has shown that vision
models learn societal biases and stereotypes, which negatively impact performance and cause downstream harms
[87, 101, 74, 90, 88]. This makes fairness datasets particularly important as vision models continue to grow.
One weakness of existing fairness datasets is that they
lack exhaustive and diverse demographic annotations that

20370

