This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GasMono: Geometry-Aided Self-Supervised Monocular Depth
Estimation for Indoor Scenes
1

1

Chaoqiang Zhao
1
Lei Zhou
Qiyu Sun
1

2

East China University of Science and Technology

Abstract
This paper tackles the challenges of self-supervised
monocular depth estimation in indoor scenes caused by
large rotation between frames and low texture. We ease
the learning process by obtaining coarse camera poses
from monocular sequences through multi-view geometry to
deal with the former. However, we found that limited by
the scale ambiguity across different scenes in the training dataset, a naı̈ve introduction of geometric coarse poses
cannot play a positive role in performance improvement,
which is counter-intuitive. To address this problem, we
propose to refine those poses during training through rotation and translation/scale optimization. To soften the
effect of the low texture, we combine the global reasoning of vision transformers with an overfitting-aware, iterative self-distillation mechanism, providing more accurate
depth guidance coming from the network itself. Experiments on NYUv2, ScanNet, 7scenes, and KITTI datasets
support the effectiveness of each component in our framework, which sets a new state-of-the-art for indoor selfsupervised monocular depth estimation, as well as outstanding generalization ability. Code and models are available at https://github.com/zxcqlf/GasMono

1. Introduction
Depth estimation from images is one of the fundamental tasks in computer vision and plays a key role in several higher-level applications [28, 44]. It has a long history
and has been intensively studied building upon multi-view
geometry [17, 37], exploiting image matching across two
or multiple images and their camera positions [31, 35, 41].
The advent of deep learning rejuvenated this field and introduced new, exciting perspectives. Among many, the possibility of learning to estimate depth out of a single image –
for long considered the holy grail in computer vision – be∗ Corresponding author, yangtang@ecust.edu.cn.

2

Matteo Poggi
1,∗
Yang Tang

MonoIndoor ++

Fabio Tosi
Stefano Mattoccia

2
2

University of Bologna

GT

Monodepth2

SC-Depthv2

GasMono

Figure 1. Comparison between existing methods [2, 11, 27] and
GasMono. Our framework shows remarkable accuracy on thin
objects and global structures.

came true [7, 9, 23, 38, 39]. However, this came at the cost
of requiring a massive amount of images annotated with
ground truth depth, often expensive to collect.
In light of this, multi-view geometry maintained a key
role in softening this latter constraint, allowing for the development of self-supervised monocular depth estimation
frameworks [57]. These replace the need for depth labels
by exploiting a proxy signal based on image reconstruction
of the frame given as input to the network, i.e. the target,
starting from one or multiple source images. The only requirement consists of collecting raw video sequences [64]
or rectified stereo images [12]. Among the two alternatives,
the former [64] results as the cheapest and most flexible,
since requiring a single camera only to move around and
collect training data, with the relative camera poses between
consecutive frames needing to be estimated by employing a
dedicated pose network (PoseNet) alongside the depth estimation task. A large body of literature built ever more accurate self-supervised solutions, mainly focusing on outdoor
environments – i.e. with driving context [10, 51] representing the preferred benchmark.
Nonetheless, the indoor setting is equally important for
the development of, among others, navigation and assistive
technologies, although featuring 1) much more complex
ego-motion configurations and 2) large untextured regions,

16209

