This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DLT: Conditioned layout generation with
Joint Discrete-Continuous Diffusion Layout Transformer
Elad Levi, Eli Brosh, Mykola Mykhailych, Meir Perez
Wix.com

Abstract
Generating visual layouts is an essential ingredient of
graphic design. The ability to condition layout generation on a partial subset of component attributes is critical to real-world applications that involve user interaction.
Recently, diffusion models have demonstrated high-quality
generative performances in various domains. However, it
is unclear how to apply diffusion models to the natural representation of layouts which consists of a mix of discrete
(class) and continuous (location, size) attributes. To address the conditioning layout generation problem, we introduce DLT, a joint discrete-continuous diffusion model.
DLT is a transformer-based model which has a flexible conditioning mechanism that allows for conditioning on any
given subset of all the layout component classes, locations,
and sizes. Our method outperforms state-of-the-art generative models on various layout generation datasets with
respect to different metrics and conditioning settings. Additionally, we validate the effectiveness of our proposed
conditioning mechanism and the joint continuous-diffusion
process. This joint process can be incorporated into a
wide range of mixed discrete-continuous generative tasks.
More information can be found on our project webpage:
https://wix-incubator.github.io/DLT

1. Introduction
An essential aspect of graphic design is layout creation:
the arrangement and sizing of visual components on a canvas or document. A well-designed layout enables users to
easily comprehend and efficiently interact with the information presented. The ability to generate high-quality layouts
is crucial for a range of applications, including user interfaces for mobile apps and websites [4] and graphic design
for information slides [6], magazines [38], scientific papers
[40], infographics [28], and indoor scenes [5].
To facilitate graphic design tasks, modelling approaches
such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [18],
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [14, 1], and masking

Figure 1: Overview of our Joint Discrete-Continuous diffusion
process for layout generation. The diffusion process is applied
jointly on both the continuous attributes of the components (size
and location) by adding a small Gaussian noise, and on the discrete
attributes of the components (class) by adding a noise that adds
a mass to the Mask class. The reverse diffusion model can be
conditioned on any given subset of the attributes.

completion [36, 16, 7] were explored for generating novel
layouts. These approaches employ various architectures
such as Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [14], and
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [17]. Recently proposed,
Transformer-based approaches [1, 36, 16, 7] have been
shown to produce diverse and plausible layouts for a variety
of applications and user requirements.
Layouts are often represented as a set of components,
each consisting of several attributes, such as class, position,
and size [18]. Inspired by recent advancements in NLP, a
common practice is to model a component as a sequence of
discrete attribute tokens, and a layout as the concatenation
of all attribute tokens [36, 7, 16]. The model is trained using
a self-supervised objective (either next-word completion or

2106

