This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Locomotion-Action-Manipulation:
Synthesizing Human-Scene Interactions in Complex 3D Environments
Jiye Lee
Seoul National University

Hanbyul Joo
Seoul National University

kay2353@snu.ac.kr

hbjoo@snu.ac.kr

Figure 1: Our system, LAMA, produces high-quality and realistic 3D human motions that include locomotion, scene interactions, and manipulations within a given 3D scene and designated interaction cues.

Abstract
Synthesizing interaction-involved human motions has
been challenging due to the high complexity of 3D environments and the diversity of possible human behaviors within.
We present LAMA, Locomotion-Action-MAnipulation, to
synthesize natural and plausible long- term human movements in complex indoor environments. The key motivation of LAMA is to build a unified framework to encompass a series of everyday motions including locomotion,
scene interaction, and object manipulation. Unlike existing
methods that require motion data “paired” with scanned
3D scenes for supervision, we formulate the problem as
a test-time optimization by using human motion capture
data only for synthesis. LAMA leverages a reinforcement
learning framework coupled with a motion matching algorithm for optimization, and further exploits a motion
editing framework via manifold learning to cover possible variations in interaction and manipulation. Throughout extensive experiments, we demonstrate that LAMA
outperforms previous approaches in synthesizing realistic
motions in various challenging scenarios. Project page:
https://jiyewise.github.io/projects/LAMA/.

1. Introduction
Synthesizing interactions within real-life 3D environments has been a challenging research problem due to its

complexity and diversity. The spatial constraint arising from
real-life 3D environments where many objects are cluttered
makes motion synthesis highly constrained and complex.
Furthermore, the nearly indefinite diversity of possible spatial arrangements of the 3D environment and human interaction behaviors makes generalization in synthesis difficult.
Due to the wide range of technical challenges involved in human-scene interactions, previous approaches
have focused on sub-problems, such as (1) modeling static
poses [24, 66, 68, 16, 61, 45, 69] or (2) human object interactions with a single target object or interaction
type [48, 67, 64, 49, 50, 44, 63, 10]. More recent methods [55, 54, 14] extend to synthesizing dynamic interaction
motions in real-world 3D scenes, where they use “scenepaired” motion datasets [15] in which motion is simultaneously captured with the surrounding 3D environment. As
such paired dataset is rare and difficult to scale up, the performance of these methods is fundamentally limited in fully
covering the complexity and diversity of human interaction
in real-world 3D scenes.
In this paper, we present LAMA, Locomotion-ActionMAnipulation, to synthesize natural and plausible longterm human motions in complex indoor environments. The
key motivation of LAMA is to build a unified framework
covering a series of everyday motions within real-world
3D scenes: locomotion through cluttered areas, interaction
with the scene, and manipulation of objects. Unlike previous approaches [55, 14] that use a “scene-paired” motion

9663

