This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PNI : Industrial Anomaly Detection using Position and Neighborhood
Information
Jaehyeok Bae ∗ 1,2
Jae-Han Lee * 1
Seyun Kim † 1
1
2
Gauss Labs Inc.
Seoul National University
wogur110@snu.ac.kr, {jaehan.lee, seyun.kim}@gausslabs.ai

Abstract

1. Introduction
In industrial inspection [1], delivering defective products
to customers due to detection failure can be costly, and false
detection can increase manufacturing costs. Therefore, high
prediction accuracy alone is insufficient, and low false positive rate (FPR) and false negative rate (FNR) are preferred.
Additionally, collecting abnormal samples can be difficult,
making it almost impossible to build a supervised model
for the task. Thus, anomaly detection methods that use only
normal samples are adopted. Anomaly localization quantifies the anomaly of each pixel in an input image, allowing
users to identify where the defect is located and improve
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

PatchCore

Proposed

Hazelnut

Cable

Anomaly Image
with G.T.

Transistor

Because anomalous samples cannot be used for training, many anomaly detection and localization methods use
pre-trained networks and non-parametric modeling to estimate encoded feature distribution. However, these methods neglect the impact of position and neighborhood information on the distribution of normal features. To overcome this, we propose a new algorithm, PNI, which estimates the normal distribution using conditional probability given neighborhood features, modeled with a multilayer perceptron network. Moreover, position information is utilized by creating a histogram of representative
features at each position. Instead of simply resizing the
anomaly map, the proposed method employs an additional
refine network trained on synthetic anomaly images to better interpolate and account for the shape and edge of the
input image. We conducted experiments on the MVTec
AD benchmark dataset and achieved state-of-the-art performance, with 99.56% and 98.98% AUROC scores in
anomaly detection and localization, respectively. Code
is available at https://github.com/wogur110/
PNI_Anomaly_Detection.

Normal Image

Figure 1: Examples from MVTec AD [1]. The normal
images (left) and the anomalous images (second column)
overlaid by ground truth mask are followed by the anomaly
maps from PatchCore [21] (third column) and our proposed
approach (right). The contours overlaid on anomaly maps
are from thresholds optimizing F1 scores of anomaly localization.
manufacturing processes. Figure 1 displays example images and results of an existing method and our proposed
approach from the MVTec AD benchmark dataset.
Since there are only normal samples available for training, conventional classification methods cannot be used.
One approach is to generate defective samples to train classifiers with supervised learning [29, 28, 22]. CutPaste [17],
for instance, used masks of rectangular and scar shapes to
learn representation in a self-supervised manner. However,
these methods show relatively low performance compared
to other recent methods due to the lack of realism in abnormal patterns. To overcome this difficulty, many recently
proposed methods [6, 21] adopt a pre-trained network such
as pre-trained ResNet [11] using ImageNet [8], which intensively learned low-level image features from a super large-

6373

