This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalized Lightness Adaptation with Channel Selective Normalization
Mingde Yao1 ,* Jie Huang1 ,* Xin Jin2 , Ruikang Xu1 , Shenglong Zhou1 , Man Zhou3 , Zhiwei Xiong1†
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Eastern Institute of Technology
3
Nanyang Technological University
Abstract

Test on known lightness

Lightness adaptation is vital to the success of image
processing to avoid unexpected visual deterioration, which
covers multiple aspects, e.g., low-light image enhancement,
image retouching, and inverse tone mapping. Existing
methods typically work well on their trained lightness conditions but perform poorly in unknown ones due to their
limited generalization ability. To address this limitation,
we propose a novel generalized lightness adaptation algorithm that extends conventional normalization techniques
through a channel ﬁltering design, dubbed Channel Selective Normalization (CSNorm). The proposed CSNorm purposely normalizes the statistics of lightness-relevant channels and keeps other channels unchanged, so as to improve feature generalization and discrimination. To optimize CSNorm, we propose an alternating training strategy
that effectively identiﬁes lightness-relevant channels. The
model equipped with our CSNorm only needs to be trained
on one lightness condition and can be well generalized to
unknown lightness conditions. Experimental results on multiple benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of
CSNorm in enhancing the generalization ability for the existing lightness adaptation methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/mdyao/CSNorm.

1. Introduction
Lightness adaptation is a vital step in image processing, encompassing tasks such as low-light image enhancement [27, 31], image retouching [29], and inverse tone mapping [7]. These tasks have beneﬁted signiﬁcantly from the
development of advanced neural network architectures. Although numerous powerful lightness adaptation methods
have been proposed, the generalization problem [56, 46] for
lightness adaptation still exists and is rarely explored.
In real-world applications, applying lightness adaptation
* Co-ﬁrst author.
† Corresponding author: zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn.

1
10668

GT
Test on unknown lightness
darker

GT
brighter

GT
Input

DRBN [59]

DRBN-CSNorm

Figure 1: Visual comparisons on known and unknown lightness
conditions. The model equipped with our CSNorm can generalize
well to other unknown lightness while keeping the performance on
the known lightness.

models to unknown lightness conditions is quite challenging due to the brightness discrepancies between training
and testing data [39, 52]. Existing lightness adaptation approaches [31, 65, 59, 32, 1, 49, 7, 24] primarily focus on
addressing the challenge of accurate image reconstruction.
However, they often underperform on wide-range scenes
with other lightness conditions due to their over-ﬁtting to
the training lightness component, leading to unsatisfactory
visual effects (Fig. 1) and inadequate generalization in complex real-world scenarios.
An alternative way is constructing a larger mixedlightness dataset including more lightness conditions, but
it is impractical for many complicated cases and too timeconsuming for cumbersome acquisition from diverse domains [47, 67]. Besides, existing models suffer from the
drawback of inadequately encapsulating generalization and
discrimination abilities, where the former is responsible for
the performance on unknown lightness conditions and the
latter mainly corresponds to the reconstruction characteris-

