This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TF-ICON: Diffusion-Based Training-Free Cross-Domain Image Composition
Shilin Lu1 Yanzhu Liu2 Adams Wai-Kin Kong1
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R) & Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR, Singapore
shilin002@e.ntu.edu.sg, liu yanzhu@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, adamskong@ntu.edu.sg

‘a professional photograph of an Eiffel
tower in the distance, ultra realistic’

‘an oil painting of a hamburger, Van
Gogh Style’

‘a professional photograph of a puppy
on the beach, ultra realistic’

(a) Composition within the photorealism domain

‘a pencil drawing of a sheep in the
sunset’

‘an oil painting of a waffle, Van Gogh
Style’

(b) Composition between real & oil painting domains

‘a pencil drawing of a panda in the
sunset’

‘a cartoon animation of buildings in the
distance’

(c) Composition between real & sketchy painting domains

‘a cartoon animation of an Eiffel tower
in the distance’

(d) Composition between real & cartoon domains

Figure 1: Image composition aims to seamlessly blend distinct objects into a speciﬁc visual context. Our training-free framework equips attention-based text-driven diffusion models with the capability to achieve this task across various domains (a)
photorealism, (b) oil painting, (c) sketching, and (d) cartoon animation, within 20 sampling steps.

Abstract
Text-driven diffusion models have exhibited impressive generative capabilities, enabling various image editing tasks. In this paper, we propose TF-ICON, a novel
Training-Free Image COmpositioN framework that harnesses the power of text-driven diffusion models for crossdomain image-guided composition. This task aims to seamlessly integrate user-provided objects into a speciﬁc visual context. Current diffusion-based methods often involve
costly instance-based optimization or ﬁnetuning of pretrained models on customized datasets, which can potentially undermine their rich prior. In contrast, TF-ICON can
leverage off-the-shelf diffusion models to perform crossdomain image-guided composition without requiring additional training, ﬁnetuning, or optimization. Moreover, we
introduce the exceptional prompt, which contains no information, to facilitate text-driven diffusion models in accurately inverting real images into latent representations,

forming the basis for compositing. Our experiments show
that equipping Stable Diffusion with the exceptional prompt
outperforms state-of-the-art inversion methods on various
datasets (CelebA-HQ, COCO, and ImageNet), and that TFICON surpasses prior baselines in versatile visual domains.
Code is available at https://github.com/Shilin-LU/TF-ICON

1. Introduction
Image composition task involves incorporating unique
objects from different photos to create a harmonious image
within a speciﬁc visual context, a.k.a. image-guided composition. For instance, consider the scenario where one desires to incorporate a beloved panda into one’s favorite artwork, e.g., oil or sketchy painting. The objective is to create
a new image where the panda blends seamlessly into the
scene without altering the appearance of the panda and the
background, just as an artist meticulously crafted this panda

2294

