This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural LiDAR Fields for Novel View Synthesis
Shengyu Huang1,2 Zan Gojcic2
Yoni Kasten2 Sanja Fidler2,3,4
1

ETH Zurich

2

NVIDIA

3

Zian Wang2,3,4 Francis Williams2
Konrad Schindler1 Or Litany2

University of Toronto

4

Vector Institute

https://research.nvidia.com/labs/toronto-ai/nfl/

Abstract
We present Neural Fields for LiDAR (NFL), a method
to optimise a neural field scene representation from LiDAR
measurements, with the goal of synthesizing realistic LiDAR
scans from novel viewpoints. NFL combines the rendering
power of neural fields with a detailed, physically motivated
model of the LiDAR sensing process, thus enabling it to accurately reproduce key sensor behaviors like beam divergence, secondary returns, and ray dropping. We evaluate
NFL on synthetic and real LiDAR scans and show that it
outperforms explicit reconstruct-then-simulate methods as
well as other NeRF-style methods on LiDAR novel view synthesis task. Moreover, we show that the improved realism of
the synthesized views narrows the domain gap to real scans
and translates to better registration and semantic segmentation performance.

1. Introduction
The goal of novel view synthesis is to generate a view
of a 3D scene, from a viewpoint at which no real sensor
image has been captured. This offers the possibility to observe real scenes from a virtual, unobserved perspective.
Among other applications, it has tremendous potential for
autonomous driving: synthetic novel views may be used to
train and test perception algorithms across a wider range of
viewing conditions, thus enhancing robustness and generalization. Moreover, novel view synthesis becomes critical
when the desired viewpoints are not known in advance, e.g.,
during training of a planning module whose decisions determine future vehicle locations.
Neural radiance fields (NeRFs) have led to unprecedented visual quality when synthesizing novel camera
views [2, 29, 30, 52]. These methods represent the 3D scene
in form of continuous density and radiance fields, from
which images can be generated through volume rendering,
mimicking the image acquisition process. The inductive
bias of neural networks imparts NeRFs the ability to interpolate complex lighting and reflectance behaviours with a

high degree of realism.
While most prior works focused on synthesizing camera views, 3D perception in the autonomous driving context
typically relies partly (or even exclusively) on LiDAR measurements. Synthesizing realistic LiDAR scans from novel
viewpoints thus has a lot of potential for data augmentation
and closed-loop testing of autonomous navigation systems.
The problem of synthesizing novel LiDAR views has
previously been addressed in two stages [24]. First, extract an explicit surface representation such as surfels or
a triangular mesh from the scanned point clouds. Then,
simulate LiDAR measurements from a novel viewpoint by
casting rays and intersecting them with the surface model.
Like for images, explicit reconstruction (which is not optimised towards the subsequent synthesis step) suffers from
discretization artifacts and introduces noticeable errors [46].
Moreover, the rendering assumes an idealised ray model
and neglects the divergence of the LiDAR beams, which
causes frequent second returns from distant surfaces.
Here, we instead build on a main insight of NeRF [29]:
directly optimizing an implicit scene representation for
novel view synthesis can produce more realistic outputs
than the reconstruct-then-simulate approach. Specifically,
we propose Neural Fields for LiDAR (NFL), a NeRF-style
representation for synthesizing novel LiDAR viewpoints.
Several NeRF extensions have utilized range measurements as additional supervision, and have shown that constraining the scene geometry more tightly can yield better
(camera) view synthesis [8, 38]. Yet, the output of those
methods are synthetic images, not LiDAR scans, consequently they have not paid attention to effects specific to
LiDAR sensing: a laser scanner does not directly sense
range, rather it measures the returned light energy per ray
and determines the range based on the waveform. This includes the possibilities that there are multiple returns1 from
the emitted ray, or no return at all.
Our formulation closely adheres to the principles of the
LiDAR measurement process and incorporates them into
1 In principle there can be >2 returns, but automotive LiDAR sensors
typically record the first two echos.

18236

