This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dark Side Augmentation: Generating Diverse Night Examples for Metric Learning
Albert Mohwald
Tomas Jenicek
Ondřej Chum
VRG, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
mohwaalb@fel.cvut.cz

jenicto2@fel.cvut.cz

Original

Abstract
Image retrieval methods based on CNN descriptors rely
on metric learning from a large number of diverse examples of positive and negative image pairs. Domains, such as
night-time images, with limited availability and variability
of training data suffer from poor retrieval performance even
with methods performing well on standard benchmarks. We
propose to train a GAN-based synthetic-image generator,
translating available day-time image examples into night
images. Such a generator is used in metric learning as a
form of augmentation, supplying training data to the scarce
domain. Various types of generators are evaluated and analyzed. We contribute with a novel light-weight GAN architecture that enforces the consistency between the original
and translated image through edge consistency. The proposed architecture also allows a simultaneous training of an
edge detector that operates on both night and day images.
To further increase the variability in the training examples
and to maximize the generalization of the trained model, we
propose a novel method of diverse anchor mining.
The proposed method improves over the state-of-the-art
results on a standard Tokyo 24/7 day-night retrieval benchmark while preserving the performance on Oxford and Paris
datasets. This is achieved without the need of training image pairs of matching day and night images. The source
code is available at https://github.com/mohwald/gandtr.

chum@cmp.felk.cvut.cz

CycleGAN

CyEDA

RCFN GAN

HEDN GAN

Figure 1. Examples of day-to-night translations with various generators. Each row consists of (left to right) the source image,
and images translated by: CycleGAN, CyEDA, and the proposed RCFN GAN and HEDN GAN. All models are trained on the
SfM dataset, except for CyEDA where a model pre-trained on
BDD100k is used.
Input

RCF

HED

HEDN

1. Introduction
Large-scale instance-level image retrieval is commonly
used e.g. as a first step in visual place recognition and visual localization. As other computer vision problems, image retrieval is dominated by methods based on deep learning models. Fast and memory efficient approaches learn
global image descriptors via metric learning. A large number and variety of corresponding image pairs is required to
train well-performing global image descriptors.
One of the recent challenges in retrieval and visual localization is insensitivity to severe illumination changes, such
as day and night [33, 34]. Methods trained mostly on the

Figure 2. Comparison of edges extracted from real night images by
RCF [19], HED [45], and proposed HEDN , which is trained jointly
with the edge-consistency based HEDN GAN generator. RCF and
HED were trained mainly on day images and do not detect some
edges in the night.

day domain perform well on that domain, while having relatively poor results when night images are observed. The
goal is an approach that performs well on all domains; im-

11153

