This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Out-of-Distribution Detection for Monocular Depth Estimation
Julia Hornauer1 , Adrian Holzbock1 , and Vasileios Belagiannis2
1

2

Ulm University, Germany , {first.last}@uni-ulm.de
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany , vasileios.belagiannis@fau.de

Figure 1: Depth prediction (center) and absolute relative error (right) from a model trained on KITTI for images from KITTI
(top, left; in-distribution: ID) and virtual KITTI (bottom, left; out-of-distribution: OOD): The depth prediction for virtual
KITTI, which is not represented in the training distribution, is incorrect; therefore, the error is too high.

Abstract
In monocular depth estimation, uncertainty estimation
approaches mainly target the data uncertainty introduced
by image noise. In contrast to prior work, we address the
uncertainty due to lack of knowledge, which is relevant for
the detection of data not represented by the training distribution, the so-called out-of-distribution (OOD) data. Motivated by anomaly detection, we propose to detect OOD
images from an encoder-decoder depth estimation model
based on the reconstruction error. Given the features extracted with the fixed depth encoder, we train an image decoder for image reconstruction using only in-distribution
data. Consequently, OOD images result in a high reconstruction error, which we use to distinguish between inand out-of-distribution samples. We built our experiments
on the standard NYU Depth V2 and KITTI benchmarks as
in-distribution data. Our post hoc method performs astonishingly well on different models and outperforms existing
uncertainty estimation approaches without modifying the
trained encoder-decoder depth estimation model.

1. Introduction
Despite the astonishing performance of deep neural networks in monocular depth estimation, image irregularities,
e.g., reflections or occlusions, as well as unknown objects or

completely unknown environments, lead to incorrect depth
predictions. Figure 1 shows example predictions (center)
from a depth estimation model trained on KITTI [14] for
test images from the same dataset (top, left) as well as virtual KITTI [4] (bottom, left). Since virtual KITTI consists of synthetically generated data, the test image is not
included in the training data and presents an unknown environment. The error plot (right) corresponding to the depth
prediction (center) shows that the depth estimate for the
truck, whose surface has reflections, is incorrectly estimated
to be too high. Therefore, the truck’s position is incorrect
based on the depth estimates, highlighting the importance of
identifying inputs for which the depth predictions are unreliable. This is a crucial aspect for the usage in safety-critical
applications such as automated driving or robotics.
The erroneous predictions, in general, can be due to different types of uncertainty. The main distinction is between
data uncertainty (aleatoric), which results from noise in the
data, and model uncertainty (epistemic), which is due to
lack of knowledge and therefore addressable with more diverse training data [29]. Recent works [22, 29, 41, 46] already target uncertainty estimation for depth estimation in
the context of deep neural networks. Moreover, they evaluate whether the uncertainty corresponds to the actual error in the test data drawn from the same distribution as
the training data. However, the current evaluation protocol only addresses the aleatoric uncertainty but not the epis-

1911

