This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uncertainty-aware State Space Transformer for Egocentric
3D Hand Trajectory Forecasting
Wentao Bao 1∗ , Lele Chen2 , Libing Zeng3 , Zhong Li2 , Yi Xu2 , Junsong Yuan4 , Yu Kong1
1
Michigan State University, 2 OPPO US Research Center,
3
Texas A&M University, 4 University at Buffalo
{baowenta,yukong}@msu.edu, libingzeng@tamu.edu,
{lele.chen,zhong.li,yi.xu}@oppo.com, jsyuan@buffalo.edu

past

future

2D space

2D space

⋯

3D space

2D space

⋯

3D space

3D space

Figure 1: Egocentric 3D Hand Trajectory Forecasting. Our goal is to predict the future 3D hand trajectory (in red) given the past
observations of egocentric video and trajectory (in blue). Compared to the 2D image space, predicting trajectory in a global 3D space is
practically more valuable to understand human intention and behavior in AR/VR applications.

Abstract
Hand trajectory forecasting from egocentric views is crucial for enabling a prompt understanding of human intentions when interacting with AR/VR systems. However, existing methods handle this problem in a 2D image space
which is inadequate for 3D real-world applications. In this
paper, we set up an egocentric 3D hand trajectory forecasting task that aims to predict hand trajectories in a 3D
space from early observed RGB videos in a first-person
view. To fulfill this goal, we propose an uncertainty-aware
state space Transformer (USST) that takes the merits of the
attention mechanism and aleatoric uncertainty within the
framework of the classical state-space model. The model
can be further enhanced by the velocity constraint and visual prompt tuning (VPT) on large vision transformers.
Moreover, we develop an annotation workflow to collect
3D hand trajectories with high quality. Experimental results on H2O and EgoPAT3D datasets demonstrate the superiority of USST for both 2D and 3D trajectory forecasting. The code and datasets are publicly released: https:
//actionlab-cv.github.io/EgoHandTrajPred .
* This work is the internship project of Wentao Bao and Libing Zeng
mentored by Lele Chen at OPPO US Research Center.

1. Introduction
Egocentric video understanding aims to understand the
camera wearers’ behavior from the first-person view. It is
receiving increasing attention in recent years [18, 27, 16, 31,
29, 36, 46, 32, 8, 7, 28] due to its analogousness to the way
human visually perceives the world. An important egocentric vision task is to forecast the egocentric hand trajectory
of the camera wearer [34], which has great value in Augmented/Virtual Reality (AR/VR) applications. For example, the predicted 3D trajectories can help plan and stabilize
a patient’s 3D hand motion who has upper-limb neuromuscular disease [27]. Besides, the early predicted 3D hand
trajectory is key to reducing rendering latency in VR games
for achieving an immersive gaming experience [15].
In the existing literature, egocentric 3D hand trajectory
forecasting is far from being explored. The method in [34]
could only predict 2D trajectory on an image and cannot
forecast precise 3D hand movements. Recent works [5,
45, 49] predict the trajectory or 3D human motions from
egocentric views, but they do not predict the 3D trajectory of the camera wearer. Besides, though forecasting the
3D hand pose provides fine-grained information about 3D
hands [10], it is out of our scope as we focus on the camera
wearers’ planning behavior revealed by 3D hand trajectory.

13702

