This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unmasking Anomalies in Road-Scene Segmentation
Shyam Nandan Rai1 , Fabio Cermelli1,2 , Dario Fontanel1 , Carlo Masone1 , Barbara Caputo1
1
Politecnico di Torino, 2 Italian Institute of Technology
first.last@polito.it

Abstract
Anomaly segmentation is a critical task for driving applications, and it is approached traditionally as a perpixel classification problem. However, reasoning individually about each pixel without considering their contextual semantics results in high uncertainty around the objects’ boundaries and numerous false positives. We propose a paradigm change by shifting from a per-pixel classification to a mask classification. Our mask-based method,
Mask2Anomaly, demonstrates the feasibility of integrating
an anomaly detection method in a mask-classification architecture. Mask2Anomaly includes several technical novelties that are designed to improve the detection of anomalies in masks: i) a global masked attention module to focus
individually on the foreground and background regions; ii)
a mask contrastive learning that maximizes the margin between an anomaly and known classes; and iii) a mask refinement solution to reduce false positives. Mask2Anomaly
achieves new state-of-the-art results across a range of
benchmarks, both in the per-pixel and component-level
evaluations. In particular, Mask2Anomaly reduces the average false positives rate by 60% w.r.t. the previous stateof-the-art.

Per-Pixel Anomaly Segmentation

⨏pixel
Dense Hybrid
Per-Pixel Classification

Mask2Former

Per-Mask Anomaly Segmentation

⨏mask
Mask2Anomaly (Ours)

⨏mask : Mask Architecture
⨏pixel : Per-Pixel Architecture
: Contains Anomaly

Per-Mask Classification

Figure 1: Per-pixel vs per-mask Anomaly Segmentation: Dense Hybrid [22], the state-of-the-art method for
AS based on per-pixel classification can detect the anomalies, but it produces many false positives. Anomaly segmentation can be cast as a mask classification problem,
but naively using MSP [25] on top of Mask2Former [12]
does not produce good results. Our Mask2Anomaly exploits mask-transformers properties to refine the classification of anomalies, drastically reducing false positives.
fpixel and fmask denotes per-pixel, and per-mask architecture. Anomalies in the output image are represented in red.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation [14, 41, 50, 48, 42] plays a pivotal role in self-driving cars, being used to obtain a detailed
understanding of the surroundings of a vehicle. Generally, semantic segmentation models are trained to recognize
a pre-defined set of semantic classes (e.g. car, pedestrian,
road, etc.); however, in real-world applications, they may
encounter objects not belonging to such categories (e.g. animals or cargo dropped on the road). Therefore, it is essential
for these models to identify objects in a scene that are not
present during training i.e. anomalies, both to avoid potential dangers and to enable continual learning [37, 8, 17, 7]
and open-world solutions [6].
Anomaly segmentation (AS) [3, 47, 20, 27] addresses
this problem, i.e. it aims to segment objects from classes

that were absent during training. Existing AS methods are
built upon the idea of individually classifying the pixels and
assigning to each of them an anomaly score. This score
may be given by a pixel-level discriminative method [1, 27,
22, 43], by estimating the uncertainty of the individual pixel
predictions [39], or by comparing the per-pixel discrepancy
between the original image and a synthetic image generated
from the semantic predictions [34, 45, 46]. However, reasoning on the pixels individually produces noisy anomaly
scores, thus leading to a high number of false positives and
poorly localized anomalies (see Fig. 1).
In this paper, we address this problem by casting AS
as a mask classification task rather than a pixel classification. This idea stems from the recent advances in mask-

4037

