This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Local Context-Aware Active Domain Adaptation
Tao Sun
Stony Brook University

Cheng Lu
XPeng Motors

Haibin Ling
Stony Brook University

tao@cs.stonybrook.edu

luc@xiaopeng.com

hling@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Active Domain Adaptation (ADA) queries the labels of
a small number of selected target samples to help adapting a model from a source domain to a target domain. The
local context of queried data is important, especially when
the domain gap is large. However, this has not been fully
explored by existing ADA works. In this paper, we propose
a Local context-aware ADA framework, named LADA, to
address this issue. To select informative target samples, we
devise a novel criterion based on the local inconsistency
of model predictions. Since the labeling budget is usually
small, fine-tuning model on only queried data can be inefficient. We progressively augment labeled target data with
the confident neighbors in a class-balanced manner. Experiments validate that the proposed criterion chooses more
informative target samples than existing active selection
strategies. Furthermore, our full method clearly surpasses
recent ADA arts on various benchmarks. Code is available
at https://github.com/tsun/LADA.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) [6, 17] adapts
a model from a related source domain to an unlabeled target
domain. It has been widely studied in the past decade. Despite its success in many applications, UDA is still a challenging task, especially when the domain gap is large [32].
In practical scenarios, it is often allowable to annotate a
small number of unlabeled data. The new paradigm of Active Domain Adaptation (ADA), which queries the label of
selected target samples to assist domain adaptation, draws
increasing attention recently due to its promising performance with minimal labeling cost [29, 20, 39, 38].
Traditional Active Learning (AL) methods select unlabeled samples that are uncertain to the model [10] or representative to the data distribution [27]. Some works combine
these two principles to design hybrid criteria [10]. These
AL strategies, however, may be less effective in ADA due
to the availability of labeled source data and the distribution shift between source and target domains. Recent ADA

works seek to use density weighted entropy [29], combine
transferable criteria [5], focus on hard examples [39] or exploit free energy biases [38] to select target samples that are
beneficial to domain adaptation.
Despite recent progress in ADA, the local context of
queried data has not been fully explored. Different from
Semi-Supervised Domain Adaptation (SSDA) [26, 15]
where all labeled target data are given at the beginning of
training and fixed afterwards, active querying to obtain labeled target data and model update interleave during the
training of ADA. The local context can guide the selection
of target samples that are uncertain and locally representative. It can also be utilized to update models and reduces the
tendency to only memorize these newly queried data during
fine-tuning [43]. Thus later training rounds can focus on
harder cases. In the particular situation when the domain
gap is large, it is also safer to trust the neighbors of queried
data than other confident but distant samples.
Thus motivated, in this paper, we propose a novel framework of Local context-aware Active Domain Adaptation
(LADA). A Local context-aware Active Selection (LAS)
module is first designed, with a novel criterion based on
the local inconsistency of model predictions. During the
active selection stage, a diverse subset from the uncertain
regions measured by our criterion is selected for querying
labels. Then we design a Progressive Anchor-set Augmentation (PAA) module to overcome issues from the small size
of queried data. Since the labeling budget for each round is
usually small, it only requires a small fraction of training
epoch before the model predicts well on the newly queried
data. Another issue is that the labeled data can be imbalanced when the target data are long-tailed or the active selection focuses on partial classes. Our PAA handles the
above-mentioned issues through augmenting labeled target
data. Specifically, during each training epoch, we initialize
an anchor set with all available queried data and progressively augment it with pseudo-labeled confident target data
in a class-balanced manner. Target training batches are sampled from the anchor set instead to fine-tune the model. We
show that choosing confident samples in the neighborhood
of queried data overcomes the adversarial effects from false

18634

