This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Calibrator Ensemble: Navigating Test Set Difficulty in
Out-of-Distribution Scenarios

1

Yuli Zou1∗ Weijian Deng2∗ Liang Zheng2
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 2 The Australian National University
yuli1027.zou@connect.polyu.hk

Abstract
Model calibration usually requires optimizing some parameters (e.g., temperature) w.r.t an objective function like
negative log-likelihood. This work uncovers a significant
but overlooked aspect that the objective function is influenced by calibration set difficulty: the ratio of misclassified
to correctly classified samples1 . If a test set has a drastically different difficulty level from the calibration set, a
phenomenon out-of-distribution (OOD) data often exhibit:
the optimal calibration parameters of the two datasets would
be different, rendering an optimal calibrator on the calibration set suboptimal on the OOD test set and thus degraded
calibration performance. With this knowledge, we propose
a simple and effective method named adaptive calibrator
ensemble (ACE) to calibrate OOD datasets whose difficulty
is usually higher than the calibration set. Specifically, two
calibration functions are trained, one for in-distribution
data (low difficulty), and the other for severely OOD data
(high difficulty). To achieve desirable calibration on a new
OOD dataset, ACE uses an adaptive weighting method that
strikes a balance between the two extreme functions. When
plugged in, ACE generally improves the performance of a
few state-of-the-art calibration schemes on a series of OOD
benchmarks. Importantly, such improvement does not come
at the cost of the in-distribution calibration performance.
Project Website: https://github.com/insysgroup/AdaptiveCalibrators-Ensemble.git.

1. Introduction
Model calibration aims to connect the neural network output with uncertainty. A common practice is to find optimal
parameters against certain objective functions on a held-out
calibration set, to obtain an optimized calibrator. In this
paper, we focus on post-hoc calibration methods, which
1 Dataset difficulty (w.r.t a classifier) shares the same meaning of classi-

fier accuracy on this dataset. We use “difficulty” to indicate the property of
a dataset (i.e., its OOD degree to the classifier), instead of using “accuracy”
which describes the performance of the classifier on a dataset.

firstnama.lastname@anu.edu.au

require training a calibration mapping function to rescale
the confidence scores of a trained neural network to make
it calibrated [9, 10, 18]. A popular technique is Temperature Scaling [9], which optimizes model temperature by
minimizing the negative log-likelihood (NLL) loss.
Post-hoc calibration methods generally work well when
calibrating in-distribution test sets. However, oftentimes
their calibration performance drops significantly when being
tested on an out-of-distribution (OOD) test set [24]. For
example, temperature scaling has shown to be ineffective
under distribution shift in some scenarios [24]. This problem
happens because the test environment (OOD) is different
from the training environment due to factors like sample bias
and non-stationarity. This paper thus aims to improve posthoc calibration methods by producing reliable and predictive
uncertainty under distribution shifts.
In the community, there exist a few works studying the
OOD calibration problem [28, 31, 36]. They typically aim to
make amendments to the calibration set to let it approximate
the OOD data in certain aspects [28, 31]. Nevertheless,
these techniques are typically not adaptive to the test dataset,
that is, the calibration set transformation process cannot
automatically adjust to the test set. In our experiment, we
observe that they improve calibration on some OOD datasets
but significantly lead to decreased in-distribution calibration
performance. In this regard, while TransCal [36] can perform
domain adaptation according to the test domain, it needs to
be re-trained for every new test set.
In this paper, our contributions are mainly in two aspects.
First, we provide a new perspective to understand calibration failure on out-of-distribution datasets. Specifically, we
show that the calibration objective is dependent on the
dataset difficulty. When the calibration set have the same
distribution with the test set, it has low difficulty, and thus the
calibrator learned on the calibration set would be effective
on the test set [9, 10, 18]. Yet, out-of-distribution test sets
usually exhibit a different (usually higher) difficulty level
compared with the calibration set because of the distribution
gap. Under this case, the optimal calibration functions are
different for calibration and OOD datasets. That is, a calibra-

19333

