This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

When Prompt-based Incremental Learning Does Not Meet Strong Pretraining
Yu-Ming Tang1,3

Yi-Xing Peng1,3

Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,3 *

1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
{tangym9, pengyx23}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
Incremental learning aims to overcome catastrophic
forgetting when learning deep networks from sequential
tasks. With impressive learning efficiency and performance,
prompt-based methods adopt a fixed backbone to sequential tasks by learning task-specific prompts. However, existing prompt-based methods heavily rely on strong pretraining (typically trained on ImageNet-21k), and we find
that their models could be trapped if the potential gap
between the pretraining task and unknown future tasks is
large. In this work, we develop a learnable Adaptive
Prompt Generator (APG). The key is to unify the prompt
retrieval and prompt learning processes into a learnable
prompt generator. Hence, the whole prompting process can
be optimized to reduce the negative effects of the gap between tasks effectively. To make our APG avoid learning
ineffective knowledge, we maintain a knowledge pool to regularize APG with the feature distribution of each class. Extensive experiments show that our method significantly outperforms advanced methods in exemplar-free incremental
learning without (strong) pretraining. Besides, under strong
pretraining, our method also has comparable performance
to existing prompt-based models, showing that our method
can still benefit from pretraining. Codes can be found at
https://github.com/TOM-tym/APG

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have become powerful
tools in various fields [5, 7, 12, 15, 28, 56]. However, when
facing sequential training tasks, DNNs learn new tasks
along with severe performance degradation on previous
tasks in the absence of old data, which is the notorious
catastrophic forgetting [11, 41, 49]. Incremental learning
aims to overcome catastrophic forgetting in DNNs, push* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Experimental comparison between our adaptive prompting scheme and other prompted-based methods [60, 61] on the CIFAR100 [25] dataset. ‘Non-pretrained’ (a standard protocol in
incremental learning) means the data from the first task is used
to pretrain the backbone. (a) With an intensive pretrained backbone, all three methods perform well. (b) When swapping to TinyImageNet (200 classes) pretrained weights, the performance of
other methods clearly drops, while ours does not. (c) Our method
significantly outperforms other methods in the presence of a large
semantic gap between pretraining task and unknown future tasks.

ing DNNs toward complex real-world applications, e.g.
AI robotics [4, 10, 42, 52] or self-driving [13, 16, 43, 45].
Previous works usually maintain a memory buffer with a
handful of old samples for rehearsal when learning new
tasks [18, 26, 48, 54, 58, 62, 63, 65]. Since keeping old data
may be infeasible due to privacy/storage concerns, another
branch of work [64, 66, 67] explores exemplar-free incremental learning, which tunes the network based on the introduced priors but the performance still far falls behind
those of rehearsal-based methods.
Recently, an appealing development [59–61] based on
prompting [21,27,29,34,35] manages to encode knowledge
into sets of prompts to steer a frozen backbone for handling
sequential tasks. In addition to impressive performance, it
has several benefits. (1) The catastrophic forgetting prob-

1706

