This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAS: Towards Resource-Efficient Federated Multiple-Task Learning
Weiming Zhuang1∗ Yonggang Wen2 Lingjuan Lyu1 Shuai Zhang3
1
Sony AI, 2 Nanyang Technological University, 3 SenseTime Research
{weiming.zhuang,lingjuan.lv}@sony.com,ygwen@ntu.edu.sg,zhangshuai@sensetime.com

Abstract

Federated learning (FL) [34] has attracted considerable
attention as it enables privacy-preserving distributed model
training among decentralized devices. It is empowering
growing numbers of applications in both academia and industry, such as medical imaging analysis [29, 41], Google
Keyboard [16], and autonomous vehicles [55, 39]. Among
them, some applications contain multiple application tasks.
For example, autonomous vehicles are related to multiple
resource-intensive computer vision (CV) tasks, including
lane detection, object detection, and segmentation [20].
In fact, the majority of edge devices (e.g., NVIDIA Jeston TX2 and AGX Xavier) can only support one FL task at
a time [30]. Multiple simultaneous FL tasks on the same device could overwhelm its memory, computation, and power
*most of the work done in S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

Total Test Loss

All-in-one

1.48
1.47
1.46
1.45
1.44
10

s

1. Introduction

1.49

t los
r tes
Lowe

Federated learning (FL) is an emerging distributed machine learning method that empowers in-situ model training
on decentralized edge devices. However, multiple simultaneous FL tasks could overload resource-constrained devices. In this work, we propose the first FL system to effectively coordinate and train multiple simultaneous FL tasks.
We first formalize the problem of training simultaneous FL
tasks. Then, we present our new approach, MAS (Merge
and Split), to optimize the performance of training multiple
simultaneous FL tasks. MAS starts by merging FL tasks into
an all-in-one FL task with a multi-task architecture. After
training for a few rounds, MAS splits the all-in-one FL task
into two or more FL tasks by using the affinities among tasks
measured during the all-in-one training. It then continues
training each split of FL tasks based on model parameters
from the all-in-one training. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MAS outperforms other methods while reducing
training time by 2× and reducing energy consumption by
40%. We hope this work will inspire the community to further study and optimize training simultaneous FL tasks.

1.50

Ours
15

The lower
the better
One-by-one
duction
re
e
m
ti
ng
ni
2.1x trai
20
25
30
Training Time (GPU Hours)

35

Figure 1: Existing methods suffer from a trade-off between
training time and test loss (lower test loss means better performance) when training 9 simultaneous FL tasks, whereas
our method navigates a sweet point, achieving the best test
loss with 2.1× training time reduction. One-by-one trains
FL tasks one after another; All-in-one combines tasks into
a multi-task learning network before training it in FL.

capacities. Thus, it is important to navigate solutions to well
coordinate these simultaneous FL tasks.
A plethora of research on FL are mainly devoted to addressing challenges such as statistical heterogeneity [28,
48], system heterogeneity [6, 51, 56], communication efficiency [23, 61, 27, 50], and privacy issues [2, 19]. Most of
the existing works only focus on one FL task, overlooking
the fact that certain applications, such as self-driving cars
or intelligent manufacturing robots, need to tackle multiple FL tasks simultaneously [20, 13]. To address this issue,
Bonawitz et.al [4] designed multi-tenancy to prevent simultaneous FL tasks from overloading devices. However, their
proposed method is slow in training because it regards these
tasks as independent training tasks and trains them sequentially. This one-by-one training method only considers the
differences among tasks, neglecting potential synergies.
Another intuitive solution is to adopt multi-task learning
(MTL) to train multiple FL tasks by combining these tasks
into an all-in-one neural network. This network has one
encoder shared among tasks and multiple task-specific decoders. It could prevent overloading devices and speeds up
the training process as only one neural network is trained.
However, it could result in worse performance because not

23414

