This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Mixture-of-Expert Training for Convolutional Neural Networks
Yihua Zhang1

Ruisi Cai2

Pin-Yu Chen9

Tianlong Chen2,3,4,5
Shiyu Chang6

Guanhua Zhang6

Zhangyang Wang2

Huan Zhang7,8

Sijia Liu1,9

1

Michigan State University, 2 University of Texas at Austin,
3
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 4 MIT, 5 Harvard University,
6
UC Santa Barbara, 7 Carnegie Mellon University, 8 UIUC, 9 IBM Research
Abstract
Sparsely-gated Mixture of Expert (MoE), an emerging
deep model architecture, has demonstrated a great promise
to enable high-accuracy and ultra-efficient model inference.
Despite the growing popularity of MoE, little work investigated its potential to advance convolutional neural networks (CNNs), especially in the plane of adversarial robustness. Since the lack of robustness has become one of
the main hurdles for CNNs, in this paper we ask: How
to adversarially robustify a CNN-based MoE model? Can
we robustly train it like an ordinary CNN model? Our pilot study shows that the conventional adversarial training
(AT) mechanism (developed for vanilla CNNs) no longer
remains effective to robustify an MoE-CNN. To better understand this phenomenon, we dissect the robustness of
an MoE-CNN into two dimensions: Robustness of routers
(i.e., gating functions to select data-specific experts) and
robustness of experts (i.e., the router-guided pathways defined by the subnetworks of the backbone CNN). Our analyses show that routers and experts are hard to adapt to
each other in the vanilla AT. Thus, we propose a new
router-expert alternating Adversarial training framework
for MoE, termed A DV M O E. The effectiveness of our proposal is justified across 4 commonly-used CNN model architectures over 4 benchmark datasets. We find that A DVM O E achieves 1% ⇠ 4% adversarial robustness improvement over the original dense CNN, and enjoys the efficiency
merit of sparsity-gated MoE, leading to more than 50% inference cost reduction. Codes are available at https://
github.com/OPTML-Group/Robust-MoE-CNN .

(DL) tasks, it still remains challenging to train and deploy
such models cheaply. A major bottleneck is the lack of
parameter efficiency [6]: A single data prediction only requires activating a small portion of the parameters of the
full model. Towards efficient DL, sparse Mixture of Experts (MoE) [7–15] aims to divide and conquer the model
parameters based on their optimal responses to specific inputs so that inference costs can be reduced. A typical MoE
structure is comprised of a set of ‘experts’ (i.e., sub-models
extracted from the original backbone network) and ‘routers’
(i.e., additional small-scale gating networks to determine
expert selection schemes across layers). During inference,
sparse MoE only activates the most relevant experts and
forms the expert-guided pathway for a given input data.
By doing so, sparse MoE can boost the inference efficiency
(see ‘GFLOPS’ measurement in Fig. 1). Architecture-wise,
sparse MoE has been used for both CNNs [8, 16] and vision
transformers (ViTs) [7, 9–15, 17]. Yet, we will focus on the
former since sparse MoE for CNNs is under-explored compared to non-sparse MoE for CNNs [18–20], and adversarial robustness (another key performance metric of our work)
was extensively studied in the context of CNNs.
It is known that a main weakness of DL is the lack of
adversarial robustness [21–23]. For example, CNNs can be
easily fooled by adversarial attacks [21–23], in terms of tiny
input perturbations generated to direct to erroneous predictions. Thus, adversarial training (AT) of CNNs has become
a main research thrust [24–29]. However, when CNN meets
sparse MoE, it remains elusive if the improved inference efficiency brought by the sparse MoE comes at the cost of
more complex adversarial training recipes. Thus, we ask:
(Q) What will be the new insights into adversarial robustness of sparse MoE-integrated CNNs? And what
will be the suited AT mechanism?

1. Introduction
Despite the state-of-the-art performance achieved by the
outrageously large networks [1–5] in various deep learning
Correspondence to: Yihua Zhang<zhan1908@msu.edu>

To our best knowledge, problem (Q) remains open in the
literature. The most relevant work to ours is [30], which
investigated the adversarial robustness of MoE and lever-

90

