This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generating Dynamic Kernels via Transformers for Lane Detection
Ziye Chen1 Yu Liu2 Mingming Gong 1 Bo Du3 Guoqi Qian1 Kate Smith-Miles1 *
1
School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne, Australia
2
Mach Drive, China 3 School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
ziyec1@student.unimelb.edu.au, yu.liu@mach-drive.com, mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au,
dubo@whu.edu.cn, qguoqi@unimelb.edu.au, kate.smithmiles@gmail.com

Abstract
State-of-the-art lane detection methods often rely on specific knowledge about lanes – such as straight lines and
parametric curves – to detect lane lines. While the specific
knowledge can ease the modeling process, it poses challenges in handling lane lines with complex topologies (e.g.,
dense, forked, curved, etc.). Recently, dynamic convolutionbased methods have shown promising performance by utilizing the features from some key locations of a lane line,
such as the starting point, as convolutional kernels, and
convoluting them with the whole feature map to detect lane
lines. While such methods reduce the reliance on specific
knowledge, the kernels computed from the key locations fail
to capture the lane line’s global structure due to its long
and thin structure, leading to inaccurate detection of lane
lines with complex topologies. In addition, the kernels resulting from the key locations are sensitive to occlusion and
lane intersections. To overcome these limitations, we propose a transformer-based dynamic kernel generation architecture for lane detection. It utilizes a transformer to generate dynamic convolutional kernels for each lane line in
the input image, and then detect these lane lines with dynamic convolution. Compared to the kernels generated from
the key locations of a lane line, the kernels generated with
the transformer can capture the lane line’s global structure from the whole feature map, enabling them to effectively handle occlusions and lane lines with complex topologies. We evaluate our method on three lane detection benchmarks, and the results demonstrate its state-of-the-art performance. Specifically, our method achieves an F1 score of
63.40 on OpenLane and 88.47 on CurveLanes, surpassing
the state of the art by 4.30 and 2.37 points, respectively.

* Corresponding Author. This work was supported in part by the Australian Research Council for funding of the ARC Training Centre in Optimisation Technologies, Integrated Methodologies and Applications (OPTIMA), under grant IC200100009. This work is also supported in part by
the computational resources of the Spartan HPC system at UniMelb.

Figure 1. Examples of lanes lines in real scenes. The lane lines
often have complex topologies, and are in diverse road scenarios.
(a) The lane lines are blocked by vehicles. (b) The lane lines have
forked and curved structures. (c) The lane lines are dense and
blocked. (d) The lane lines are extremly curved. The lighting and
weather conditions in these four pictures are also very different.

1. Introduction
Lane detection is a fundamental task in Autonomous
Driving System (ADS) and Advanced Driver Assistance
System (ADAS). It plays a crucial role in the downstreaming tasks, such as driving route planning, lane keeping assist, and adaptive cruise control. As shown in Figure
1, lane detection in real scenes is very challenging, since
lane lines usually have complex topologies such as dense,
curved, and forked structures, and are often blocked by vehicles and pedestrians. Furthermore, to be deployed on realtime vehicle-based systems, the lane detection algorithms
need to have high running speed.
Traditional lane detection methods [16, 29, 12, 18, 4]
usually rely on hand-crafted features and post-processing
techniques like Hough Transform [7]. These methods are
limited in representation ability and robustness, making
them difficult to handle the diversity of lane lines in different road scenarios. Deep-learning-based lane detection

6835

