This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Perpetual Humanoid Control for Real-time Simulated Avatars
Zhengyi Luo1,2 Jinkun Cao2 Alexander Winkler1 Kris Kitani1,2 Weipeng Xu1
1
Reality Labs Research, Meta; 2 Carnegie Mellon University
https://zhengyiluo.github.io/PHC/

Figure 1: We propose a motion imitator that can naturally recover from falls and walk to far-away reference motion, perpetually controlling
simulated avatars without requiring reset. Left: real-time avatars from video, where the blue humanoid recovers from a fall. Right: Imitating
3 disjoint clips of motion generated from language, where our controller fills in the blank. The color gradient indicates the passage of time.

Abstract
We present a physics-based humanoid controller that
achieves high-fidelity motion imitation and fault-tolerant
behavior in the presence of noisy input (e.g. pose estimates
from video or generated from language) and unexpected
falls. Our controller scales up to learning ten thousand motion clips without using any external stabilizing forces and
learns to naturally recover from fail-state. Given reference
motion, our controller can perpetually control simulated
avatars without requiring resets. At its core, we propose the
progressive multiplicative control policy (PMCP), which
dynamically allocates new network capacity to learn harder
and harder motion sequences. PMCP allows efficient scaling for learning from large-scale motion databases and
adding new tasks, such as fail-state recovery, without catastrophic forgetting. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
controller by using it to imitate noisy poses from videobased pose estimators and language-based motion generators in a live and real-time multi-person avatar use case.

1. Introduction
Physics-based motion imitation has captured the imagination of vision and graphics communities due to its po-

tential for creating realistic human motion, enabling plausible environmental interactions, and advancing virtual
avatar technologies of the future. However, controlling
high-degree-of-freedom (DOF) humanoids in simulation
presents significant challenges, as they can fall, trip, or deviate from their reference motions, and struggle to recover.
For example, controlling simulated humanoids using poses
estimated from noisy video observations can often lead humanoids to fall to the ground[48, 49, 20, 22]. These limitations prevent the widespread adoption of physics-based
methods, as current control policies cannot handle noisy observations such as video or language.
In order to apply physically simulated humanoids for
avatars, the first major challenge is learning a motion imitator (controller) that can faithfully reproduce human-like
motion with a high success rate. While reinforcement learning (RL)-based imitation policies have shown promising results, successfully imitating motion from a large dataset,
such as AMASS (ten thousand clips, 40 hours of motion),
with a single policy has yet to be achieved. Attempts to use
larger or a mixture of expert policies have been met with
some success [43, 45], although they have not yet scaled to
the largest dataset. Therefore, researchers have resorted to
using external forces to help stabilize the humanoid. Resid-

10895

