This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ClusT3: Information Invariant Test-Time Training
Gustavo A. Vargas Hakim* , David Osowiechi* ,
Mehrdad Noori , Milad Cheraghalikhani , Ali Bahri , Ismail Ben Ayed , and Christian Desrosiers
ÉTS Montreal, Canada

Abstract
Deep Learning models have shown remarkable performance in a broad range of vision tasks. However, they
are often vulnerable to domain shifts at test-time. Testtime training (TTT) methods have been developed in an attempt to mitigate these vulnerabilities, where a secondary
task is solved at training time, simultaneously with the
main task, to be later used as an self-supervised proxy task
at test-time. In this work, we propose a novel unsupervised TTT technique based on the maximization of Mutual
Information between multi-scale feature maps and a discrete latent representation, which can be integrated to the
standard training as an auxiliary clustering task. Experimental results demonstrate competitive classification performance on different popular test-time adaptation benchmarks. The code can be found at: https://github.
com/dosowiechi/ClusT3.git

1. Introduction
The domain invariance hypothesis has been key to the
success of deep learning methods for computer vision. In
this hypothesis, the training and testing data are both assumed to be drawn from the same distribution, which rarely
holds in practical settings. Moreover, it has been shown in
numerous studies that the performance in classification and
segmentation can drop significantly when domain shifts are
present [26, 24]. In response, Domain Adaptation (DA)
studies the adaptation of learning algorithms to new domains, when different types of domain shifts are present
in the test data. From this field, two promising directions have emerged: Domain Generalization and Test-Time
Adaptation. On the one hand, Domain Generalization (DG)
[30, 25, 33, 14, 32] assumes a model is trained on a large
source dataset composed of different domains, and evalu* Equal contribution.
Correspondence to gustavo-adolfo.vargashakim.1@ens.etsmtl.ca, david.osowiechi.1@ens.etsmtl.ca

ates the performances on new domains at test-time. On
the other hand, Test-Time Adaptation (TTA) [31, 18, 13, 1]
adapts the model to test data on the fly, typically adjusting
to subsets of the new domain (e.g., mini-batches) each time.
In TTA, there is no supervision from the testing samples nor
access to the source domain, which makes it a challenging,
yet realistic problem. The main limitation of DG is the requirement of a large amount of training data from different
domains, without the guarantee that the model generalizes
well to the (virtually unlimited) possible new domains it
may encounter. TTA methods do not have this issue. However, they are highly sensitive to the choice of the unsupervised loss functions deployed at test-time, which may
severely hurt the performances.
Test-Time Training (TTT) [28, 19, 7, 23] is an attractive variant of TTA, where an auxiliary task is learned from
the training data (source domain) and later used at testtime to update a model. Typically, unsupervised and selfsupervised tasks are chosen, as they allow for an adaptation
process that does not require any label. Moreover, the joint,
two-task training protocol for the source domain provides
momentum at test-time, enabling the use of a loss function
that is not completely foreign to the model.
Inspired by the recent success of Mutual-Information
(MI) maximization in several learning tasks, such as representation learning [12, 10, 22, 29], deep clustering [11] and
few-shot learning [2], we propose an information invariant
TTT method called ClusT3. Our method maximizes the MI
between the feature maps at different scales and discrete
latent representations related to clustering. The main idea
is that the amount of information between the features and
their corresponding discrete encoding should remain constant in both the source and target domains (see Fig. 1). Toward this goal, we introduce an auxiliary task that performs
information-maximization clustering while training on the
source examples. At test time, we use the MI between the
features and cluster assignments as a measure of representation quality, and maximize the MI as objective for test-time
adaptation. Unlike previous TTT approaches, which rely

6136

