This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Convolutional Networks with Oriented 1D Kernels
Alexandre Kirchmeyer *
Carnegie Mellon University

Jia Deng
Princeton University

akirchme@cs.cmu.edu

jiadeng@princeton.edu

Abstract
In computer vision, 2D convolution is arguably the most
important operation performed by a ConvNet. Unsurprisingly, it has been the focus of intense software and hardware optimization and enjoys highly efficient implementations. In this work, we ask an intriguing question: can
we make a ConvNet work without 2D convolutions? Surprisingly, we find that the answer is yes—we show that a
ConvNet consisting entirely of 1D convolutions can do just
as well as 2D on ImageNet classification. Specifically, we
find that one key ingredient to a high-performing 1D ConvNet is oriented 1D kernels: 1D kernels that are oriented
not just horizontally or vertically, but also at other angles.
Our experiments show that oriented 1D convolutions can
not only replace 2D convolutions but also augment existing architectures with large kernels, leading to improved
accuracy with minimal FLOPs increase. A key contribution of this work is a highly-optimized custom CUDA
implementation of oriented 1D kernels, specialized to the
depthwise convolution setting. Our benchmarks demonstrate that our custom CUDA implementation almost perfectly realizes the theoretical advantage of 1D convolution:
it is faster than a native horizontal convolution for any arbitrary angle. Code is available at https://github.
com/princeton-vl/Oriented1D.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Networks (ConvNets) [27, 25] are widely
used in computer vision. They have been successfully applied to a variety of tasks [15, 40, 16, 63] and domains
[25, 34, 23, 39, 59], and many new ConvNet-based building blocks [47, 8, 57] and design practices [44, 50, 32] have
emerged over the years.
In the computer vision context, a 2D convolution is arguably the most important operation performed by a ConvNet. In virtually all ConvNet architectures [25, 18, 32],
2D convolution is the default choice and accounts for the
bulk of the computation. Unsurprisingly, 2D convolution
has been the focus of intense software and hardware optimization and enjoys highly efficient implementations.
* Work done during an internship at Princeton University.

In this work, we ask an intriguing question: can we make
a ConvNet work without 2D convolution? Surprisingly, we
find that the answer is yes—we show that a ConvNet consisting entirely of 1D convolutions can do as well on ImageNet classification, a surprising result given that 2D convolution has been the go-to design choice.
Specifically, we find that one key ingredient to a highperforming 1D ConvNet is oriented 1D kernels: 1D kernels
that are oriented not just horizontally or vertically, but also
at other angles. This is a novel finding—although horizontal
and vertical 1D convolutions have been frequently used in
the past, 1D kernels oriented at arbitrary angles have not
been well studied.
Oriented 1D kernels are motivated by the fact that 2D
kernels can be approximated by 1D kernels, which are more
efficient computationally. In particular, it is well known that
convolution with a separable 2D kernel (i.e. rank 1 as a matrix) is equivalent to consecutive convolutions with a vertical 1D kernel and a horizontal 1D kernel, leading to significant efficiency gain. However, in practice, not all learned
2D kernels are rank 1; if we only use vertical and horizontal
1D kernels, 2D kernels with a full rank, such as diagonal
matrices, are poorly approximated, which can lead to a loss
in accuracy: for example, the network may be less able to
detect a 45◦ edge. This is when oriented 1D kernels can be
helpful. By orienting a 1D kernel at more angles, we expand the set of 2D kernels that can be well approximated by
1D kernels while retaining the efficiency of 1D kernels.
Oriented 1D kernels are also motivated by the increasing use of large 2D kernels in recent convolutional architectures. Large 2D kernels improve the modeling of long-range
dependencies, which have been shown to result in better
accuracy [32, 12, 30]. However, large 2D kernels are significantly more expensive because the cost scales quadratically. A 31 × 31 kernel is 19 times more costly in terms
of multiply-add operations than the standard 7 × 7 kernels. This motivates oriented 1D kernels as an alternative
for modeling long-range dependencies, because the cost of
1D kernels scale only linearly with the kernel size.
The concept of oriented 1D kernels is simple, but nontrivial to implement in a way that realizes its efficiency advantage over 2D kernels. This is because on a GPU, the pat-

6222

