This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continuously Masked Transformer for Image Inpainting
Keunsoo Ko
The Catholic University of Korea

Chang-Su Kim*
Korea University

ksko@catholic.ac.kr

changsukim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
A novel continuous-mask-aware transformer for image
inpainting, called CMT, is proposed in this paper, which
uses a continuous mask to represent the amounts of errors
in tokens. First, we initialize a mask and use it during the
self-attention. To facilitate the masked self-attention, we
also introduce the notion of overlapping tokens. Second,
we update the mask by modeling the error propagation during the masked self-attention. Through several masked selfattention and mask update (MSAU) layers, we predict initial
inpainting results. Finally, we reﬁne the initial results to reconstruct a more faithful image. Experimental results on
multiple datasets show that the proposed CMT algorithm
outperforms existing algorithms signiﬁcantly. The source
codes are available at https://github.com/keunsoo-ko/CMT.

0

Mask Value

1

Mask Update Process

CMT

Input with a Hole

Inpainted Output

Figure 1: Illustration of the mask update process in the proposed
CMT algorithm: The man’s hand is designated as a hole. Initially,
in the mask, the hole pixels are assigned 0, while the others 1. The
mask is updated gradually through several MSAU layers, and the
inpainted image is obtained.

1. Introduction
The objective of image inpainting is to reconstruct visually plausible images by ﬁlling in holes or defects in input
images, such as old photos with scratches and ﬂawed photos with distracting objects. In inpainting, it is necessary
to predict the contents inside holes based on intact regions.
Early inpainting algorithms [3, 15, 25, 9] ﬁll in a hole patch
using similar patches in the same image or from an external
database, but they may fail to generate detailed patterns.
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
been developed for inpainting [24, 30, 12, 32, 36], achieving promising performances. However, they suffer from visual artifacts, such as blurriness, color discrepancies, and
artiﬁcial edges, since ordinary convolutional layers are applied to all pixels — both hole and non-hole pixels — in
the same manner. To alleviate such artifacts, mask-aware
inpainting algorithms based on CNNs have been proposed
[17, 33, 21, 31], in which adaptive ﬁltering is performed to
process each pixel according to its state.
With the success of the transformers [5, 20] in vision
tasks, transformer-based inpainting algorithms [35, 28, 4,
19] also have been proposed. They provide decent inpaint* Corresponding author

ing results, for the global attention facilitates to inpaint
holes using the information in distant regions. In particular,
Li et al. [16] developed a mask-aware transformer, which
classiﬁes tokens as either valid or invalid using a binary
mask. Their algorithm declares an output token as valid
if it depends on at least one valid input token. However, this
binary masking has a limitation that a valid token can be
still erroneous.
In this paper, we propose a novel transformer for image
inpainting, called continuously masked transformer (CMT),
which uses a continuous mask to represent the amounts
of errors in tokens. First, we initialize a continuous mask
and use it during the self-attention process. To facilitate
the masked self-attention, we employ overlapping tokens,
which consist of ordinary and shifted tokens. Then, we update the mask by modeling the error propagation during the
masked self-attention as illustrated in Figure 1. We generate initial inpainting results through several masked selfattention and mask update (MSAU) layers. Finally, we develop the reﬁnement network to reﬁne the initial results to
reconstruct a more faithful image. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that the proposed CMT algorithm provides excellent inpainting performance.

13169

