This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Constraining Depth Map Geometry for Multi-View Stereo:
A Dual-Depth Approach with Saddle-shaped Depth Cells

1

Xin Li2
Xinyi Ye1
Weiyue Zhao1
Tianqi Liu1
Zihao Huang1
Zhiguo Cao1 *
Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control, Ministry of Education; School of Artificial
Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Albany, Albany NY 12222
{xinyiye, zhaoweiyue, tianqiliu, zihaohuang, zgcao}@hust.edu.cn
xli48@albany.edu

Abstract
Learning-based multi-view stereo (MVS) methods deal
with predicting accurate depth maps to achieve an accurate and complete 3D representation. Despite the excellent
performance, existing methods ignore the fact that a suitable depth geometry is also critical in MVS. In this paper,
we demonstrate that different depth geometries have significant performance gaps, even using the same depth prediction error. Therefore, we introduce an ideal depth geometry
composed of Saddle-Shaped Cells, whose predicted depth
map oscillates upward and downward around the groundtruth surface, rather than maintaining a continuous and
smooth depth plane. To achieve it, we develop a coarseto-fine framework called Dual-MVSNet (DMVSNet), which
can produce an oscillating depth plane. Technically, we predict two depth values for each pixel (Dual-Depth), and propose a novel loss function and a checkerboard-shaped selecting strategy to constrain the predicted depth geometry.
Compared to existing methods,DMVSNet achieves a high
rank on the DTU benchmark and obtains the top performance on challenging scenes of Tanks and Temples, demonstrating its strong performance and generalization ability.
Our method also points to a new research direction for considering depth geometry in MVS.

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) is a fundamental technique
that bridges the gap between 2-D photograph clues and 3D spatial information. It takes multiple 2-D RGB observations, as well as their respective camera parameters, to
reconstruct the 3-D representation of a scene. There are
many applications for MVS that range from autopilot [12]
* Corresponding author

https://github.com/DIVE128/DMVSNet

to virtual reality [10]. Although traditional MVS methods have achieved significant performance, many learningbased methods [39, 17, 16, 24, 9] have demonstrated their
superior ability to tackle low-texture and repetitive pattern
regions for a more accurate and complete reconstruction.
Generally, reconstructing a scene using learning-based
multiview stereo (MVS) techniques involves two phases:
depth prediction and fusion rendering. Learning-based
methods primarily focus on optimizing the depth prediction
process to provide accurate depth maps for subsequent fusion rendering. Therefore, the learning-based MVS reconstruction task can be seen as a depth prediction task. Recent
works [9, 32, 34] have improved the accuracy of depth prediction by enhancing feature matching and cost regularization. Additionally, techniques such as deformable convolutions [34, 9] and attention mechanisms [9, 32] have been
utilized to obtain accurate depth maps. However, an interesting phenomenon has been observed: Depth maps with
smaller estimation errors might not achieve better 3-D reconstruction quality after fusion rendering. Are there other
factors limiting the accuracy of 3-D reconstruction? After
a thorough investigation into the fusion process, we found
that the depth geometry is an important factor that has been
overlooked in MVS. Different depth geometries suffer from
significant performance gaps, even for the same depth estimation error case. Thus it is worth considering what constitutes a good depth geometry.
To address the question, as shown in Fig. 1, we introduced two ideal depth geometries representing two extreme
cases: geometry composed of one-sided cells vs. geometry composed of a saddle-shaped cell. The former has
depth planes on the same side as the ground-truth surface,
while the latter oscillates back and forth on both sides of the
ground-truth surface. To evaluate the impact of these depth
geometries on 3D reconstruction, we artificially controlled
cells of the predicted depth planes while ensuring the same
absolute error in depth prediction. Interestingly, we found

17661

