This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

H3WB: Human3.6M 3D WholeBody Dataset and Benchmark
Yue Zhu
Nermin Samet
David Picard
LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-Vallée, France
{yue.zhu, nermin.samet, david.picard}@enpc.fr
Code and dataset: https://github.com/wholebody3d/wholebody3d

Abstract
We present a benchmark for 3D human whole-body pose
estimation, which involves identifying accurate 3D keypoints on the entire human body, including face, hands,
body, and feet. Currently, the lack of a fully annotated and
accurate 3D whole-body dataset results in deep networks
being trained separately on specific body parts, which
are combined during inference. Or they rely on pseudogroundtruth provided by parametric body models which are
not as accurate as detection based methods. To overcome
these issues, we introduce the Human3.6M 3D WholeBody
(H3WB) dataset, which provides whole-body annotations
for the Human3.6M dataset using the COCO Wholebody
layout. H3WB comprises 133 whole-body keypoint annotations on 100K images, made possible by our new multiview pipeline. We also propose three tasks: i) 3D wholebody pose lifting from 2D complete whole-body pose, ii)
3D whole-body pose lifting from 2D incomplete whole-body
pose, and iii) 3D whole-body pose estimation from a single
RGB image. Additionally, we report several baselines from
popular methods for these tasks. Furthermore, we also provide automated 3D whole-body annotations of TotalCapture and experimentally show that when used with H3WB
it helps to improve the performance.

1. Introduction
3D Human pose estimation is the task of localizing human body keypoints in images which is critical to analyze human behavior, expressions, emotions, intentions,
and how people communicate and interact with the physical world. As a result, 3D human pose estimation has
an important role in several vision tasks and applications
such as robotics [28, 25, 29] or augmented/virtual reality [55, 3, 73, 81]. However, to make more accurate predictions about human behaviors, we need more than a few
body keypoints. To that end, 3D whole-body pose estimation aims to detect face, hand and foot keypoints in addition
to the standard human body keypoints of classical 3D hu-

man pose estimation.
The lack of accurate 3D datasets has made 3D wholebody pose estimation a challenging task, leading previous works to focus on separate body parts and train separate models on different datasets for 3D body pose [1,
30, 55, 56, 63, 3, 44, 45, 46, 65, 74, 77, 80, 26], 3D
hand pose [8, 58, 84, 7, 27, 37, 82, 31], or 3D face landmarks [68, 9, 13]. However, directly ensembling separate
body part models during inference suffers from issues arising from datasets’ biases, pose and scales, and complex inference pipelines. Distillation from pretrained models has
been used to overcome these issues, with FrankMocap [66]
using three specialized pretrained models to estimate 65
whole-body keypoints (22 on the body, 40 on the hands,
and 3 on the face), and DOPE [75] also using three specialized models to output 139 whole-body keypoints (13 on the
body, 42 on the hands, and 84 on the face).
Alternatively, parametric body models can be fitted to
obtain whole-body pose, as has been proposed in ExPose [18], SMPLify-X [60] or Monocular Total Capture
(MTC) [77]. While parametric models enable sampling
an almost infinite number of keypoints from the mesh [24,
22, 23], their accuracy is usually less than that of detection
based methods on fine body parts like hands and feet (see
supplementary material for examples from the literature).
Indeed, parametric models are tailored for visual applications such as realistic motion generation [62] or avatar capture [67], where a realistic capture of the body shape and
pose is more important than fine grain accuracy. Relying on
a small set of data-driven pose parameters ensures realism
but also limits their flexibility in representing complex unusual poses. For applications where the body shape is not
needed but the accuracy of the keypoints is essential, like
high performance sport analysis or ergonomics, detection
based methods are thus the preferred solution.
Furthermore, 3D whole-body pose estimation has not
been fully explored in the literature due to the absence of
a representative and accurate benchmark. As previously
mentioned, existing 3D whole-body methods either rely on
specific datasets and models for different body parts, lead-

20166

