This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning with Noisy Data for Semi-Supervised 3D Object Detection
Zehui Chen1

Zhenyu Li2 Shuo Wang1 Dengpan Fu3 Feng Zhao1∗
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Harbin Institute of Technology 3 NIO

{lovesnow,wangshuo}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
dengpan.fu@nio.com

zhenyuli17@hit.edu.cn

fzhao956@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Pseudo-Labeling (PL) is a critical approach in semisupervised 3D object detection (SSOD). In PL, delicately
selected pseudo-labels, generated by the teacher model,
are provided for the student model to supervise the semisupervised detection framework. However, such a paradigm
may introduce misclassified labels or loose localized box
predictions, resulting in a sub-optimal solution of detection performance. In this paper, we take PL from a noisy
learning perspective: instead of directly applying vanilla
pseudo-labels, we design a noise-resistant instance supervision module for better generalization. Specifically, we
soften the classification targets by considering both the
quality of pseudo labels and the network learning ability,
and convert the regression task into a probabilistic modeling problem. Besides, considering that self-supervised
learning works in the absence of labels, we incorporate
dense pixel-wise feature consistency constraints to eliminate the negative impact of noisy labels. To this end,
we propose NoiseDet, a simple yet effective framework
for semi-supervised 3D object detection. Extensive experiments on competitive ONCE and Waymo benchmarks
demonstrate that our method outperforms current semisupervised approaches by a large margin. Notably, our
NoiseDet achieves state-of-the-art performance under various dataset scales on ONCE dataset. For example,
NoiseDet improves its NoiseyStudent baseline from 55.5
mAP to 58.0 mAP, and further reaches 60.2 mAP with enhanced pseudo-label generation. Code will be available at
https://github.com/zehuichen123/NoiseDet.

1. Introduction
3D object detection, aiming at detecting instances in the
3D space, is of great importance in various applications.
Thanks to the large amount of labeled data, it has achieved
∗ Corresponding Author

Figure 1. The noisy predictions generated by a well-trained 3D object detector. Despite carefully tuning the model and filtering lowconfidence score predictions, there are still low-quality bounding
boxes left. Directly enforcing the detector to learn from such noisy
data on an unlabeled dataset can mislead the model convergence
or even deteriorate its performance. In the top figure, we demonstrate an inaccurate heading regression case, and the bottom case
shows a false positive prediction. We distinguish the ground truth
and model predictions with green and blue, respectively.

great success in the past few years [37, 29, 9, 56, 10, 11].
However, labeling a large-scale dataset is extremely timeconsuming and labor-intensive [40]. This issue gets much
more severe in the 3D object detection task, where 7 degreeof-freedom parameters need to be determined as well as the
categorical labels. Therefore, how to further boost the supervised detectors with limited labeled datasets remains a
practical and urgent problem.
Semi-supervised object detection (SSOD) demonstrates
great prospects recently due to its simplicity and weak dependence on costly annotations [46, 20, 39]. By leveraging easily accessible unlabeled data, SSOD approaches
enhance the model performance with little human effort
[47, 43, 51, 25]. The strategies of current SSOD can be

6929

