This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly-Supervised Action Segmentation and Unseen Error Detection in
Anomalous Instructional Videos
Reza Ghoddoosian

Isht Dwivedi
Nakul Agarwal
Honda Research Institute, USA

Behzad Dariush

{reza ghoddoosian, idwivedi, nakul agarwal, bdariush}@honda-ri.com

Abstract
We present a novel method for weakly-supervised action
segmentation and unseen error detection in anomalous instructional videos. In the absence of an appropriate dataset
for this task, we introduce the Anomalous Toy Assembly
(ATA) dataset1 , which comprises 1152 untrimmed videos
of 32 participants assembling three different toys, recorded
from four different viewpoints. The training set comprises
27 participants who assemble toys in an expected and consistent manner, while the test and validation sets comprise
5 participants who display sequential anomalies in their
task. We introduce a weakly labeled segmentation algorithm that is a generalization of the constrained Viterbi algorithm and identifies potential anomalous moments based
on the difference between future anticipation and current
recognition results. The proposed method is not restricted
by the training transcripts during testing, allowing for the
inference of anomalous action sequences while maintaining real-time performance. Based on these segmentation
results, we also introduce a baseline to detect pre-defined
human errors, and benchmark results on the ATA dataset.
Experiments were conducted on the ATA and CSV datasets,
outperforming the state-of-the-art in segmenting anomalous
videos under both online and offline conditions.

1. Introduction
One of the challenges in human machine interaction is
the automatic vision-based understanding of human actions
in instructional videos. These videos depict a series of lowlevel actions that collectively accomplish a top-level task,
such as preparing a meal or assembling an object. However, labeling each frame of these videos can be arduous
and necessitate a significant amount of manual effort to note
the start and end times of each action segment. Consequently, there has been a surge of research interest in developing weakly-supervised methods to learn the actions. In
1 https://usa.honda-ri.com/ata

Figure 1. A toy example of different assembly sequences. Given
a fixed set of non-anomalous training transcripts, our method explores and infers unseen anomalous sequences at test time. The
anomalous sequences may or may not entail assembly errors.

particular, such methods aim to overcome the challenge of
weakly-labeled instructional videos, where only the ordered
sequence of action labels (transcript) is provided without
any information on the duration of each action.
Specifically, detection of fine errors and anomalies in
tasks performed by human operators is critical for enhancing quality of work, safety, and efficiency. Anomalies can
take different forms, but in this paper, we focus on the detection of fine-grained sequential anomalies in instructional
videos. We define sequential anomalies as unseen action
sequences that arise due to unexpected permutations of the
action sequences seen in the training set. Such permutations
may include unexpected changes in the order of actions, or
the omission or addition of one or multiple actions at any
point in the video. We also define an “error” as a sequential
anomaly that leads to an undesired outcome. This means
that not all sequential anomalies indicate faulty procedures
(Fig.1). In the context of assembly, some examples of these
unseen variations at test time include scenarios where an assembly worker skips fastening a screw or spends too much
time idling between actions. AI systems can be trained
on limited data collected from the optimal work of professionals, yet they must still be capable of detecting out-ofsequence actions in situations where inexperienced workers
make mistakes or follow sub-optimal sequences.
Existing weakly-supervised segmentation methods di-

10128

