This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CroCo v2: Improved Cross-view Completion Pre-training
for Stereo Matching and Optical Flow
Philippe Weinzaepfel
Thomas Lucas
Vincent Leroy
Yohann Cabon
Vaibhav Arora
Romain Brégier
Gabriela Csurka
Leonid Antsfeld
Boris Chidlovskii
Jérôme Revaud
NAVER LABS Europe
https://github.com/naver/croco

Abstract
Despite impressive performance for high-level downstream tasks, self-supervised pre-training methods have not
yet fully delivered on dense geometric vision tasks such as
stereo matching or optical flow. The application of selfsupervised concepts, such as instance discrimination or
masked image modeling, to geometric tasks is an active
area of research. In this work, we build on the recent crossview completion framework, a variation of masked image
modeling that leverages a second view from the same scene
which makes it well suited for binocular downstream tasks.
The applicability of this concept has so far been limited in
at least two ways: (a) by the difficulty of collecting realworld image pairs – in practice only synthetic data have
been used – and (b) by the lack of generalization of vanilla
transformers to dense downstream tasks for which relative
position is more meaningful than absolute position. We explore three avenues of improvement. First, we introduce a
method to collect suitable real-world image pairs at large
scale. Second, we experiment with relative positional embeddings and show that they enable vision transformers
to perform substantially better. Third, we scale up vision
transformer based cross-completion architectures, which is
made possible by the use of large amounts of data. With
these improvements, we show for the first time that stateof-the-art results on stereo matching and optical flow can
be reached without using any classical task-specific techniques like correlation volume, iterative estimation, image
warping or multi-scale reasoning, thus paving the way towards universal vision models.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised pre-training methods aim at learning
rich representations from large amounts of unannotated
data, which can then be finetuned on a variety of downstream tasks. This requires the design of pretext tasks, for

Figure 1. Pre-training for dense geometric tasks. We pre-train
a generic architecture, with a monocular encoder and a binocular
decoder, with cross-view completion before finetuning it on the
stereo matching or optical flow downstream task.

which supervision signal can be extracted from the data itself, as well as generic architectures that can be easily transferred. We hypothesize that successfully pre-training large
models for geometric tasks such as stereo matching or optical flow, see Figure 1, requires three things all together:
(a) a well-designed dense pretext task inciting the understanding of 3D scene layout and geometry, (b) an architecture that processes pairs of images, suitable for different
downstream tasks, and (c) large-scale real-world data.
Early self-supervised methods proceeded by discarding
part of the signal (e.g. image color [95], patch ordering [55]
or image orientation [25]) and trying to recover it. Later
methods based on instance discrimination [12, 13, 16, 30]
were first to surpass supervised pre-training on high-level
tasks: they are based on the idea that output features should
be invariant to well-designed classes of augmentations. Another recently successful pretext task is masked image modeling (MIM) [2, 22, 29, 81, 84, 100], where part of the
input data is masked and an auto-encoder is trained to restore the full signal from the remaining visible parts. Instance discrimination and MIM methods have achieved excellent performance on semantic tasks such as image clas-

17969

