This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Upsample by Learning to Sample
Wenze Liu

Hao Lu*

Hongtao Fu

Zhiguo Cao

School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
{wzliu,hlu}@hust.edu.cn

43.5

We present DySample, an ultra-lightweight and effective
dynamic upsampler. While impressive performance gains
have been witnessed from recent kernel-based dynamic upsamplers such as CARAFE, FADE, and SAPA, they introduce much workload, mostly due to the time-consuming dynamic convolution and the additional sub-network used to
generate dynamic kernels. Further, the need for high-res
feature guidance of FADE and SAPA somehow limits their
application scenarios. To address these concerns, we bypass dynamic convolution and formulate upsampling from
the perspective of point sampling, which is more resourceefficient and can be easily implemented with the standard
built-in function in PyTorch. We first showcase a naive design, and then demonstrate how to strengthen its upsampling behavior step by step towards our new upsampler,
DySample. Compared with former kernel-based dynamic
upsamplers, DySample requires no customized CUDA package and has much fewer parameters, FLOPs, GPU memory, and latency. Besides the light-weight characteristics,
DySample outperforms other upsamplers across five dense
prediction tasks, including semantic segmentation, object
detection, instance segmentation, panoptic segmentation,
and monocular depth estimation. Code is available at
https://github.com/tiny-smart/dysample.

43.0

1. Introduction
Feature upsampling is a crucial ingredient in dense prediction models for gradually recovering the feature resolution. The most commonly used upsamplers are nearest
neighbor (NN) and bilinear interpolation, which follows
fixed rules to interpolate upsampled values. To increase
flexibility, learnable upsamplers are introduced in some specific tasks, e.g., deconvolution in instance segmentation [13]
and pixel shuffle [34] in image super-resolution [31, 12, 22].
* Corresponding author

mIoU(%)

Abstract

DySample Series
CARAFE

42.5
42.0
41.5

SAPA

FADE

bilinear

41.0

pixel
shuffle
deconv

5

10

15

latency(ms)

20

25

Figure 1. Comparison of performance, inference speed,
and GFLOPs of different upsamplers. The circle size indicates the GFLOPs cost. The inference time is tested by
×2 upsampling a feature map of size 256 × 120 × 120. The
mIoU performance and additional GFLOPs are tested with
SegFormer-B1 [40] on the ADE20K data set [42].

However, they either suffer from checkerboard artifacts [32]
or seem not friendly to high-level tasks. With the popularity of dynamic networks [14], some dynamic upsamplers
have shown great potential on several tasks. CARAFE [37]
generates content-aware upsampling kernels to upsample
the feature by dynamic convolution. The following work
FADE [29] and SAPA [30] propose to combine both the
high-res guiding feature and the low-res input feature to
generate dynamic kernels, such that the upsampling process
could be guided by the higher-res structure. These dynamic
upsamplers are often of complicated structures, require customized CUDA implementation, and cost much more inference time than bilinear interpolation. Particularly for FADE
and SAPA, the higher-res guiding feature introduces even
more computational workload and narrows their application

6027

