This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Counterfactual-based Saliency Map:
Towards Visual Contrastive Explanations for Neural Networks
Xue Wang‡ , Zhibo Wang†,‡,∗ ,Haiqin Weng ,Hengchang Guo‡ , Zhifei Zhang , Lu Jin ,Tao Wei ,Kui Ren†
†
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, P. R. China,
‡
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, P. R. China,

Ant Group,  Adobe Research
{shannonwang, hc guo}@whu.edu.cn, {zhibowang, kuiren}@zju.edu.cn,
{haiqin.wenghaiqin, lyla.jl, lenx.wei}@antgroup.com, zzhang@adobe.com

Abstract
Explaining deep models in a human-understandable way
has been explored by many works that mostly explain why
an input causes a corresponding prediction (i.e., Why P?).
However, seldom they could handle those more complex
causal questions like “Why P rather than Q?” and “Why
one is P, while another is Q?”, which would better help
humans understand the behavior of deep models. Considering the insufﬁcient study on such complex causal questions, we make the ﬁrst attempt to explain different causal
questions by contrastive explanations in a uniﬁed framework, i.e., Counterfactual Contrastive Explanation (CCE),
which visually and intuitively explains the aforementioned
questions via a novel positive-negative saliency-based explanation scheme. More speciﬁcally, we propose a contentaware counterfactual perturbing algorithm to stimulate
contrastive examples, from which a pair of positive and
negative saliency maps could be derived to contrastively
explain why P (positive class) rather than Q (negative
class). Beyond existing works, our counterfactual perturbation meets the principles of validity, sparsity, and data distribution closeness at the same time. In addition, by slightly
adjusting the objective of perturbation, our framework can
adapt to different causal questions. Extensive experimental evaluation demonstrates the effectiveness and superior
performance of the proposed CCE on different benchmark
metrics for interpretability, including Sanity Check, Class
Deviation Score and Insertion-Deletion tests. A user study
is conducted and the results show that user conﬁdence is increasing signiﬁcantly when presented with CCE compared
to standard saliency map baselines.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved breakthrough performance in various computer vision tasks, e.g.,
∗ Zhibo Wang is the corresponding author.

image classiﬁcation [19, 34], object detection [28, 29], semantic segmentation [23], etc. However, the “black-box”
nature of DNNs, i.e., massive unexplainable parameters and
lack of intuitive understanding in prediction, has been drawing chaos in the human-understandable analysis of their behavior. Since human-understandable explanations of DNNs
would signiﬁcantly facilitate the causal analysis, e.g., what
causes misclassiﬁcation or bias, it is rising increasing demand for related research. One of the popular approaches
to interpreting deep learning models is to display visual explanations in the form of saliency maps [6, 32, 33, 36].
Most saliency-based approaches highlight the most informative areas by assigning weights to image regions concerning their contributions to the ﬁnal prediction, revealing
their causal relationship.
However, in the ﬁeld of social science, Miller [26] systematically surveyed explanation methods and pointed out
that most explanations are contrastive. That is, people not
only want to know “Why P?”, where P refers to the given
conclusion, but also have great interest in “Why P, rather
than Q?”, in which Q is often implicit from the context.
Van Bouwel and Weber [40] deﬁned the latter question as
P-contrast referring to differences that occur on properties
within an object, and formally state it as “Why does object a
have property P, rather than property Q?” Saliency maps efﬁciently answer the question “Why P?” by highlighting the
most informative regions, but it does not take the P-contrast
question into account. For example, when an application
for a loan is denied by the bank, the applicant would be left
wondering not only why was the loan denied, but also how
to pass the application. The saliency maps might only point
out that the income is the main reason for denial but fail to
state the difference between approval and denial.
For structured data such as tabular data, counterfactual
explanation [42, 7] is a popular method to answer P-contrast
question. A counterfactual explanation modiﬁes the input

2042

