This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Point2Mask: Point-supervised Panoptic Segmentation via Optimal Transport
Wentong Li1 , Yuqian Yuan1 , Song Wang1 ,
Jianke Zhu1 *, Jianshu Li2 , Jian Liu2 , Lei Zhang3
1
2
3
Zhejiang University
Ant Group
The HongKong Polytechnical University

Figure 1: Examples of pixel-wise mask predictions generated by Point2Mask on COCO with ResNet-101. Only a single
point annotation per target is used as supervision during training to obtain these results.

Abstract
Weakly-supervised image segmentation has recently attracted increasing research attentions, aiming to avoid the
expensive pixel-wise labeling. In this paper, we present
an effective method, namely Point2Mask, to achieve highquality panoptic prediction using only a single random
point annotation per target for training. Specifically, we formulate the panoptic pseudo-mask generation as an Optimal
Transport (OT) problem, where each ground-truth (gt) point
label and pixel sample are defined as the label supplier and
consumer, respectively. The transportation cost is calculated by the introduced task-oriented maps, which focus on
the category-wise and instance-wise differences among the
various thing and stuff targets. Furthermore, a centroidbased scheme is proposed to set the accurate unit number
for each gt point supplier. Hence, the pseudo-mask generation is converted into finding the optimal transport plan at a
globally minimal transportation cost, which can be solved
via the Sinkhorn-Knopp Iteration. Experimental results on
Pascal VOC and COCO demonstrate the promising performance of our proposed Point2Mask approach to pointsupervised panoptic segmentation. Source code is available
at: https://github.com/LiWentomng/Point2Mask.

1. Introduction
Panoptic segmentation aims to obtain the pixel-wise labels of instance things and semantic stuff in the whole image, which plays an important role in applications such
as autonomous driving, image editing and robotic manipulation. Although having achieved promising performance, most of the existing panoptic segmentation approaches [29, 10, 51, 8, 20, 47] are trained in a fully supervised manner, which heavily depend on the pixel-wise
mask annotations, incurring expensive labeling costs.
To deal with this problem, weakly-supervised methods
have recently attracted research attentions to obtain highquality pixel-wise masks with label-efficient sparse annotations, such as bounding box [43, 26, 22, 27], multiple
points [28], or the combination of them [9, 41]. Such methods make image segmentation more accessible with lower
annotation efforts for new categories or scene types. In
this paper, we explore a simpler yet more efficient annotation form, i.e., a single random point for each thing and
stuff target, to achieve high-quality panoptic segmentation.
As discussed in [2], the cost of point-level labels is only
marginally above image-level ones 1 . Such a setting has
1 On Pascal VOC [14], image labels cost around 20 sec./img, single
point labels cost 22.1 sec./img, while full mask labels cost 239.7 sec./img.

572

