This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Candidate-aware Selective Disambiguation Based On Normalized Entropy for
Instance-dependent Partial-label Learning

1

Shuo He1 Guowu Yang1 * Lei Feng2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

shuohe@std.uestc.edu.cn, guowu@uestc.edu.cn, lfengqaq@gmail.com

Abstract
In partial-label learning (PLL), each training example
has a set of candidate labels, among which only one is the
true label. Most existing PLL studies focus on the instanceindependent (II) case, where the generation of candidate
labels is only dependent on the true label. However, this IIPLL paradigm could be unrealistic, since candidate labels
are usually generated according to the specific features of
the instance. Therefore, instance-dependent PLL (ID-PLL)
has attracted increasing attention recently. Unfortunately,
existing ID-PLL studies lack an insightful perception of the
intrinsic challenge in ID-PLL. In this paper, we start with
an empirical study of the dynamics of label disambiguation
in both II-PLL and ID-PLL. We found that the performance
degradation of ID-PLL stems from the inaccurate supervision caused by massive under-disambiguated (UD) examples that do not achieve complete disambiguation. To solve
this problem, we propose a novel two-stage PLL framework
including selective disambiguation and candidate-aware
thresholding. Specifically, we first choose a part of welldisambiguated (WD) examples based on the magnitude of
normalized entropy (NE) and integrate harmless complementary supervision from the remaining ones to train two
networks. Next, the remaining examples whose NE is lower
than the specific class-wise WD-NE threshold are selected
as additional WD ones. Meanwhile, the remaining UD
examples, whose NE is lower than the self-adaptive UDNE threshold and whose predictions from two networks are
agreed, are also regarded as WD ones for model training. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed
method outperforms state-of-the-art PLL methods.

1. Introduction
The development of modern deep neural networks
(DNNs) relies on a large amount of perfectly labeled
* Corresponding author.

Labeling Random
Confidence CLs
Huskie

Image

ID CLs

Labeling
Confidence

Huskie

Cat
Whale

Wolf

Lion

Lion

Penguin

Golden
Retriever

Bird

Tiger

Figure 1. Illustration of the difference of labeling confidence after
label disambiguation between II-PLL (left) and ID-PLL (right).
We can see that the difficulty of identifying the true label (blue) of
examples with various types of candidate labels (CLs) is prominently different. In addition, the image with sharp labeling confidence on random CLs is well-disambiguated, while the image with
flat labeling confidence on ID CLs is under-disambiguated.

data in real-world tasks. However, collecting such highquality data in real-world scenarios is considerably timeconsuming and laborious even for experienced labeling experts [28]. To alleviate this issue, researchers have paid
much attention to partial-label learning (PLL), a weaklysupervised learning paradigm that is labeling-friendly for
non-expert annotators, allowing to assign a candidate label set [6]. In particular, a majority of previous PLL works
implicitly employ an instance-independent (II) assumption
that the generation of each candidate label for an instance
is of equiprobability and independent of the instance itself.
But, this ideal assumption is unrealistic in real-world scenarios [22]. From the perspective of an image annotator, the
probability of a domain class being selected as a candidate
label is related to the visual perception information (i.e., semantic, color, and shape) of an image itself. This case is
called instance-dependent (ID) [23] where the generation
of candidate labels is according to the specific features of

1792

