This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Linear-Covariance Loss for End-to-End Learning of 6D Pose Estimation
Fulin Liu
Beihang University

Yinlin Hu
MagicLeap

Mathieu Salzmann
EPFL, ClearSpace

liufulin@buaa.edu.cn

yhu@magicleap.com

mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch

Abstract
Most modern image-based 6D object pose estimation
methods learn to predict 2D-3D correspondences, from
which the pose can be obtained using a PnP solver. Because
of the non-differentiable nature of common PnP solvers,
these methods are supervised via the individual correspondences. To address this, several methods have designed
differentiable PnP strategies, thus imposing supervision on
the pose obtained after the PnP step. Here, we argue that
this conflicts with the averaging nature of the PnP problem,
leading to gradients that may encourage the network to degrade the accuracy of individual correspondences. To address this, we derive a loss function that exploits the ground
truth pose before solving the PnP problem. Specifically, we
linearize the PnP solver around the ground-truth pose and
compute the covariance of the resulting pose distribution.
We then define our loss based on the diagonal covariance
elements, which entails considering the final pose estimate
yet not suffering from the PnP averaging issue. Our experiments show that our loss consistently improves the pose
estimation accuracy for both dense and sparse correspondence based methods, achieving state-of-the-art results on
both Linemod-Occluded and YCB-Video.

1. Introduction
Estimating the 6D pose of 3D objects from monocular
images is a core computer vision task, with many real world
applications, such as robotics manipulation [53, 54], autonomous driving [9, 48] and augmented reality [10, 32].
Although this task can be facilitated by the use of RGBD
input, depth sensors are not ubiquitous, and thus 6D object pose estimation from RGB images remains an active
research area.
With the development of deep neural networks (DNNs),
early methods [1, 14, 26, 49] formulated pose estimation as a regression problem, directly mapping the input image to the 6D object pose. More recently, most
works [5, 21, 23, 33, 35, 38, 39, 41, 42, 43, 44] draw inspiration from geometry and seek to predict 2D-3D correspon-

p

est. g.t.

loss

pose
Image

DNN

Noisy 2D-3D matching

Ground truth
pose (g.t.)

PnP

Posterior
distribution
p

g.t.

loss

pose
Residual variances of
correspondences

Linearized Solution
PnP distribution

Figure 1. Difference between other differentiable PnP losses
and our proposed loss. Other methods (first row) first solve for
the object pose from noisy correspondences, and then compute the
loss based on the resulting pose and the ground truth. By contrast, we (second row) utilize the ground-truth pose to estimate
the residual variance of the correspondences and compute the covariance of the pose distribution. We define our loss based on the
diagonal elements of this covariance.

dences, from which the 6D pose can be obtained by solving
the Perspective-n-Points (PnP) problem. While effective,
these methods supervise the training process with the individual correspondences, and not with the ground-truth pose
itself, as standard PnP solvers are not differentiable.
To enable end-to-end training, several attempts have
been made to incorporate the PnP solver as a differentiable
network layer [3, 4, 6]. While these methods make it possible to employ pose-driven loss functions to train the DNN,
they only leverage the optimal pose as supervision, thus not
imposing constraints on other pose candidates. In [7], this
was addressed by deriving a loss function based on the posterior pose distribution, encouraging a larger posterior for
the ground truth and smaller posteriors for the other poses.
Nevertheless, to the best of our knowledge, all of these
differentiable PnP layers have a common property: They
first solve the PnP problem to obtain either the pose [3, 4, 6]
or the posterior pose distribution [7], and then compute the
error to be backpropagated based on a dedicated loss func-

14107

