This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MV-DeepSDF: Implicit Modeling with Multi-Sweep Point Clouds
for 3D Vehicle Reconstruction in Autonomous Driving
Yibo Liu1,2 , Kelly Zhu1,3 , Guile Wu1 , Yuan Ren1 , Bingbing Liu1 , Yang Liu1 , Jinjun Shan2
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 2 York University, 3 University of Toronto
{yorklyb,jjshan}@yorku.ca, kellyk.zhu@mail.utoronto.ca
{guile.wu, yuan.ren3, liu.bingbing, yang.liu9}@huawei.com

Abstract
Reconstructing 3D vehicles from noisy and sparse partial point clouds is of great significance to autonomous
driving. Most existing 3D reconstruction methods cannot be directly applied to this problem because they are
elaborately designed to deal with dense inputs with trivial noise. In this work, we propose a novel framework,
dubbed MV-DeepSDF, which estimates the optimal Signed
Distance Function (SDF) shape representation from multisweep point clouds to reconstruct vehicles in the wild. Although there have been some SDF-based implicit modeling methods, they only focus on single-view-based reconstruction, resulting in low fidelity. In contrast, we first analyze multi-sweep consistency and complementarity in the
latent feature space and propose to transform the implicit
space shape estimation problem into an element-to-set feature extraction problem. Then, we devise a new architecture
to extract individual element-level representations and aggregate them to generate a set-level predicted latent code.
This set-level latent code is an expression of the optimal 3D
shape in the implicit space, and can be subsequently decoded to a continuous SDF of the vehicle. In this way, our
approach learns consistent and complementary information
among multi-sweeps for 3D vehicle reconstruction. We conduct thorough experiments on two real-world autonomous
driving datasets (Waymo and KITTI) to demonstrate the superiority of our approach over state-of-the-art alternative
methods both qualitatively and quantitatively.

1. Introduction
3D vehicle reconstruction from sparse and partial point
clouds is a fundamental need in the autonomous driving
industry [12, 17]. It aims to infer the 3D structure of
vehicles at arbitrary resolutions in the wild, which is of
great significance to many downstream tasks in autonomous
driving. Despite the many 3D reconstruction methods

Figure 1. An illustration of the motivation of the proposed approach. Our approach takes multi-sweep point clouds as input
and simplifies 3D vehicle reconstruction from multi-sweeps into
an element-to-set feature extraction problem. In this way, we infer
an optimal estimation of the 3D shape described in the abstract implicit space for 3D vehicle reconstruction in autonomous driving.

[28, 35, 26, 39, 41, 1, 19, 4], most of them focus on imagebased inputs [28, 35, 26, 39, 41], dense point cloud inputs
[19, 31, 11], or their combination [1, 4, 9] and thus, cannot
be directly applied to this problem.
Recently, [12] has shown promising performance in applying implicit modeling to tackle this problem. Contrary to
explicit modeling methods [32, 33, 47, 49, 43, 42, 10, 2, 38]
that directly represent 3D object shape structure with points,
voxels, or meshes, implicit modeling maps the 3D shape
to a low-dimensional latent space and learns the projection
from the latent space to a continuous function that describes
the 3D shape. This presents two significant advantages: 1)
the 3D shape can be stored as a low-dimensional memorysaving latent code [31, 11, 12, 6]; 2) the trained network
outputs a continuous function in the 3D space which supports mesh extraction at any resolution [31]. To this end, we
also choose to employ implicit modeling in our approach.
However, previous point cloud-based implicit modeling methods [31, 11, 12] mainly focus on recovering 3D
shapes from a single-view partial point cloud and fail to
leverage the multi-sweep information of vehicles. As a result, when noise or annotation errors exist in an individual
sweep, single-view methods usually produce low fidelity results. In real-world datasets (e.g., [36, 15]), multi-sweep

8306

