This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeSS-ST: Detecting Good and Stable Keypoints with a Neural Stability Score
and the Shi-Tomasi detector
Konstantin Pakulev
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology

Alexander Vakhitov
SLAMcore

Konstantin.Pakulev@skoltech.ru

alexander.vakhitov@gmail.com

Gonzalo Ferrer
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
G.Ferrer@skoltech.ru

Abstract
Learning a feature point detector presents a challenge
both due to the ambiguity of the definition of a keypoint and,
correspondingly, the need for specially prepared ground
truth labels for such points. In our work, we address both
of these issues by utilizing a combination of a hand-crafted
Shi-Tomasi detector, a specially designed metric that assesses the quality of keypoints, the stability score (SS), and
a neural network. We build on the principled and localized
keypoints provided by the Shi-Tomasi detector and learn the
neural network to select good feature points via the stability
score. The neural network incorporates the knowledge from
the training targets in the form of the neural stability score
(NeSS). Therefore, our method is named NeSS-ST since it
combines the Shi-Tomasi detector and the properties of the
neural stability score. It only requires sets of images for
training without dataset pre-labeling or the need for reconstructed correspondence labels. We evaluate NeSS-ST on
HPatches, ScanNet, MegaDepth and IMC-PT demonstrating state-of-the-art performance and good generalization
on downstream tasks. The project repository is available
at: https://github.com/KonstantinPakulev/
NeSS-ST.

1. Introduction
Feature point detection (keypoint detection) is usually
the first step in camera localization and scene reconstruction pipelines based on sparse features commonly used in
robotics [29], computer vision [33], augmented, mixed and
virtual reality [7, 22] and other systems.
Whilst feature description is successfully approached in
the literature as metric learning [27, 36] problem, applying

deep learning to the feature detection task still poses a challenge with classical solutions showing competitive results
on the state-of-the-art benchmarks [15]. The difficulty is
caused by the innate vagueness of point of interest definition [40] that greatly complicates the formulation of feature
detection as a learning problem.
The data required to learn keypoints with sufficient robustness to illumination and viewpoint changes presents another challenge. Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [33, 10] and
Multi-View Stereo (MVS) [34, 10] reconstructions that are
used by some methods [41, 30, 31, 13, 37] to obtain pixelaccurate correspondences are hard to build properly and
lack full image coverage [19, 9].
We approach the problem of “defining a keypoint” by
leveraging principled assumptions that make up reasonable
keypoints [35]: we employ the Shi-Tomasi [35] detector to
provide locations for keypoints as well as to perform subpixel localization. At the same time, we propose a quantitative metric to measure the stability of detected keypoints
to viewpoint transformations, the stability score (SS), that
randomly perturbs detected points and their surrounding
patches for later aggregation of their statistics. This metric can be calculated in an online fashion for a set of keypoints from a single image, so it is ideal for automatically
generating a supervised signal for training a neural network
that predicts the neural stability score (NeSS). We empower
a classical method, the Shi-Tomasi detector, with a neural
approach, NeSS, getting a method, NeSS-ST, that provides
accurate locations of keypoints that are more likely to remain stable under viewpoint changes.
The design presented in our work does not rely on
ground-truth poses or reconstructed correspondences alongside [11, 3, 18]. These methods are sometimes referred
to as self-supervised [11, 18]. Compared to the prior art,
NeSS-ST needs only a set of real images without any la-

9578

