This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Segmenting Known Objects and Unseen Unknowns without Prior Knowledge
Stefano Gasperini1,2,◦ Alvaro Marcos-Ramiro2 Michael Schmidt2
Nassir Navab1 Benjamin Busam1 Federico Tombari1,3
1

2

Technical University of Munich

BMW Group

3

Google

Abstract
Panoptic segmentation methods assign a known class
to each pixel given in input. Even for state-of-the-art approaches, this inevitably enforces decisions that systematically lead to wrong predictions for objects outside the
training categories. However, robustness against out-ofdistribution samples and corner cases is crucial in safetycritical settings to avoid dangerous consequences. Since
real-world datasets cannot contain enough data points to
adequately sample the long tail of the underlying distribution, models must be able to deal with unseen and unknown scenarios as well. Previous methods targeted this
by re-identifying already-seen unlabeled objects. In this
work, we propose the necessary step to extend segmentation with a new setting which we term holistic segmentation. Holistic segmentation aims to identify and separate objects of unseen, unknown categories into instances
without any prior knowledge about them while performing
panoptic segmentation of known classes. We tackle this new
problem with U3HS, which finds unknowns as highly uncertain regions and clusters their corresponding instanceaware embeddings into individual objects. By doing so,
for the first time in panoptic segmentation with unknown
objects, our U3HS is trained without unknown categories,
reducing assumptions and leaving the settings as unconstrained as in real-life scenarios. Extensive experiments on
public data from MS COCO, Cityscapes, and Lost&Found
demonstrate the effectiveness of U3HS for this new, challenging, and assumptions-free setting called holistic segmentation. Project page: https://holisticseg.github.io.

1. Introduction
Since neural networks have achieved unprecedented performance in perception tasks (e.g., object detection and semantic segmentation), there has been a growing interest
◦ This work was conducted while working at BMW Group.

Contact author: Stefano Gasperini (stefano.gasperini@tum.de).

input with unknowns

panoptic segmentation

detected unseen unknowns

proposed: holistic segmentation

Figure 1. State-of-the-art panoptic segmentation methods [13]
cannot deal with unseen classes from [52] (top right). Instead, our
U3HS addresses the proposed holistic segmentation setting. U3HS
finds unseen unknowns (bottom left) and separates them into instances (bottom right) without prior knowledge about unknowns.

in ensuring their safe deployment, especially important for
safety-critical scenarios, such as autonomous driving and
robotics [25]. Recently, several works have been proposed
to improve robustness and generalization by addressing corner cases and out-of-distribution data [6, 65, 22], via domain adaptation [70], adversarial augmentations [44], simulations [1], and uncertainty estimation [54].
Due to the difficulty of collecting corner cases from the
long tail of the underlying data distribution, current datasets
cannot fully represent the diversity of the world, leaving
its vast majority as difficult out-of-distribution (OOD) samples [32, 8]. In safety-critical applications, considering
them during development and deployment is of utmost importance [3, 44], or they could cause severe damage.
Furthermore, since the powerful and popular softmax
highly promotes the probability of the highest logit, stateof-the-art methods tend to be overly confident even on
wrong predictions [58, 25]. In safety-critical settings, reliable confidence together with interpretability techniques
[20, 77] increases trust for downstream tasks [25], e.g., trajectory prediction and path planning. Towards this end, estimating the uncertainty of a model’s output is commonly
considered a key enabler for its safe applicability [39, 25].

19321

