This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Alignment Before Aggregation: Trajectory Memory Retrieval Network
for Video Object Segmentation
Yuan Wang1∗
Huayu Mai1
Tianzhu Zhang1,2,3†
Feng Wu1,2
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
3
Deep Space Exploration Lab

Rui Sun1 *

{issunrui,wy2016,mai556}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {tzzhang, fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Memory-based methods in semi-supervised video object
segmentation task achieve competitive performance by performing dense matching between query and memory frames.
However, most of the existing methods neglect the fact that
videos carry rich temporal information yet redundant spatial
information. In this case, direct pixel-level global matching will lead to ambiguous correspondences. In this work,
we reconcile the inherent tension of spatial and temporal
information to retrieve memory frame information along the
object trajectory, and propose a novel and coherent Trajectory Memory Retrieval Network (TMRN) to equip with
the trajectory information, including a spatial alignment
module and a temporal aggregation module. The proposed
TMRN enjoys several merits. First, TMRN is empowered
to characterize the temporal correspondence which is in
line with the nature of video in a data-driven manner. Second, we elegantly customize the spatial alignment module
by coupling SVD initialization with agent-level correlation
for representative agent construction and rectifying false
matches caused by direct pairwise pixel-level correlation,
respectively. Extensive experimental results on challenging benchmarks including DAVIS 2017 validation / test and
Youtube-VOS 2018 / 2019 demonstrate that our TMRN, as
a general plugin module, achieves consistent improvements
over several leading methods.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised Video Object Segmentation (VOS) is
a fundamental task to perform pixel-wise classification of
a set of class-agnostic objects in video sequences. It has
been widely applied to autonomous driving [61], video editing [31], augmented reality [30], etc. Since the object mask
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Spatial
Alignment

Spatial
Alignment

Spatial
Alignment

Aligned Features
Temporal Aggregation

…
Memory Frame

Memory Frame

Memory Frame

Query Frame

(a) Temporal Aggregation Module
Pair-wise Pixel-level Correlation
𝑝2
𝑝3

Pixel
Similarity: 0.85
Pixel
Similarity: 0.91

Query Frame

Memory Frame

𝑝2

𝑝3
Memory Frame

𝑝1

②

①

𝑝1

Agent-level Correlation
Agent-level
Similarity
0.15

①

①

③

Reference points
Query Frame

③

Agent-level
Similarity
0.95

Memory background pixel

②
Query foreground pixel
Memory foreground pixel

(b) Agent-level Correlation in Spatial Alignment Module

Figure 1: Illustration of our motivation. (a) shows TMRN
reconciles the inherent tension of spatial and temporal information to retrieve memory frame information along the
object trajectory. (b) shows we carefully design a spatial
alignment module through a set of representative reference
features (agents) to rectify direct pairwise pixel-level correlation caused by distractors with similar appearance.

is only given in the first frame without any other prior information assumptions, how to fully exploit limited and
semantic-agnostic information to perform accurate segmentation in the subsequent frames is thus extremely challenging.
Recently, memory-based methods [56, 37, 7, 38, 32]
dominate this field credited to their simplicity yet competitive performance. The core idea of the memory-based methods is to perform dense matching between query (i.e., current frame) and memory (i.e., past frames with given or
segmented masks), and to retrieve the constructed memory
bank in a pixel-level manner. Despite their promising results,

1218

