This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NDC-Scene: Boost Monocular 3D Semantic Scene Completion
in Normalized Device Coordinates Space
Jiawei Yao1 * Chuming Li2,4 * Keqiang Sun3 * Yingjie Cai3 Hao Li3
Wanli Ouyang4† Hongsheng Li3,4,5†
1
University of Washington 2 The University of Sydney
3
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory 5 CPII under InnoHK
jwyao@uw.edu, chli3951@uni.sydney.edu.au, wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au,
{kqsun@link, caiyingjie@link, haoli@link, hsli@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Monocular 3D Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) has
garnered significant attention in recent years due to its potential to predict complex semantics and geometry shapes
from a single image, requiring no 3D inputs. In this paper, we identify several critical issues in current state-ofthe-art methods, including the Feature Ambiguity of projected 2D features in the ray to the 3D space, the Pose
Ambiguity of the 3D convolution, and the Computation
Imbalance in the 3D convolution across different depth
levels. To address these problems, we devise a novel
Normalized Device Coordinates scene completion network
(NDC-Scene) that directly extends the 2D feature map to a
Normalized Device Coordinates (NDC) space, rather than
to the world space directly, through progressive restoration of the dimension of depth with deconvolution operations. Experiment results demonstrate that transferring
the majority of computation from the target 3D space to
the proposed normalized device coordinates space benefits monocular SSC tasks. Additionally, we design a
Depth-Adaptive Dual Decoder to simultaneously upsample and fuse the 2D and 3D feature maps, further improving overall performance. Our extensive experiments
confirm that the proposed method consistently outperforms
state-of-the-art methods on both outdoor SemanticKITTI
and indoor NYUv2 datasets. Our code are available at
https://github.com/Jiawei-Yao0812/NDCScene.

1. Introduction
Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) [38] is a crucial task
in 3D scene understanding [43] [20], with wide applications
like virtual reality, embodied AI, and autonomous driving,
* These authors contribute equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors.

Figure 1: Feature ambiguity. We compare (a) the feature maps generated
by the proposed dual decoder in the normalized device coordinates space,
and (b) the feature maps projected through FLoSP [7], with reference to
the ground truth demonstrated in (c). In (b), the multi-scale 2D features
are projected along their line of sight, which introduces ambiguity in both
feature size and feature depth. Conversely, in the normalized device coordinates space, the semantics and occupancy are implicitly restored, as
exemplified in (a).

etc. Despite the growing body of research on this topic, the
majority of existing SSC solutions [35] [6] [8] depend on input RGB image and corresponding 3D inputs such as depth
image, truncated signed distance function (TSDF)1 , etc., to
forecast volumetric occupancy and the corresponding semantic labels. However, the reliance on these 3D data often
entails the use of specialized and costly depth sensors, and
thus limits the further application of the Semantic Scene
Completion algorithms. Recently, there is growing interest in monocular 3D semantic scene completion [7], which
aims to reconstruct a volumetric 3D scene from a single
RGB image, thus eliminating the requirement of the additional 3D inputs.
In the pioneering method Monoscene [7], the 2D features are lifted to the 3D space by inverting the perspective
projection, where the same 2D features are propagated to
1 TSDF is a representation to encode depth volume, where each voxel
stores the distance value to its closest surface and the sign indicates
whether the voxel is in visible spaces.

9455

