This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GeT: Generative Target Structure Debiasing for Domain Adaptation
Can Zhang
Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
can.zhang@u.nus.edu

gimhee.lee@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Domain adaptation (DA) aims to transfer knowledge
from a fully labeled source to a scarcely labeled or totally unlabeled target under domain shift. Recently, semisupervised learning-based (SSL) techniques that leverage
pseudo labeling have been increasingly used in DA. Despite the competitive performance, these pseudo labeling
methods rely heavily on the source domain to generate
pseudo labels for the target domain and therefore still suffer
considerably from source data bias. Moreover, class distribution bias in the target domain is also often ignored
in the pseudo label generation and thus leading to further deterioration of performance. In this paper, we propose GeT that learns a non-bias target embedding distribution with high quality pseudo labels. Specifically, we
formulate an online target generative classifier to induce
the target distribution into distinctive Gaussian components weighted by their class priors to mitigate source data
bias and enhance target class discriminability. We further propose a structure similarity regularization framework to alleviate target class distribution bias and further
improve target class discriminability. Experimental results
show that our proposed GeT is effective and achieves consistent improvements under various DA settings with and
without class distribution bias. Our code is available at:
https://lulusindazc.github.io/getproject/.

1. Introduction
Despite the remarkable advances of deep learning in
the last decade [19, 58, 21, 27], the success of most deep
learning-based works is based on the assumption that the
data distributions of the train and test sets are similar, i.e.
no domain shift. However, it is difficult to ensure no domain shift in the data distributions for many practical realworld scenarios. Consequently, many domain adaptation
(DA) works [11, 25, 54, 50] have been proposed to alleviate the domain shift problem. Unsupervised DA (UDA) is
the most commonly studied DA setting, where the goal is to
transfer knowledge from the labeled source data to the unla-

Prediction
Source Image

ℒ!
Model

Prediction

Source Ground-truth

ℒ"#

Debiased &
Discriminative Target
Pseudo Labels

Target Image
Our GeT

Figure 1. Our GeT is designed to generate source domain and
class distribution debiased and discriminative pseudo labels for the
target domain in various domain adaptation tasks.

beled target data with domain shift. Other more challenging
variants of UDA include partial-set DA (PDA) [5, 68, 12]
where the target label space is a subset of the source label
space, semi-supervised DA (SSDA) [55, 22, 33, 26] which
assumes partial target data are labeled, etc.
Most DA approaches are often either based on learning
domain-invariant feature representations or directly adopting SSL techniques for knowledge transfer. It is shown
in [3, 43, 44] that the target error is bounded by the source
error and the divergence between marginal distributions in
the source and target domains. Inspired by the theoretical analysis, many works [38, 65, 56, 15, 61] propose
to learn domain-invariant feature representations using a
shared feature extractor to align the source and target domains. Nonetheless, feature alignment-based methods usually suffer from the potential risk of damaging intrinsic
target data discrimination. On the other hand, some recent works [9, 72, 51] investigate the application of SSL
techniques, e.g. MixMatch [4] in [51], Label Propagation [74] in [72], etc to strengthen discriminability on the
unlabeled target domain. Although SSL-based DA methods can achieve competitive performance, they often suffer
from source domain bias due to over reliance on the source
domain for pseudo label generation. A recent work [36]
proposes to deal with data bias using an auxiliary target
domain-oriented classifier (ATDOC) based on pseudo labeling. It is shown that the proposed SSL regularization can
work quite well in most DA scenarios.
In addition to source data bias, many DA approaches (in-

23577

