This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GlobalMapper: Arbitrary-Shaped Urban Layout Generation
Liu He
Purdue University

Daniel Aliaga
Purdue University

he425@purdue.edu

aliaga@purdue.edu

Random Generation

Road Network + Prior

Road Network

Conditional Generation

Figure 1: Arbitrary Urban Layout Generation. Our method generates realistic urban layouts given an arbitrary road
network (Left Pair). Moreover, given learned prior from a building layout, our method conditionally generates similar urban
layouts for the given arbitrary road network (Right Pair).

Abstract
Modeling and designing urban building layouts is of significant interest in computer vision, computer graphics, and
urban applications. A building layout consists of a set of
buildings in city blocks defined by a network of roads. We
observe that building layouts are discrete structures, consisting of multiple rows of buildings of various shapes, and
are amenable to skeletonization for mapping arbitrary city
block shapes to a canonical form. Hence, we propose a
fully automatic approach to building layout generation using graph attention networks. Our method generates realistic urban layouts given arbitrary road networks, and enables conditional generation based on learned priors. Our
results, including user study, demonstrate superior performance as compared to prior layout generation networks,
support arbitrary city block and varying building shapes as
demonstrated by generating layouts for 28 large cities.

1. Introduction
Layout generation is of significant interest today in computer vision, computer graphics, and related fields. In particular, an urban building layout consists of a set of buildings arranged into arbitrarily shaped city blocks as defined

by a network of interconnected roads. Such layouts are
needed in order to provide urban configurations for entertainment, simulation, and scientific applications such as designing and evolving cities to address urban weather forecasting (Fig. 5), urban heat island modeling, and sky view
factor analysis, etc.
The capture and modeling of complex urban building
layouts has been pursued from several directions. 1) Computer vision and photogrammetry works seek to metrically
reconstruct building layouts over large areas from satellite
and/or aerial imagery [11, 40, 12, 21, 64, 70, 34, 36, 15].
Nonetheless, these approaches are constrained by image
resolution, occlusion, and segmentation accuracy. 2) Urban
procedural modeling has made significant strides in generating the hierarchical components of a city such as road
networks, city blocks, parcels, buildings, and more (e.g.,
buildings [39, 67, 5], roads [42, 10], trees [22, 24, 31, 69],
parcels [35, 57] and even entire cities [56, 4]). Unfortunately, the generation process requires time consuming and
expert knowledge in developing custom procedural rules to
create or update the content. 3) Inverse urban procedural
modeling attempts to remove the need of explicit rule specification by encoding heuristics specific to cities [6, 68].
Recently, some solutions have addressed inverse modeling for layout generation; e.g., using graph-based meth-

454

