This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Gradient Inversion via Over-Parameterized Networks in Federated
Learning

Chi Zhang , Xiaoman Zhang , Ekanut Sotthiwat , Yanyu Xu , Ping Liu , Liangli Zhen* , Yong Liu
Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR, Singapore
{victor.chizhang, pino.pingliu}@gmail.com, {zhang xiaoman, stusottek, xu yanyu, zhenll,
liuyong}@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract
Federated learning has gained recognitions as a secure
approach for safeguarding local private data in collaborative learning. But the advent of gradient inversion research has posed significant challenges to this premise by
enabling a third-party to recover groundtruth images via
gradients. While prior research has predominantly focused
on low-resolution images and small batch sizes, this study
highlights the feasibility of reconstructing complex images
with high resolutions and large batch sizes. The success of
the proposed method is contingent on constructing an overparameterized convolutional network, so that images are
generated before fitting to the gradient matching requirement. Practical experiments demonstrate that the proposed
algorithm achieves high-fidelity image recovery, surpassing
state-of-the-art competitors that commonly fail in more intricate scenarios. Consequently, our study shows that local
participants in a federated learning system are vulnerable
to potential data leakage issues. Source code is available at
https://github.com/czhang024/CI-Net.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) [16, 17, 20] provides a distributed paradigm that enables multiple parties to cooperatively learn a shared model. The primary premise of such a
learning scheme is to tackle apprehensions concerning data
privacy and security, by permitting users to upload their local gradients instead of the raw data.
But yet, this purported property of data privacy protection has recently come under scrutiny, as evidenced by
several works [37, 35, 32] that question the possibility of
recovering hidden data from uploaded gradients. Stud* Corresponding author: Liangli Zhen (zhenll@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg).

ies [7, 11] provided affirmative evidence to this question by
demonstrating the feasibility of reconstructing training images through a process known as “gradient inversion”. Such
a process involves the use of some randomly generated images, and iteratively computes the discrepancy between the
gradients of the generated image and the true values. It then
adjusts the pixel values in the direction of minimizing such
a discrepancy, until the generated image gradients match the
target gradients to a satisfactory degree.
The success of these inversion works is often contingent upon certain stringent assumptions: the underlying
groundtruth images should possess low image resolutions
and small batch sizes. A compelling counterexample to this
is that attempting gradient inversion for batch sizes larger
than 4 on datasets like CIFAR-10 turns out to be arduous [35]. For more complex datasets like ImageNet, images
recovery for large batch sizes would be even more challenging [31]. But real-world participants of federated learning
systems typically employ significantly larger batch sizes,
for instance, 64 on CIFAR-10 and 16 on ImageNet, during local model training. As consequences, the inversion of
gradients in such scenarios poses a significant challenge for
these algorithms.
Lying ahead is the issue of nested gradients. Typically,
local clients in an FL system only transmit an averaged gradient to the server, rather than the gradient of each individual image. Decoupling these averaged gradients presents an
arduous task since random decomposition may only lead to
a set of noisy gradients. An ideal algorithm would be capable of properly decoupling the averaged gradient in a correct
way such that each gradient would act as a proxy for some
natural image as expected.
The conventional approach to address the gradient coupling issue involves incorporating some image priors. For
example, a study in [7] introduced a total variation term to
penalize images with high variations, while the work [31]

5126

