This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Chinese Text Recognition with A Pre-Trained CLIP-Like Model Through
Image-IDS Aligning
Haiyang Yu, Xiaocong Wang, Bin Li*, Xiangyang Xue
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
{hyyu20, xcwang20, libin, xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

Text Image

Text Image

Scene text recognition has been studied for decades
due to its broad applications. However, despite Chinese
characters possessing different characteristics from Latin
characters, such as complex inner structures and large
categories, few methods have been proposed for Chinese
Text Recognition (CTR). Particularly, the characteristic of
large categories poses challenges in dealing with zero-shot
and few-shot Chinese characters. In this paper, inspired
by the way humans recognize Chinese texts, we propose
a two-stage framework for CTR. Firstly, we pre-train
a CLIP-like model through aligning printed character
images and Ideographic Description Sequences (IDS). This
pre-training stage simulates humans recognizing Chinese
characters and obtains the canonical representation of each
character. Subsequently, the learned representations are
employed to supervise the CTR model, such that traditional
single-character recognition can be improved to text-line
recognition through image-IDS matching. To evaluate the
effectiveness of the proposed method, we conduct extensive
experiments on both Chinese character recognition (CCR)
and CTR. The experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed method performs best in CCR and outperforms
previous methods in most scenarios of the CTR benchmark. It is worth noting that the proposed method can
recognize zero-shot Chinese characters in text images
without fine-tuning, whereas previous methods require finetuning when new classes appear. The code is available at
https://github.com/FudanVI/FudanOCR/tree/main/imageids-CTR.

Encoder

Encoder

1. Introduction
In recent decades, most researchers have focused on exploring Chinese character recognition (CCR) [13, 25, 40,
37, 41], few methods are dedicated to tackle Chinese Text
* Corresponding Author

Pre-trained
Printed
Character Image
Image
Encoder

Decoder

Decoder

FC

Matching
Head

Text
Encoder

Prediction

Prediction

IDS Lexicon

(a)

Contrastive
Loss

(b)

Figure 1. Comparison between the framework of previous methods
(a) and that of the proposed method (b). The data flow of the pretraining stage is in red.

Recognition (CTR). Unlike Latin characters, Chinese characters have a large number of categories and complex internal structures, which lead to zero-shot (i.e., characters in
test sets are unseen in training sets) and few-shot problems
in practical applications. The conventional framework for
CTR should be fine-tuned with the updated alphabet when
a new Chinese character appears. However, humans are
able to easily match unseen character images with the corresponding characters in their stsndard (e.g. printed) forms.
Thus, the question is – Can a model recognize Chinese texts
like humans?
To tackle the zero-shot problem, existing CCR methods rely on predicting radical or stroke sequences to recognize characters. For example, some radical-based methods [32, 31] are proposed to decompose Chinese characters
at the radical level and predict corresponding radical sequences to determine final predicted characters. Recently,
a stroke-based method [5] has been proposed to decompose
Chinese characters into stroke sequences, offering a fundamental solution to the zero-shot problem in CCR. These
methods are based on relatively complex networks so that

11943

