This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Good Student is Cooperative and Reliable: CNN-Transformer Collaborative
Learning for Semantic Segmentation
Jinjing Zhu1
1

Yunhao Luo3
2

AI Thrust, HKUST(GZ)

Xu Zheng1

Dept. of CSE, HKUST

3

Hao Wang 4

Lin Wang1,2 *

Brown University

4

Alibaba Cloud, Alibaba Group

zhujinjing.hkust@gmail.com, devinluo27@gmail.com, zhengxu128@gmail.com, cashenry@126.com, linwang@ust.hk

Project Page:

-0.14 -0.11 -0.13

ViT-based
Student

+0.69

mIoU(%)

mIoU(%)

+2.03

https://vlislab22.github.io/CTCL/

+0.39
+0.28 +0.28

HFD

BSD

After
Distillation

-0.87
CNN-based
Student Extract

+0.26

MobileNetV2

Extract

（a）

（b）

MiT-B1

Figure 1: (a) Our CNN-ViT collaborative learning framework can learn the compact ViT-models and CNN-based models simultaneously
while achieving the SoTA segmentation performance than prior methods. (b) We propose the first online KD framework to collaboratively
learn compact CNN-based and ViT-based models by selecting and exchanging reliable knowledge between them.

Abstract
In this paper, we strive to answer the question ‘how to
collaboratively learn convolutional neural network (CNN)based and vision transformer (ViT)-based models by selecting and exchanging the reliable knowledge between them
for semantic segmentation?’ Accordingly, we propose an
online knowledge distillation (KD) framework that can simultaneously learn compact yet effective CNN-based and
ViT-based models with two key technical breakthroughs to
take full advantage of CNNs and ViT while compensating
their limitations. Firstly, we propose heterogeneous feature distillation (HFD) to improve students’ consistency in
low-layer feature space by mimicking heterogeneous features between CNNs and ViT. Secondly, to facilitate the two
students to learn reliable knowledge from each other, we
propose bidirectional selective distillation (BSD) that can
dynamically transfer selective knowledge. This is achieved
by 1) region-wise BSD determining the directions of knowledge transferred between the corresponding regions in the
feature space and 2) pixel-wise BSD discerning which of the
prediction knowledge to be transferred in the logit space.
∗ Corresponding author.

Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate that our proposed framework outperforms the stateof-the-art online distillation methods by a large margin, and
shows its efficacy in learning collaboratively between ViTbased and CNN-based models.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation [6, 25, 39] is a crucial and challenging vision task, which aims to predict a category label for each pixel in the input image. Although the stateof-the-art (SoTA) segmentation methods have achieved remarkable performance, they often require prohibitive computational costs. This limits their applications to resourcelimited scenarios, e.g., autonomous driving [12]. Consequently, growing attention has been paid to model compression aiming at obtaining more compact networks. It
can be roughly divided into quantization [10, 13, 38], pruning [4, 26, 32], and knowledge distillation (KD) [27, 30, 33].
The standard KD paradigm aims to learn a compact yet effective student model under the guidance of a high-capacity
teacher model. For instance, CD [29] proposes a channelwise KD approach by normalizing the activation map of

11720

