This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

C2 ST: Cross-modal Contextualized Sequence Transduction for Continuous Sign
Language Recognition
Huaiwen Zhang Zihang Guo Yang Yang Xin Liu De Hu*
College of Computer Science, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot, 010021, China
huaiwen.zhang@imu.edu.cn, {zihang.guo, yangyang, xin.liu}@mail.imu.edu.cn, cshood@imu.edu.cn

Abstract
Continuous Sign Language Recognition (CSLR) aims to
transcribe the signs of an untrimmed video into written
words or glosses. The mainstream framework for CSLR
consists of a spatial module for visual representation learning, a temporal module aggregating the local and global
temporal information of frame sequence, and the connectionist temporal classification (CTC) loss, which aligns
video features with gloss sequence. Unfortunately, the
language prior implicit in the gloss sequence is ignored
throughout the modeling process. Furthermore, the contextualization of glosses is further ignored in alignment learning, as CTC makes an independence assumption between
glosses. In this paper, we propose a Cross-modal Contextualized Sequence Transduction (C2 ST) for CSLR, which effectively incorporates the knowledge of gloss sequence into
the process of video representation learning and sequence
transduction. Specifically, we introduce a cross-modal context learning framework for CSLR, in which the linguistic
features of gloss sequences are extracted by a language
model, and recurrently integrate with visual features for
video modelling. Moreover, we introduce the contextualized
sequence transduction loss that incorporates the contextual
information of gloss sequences in label prediction, without
making any independence assumptions between the glosses.
Our method sets the new state of the art on three widely used
large-scale sign language recognition datasets: Phoenix2014, Phoenix-2014-T, and CSL-Daily. On CSL-Daily, our
approach achieves an absolute gain of 4.9% WER compared to the best published results.

1. Introduction
Sign language, which utilizes signals like hand/arm positions, and body postures to aid individuals with hearing
impairments globally, has become a powerful communication tool that enhances their quality of life. Due to the critical role of sign language and the increased availability of

Gloss

Loss CTC

Connectionist
Temporal
Classification

Gloss

Loss CST

Gloss

Local
Contextualized
Sequence
Transduction

Loss CST

Global
Contextualized
Sequence
Transduction
Loss KL
Classifier

Local & Global
Temporal
Aggregator

Fusion Module

Local & Global
Temporal
Aggregator
Visual Spatial
Perception

Visual Spatial
Perception

Adapter

Language Model

Gloss

(a) Conventional

(b) Ours C2 ST

Figure 1: Illustration of the framework of conventional sign
language recognition methods (a) and our proposed Crossmodal Contextualized Sequence Transduction (C2 ST) (b).
The proposed C2 ST incorporates the textual information to
the original visual branch by the introduced fusion module.
In addition, we introduce a novel Contextualized Sequential
Transduction (CST) loss function to consider the relationship between the labels in training process.

sign language datasets, continuous sign language recognition (CSLR) [28, 11, 40, 15, 14, 6] has gained significant
attention in recent years, which enables communication between hearing-impaired people and persons without specific
knowledge of sign language.
With the aim of automatically recognizing gloss sequences (the smallest semantic unit in sign language) from
untrimmed sign videos, various CSLR methods [15, 14]
have been proposed. Fig.1a shows the mainstream CSLR
framework, which consists of a spatial module and a tem-

21053

