This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ADAPT: Efficient Multi-Agent Trajectory Prediction with Adaptation
Görkay Aydemir1 Adil Kaan Akan1,2 Fatma Güney1,2
1
2
KUIS AI Center
Department of Computer Engineering, Koç University

SceneTransformer
LTP
HiVT
Ours
PAGA
0
5
10
15
#params (M)
(a)

2.1

Inf. Time (ms) vs brier-mFDE
AutoBot
LaneGCN
mmTransformer

brier-mFDE
1.9
2.0

#params vs brier-mFDE

AutoBot
LaneGCN
mmTransformer
DenseTNT

DenseTNT

HiVT
Ours
0 100 200 300 400
Inference Time (ms)

1.8

Forecasting future trajectories of agents in complex traffic scenes requires reliable and efficient predictions for all
agents in the scene. However, existing methods for trajectory prediction are either inefficient or sacrifice accuracy.
To address this challenge, we propose ADAPT, a novel approach for jointly predicting the trajectories of all agents
in the scene with dynamic weight learning. Our approach
outperforms state-of-the-art methods in both single-agent
and multi-agent settings on the Argoverse and Interaction
datasets, with a fraction of their computational overhead.
We attribute the improvement in our performance: first, to
the adaptive head augmenting the model capacity without
increasing the model size; second, to our design choices in
the endpoint-conditioned prediction, reinforced by gradient
stopping. Our analyses show that ADAPT can focus on each
agent with adaptive prediction, allowing for accurate predictions efficiently. https:// KUIS-AI.github.io/ adapt

fguney@ku.edu.tr

brier-mFDE
1.9
2.0

Abstract

2.1

kakan20@ku.edu.tr

1.8

gorkayaydemir@gmail.com

(b)

Figure 1: Accuracy vs. Efficiency. We plot the accuracy in terms of error (brier-mFDE) vs. the number
of parameters (a) and inference time (b) on the test set
of Argoverse dataset [11]. Our method achieves one of
the lowest reported errors with a small number of parameters, leading to highly efficient inference time compared to methods AutoBot [22], LaneGCN [32], mmTransformer [33], DenseTNT [23], SceneTransformer [37],
LTP [48], PAGA [13], and HiVT [53].

1. Introduction
A self-driving agent needs to be able to anticipate the
future behavior of other agents around it to plan its trajectory. This problem, known as trajectory forecasting, is an
important requirement for safe navigation. There are multiple challenges to solving this problem. First of all, traffic scenes are highly dynamic. The behavior of an agent
depends not only on the scene properties, such as configurations of lanes but also on other agents, such as yielding
to another vehicle that has priority. Second, multiple futures need to be predicted due to the inherent uncertainty in
future predictions. While these two challenges are studied
in the literature, one challenge remains mostly unresolved:
The future is shaped according to all agents in the scene
acting together. Therefore, trajectories of all agents need to
be predicted as opposed to the current practice of predicting
only the trajectory of a selected agent [11, 6].
The progress in trajectory forecasting has focused
mainly on scene representations for predicting the trajectory of a single agent. Typically, the existing meth-

ods [32, 49, 21] follow an agent-centric reference frame
where the scene is centered around the agent of interest, and
everything else is positioned relative to it. This way, the
prediction network is provided with the same initial state
regardless of the agent’s location or orientation, providing
pose-invariance. In other words, the scene is observed from
the viewpoint of the agent of interest. In multi-agent setting,
each agent has a different view of the world, and one cannot
be prioritized over another as in the case of the agent-centric
approach. A straightforward extension of an agent-centric
approach to multi-agent is iterating the process for each
agent in its own reference frame (Fig. 2). This is achieved
by transforming the scene according to each agent to obtain pose-invariant features. However, this solution scales
linearly with the number of agents and causes a variable inference time that cannot be afforded in the real-time setting
of driving. As a solution, SceneTransformer [37] introduces
a global frame that is shared across agents. In their scenecentric approach, all agents are positioned with respect to

8295

