This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Evaluating Data Attribution for Text-to-Image Models
Sheng-Yu Wang1 Alexei A. Efros2 Jun-Yan Zhu1 Richard Zhang3
1
2
3
Carnegie Mellon University
UC Berkeley
Adobe Research

(a) Creating an Attribution Dataset

(b) Evaluating Attribution Methods

Exemplar
25.61%

5.53%

3.62%

Finetune
Generator

Synthesized image
as query
2.89%
Variations influenced by exemplar

2.76%

2.71%

3.25%

···

Chance attribution:
~0.0001%

Attribute the exemplar from training data

Figure 1: Attribution by Customization (AbC). (a) We create an visual data attribution dataset by taking a pretrained generative model
and tuning it toward an exemplar image (or images) using “customization” [18, 53, 35]. This produces a set of synthesized images that are
computationally influenced by the exemplar by construction. (b) Given the dataset, we can evaluate data attribution approaches by how high
they rank the exemplar relative to other training images. Furthermore, using our dataset, we tune representations toward attribution and
estimate the probability a given image was an exemplar.

Abstract
While large text-to-image models are able to synthesize
“novel” images, these images are necessarily a reflection of
the training data. The problem of data attribution in such
models – which of the images in the training set are most
responsible for the appearance of a given generated image
– is a difficult yet important one. As an initial step toward
this problem, we evaluate attribution through “customization”
methods, which tune an existing large-scale model toward
a given exemplar object or style. Our key insight is that
this allow us to efficiently create synthetic images that are
computationally influenced by the exemplar by construction.
With our new dataset of such exemplar-influenced images, we
are able to evaluate various data attribution algorithms and
different possible feature spaces. Furthermore, by training
on our dataset, we can tune standard models, such as DINO,
CLIP, and ViT, toward the attribution problem. Even though
the procedure is tuned towards small exemplar sets, we show
generalization to larger sets. Finally, by taking into account
the inherent uncertainty of the problem, we can assign soft
attribution scores over a set of training images.

1. Introduction
Contemporary generative models create high-quality synthetic images that are “novel”, i.e., different from any image
seen in the training set. Yet, these synthetic images would
not be possible without the vast training sets employed by
the models. It is quite remarkable, yet poorly understood,
how the generative process is able to compose objects, styles,
and attributes from different training images into a coherent novel scene. Because of copyright and ownership of
the training images, understanding the interplay between
training data and generative model outputs has become increasingly necessary, both for scientific progress, as well as
for practical or legal reasons.
There is a general agreement in the community that not
all the billions of training images contribute equally to the
appearance of a given synthesized output image. So, given a
particular network output, can we identify the subset of training images that are most responsible for it? Even for image
classifiers, this has remained an open, difficult machine learning problem. Approaches such as influence functions [34]
(inspired by robust statistics), and training and analyzing
many models on random subsets [17] (inspired by Shapley

7192

