This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uncertainty-guided Learning for Improving Image Manipulation Detection
Kaixiang Ji1

Feng Chen1 Xin Guo1 Yadong Xu2 Jian Wang1 * Jingdong Chen1
1
Ant Group 2 Tsinghua University

{kaixiang.jkx, bangzhu.gx, bobblair.wj, jingdongchen.cjd}@antgroup.com
chenfeng1271@gmail.com

xuyd17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Image manipulation detection (IMD) is of vital importance as faking images and spreading misinformation can
be malicious and harm our daily life. IMD is the core
technique to solve these issues and poses challenges in
two main aspects: (1) Data Uncertainty, i.e., the manipulated artifacts are often hard for humans to discern and
lead to noisy labels, which may disturb model training; (2)
Model Uncertainty, i.e., the same object may hold different categories (tampered or not) due to manipulation operations, which could potentially confuse the model training
and result in unreliable outcomes. Previous works mainly
focus on solving the model uncertainty issue by designing
meticulous features and networks, however, the data uncertainty problem is rarely considered. In this paper, we address both problems by introducing an uncertainty-guided
learning framework, which measures data and model uncertainties by a novel Uncertainty Estimation Network (UEN).
UEN is trained under dynamic supervision, and outputs estimated uncertainty maps to refine manipulation detection
results, which significantly alleviates the learning difficulties. To our knowledge, this is the first work to embed uncertainty modeling into IMD. Extensive experiments on various
datasets demonstrate state-of-the-art performance, validating the effectiveness and generalizability of our method.

1. Introduction
Seeing is no longer believing! With the development of
modern image editing tools, such as Photoshop, Snapseed
etc., editing and sharing images have become easier and
more popular. However, the abuse of manipulated images can also cause various problems that affect our daily
life negatively. In addition, manipulated images are often
realistic-looking, making them difficult and laborious for
humans to discern. Thus, it is critical to develop effective
methods for image manipulation detection (IMD).
* Corresponding author: bobblair.wj@antgroup.com

(a) original

(b) manipulated

(c) ground truth

Figure 1: Data uncertainty refers to noisy labels as shown
in the red bounding box of the first row where the child is
removed from the original position but is labeled as untampered. Such data uncertainty also shows in the red mask
boundary in the second row where the blurring operation
makes it hard to label. Besides, model uncertainty is caused
by the fact that the same object may have different labels,
confusing the model training. In the first row, the same child
in the original and manipulated images are labeled differently.

The main challenge of the IMD task is twofold: data uncertainty and model uncertainty. The former is induced by
the fact that the manipulated artifacts are often hard to discern, posing a great challenge to annotation and resulting
in noisy labels. Humans can effortlessly distinguish manipulated content by comparing original and manipulated
images, e.g. comparing (a) and (b) in Figure 1, the different regions between them are manipulated areas. However,
during the real-word labeling process, original images are
usually unavailable, making annotations prone to errors. As
shown in the first row, the red bounding box indicates the
child has been removed, which is easily overlooked by annotators and marked as untampered. In the second row, we
draw the mask boundary in red on the manipulated image.
The blurring operation makes the boundary difficult to iden-

22456

