This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MBPTrack: Improving 3D Point Cloud Tracking with Memory Networks and
Box Priors
Tian-Xing Xu1 Yuan-Chen Guo1 Yu-Kun Lai2 Song-Hai Zhang1 *
1
Tsinghua University, China 2 Cardiff University, United Kingdom
1

{xutx21@mails., guoyc19@mails., shz@}tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
3D single object tracking has been a crucial problem for
decades with numerous applications such as autonomous
driving. Despite its wide-ranging use, this task remains
challenging due to the significant appearance variation
caused by occlusion and size differences among tracked targets. To address these issues, we present MBPTrack, which
adopts a Memory mechanism to utilize past information and
formulates localization in a coarse-to-fine scheme using
Box Priors given in the first frame. Specifically, past frames
with targetness masks serve as an external memory, and a
transformer-based module propagates tracked target cues
from the memory to the current frame. To precisely localize
objects of all sizes, MBPTrack first predicts the target center via Hough voting. By leveraging box priors given in the
first frame, we adaptively sample reference points around
the target center that roughly cover the target of different
sizes. Then, we obtain dense feature maps by aggregating
point features into the reference points, where localization
can be performed more effectively. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that MBPTrack achieves state-of-the-art performance on KITTI, nuScenes and Waymo Open Dataset,
while running at 50 FPS on a single RTX3090 GPU.

Search Area

2

LaiY4@cardiff.ac.uk

Target Center

Reference Points
BoxPrior
Sample

Feature
Propagation

Memory

Point-toReference

Bounding Box
Targetness Mask
Update
BPLocNet

Figure 1: An illustration of our proposed MBPTrack for
3D SOT task. MBPTrack employs a memory mechanism
to propagate target cues from historical frames and then
utilizes a localization head, named BPLocNet, for coarseto-fine bounding box prediction. BPLocNet first samples
reference points around each predicted target center using
a bounding box prior, which adaptively covers the tracked
targets of all sizes. Then, BPLocNet aggregates local features from reference points for further refinement.

1. Introduction
The ability to track objects in 3D space is essential
for numerous applications, including robotics [2, 12], autonomous driving [33, 15], and surveillance systems [27].
Given the initial state of a specific object, the aim of 3D
single object tracking (SOT) is to estimate the pose and
position of the tracked target in each frame. Early approaches [25, 18, 21] rely heavily on RGB information,
which often struggle to handle changing lighting conditions.
Therefore, recent research works [8, 23, 10, 11, 35, 31] have
focused on using point clouds to solve 3D object tracking
for their unique advantages, such as accurate spatial infor* corresponding author

mation and robustness to illumination changes.
Existing methods [23, 30, 34, 24, 5, 10, 36, 11] for the
3D SOT task predominantly follow the Siamese paradigm,
which takes the target template cropped from the previous
frame and search area in the current frame as input, and
then localizes the target in an end-to-end manner using a localization network such as Region Proposal Network [22]
(RPN). Different from previous methods, M2-Track [35]
explicitly models the target’s motion between two successive frames and CXTrack [31] proposes to exploit the spatial contextual information across adjacent frames. Despite
achieving promising results on popular datasets, the aforementioned methods propagate target cues solely from the

9911

