This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sound Localization from Motion:
Jointly Learning Sound Direction and Camera Rotation
Ziyang Chen

Shengyi Qian

Andrew Owens

University of Michigan

Abstract
The images and sounds that we perceive undergo subtle but geometrically consistent changes as we rotate our
heads. In this paper, we use these cues to solve a problem
we call Sound Localization from Motion (SLfM): jointly estimating camera rotation and localizing sound sources. We
learn to solve these tasks solely through self-supervision.
A visual model predicts camera rotation from a pair of images, while an audio model predicts the direction of sound
sources from binaural sounds. We train these models to
generate predictions that agree with one another. At test
time, the models can be deployed independently. To obtain
a feature representation that is well-suited to solving this
challenging problem, we also propose a method for learning
an audio-visual representation through cross-view binauralization: estimating binaural sound from one view, given
images and sound from another. Our model can successfully estimate accurate rotations on both real and synthetic
scenes, and localize sound sources with accuracy competitive with state-of-the-art self-supervised approaches. Project
site: https://ificl.github.io/SLfM .

1. Introduction
As you rotate your head, the images and sounds that
you perceive change in geometrically consistent ways. For
example, after turning to the right, a sound source that was
directly in front of you will become louder in your left ear
and quieter in your right, while simultaneously the visual
scene will move right-to-left across your visual field (Fig. 1).
We hypothesize that these co-occurring audio and visual
signals provide “free” supervision that captures geometry,
including the motion made by a camera and the direction of
sound sources. These are each core problems in machine
perception, but are largely studied separately, often using
supervised methods that rely on difficult-to-acquire labeled
training data, such as annotated sound directions. We take inspiration from self-supervised approaches to structure from
motion [104], which learn to estimate 3D structure and camera pose by solving both tasks simultaneously.

L

R

Figure 1: Images and sounds change in geometrically consistent
ways. For example, when we rotate to the right, a sound source
that is initially in front of us becomes louder in our left ear. We use
these cues to jointly train models for two tasks: localizing sounds
from binaural audio and estimating camera rotation from images.
The two models are trained entirely through self-supervision, by
learning to produce outputs that agree with one other.

Analogously, we propose a problem we call sound localization from motion (SLfM): jointly estimating camera
rotation from images and the sound direction from binaural
audio. By solving both tasks simultaneously, we avoid the
need for labeled training data. Our models provide each
other with self-supervision: a visual model predicts the rotation angle between pairs of images, while an audio model
predicts the azimuth of sound sources. We force their predictions to agree with one another, such that changes in
rotation are consistent with changes in sound direction and
binaural cues. After training, the models can be deployed
independently, without multimodal data at test time.
This is a challenging task that requires perceiving motion
in images and binaural cues in audio. Our second contribution is a method for learning representations that are wellsuited to this task through cross-view binauralization. We
train a network to convert mono to binaural sound for one
viewpoint, given an audio-visual pair sampled from another
17897

