This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SIDGAN: High-Resolution Dubbed Video Generation via Shift-Invariant
Learning
Urwa Muaz∗ Wondong Jang∗ Rohun Tripathi Santhosh Mani Wenbin Ouyang
Ravi Teja Gadde Baris Gecer Sergio Elizondo Reza Madad Naveen Nair
Amazon Prime Video

Query Faces

Reference Face

Dubbed Faces

Reference Face

Driving Audio

Dubbed Faces

Figure 1: SIDGAN synthesizes the mouth regions that are synchronized with the driving audio while maintaining the identity
of the reference face and the pose of the query faces. Note that the dubbed faces from two different identities and poses have
the similar lip shapes for the corresponding audio. Query faces for the second identity are not visualized due to space limit.

Abstract
Dubbed video generation aims to accurately synchronize
mouth movements of a given facial video with driving audio
while preserving identity and scene-specific visual dynamics, such as head pose and lighting. Despite the accurate
lip generation of previous approaches that adopts a pretrained audio-video synchronization metric as an objective
function, called Sync-Loss, extending it to high-resolution
videos was challenging due to shift biases in the loss landscape that inhibit tandem optimization of Sync-Loss and visual quality, leading to a loss of detail.
To address this issue, we introduce shift-invariant learning, which generates photo-realistic high-resolution videos
with accurate Lip-Sync. Further, we employ a pyramid network with coarse-to-fine image generation to improve stability and lip syncronization. Our model outperforms stateof-the-art methods on multiple benchmark datasets, includ∗ Equal contribution.

ing AVSpeech, HDTF, and LRW, in terms of photo-realism,
identity preservation, and Lip-Sync accuracy.

1. Introduction
Dubbed video generation aims at Lip-Syncing a face at
each query frame with driving audio while retaining its visual identity and pose as shown in Figure 1. With the unprecedented expansion of multimedia industry, there has
been a huge rise in video content that involves speakers delivering dialogues. For those videos, dubbed video generation can facilitate many applications, such as avatar animation, automated creating of audio-visual content, and visual
dubbing of movies. Due to recent advances in camera sensors, internet speed, and display, high resolution video content (4K or more) has become a necessity in most computer
vision applications, including dubbed video generation.
Generating lip motions accurately synchronized with audio has been a major challenge in dubbed video genera-

7833

