This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploiting Proximity-Aware Tasks for Embodied Social Navigation
Enrico Cancelli1 * Tommaso Campari2 * Luciano Serafini2
1

University of Padova

2

Angel X. Chang3,4,5

Lamberto Ballan1

Fondazione Bruno Kessler (FBK) 3 Simon Fraser University
4
Canada-CIFAR AI Chair 5 Amii

Abstract
Learning how to navigate among humans in an occluded
and spatially constrained indoor environment, is a key ability required to embodied agents to be integrated into our society. In this paper, we propose an end-to-end architecture
that exploits Proximity-Aware Tasks (referred as to Risk and
Proximity Compass) to inject into a reinforcement learning
navigation policy the ability to infer common-sense social
behaviours. To this end, our tasks exploit the notion of immediate and future dangers of collision. Furthermore, we
propose an evaluation protocol specifically designed for the
Social Navigation Task in simulated environments. This is
done to capture fine-grained features and characteristics of
the policy by analyzing the minimal unit of human-robot
spatial interaction, called Encounter. We validate our approach on Gibson4+ and Habitat-Matterport3D datasets.

Figure 1: Illustration of an agent-person “encounter”. From
top-left to bottom-right: i) episode starts; ii) the embodied
agent/robot sees a person; iii) it moves back to avoid a collision; iv) it reaches the goal by avoiding the person.

1. Introduction
Navigating safely in a dynamic scenario populated by
humans who are moving in the same environment is necessary for embodied agents such as home assistants robots.
To do so, as depicted in Figure 1, the agent should be able
to dynamically and interactively navigate the environment
by avoiding static objects and moving persons.
Recently, the development of photorealistic 3D simulators [35, 36, 21] has provided the tools to train embodied
agents and experiment in large-scale indoor environments
[8, 31, 15]. Thanks to these frameworks, several tasks
and challenges have been introduced [1, 48, 14], fostering the development of accompanying techniques to solve
these tasks. In particular, in the PointGoal Navigation task
(where an agent is required to reach a specific location in an
environment), an agent without any sensor/actuation noise
trained for billions of steps can obtain almost perfect performance [42]. Other approaches [45, 27] obtained impressive
* Both authors contributed equally. Datasets and code are publicly available on https://github.com/EnricoCancelli/ProximitySocialNav.

results even in the presence of noise. Another relevant task
is Object Goal Navigation, where an agent is required to
find and navigate to a specific object given the object category. This task requires both semantic and navigation capabilities and leads to the development of modular approaches
based on semantic maps [9, 6, 32], as well as end-to-end
trained models using reinforcement learning (RL) [46, 33].
However, despite encouraging progress on the challenging task, all the previously mentioned tasks frame navigation in a fundamentally static environment. The dynamic
element introduced by sentient, moving human beings in
the scene forces us to rethink how the current models are
designed. A good navigation policy must not be just effective (i.e., able to achieve its goal) and efficient (i.e., able
to achieve the objective through a close-to-optimal path)
but also safe (reaching the destination without harming others). This social element is included in the Social Navigation Task (SocialNav) [44, 29], where an agent must tackle
PointGoal Navigation in simulated indoor environments. To
tackle this task, Yokoyama et al. [47] introduced a simple

10957

