This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Fusion Transformer Network with Weighted Vector-Wise
Keypoints Voting for Robust 6D Object Pose Estimation

1

Jun Zhou1,* , Kai Chen2,* , Linlin Xu3 , Qi Dou2 , and Jing Qin1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 3 University of Waterloo

juzhou@polyu.edu.hk, {kaichen, qdou}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk,l44xu@uwaterloo.ca,harry.qin@polyu.edu.hk

Depth

Depth

Abstract
One critical challenge in 6D object pose estimation from
a single RGBD image is efficient integration of two different
modalities, i.e., color and depth. In this work, we tackle this
problem by a novel Deep Fusion Transformer (DFTr) block
that can aggregate cross-modality features for improving
pose estimation. Unlike existing fusion methods, the proposed DFTr can better model cross-modality semantic correlation by leveraging their semantic similarity, such that
globally enhanced features from different modalities can
be better integrated for improved information extraction.
Moreover, to further improve robustness and efficiency, we
introduce a novel weighted vector-wise voting algorithm
that employs a non-iterative global optimization strategy
for precise 3D keypoint localization while achieving near
real-time inference. Extensive experiments show the effectiveness and strong generalization capability of our proposed 3D keypoint voting algorithm. Results on four widely
used benchmarks also demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods by large margins. Code
is available at https://github.com/junzastar/DFTr Voting.

1. Introduction
6D object pose estimation aims to recognize the 3D position and orientation of objects in the camera coordinate
system. It is a widely studied task in both computer vision and robotics for its critical importance to many realworld applications, such as robotic grasping and manipulation [16, 37], augmented reality [1, 52] and autonomous
navigation [14, 63]. Although significant progress has been
made in recent years, critical challenges remain due to many
factors such as varying illuminations, sensor noise, heavy
occlusion, and the highly reflective surface of objects. Recently, along with the dramatic growth of RGB-D sensors,
methods based on RGB-D data has attracted more attenThe * indicates equal contribution.

Uniform metallic color

Reflective surface

Inter-objects occlusion

Challenges

DFTr

Figure 1. An illustration of typical challenges for object pose
estimation, e.g. texture-less material, surface reflection, and interobject occlusion.

tion, due to the fact that extra geometry information in
the depth channel is complimentary to the color information for better alleviating difficulties in 6D pose estimation
[24, 26, 59, 63].
However, so far, how to efficiently integrate these two
modalities, i.e., color and depth, for better 6D pose estimation remains an open question. Prior works [9, 36, 61, 63]
use the depth information as an additional clue to refine the
final pose or concatenate the extracted RGB and geometric
features directly for pose estimation. However, such methods do not make full use of the 3D geometry information
and are sensitive to severe occlusions, and also ignore the
global feature representation. Current methods are still limited, whether a simple point-wise fusion encoder [20, 58]
or a k-Nearest Neighbor (k-NN) based feature query tactic
[19], where inter-modality global semantic correlations are
not considered. Such fusion strategies are more likely to be
disturbed severely when the object has highly reflective surfaces also without any texture cues, e.g., metal objects, as
shown in Fig. 1, because (1) the lack of one modality data
will directly cause the failure of CNN or PCN (point cloud
network) feature extraction, (2) the occlusion between objects results in data loss, and (3) the k-NN based feature
clustering approach is sensitive to noise since the integrated
features are likely absent on the query object.
Furthermore, given the fused representative RGB-D features, how to robustly estimate the object pose parameters

13967

