This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InterDiff: Generating 3D Human-Object Interactions with Physics-Informed
Diffusion
Zhengyuan Li Yu-Xiong Wang∗ Liang-Yan Gui*
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Sirui Xu

{siruixu2, zli138, yxw, lgui}@illinois.edu
https://sirui-xu.github.io/InterDiff/

Figure 1. A novel task of predicting 3D human-object interactions. We provide 9 HOI sequences sampled every 40 frames at 30 FPS.
Conditioned on past HOIs in gray meshes, our model generates long-term, diverse, and vivid HOIs, represented by the colored meshes.

Abstract
This paper addresses a novel task of anticipating 3D
human-object interactions (HOIs). Most existing research
on HOI synthesis lacks comprehensive whole-body interactions with dynamic objects, e.g., often limited to manipulating small or static objects. Our task is significantly more
challenging, as it requires modeling dynamic objects with
various shapes, capturing whole-body motion, and ensuring physically valid interactions. To this end, we propose
InterDiff, a framework comprising two key steps: (i) interaction diffusion, where we leverage a diffusion model to encode the distribution of future human-object interactions;
(ii) interaction correction, where we introduce a physicsinformed predictor to correct denoised HOIs in a diffusion
step. Our key insight is to inject prior knowledge that the
interactions under reference with respect to contact points
follow a simple pattern and are easily predictable. Experiments on multiple human-object interaction datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method for this task,
* Equal contribution.

capable of producing realistic, vivid, and remarkably longterm 3D HOI predictions.

1. Introduction
Being able to “look into the future” is a remarkable cognitive hallmark of humans. Not only can we anticipate how
people will move or behave in the near future, but we can
also forecast how our actions will interact with the everchanging environment based on past information. An automated system that accurately forecasts 3D human-object
interactions (HOIs) would have significant implications for
various fields, such as robotics, animation, and computer vision. However, existing work on HOI synthesis does not adequately reflect the real-world complexity, e.g., examining
hand-object interactions from an ego-centric view [51, 53],
synthesizing interactions of grasping small objects [20],
representing HOIs in simplified skeletons [13, 71, 88], or
overlooking object dynamics [46, 81, 97].
To overcome such limitations, in this work, we reformulate the task of human-object interaction prediction, where

14928

