This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CAD-Estate: Large-scale CAD Model Annotation in RGB Videos
Kevis-Kokitsi Maninis
Google Research

Stefan Popov
Google Research

Matthias Nießner
TUM

Vittorio Ferrari
Google Research

Figure 1. Example annotations of the CAD-Estate dataset. We create globally consistent 3D representations from RGB videos, by retrieving
CAD models and estimating their poses. We visualize them by overlaying them on the video frames (left, mid), and from a top-view (right).

Abstract

ular Scan2CAD benchmark.

The dataset is available at

https://github.com/google-research/cad-estate .

We propose a method for annotating videos of complex multi-object scenes with a globally-consistent 3D representation of the objects. We annotate each object with
a CAD model from a database, and place it in the 3D
coordinate frame of the scene with a 9-DoF pose transformation. Our method is semi-automatic and works on
commonly-available RGB videos, without requiring a depth
sensor. Many steps are performed automatically, and the
tasks performed by humans are simple, well-specified, and
require only limited reasoning in 3D. This makes them feasible for crowd-sourcing and has allowed us to construct
a large-scale dataset by annotating real-estate videos from
YouTube. Our dataset CAD-Estate offers 101k instances of
12k unique CAD models placed in the 3D representations
of 20k videos. In comparison to Scan2CAD, the largest existing dataset with CAD model annotations on real scenes,
CAD-Estate has 7× more instances and 4× more unique
CAD models. We showcase the benefits of pre-training a
Mask2CAD model on CAD-Estate for the task of automatic
3D object reconstruction and pose estimation, demonstrating that it leads to performance improvements on the pop-

1. Introduction
Semantic 3D scene understanding from images and
videos is a major topic in 3D scene understanding, crucial for many computer vision applications, ranging from
robotics to AR/VR scenarios. The final goal is to detect all
objects in the scene, recognize their class, reconstruct their
3D shape, as well as their pose within the overall scene coordinate frame. With the advances of scalable deep learning
techniques, the field has progressed from reconstructing the
3D shape of one object in a simple image with trivial background [32, 50, 40, 33, 8, 17], to limited reasoning about object arrangements in simple multi-object scenes [36, 18, 23],
and finally to unrestricted multi-object 3D reconstruction in
complex real-world scenes [49, 30, 42, 12]. This evolution
has been dependent on the availability of ever larger and
more diverse data sets for training and evaluation [3, 10, 6,
44, 47, 7, 27, 15, 16]
Existing datasets for Semantic 3D scene understanding

20189

