This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Physics-Driven Turbulence Image Restoration with Stochastic Refinement
Ajay Jaiswal1∗ , Xingguang Zhang2∗ , Stanley H. Chan2 , Zhangyang Wang1
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 Purdue University
{ajayjaiswal, atlaswang}@utexas.edu {zhan3275, stanchan}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Image distortion by atmospheric turbulence is a stochastic degradation, which is a critical problem in long-range
optical imaging systems. A number of research has been
conducted during the past decades, including model-based
and emerging deep-learning solutions with the help of synthetic data. Although fast and physics-grounded simulation
tools have been introduced to help the deep-learning models adapt to real-world turbulence conditions recently, the
training of such models only relies on the synthetic data
and ground truth pairs. This paper proposes the Physicsintegrated Restoration Network (PiRN) to bring the physicsbased simulator directly into the training process to help the
network to disentangle the stochasticity from the degradation and the underlying image. Furthermore, to overcome
the “average effect” introduced by deterministic models
and the domain gap between the synthetic and real-world
degradation, we further introduce PiRN with Stochastic Refinement (PiRN-SR) to boost its perceptual quality. Overall, our PiRN and PiRN-SR improve the generalization to
real-world unknown turbulence conditions and provide a
state-of-the-art restoration in both pixel-wise accuracy and
perceptual quality. Our codes are available at https:
//github.com/VITA-Group/PiRN .

1. Introduction
Atmospheric turbulence (AT) is one of the major sources
of degradation in long-range passive imaging systems. It
arises due to random spatiotemporal fluctuations in the index of refraction [19, 61]. When accumulating over the distance, turbulence oftentimes leads to degraded image quality with random pixel displacement and blurring [5]. Such
degradation is very common in settings when the object
distance is long, and the exposure is short [61], causing a
substantial drop in the performance of long-range passive
imaging and its downstream tasks, such as human recognition, detection, and tracking. Developing restoration meth* Equal contribution.

ods to mitigate the turbulence effect is important. However, anisoplanatic turbulence has two major properties: 1
the geometric warping and blur are entangled with each
other; 2 the point spread function is spatially and temporally varying, which makes the problem harder than other
image restoration problems.
Turbulence mitigation algorithms have been studied for
several decades by the image processing community. Since
capturing real-world corrupted and clean image pairs is almost impossible, those conventional methods are modelbased [16, 20, 27, 49, 2, 17, 23, 74, 39]. Recently, datadriven approaches have been introduced with synthetic data
from various turbulence simulators. Existing deep learning
works explored both deterministic and stochastic methods
to solve the turbulence mitigation problem. In the deterministic approaches [41, 72, 1, 28, 34, 47, 45, 26, 51, 18], a turbulence mitigation network is trained on a synthetic dataset
to minimize pixel-level distortion between the output and
ground truth images. The generalization capability of those
works is fully limited by the training images. Moreover, the
deterministic models learn to “fill up” a probability space
that covers all possible clean images, which leads to unnatural output with an average effect. Although adversarial
training [28, 34, 51] has been used to alleviate this problem, it could make the model more vulnerable to small perturbation on the input [10, 11]. The stochastic approaches
[44, 12] could produce more natural images with certain
robustness. However, they are more likely to hallucinate
as they do not have a physics-grounded degradation model,
and the generative models they used are unconditional diffusion models trained on general datasets. The large domain
gap between the testing images and the training set distribution and the lack of a good forward model as a connection
oftentimes cause the output of generative models unreliable.
In this work, we propose a two-stage method to improve
both the fidelity [43] and perceptual quality [66] for singleframe turbulence mitigation. To improve fidelity, we propose to tightly couple a physics-based turbulence simulator
[40, 9] in the training paradigm of our turbulence restoration
backbone. Specifically, we re-degrade the reconstructed image and align it with the original input to enforce the con-

12170

