This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Cross-Representation Affinity Consistency
for Sparsely Supervised Biomedical Instance Segmentation

Shenglong Zhou

1

Xiaoyu Liu1, * Wei Huang1 Zhiwei Xiong1,2,†
Yueyi Zhang1,2 Xuejin Chen1,2 Zheng-Jun Zha1

Feng Wu1,2

1

2

University of Science and Technology of China
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center

Abstract
Sparse instance-level supervision has recently been
explored to address insufficient annotation in biomedical instance segmentation, which is easier to annotate
crowded instances and better preserves instance completeness for 3D volumetric datasets compared to common semisupervision. In this paper, we propose a sparsely supervised
biomedical instance segmentation framework via crossrepresentation affinity consistency regularization. Specifically, we adopt two individual networks to enforce the
perturbation consistency between an explicit affinity map
and an implicit affinity map to capture both feature-level
instance discrimination and pixel-level instance boundary
structure. We then select the highly confident region of
each affinity map as the pseudo label to supervise the other
one for affinity consistency learning. To obtain the highly
confident region, we propose a pseudo-label noise filtering
scheme by integrating two entropy-based decision strategies. Extensive experiments on four biomedical datasets
with sparse instance annotations show the state-of-the-art
performance of our proposed framework. For the first time,
we demonstrate the superiority of sparse instance-level supervision on 3D volumetric datasets, compared to common
semi-supervision under the same annotation cost. Code
is available at https://github.com/liuxy1103/
CRAC.

1. Introduction
Biomedical instance segmentation aims to assign each
image pixel to an instance, which plays an essential role
in biomedical instance morphology and distribution analysis [36, 32]. Recently, deep-learning-based methods [22,
26, 48, 20, 15, 30, 6] have achieved state-of-the-art perfor* This work was done during Xiaoyu Liu’s internship at Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center.
† Corresponding author: zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Comparison of instance annotation schemes in different supervision ways for the volumetric dataset. (a) Full supervision, where the whole volume is annotated. (b) Semi-supervision,
where a subset of the whole volume is densely annotated. (c)
sparse instance-level supervision, where a subset of instances of
the whole volume is annotated.

mance on biomedical instance segmentation with densely
annotated images for fully-supervised training. However,
it is expensive and laborious to obtain accurate and dense
annotations.
To alleviate the huge cost of manual annotations, many
works [42, 13, 49, 37, 7] adopt the semi-supervised learning strategy to train an effective segmentation model with
a small set of densely annotated images and a large set
of unannotated images. However, in the field of biomedical instance segmentation, dense annotation is difficult to
apply due to the crowded instances. Especially, for the
3D volumetric datasets (e.g., electron microscopy datasets),
dense annotation within a small sub-volume usually damages the completeness of the instances along the axial direction. Meanwhile, in practice, domain experts tend to annotate instances one by one sparsely, rather than annotating
all instances densely within a small sub-volume.
In this paper, we aim to deal with the task of biomedical instance segmentation with sparse instance annotations.
This task is of utmost importance, as annotating a small
subset of instances in a biomedical dataset not only saves
the annotation cost but also conforms to annotation habits
in the practical scenario. We illustrate different annotation

21107

