This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MotionBERT: A Unified Perspective on Learning Human Motion Representations
Wentao Zhu1

Xiaoxuan Ma1
1

Zhaoyang Liu2

Peking University

2

Libin Liu1

Wayne Wu2

†

Yizhou Wang1

Shanghai AI Laboratory

{wtzhu,maxiaoxuan,libin.liu,yizhou.wang}@pku.edu.cn
{zyliumy,wuwenyan0503}@gmail.com

Abstract
We present a unified perspective on tackling various
human-centric video tasks by learning human motion representations from large-scale and heterogeneous data resources. Specifically, we propose a pretraining stage in
which a motion encoder is trained to recover the underlying 3D motion from noisy partial 2D observations. The
motion representations acquired in this way incorporate
geometric, kinematic, and physical knowledge about human motion, which can be easily transferred to multiple
downstream tasks. We implement the motion encoder with
a Dual-stream Spatio-temporal Transformer (DSTformer)
neural network. It could capture long-range spatio-temporal
relationships among the skeletal joints comprehensively and
adaptively, exemplified by the lowest 3D pose estimation
error so far when trained from scratch. Furthermore, our
proposed framework achieves state-of-the-art performance
on all three downstream tasks by simply finetuning the pretrained motion encoder with a simple regression head (1-2
layers), which demonstrates the versatility of the learned
motion representations. Code and models are available at
https://motionbert.github.io/

1. Introduction
Perceiving and understanding human activities have long
been a core pursuit of machine intelligence. To this end,
researchers define various tasks to estimate human-centric
semantic labels from videos, e.g. skeleton keypoints [13, 33],
action classes [60, 116], and surface meshes [42, 66]. While
significant progress has been made in each of these tasks,
they tend to be modeled in isolation, rather than as interconnected problems. For example, Spatial Temporal Graph Con† Yizhou Wang is with Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, School
of Computer Science, Peking University and Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University.

I. Pretrain
Mask

Motion
FC
Encoder

Noise
Motion
Capture

Annotated Unannotated
Videos
Videos

2D Skeletons

II. Finetune

Corrupted
2D Skeletons

3D Motion

3D Pose Estimation

Motion
Encoder

Action Recognition
“tennis bat swing”

Mesh Recovery
Video

2D Skeletons

Downstream Tasks

Figure 1. Framework overview. We utilize a motion encoder to
learn human motion representations via recovering 3D human motion from corrupted 2D skeleton sequences. To adapt to different
downstream tasks, we finetune the pretrained motion representations with a linear layer or a simple MLP.

volutional Networks (ST-GCN) have been applied to modeling spatio-temporal relationship of human joints in both 3D
pose estimation [12, 109] and action recognition [89, 116],
but their connections have not been fully explored. Intuitively, these models should all have learned to identify typical human motion patterns, despite being designed for different problems. Nonetheless, current methods fail to mine
and utilize such commonalities across the tasks. Ideally, we
could develop a unified human-centric video representation
that can be shared across all relevant tasks.
One significant challenge to developing such a representation is the heterogeneity of available data resources. Motion capture (Mocap) systems [36, 71] provide high-fidelity
3D motion data obtained with markers and sensors, but the
appearances of captured videos are usually constrained to
simple indoor scenes. Action recognition datasets provide
annotations of the action semantics, but they either contain
no human pose labels [15, 88] or feature limited motion
of daily activities [59, 60, 86]. In contrast, in-the-wild human videos offer a vast and diverse range of appearance and
motion. However, obtaining precise 2D pose annotations
requires considerable effort [3], and acquiring ground-truth
(GT) 3D joint locations is almost impossible. Consequently,

15085

