This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mask-Attention-Free Transformer for 3D Instance Segmentation
Xin Lai1
Yuhui Yuan3
Ruihang Chu1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Yukang Chen1
Han Hu3
Jiaya Jia1,2 *
2
SmartMore 3 Microsoft Research Asia
Proportion of agents in households

Abstract
60

1. Introduction
Nowadays 3D point clouds can be conveniently collected. They have benefited various applications, such as
autonomous driving, robotics, and augmented reality. As
a fundamental task, 3D instance segmentation also poses
great challenges simultaneously, such as geometric occlusion and semantic ambiguity.
Many works have been proposed to solve the 3D instance
segmentation task. Grouping-based methods [25, 55, 5, 75]
rely on heuristic clustering algorithms such as DBSCAN
or Breadth-First Search (BFS) to generate instance proposals. They thus require sophisticated hyper-parameters
* Corresponding Author

58.1

57.3

56.9

56.9
55
mAP(%)

Recently, transformer-based methods have dominated
3D instance segmentation, where mask attention is commonly involved. Specifically, object queries are guided
by the initial instance masks in the first cross-attention,
and then iteratively refine themselves in a similar manner. However, we observe that the mask-attention pipeline
usually leads to slow convergence due to low-recall initial instance masks. Therefore, we abandon the mask attention design and resort to an auxiliary center regression task instead. Through center regression, we effectively
overcome the low-recall issue and perform cross-attention
by imposing positional prior. To reach this goal, we develop a series of position-aware designs. First, we learn
a spatial distribution of 3D locations as the initial position queries. They spread over the 3D space densely,
and thus can easily capture the objects in a scene with
a high recall. Moreover, we present relative position encoding for the cross-attention and iterative refinement for
more accurate position queries. Experiments show that our
approach converges 4× faster than existing work, sets a
new state of the art on ScanNetv2 3D instance segmentation benchmark, and also demonstrates superior performance across various datasets. Code and models are available at https://github.com/dvlab-research/
Mask-Attention-Free-Transformer.

50

45

40

Ours-128-epoch
Ours-256-epoch
Baseline-512-epoch

0

100

200

300

400

500

#epochs
Figure 1. Validation curve of the baseline and ours on ScanNetv2
val set. With only 128-epoch training, ours outperforms the baseline trained with 512 epochs.

tuning and are prone to wrongly segment instances that
are close to each other. Recently, transformer-based methods [49, 50] develop a fully end-to-end pipeline. With transformer decoder layers, a fixed number of object queries
attend to global features iteratively and directly output instance predictions. It requires no post-processing for duplicate removal such as NMS, since it adopts one-to-one
bipartite matching during training. Moreover, it employs
mask attention, which uses the instance masks predicted in
the last layer to guide the cross-attention.
However, we point out that current transformer-based
methods suffer from the issue of slow convergence. As
shown in Fig. 1, the baseline model manifests slow convergence and lags behind our method by a large margin, particularly in the early stages of training. We dive further and
find that the issue is potentially caused by the low recall of
the initial instance masks. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 2
(a), the initial instance masks are produced by the similarity
map between the initial object queries and the point-wise
mask features. Since the initial object queries are unstable
in early training, we notice that the recall of initial instance
masks is substantially lower than ours in Fig. 3, especially
at the beginning of training (i.e., the 32-th epoch). The lowquality initial instance masks increase the training difficulty,

3693

