This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Attack-tolerant Federated Learning via Critical Parameter Analysis
Sungwon Han*1 Sungwon Park*1 Fangzhao Wu2 Sundong Kim3
Bin Zhu2 Xing Xie2 Meeyoung Cha4,1
1
2
KAIST
Microsoft Research Asia 3 GIST 4 Institute for Basic Science
Abstract
Federated learning is used to train a shared model in a
decentralized way without clients sharing private data with
each other. Federated learning systems are susceptible to
poisoning attacks when malicious clients send false updates
to the central server. Existing defense strategies are ineffective under non-IID data settings. This paper proposes a new
defense strategy, FedCPA (Federated learning with Critical Parameter Analysis). Our attack-tolerant aggregation
method is based on the observation that benign local models
have similar sets of top-k and bottom-k critical parameters,
whereas poisoned local models do not. Experiments with
different attack scenarios on multiple datasets demonstrate
that our model outperforms existing defense strategies in
defending against poisoning attacks.

1. Introduction
The proliferation of computing devices like mobile phones
has led to an increase in proprietary user data. The abundance of user data offers the opportunity to create numerous applications but also raises concerns about data privacy. Federated learning (FL) is a cutting-edge collaborative technique that addresses the privacy challenge by enabling machine learning on decentralized devices without
exchanging locally stored data [26]. For example, a prominent FL model, FedAvg [17], works as follows: Given a
central server and multiple clients, the central server selects
a random subset of clients and sends the global model to
them. Then, each selected client uses its own data to optimize the local model and sends back the model update
to the central server. The central server takes the average
of these received updates to construct a new global model.
This FL framework enables a decentralized system to train
a globally shared model via aggregating updates from local
models while preserving data privacy.
However, the averaging operation used in the central
server leaves room for poisoning attacks [2, 16] when mali* Equal contribution to this work.

cious clients pose as ordinary clients and submit fraudulent
model updates. Attackers can not only impede the convergence of model training and degrade performance [23]
(which is called untargeted attacks) but they can also
manipulate model updates by injecting a backdoor into the
resulting global model without substantially degrading its
performance [25] (which is called targeted attacks).
Several defense strategies have been proposed to eliminate false updates from potentially malicious clients and
maintain benign updates on FL systems. For instance, one
idea is to use outlier-resistant statistics such as the median
or trimmed mean [31, 32] rather than the average in model
aggregation. Blanchard et al. [3] proposed Krum, which
removes atypical model updates with low local density
compared to their k-nearest neighbors. Fung et al. [8]
and Fu et al. [7] proposed weighted averaging of local
updates in proportion to each update’s normality level.
Nevertheless, these defense strategies cannot detect adversaries in so-called non-IID (non-independent, identically
distributed) situations, where data distributions vary substantially among clients. Existing defense strategies project
model updates as individual Euclidean vectors and evaluate
their abnormality based on their distances from other model
updates. Meanwhile, the non-IID property leads to diverse
benign updates, which makes malicious and benign updates
indistinguishable in Euclidean space. As a result, existing
defense strategies become ineffective [2, 19].
This paper presents FedCPA (Federated learning with
Critical Parameter Analysis), an attack-tolerant aggregation
method for FL under non-IID data settings. Inspired by a
recent observation that not all model parameters contribute
equally to optimization [6, 28], we assess the importance
of the model parameters in every client’s update. Our
analysis shows that benign model updates share similar sets
of top-k and bottom-k important parameters, even under
non-IID data. However, this pattern is not observed for
malicious model updates. Based on this observation, we
propose a new defense strategy tailored for FL systems to
measure model similarity, which extends beyond the extant
Euclidean-based similarity and provides an efﬁcient way to
discard updates from clients that are likely malicious.

4999

