This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Joint Optimization of Layer-Adaptive Weight Pruning
in Deep Neural Networks

1

Kaixin Xu1,2,∗ Zhe Wang1,2,∗ Xue Geng1 Min Wu1 Xiaoli Li1,2 Weisi Lin2
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR),
1 Fusionopolis Way, 138632, Singapore
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{xuk,wangz,geng xue,wumin,xlli}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, wslin@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel layer-adaptive weightpruning approach for Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) that
addresses the challenge of optimizing the output distortion
minimization while adhering to a target pruning ratio constraint. Our approach takes into account the collective
influence of all layers to design a layer-adaptive pruning
scheme. We discover and utilize a very important additivity property of output distortion caused by pruning weights
on multiple layers. This property enables us to formulate
the pruning as a combinatorial optimization problem and
efficiently solve it through dynamic programming. By decomposing the problem into sub-problems, we achieve linear time complexity, making our optimization algorithm
fast and feasible to run on CPUs. Our extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our approach over existing methods on the ImageNet and CIFAR-10 datasets. On
CIFAR-10, our method achieves remarkable improvements,
outperforming others by up to 1.0% for ResNet-32, 0.5%
for VGG-16, and 0.7% for DenseNet-121 in terms of top-1
accuracy. On ImageNet, we achieve up to 4.7% and 4.6%
higher top-1 accuracy compared to other methods for VGG16 and ResNet-50, respectively. These results highlight the
effectiveness and practicality of our approach for enhancing DNN performance through layer-adaptive weight pruning. Code will be available on https://github.com/
Akimoto-Cris/RD_VIT_PRUNE.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) [22, 34, 35, 17, 19] play
a critical role in various computer vision tasks. However, to
achieve high accuracy, DNNs typically require large number of parameters, which makes it very energy-consuming
and is difficult to be deployed on resource-limited mobile
* These authors contributed equally to this work

devices [16, 15]. Pruning is one of the powerful ways to
reduce the complexity of DNNs. By removing the redundant parameters, the operations can be significantly reduced
(e.g., FLOPs), which leads to faster speed and less energyconsuming. Typically, pruning approaches can be divided
into two categories: structured pruning [14, 1, 9, 31, 18, 30]
and weight (unstructured) pruning [27, 32, 28, 39, 16, 15].
Structured pruning approaches consider a channel or a
kernel as a basic pruning unit, while weight pruning approaches consider a weight as a basic pruning unit. The
former is more hardware-friendly and the latter is able to
achieve higher pruning ratio.
In this paper, we focus on improving the weight pruning and propose a novel jointly-optimized layer-adaptive
approach to achieve state-of-the-art results between FLOPs
and accuracy. Recent discoveries [10, 13, 25] demonstrate
that layer-adaptive sparsity is the superior pruning scheme.
However, one drawback in prior layer-adaptive approaches
is that they only consider the impact of a single layer when
deciding the pruning ratio of that layer. The mutual impact
between different layers is ignored. Moreover, another challenge is that the search space of the pruning ratio for each
layer increases exponentially as the number of layers. In a
deep neural network, the number of layers can be a hundred
or even a thousand, which makes it very difficult to find the
solution efficiently.
In our approach, we define a joint learning objective to
learn the layer-adaptive pruning scheme. We aim to minimize the output distortion of the network when pruning
weights on all layers under the constraint of target pruning
ratio. As the output distortion is highly related to accuracy,
our approach is able to maintain accuracy even at high pruning ratios. We explore an important property of the output
distortion and find that the additivity property [42, 41, 38]
holds when we prune weights on multiple layers. In other
words, the output distortion caused by pruning all layers’
weights equals to the sum of the output distortion due to the

17447

