This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning in Imperfect Environment: Multi-Label Classification
with Long-Tailed Distribution and Partial Labels
Wenqiao Zhang 1

Changshuo Liu 2
1

Lingze Zeng 2
Yueting Zhuang 1

Bengchin Ooi 2

Siliang Tang 1

Zhejiang University, China, 2 National University of Singapore, Singapore,

wenqiaozhang@zju.edu.cn, liu717@comp.nus.edu.sg, Zenglz_pro@163.com, ooibc@comp.nus.edu.sg,
siliang@zju.edu.cn, yzhuang@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Conventional multi-label classification (MLC) methods
assume that all samples are fully labeled and identically
distributed. Unfortunately, this assumption is unrealistic in
large-scale MLC data that has long-tailed (LT) distribution
and partial labels (PL). To address the problem, we introduce
a novel task, Partial labeling and Long-Tailed Multi-Label
Classification (PLT-MLC), to jointly consider the above two
imperfect learning environments. Not surprisingly, we find
that most LT-MLC and PL-MLC approaches fail to solve the
PLT-MLC, resulting in significant performance degradation
on the two proposed PLT-MLC benchmarks. Therefore, we
propose an end-to-end learning framework: COrrection →
ModificatIon → balanCe, abbreviated as COMIC. Our bootstrapping philosophy is to simultaneously correct the missing labels (Correction) with convinced prediction confidence
over a class-aware threshold and to learn from these recall
labels during training. We next propose a novel multi-focal
modifier loss that simultaneously addresses head-tail imbalance and positive-negative imbalance to adaptively modify
the attention to different samples (Modification) under the LT
class distribution. In addition, we develop a balanced training strategy by distilling the model’s learning effect from
head and tail samples, and thus design a balanced classifier
(Balance) conditioned on the head and tail learning effect
to maintain stable performance for all samples. Our experimental study shows that the proposed COMIC significantly
outperforms general MLC, LT-MLC and PL-MLC methods
in terms of effectiveness and robustness on our newly created
PLT-MLC datasets. Codes and benchmarks are available on
the link https://https://github.com/wannature/COMIC

1. Introduction
In recent years, the development of deep learning prosperity to the field of computer vision [20, 17, 19, 16, 23, 22, 25,

24, 43, 42, 18]. Images typically contain multiple objects
and concepts, highlighting the importance of multi-label classification (MLC) [34] for real-world tasks. Along with the
wide adoption of deep learning, recent MLC approaches have
made remarkable progress in visual recognition [36, 38], but
the performance is limited by two common assumptions:
all categories have comparable numbers of instances and
each training instance has been fully annotated with all the
relevant labels. While this conventional setting provides a
perfect training environment for various studies, it conceals
a number of complexities that typically arise in real-world
applications: i) Long-Tailed (LT) Class Distribution. With
the growth of digital data, the crux of making a large-scale
dataset is no longer about where to collect, but how to balance it [33]. However, the cost of expanding the dataset to
a larger class vocabulary with balanced data is not linear —
but exponential — since the data is inevitably long-tailed
following Zipf’s distribution [30]. ii) Partial Labels (PL)
of Instances. In the case of a large number of categories, it
is difficult and even impractical to fully annotate all relevant
labels for each image [39, 46]. Intuitively, humans tend to
focus on different aspects of image contents due to human
bias, i.e.,, their preference, personality and sentiment [41],
which indirectly affects how and what we annotate. In fact,
LT and PL are often co-occurring, and therefore, the MLC
model must be sufficiently robust to handle different data
distributions and imperfect datasets.
In this paper, we present a new challenge for MLC at
scale, Partial labeling and Long-Tailed Multi-Label Classification (PLT-MLC), with concomitant existence of both PL
setting [39] and LT distribution [33] problems. As captured
in the overview of PLT-MLC in Figure 1 (a), it has the following three challenges: i) False Negative Training. Under
the PL setting, the MLC model treats the un-annotated labels ( ) as negatives ( ), which may produce sub-optimal
decision boundary as it adds noise of false negative labels
(Figure 1 (b)). The situation is further exacerbated in the

1423

