This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SportsMOT: A Large Multi-Object Tracking Dataset in Multiple Sports Scenes
Yutao Cui∗ Chenkai Zeng∗ Xiaoyu Zhao∗ Yichun Yang∗ Gangshan Wu Limin Wang B
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
https://github.com/MCG-NJU/SportsMOT

Abstract
Multi-object tracking (MOT) in sports scenes plays a
critical role in gathering players statistics, supporting further applications, such as automatic tactical analysis. Yet
existing MOT benchmarks cast little attention on this domain. In this work, we present a new large-scale multiobject tracking dataset in multiple sports scenes, coined
as SportsMOT, where all players on the court are supposed to be tracked. It consists of 240 video sequences,
over 150K frames (almost 15× MOT17) and over 1.6M
bounding boxes (3× MOT17) collected from 3 sports categories, including basketball, volleyball and football. Our
dataset is characterized with two key properties: 1) fast
and variable-speed motion and 2) similar yet distinguishable appearance. We expect SportsMOT to encourage the
MOT trackers to promote in both motion-based association and appearance-based association. We benchmark
several state-of-the-art trackers and reveal the key challenge of SportsMOT lies in object association. To alleviate
the issue, we further propose a new multi-object tracking
framework, termed as MixSort, introducing a MixFormerlike structure as an auxiliary association model to prevailing tracking-by-detection trackers. By integrating the
customized appearance-based association with the original
motion-based association, MixSort achieves state-of-the-art
performance on SportsMOT and MOT17. Based on MixSort, we give an in-depth analysis and provide some profound insights into SportsMOT.

1. Introduction
Multi-object tracking (MOT) has been a fundamental
computer vision task for recent decades, aiming to locate
the objects and associate them in video sequences. Researchers have cast much focus on various practical use
cases like crowded street scenes [9, 27], static dancing
scenes [33] and driving scenarios [14], achieving consid* Equal contribution. B : Corresponding author.

erable progress [2, 4, 30, 37, 38, 40, 41] in MOT. MOT for
sports scenes however is overlooked, where typically only
the players on the court should be tracked for further analysis, such as counting the players’ running distance or average speed and automatic tactical analysis.
Generally, prevailing state-of-the-art trackers [1,6,11,39,
44] consist of several components to accomplish the tracking task: objects localization module, motion based objects
association module and appearance based association module. Biased to the data distribution of specific human tracking benchmarks, e.g. MOT17 [27], MOT20 [9] and DanceTrack [33], the components of these trackers have difficulty
adapting to sports scenes. Firstly, motivated by surveillance
or self-driving applications, current human tracking benchmarks provide tracks for almost all persons in the scenes.
While for sports scenes like basketball or football games,
generally only the players on the court are what we focus
on, hence a specialized training platform is required to make
the detectors suitable for sports scenes. More importantly,
in MOT17 and MOT20, these trackers highlight Kalman
Filter [16] based IoU matching for object association, due
to the slow and regular motion of pedestrians. DanceTrack
highlights diverse motion rather than fast movement [33],
that is, dancers frequently switch the motion direction and
relative position. However in sports scenes, we observe
fast and variable-speed movement of objects on adjacent
frames, i.e. players usually possess high speed and frequently change their running speed in professional sports
events, thus constituting barriers in existing motion based
association. For instance, as visualized in Fig. 1, the adjacent IoU and Kalman-Filter-based IoU in sports scenes
remain lower than that on MOT17 and DanceTrack (More
detailed comparison can be found in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3). As
a consequence, more suitable motion based association for
sports scenes is required. Additionally, compared to the
MOT17 and MOT20 datasets in street scenes, the objects
appearances in sports scenes are less distinguishable, since
not only the players inherently are in similar clothes but also
the players are frequently blurred caused by fast camera motion or targets motion. Different from DanceTrack, where
generally the dancers are in almost the same clothes and

9921

