This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Heterogeneous Diversity Driven Active Learning for Multi-Object Tracking
Rui Li1,2, *, Baopeng Zhang1 , Jun Liu2 , Wei Liu1 , Jian Zhao3,4,5 , Zhu Teng1,†
1

3

Beijing Jiaotong University 2 Singapore University of Technology and Design
Institute of North Electronic Equipment 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory 5 Intelligent Game and Decision Laboratory

Abstract
The existing one-stage multi-object tracking (MOT) algorithms have achieved satisfactory performance beneﬁting from a large amount of labeled data. However, acquiring plenty of laborious annotated frames is not practical
in real applications. To reduce the cost of human annotations, we propose Heterogeneous Diversity driven Active
Multi-Object Tracking (HD-AMOT), to infer the most informative frames for any MOT tracker by observing the heterogeneous cues of samples. HD-AMOT deﬁnes the diversiﬁed
informative representation by encoding the geometric and
semantic information, and formulates the frame inference
strategy as a Markov decision process to learn an optimal
sampling policy based on the designed informative representation. Speciﬁcally, HD-AMOT consists of a diversiﬁed
informative representation module as well as an informative frame selection network. The former produces the signal characterizing the diversity and distribution of frames,
and the latter receives the signal and conducts multi-frame
cooperation to enable batch frame sampling. Extensive experiments conducted on the MOT15, MOT17, MOT20, and
Dancetrack datasets demonstrate the efﬁcacy and effectiveness of HD-AMOT. Experiments show that under 50% budget our HD-AMOT can achieve similar or even higher performance as fully-supervised learning.

Frame: 365

Frame: 366

Frame: 367

Frame: 368

…
State 1: Moving

State 2: Static

Figure 1. A stimulus example of active learning for one-stage
MOT. There are many similar continuous frames in tracking sequences, such as frames 365-368 of MOT17-02 [23], and fully
annotated these frames may have little effect on improving the performance of the tracker. Moreover, objects usually have different
states, such as moving and static states, as shown in the red dotted
box. The moving states usually contain more knowledge than the
static ones, in which case the uniform and random sampling may
fail to capture the diverse visual patterns of tracking sequences.

in the MOT17 dataset [23], a sequence containing only 600
frames requires annotating 18,581 bounding boxes (including coordinates and identity labels) for 62 pedestrians. In
addition, there are many similar continuous frames in tracking sequences, such as frames 365-368 of the MOT17-02
sequence in Fig. 1, which may have little effect on boosting the performance of the tracker. One way to deal with
the above issue is to randomly or uniformly sample tracking sequences for annotation. However, as shown in the red
dotted box of Fig. 1, objects in tracking sequences may
have different motion states, and the moving state contains
more knowledge than the static state, in which case the uniform sampling may fail to capture diverse visual patterns.
Moreover, random sampling is easy to yield unstable results. Therefore, it is essential to develop algorithms to infer
training data more efﬁciently in one-stage MOT.
Instead of selecting the subset randomly or uniformly,

1. Introduction
As a sophisticated research topic, one-stage multi-object
tracking (MOT) has attracted more research attention in recent years, which simultaneously focuses on pinpointing
multiple objects in each frame and recording their trajectories in the entire sequence. Despite the great success of deep
learning-based one-stage MOT methods [25, 48, 27, 26, 52,
6, 22], they need a large amount of annotated samples for
training, which requires costly human labor. For example,
* Work done when Rui Li was an visiting student of SUTD.
† Zhu Teng is the corresponding author (zteng@bjtu.edu.cn).

9932

