This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Size Does Matter: Size-aware Virtual Try-on via Clothing-oriented
Transformation Try-on Network
Chieh-Yun Chen1,2∗ Yi-Chung Chen1,3∗ Hong-Han Shuai2 Wen-Huang Cheng3
1
Stylins.ai 2 National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University 3 National Taiwan University

Figure 1. Multi-garment virtual try-on results with different sizes (tucked or untucked). r is the ratio of torso length over shoulder
width, which can be decided by customers in online shopping scenarios. Padding blue backgrounds for better visualizing clothing skeletons.

Abstract
Virtual try-on tasks aim at synthesizing realistic try-on
results by trying target clothes on humans. Most previous works relied on the Thin Plate Spline or appearance
flows to warp clothes to fit human body shapes. However,
both approaches cannot handle complex warping, leading
to over distortion or misalignment. Furthermore, there
is a critical unaddressed challenge of adjusting clothing
sizes for try-on. To tackle these issues, we propose a
Clothing-Oriented Transformation Try-On Network (COTTON). COTTON leverages clothing structure with landmarks and segmentation to design a novel landmark-guided
transformation for precisely deforming clothes, allowing
for size adjustment during try-on. Additionally, to properly remove the clothing region from the human image without losing significant human characteristics, we propose
a clothing elimination policy based on both transformed
clothes and human segmentation. This method enables
users to try on clothes tucked-in or untucked while retaining
more human characteristics. Both qualitative and quantitative results show that COTTON outperforms the state-ofthe-art high-resolution virtual try-on approaches. All the
code is available at https://github.com/cotton6/COTTONsize-does-matter.

1. Introduction
Image-based virtual try-on replaces clothing items on
a person with the desired ones, creating realistic try-on results and lowering costs associated with on-model photos
for the e-commerce industry1 . Additionally, it enables customers to use virtual dressing rooms when shopping online,
potentially enhancing the e-commerce experience and increasing conversion rates2 . As online shopping becomes
popular, the virtual try-on tasks have received more and
more attention [2,4,5,9,13,17,23,28,29,33,35]. For example, to extend the virtual try-on resolution from low (256 ×
192) to high (1024 × 768), the most obvious difficulty is the
misalignment issue. [5] proposed the alignment-aware segment normalization to remove the misleading information
in the misaligned area. Additionally, [23] further performs
appearance flow-based warping and segmentation map generation simultaneously to tackle misalignment.
Despite the considerable progress made in previous
works, there are still some challenges that have not been
adequately addressed, as outlined below. i) Handling
complex warping without misalignment: General image*These authors contributed equally to this work.
1 https://www.zmo.ai/aimodels/
2 https://www.revery.ai

7513

