This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

What does a platypus look like?
Generating customized prompts for zero-shot image classification
Sarah Pratt1*
1

Ian Covert1

University of Washington

Rosanne Liu2, 3
2

Google DeepMind

3

Ali Farhadi1

ML Collective

Abstract

1. Introduction
Open-vocabulary models [40, 23, 42, 63] achieve high
classification accuracy across a large number of datasets
without labeled training data for those tasks. To accomplish
this, these models leverage the massive amounts of imagetext pairs available on the internet by learning to associate
the images with their correct caption, leading to greater
flexibility during inference. Unlike standard models, these

Standard
Zero-shot
Customized Prompts via
Language models (CuPL)

Open-vocabulary models are a promising new paradigm
for image classification. Unlike traditional classification
models, open-vocabulary models classify among any arbitrary set of categories specified with natural language during inference. This natural language, called “prompts”,
typically consists of a set of hand-written templates (e.g.,
“a photo of a {}”) which are completed with each of the
category names. This work introduces a simple method
to generate higher accuracy prompts, without relying on
any explicit knowledge of the task domain and with far
fewer hand-constructed sentences. To achieve this, we combine open-vocabulary models with large language models
(LLMs) to create Customized Prompts via Language models (CuPL, pronounced “couple”). In particular, we leverage the knowledge contained in LLMs in order to generate many descriptive sentences that contain important discriminating characteristics of the image categories. This
allows the model to place a greater importance on these regions in the image when making predictions. We find that
this straightforward and general approach improves accuracy on a range of zero-shot image classification benchmarks, including over one percentage point gain on ImageNet. Finally, this simple baseline requires no additional
training and remains completely zero-shot. Code available
at https://github.com/sarahpratt/CuPL.

A photo of a goldfish
A photo of a platypus
A photo of a spatula

Text encoder

Image encoder

What does
a platypus
look like?

GPT-3

A platypus
looks like a
beaver with
a ducks bill

Goldfish are small orange fish
with shiny scales
A platypus looks like a beaver
with a ducks bill

Image encoder

A spatula is a flat rectangular
kitchen utensil with a long
handle

Text encoder

Figure 1. Schematic of the method. (Top) The standard method
of a zero-shot open-vocabulary image classification model (e.g.,
CLIP [42]). (Bottom) Our method of CuPL. First, an LLM generates descriptive captions for given class categories. Next, an openvocabulary model uses these captions as prompts for performing
classification.

models classify images by providing a similarity score between an image and a caption. To perform inference, one
can generate a caption or “prompt” associated with each of
the desired categories, and match each image to the best
prompt. This means that categories can be selected ad hoc
and adjusted without additional training.
However, this new paradigm poses a challenge:
How can we best represent an image category through
natural language prompts?

*Correspondence to spratt3@uw.edu.

15691

