This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

General Planar Motion from a Pair of 3D Correspondences
Juan Carlos Dibene

Zhixiang Min
Stevens Institute of Technology

Enrique Dunn

{jdibenes,zmin1,edunn}@stevens.edu

Abstract
We present a novel 2-point method for estimating the
relative pose of a camera undergoing planar motion from
3D data (e.g. from a calibrated stereo setup or an RGBD sensor). Unlike prior art, our formulation does not assume knowledge of the plane of motion, (e.g. parallelism
between the optical axis and motion plane) to resolve the
under-constrained nature of SE(3) motion estimation in this
context. Instead, we enforce geometric constraints identifying, in closed-form, a unique planar motion solution from
an orbital set of geometrically consistent SE(3) motion estimates. We explore the set of special and degenerate geometric cases arising from our formulation. Experiments on
synthetic data characterize the sensitivity of our estimation
framework to measurement noise and different types of observed motion. We integrate our solver within a RANSAC
framework and demonstrate robust operation on standard
benchmark sequences of real-world imagery. Code is available at: https://github.com/jdibenes/gpm.

1. Introduction
Pose estimation is a basic geometric perception task crucial to multiple computer vision and robotic applications
such as 3D modeling [9], image registration [22], object
pose estimation [24], visual odometry [23], and simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) [21]. The problem
is generally formulated as the estimation of the parameters
of a motion-model representation (i.e. SE(2) or SE(3)) that
satisfies a given image formation model and a set of input
observations [8]. From a geometric perspective, the 2D and
3D variants of the absolute orientation problem (i.e. finding
the rigid motion among two sets of corresponding points
expressed in different Euclidean coordinate systems), are
perhaps the most straightforward and well-known.
The use of constrained planar motion models allows to
reduce data requirements and enforce structured geometric
priors onto the estimates (e.g. non-holonomic constraints
applicable to robotic vehicle platforms). For such cases,
the desired estimate may be geometrically represented as

Axis of
rotation

PB

PA

τ2
Motion plane

Translation

τ1

Figure 1. Planar motion is common to mobile platforms traversing
locally flat terrain such as the KITTI [10] (left) and TUM [34]
(right) benchmarks. Our method operates on 3D feature inputs,
possibly attained through stereo triangulation or depth sensors, to
estimate planar motion without any priors on the motion plane.

an element of SE(2) defined on a 2D plane embedded in
Euclidean 3-space. Surprisingly, the task of jointly estimating a completely unknown embedding motion plane, as well
as the corresponding SE(2) motion parameters, remains an
open research problem.
Our geometric formulation assumes the availability of a
pair of correspondences among local (i.e. camera-space)
3D points attained from RGB-D inputs (e.g. active/passive
stereo, time-of-flight sensors, view-registered lidar). Per the
discussion in Horn’s classic work [16], such input underconstrains the estimation of the general SE(3) transformation relating the 3D coordinates. Our formulation disambiguates among the ensuing 1D family of solutions in general SE(3) by enforcing compliance to a general planar motion (i.e. SE(2)) model through a straightforward geometric constraint: orthogonality between the translation com-

8060

