This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DPM-OT: A New Diffusion Probabilistic Model Based on Optimal Transport
Zezeng Li1,2 , Shenghao Li1 , Zhanpeng Wang3 , Na Lei1 ,* Zhongxuan Luo1 , David Xianfeng Gu4
1

2

School of Software, Dalian University of Technology, China
Beijing Key Laboratory of Light-field Imaging and Digital Geometry, Capital Normal University, China
3
School of Mathematical Sciences, University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
4
Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, State University of New York at Stony Brook, USA

Abstract
Sampling from diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs)
can be viewed as a piecewise distribution transformation,
which generally requires hundreds or thousands of steps
of the inverse diffusion trajectory to get a high-quality image. Recent progress in designing fast samplers for DPMs
achieves a trade-off between sampling speed and sample
quality by knowledge distillation or adjusting the variance
schedule or the denoising equation. However, it can’t be optimal in both aspects and often suffer from mode mixture in
short steps. To tackle this problem, we innovatively regard
inverse diffusion as an optimal transport (OT) problem between latents at different stages and propose the DPM-OT,
a unified learning framework for fast DPMs with a direct expressway represented by OT map, which can generate highquality samples within around 10 function evaluations. By
calculating the semi-discrete optimal transport map between the data latents and the white noise, we obtain an expressway from the prior distribution to the data distribution,
while significantly alleviating the problem of mode mixture. In addition, we give the error bound of the proposed
method, which theoretically guarantees the stability of the
algorithm. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness
and advantages of DPM-OT in terms of speed and quality
(FID and mode mixture), thus representing an efficient solution for generative modeling. Source codes are available
at https://github.com/cognaclee/DPM-OT.

1. Introduction
Diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) [40, 17, 43] are
a class of new prevailing generative models which use a
parameterized Markov chain to produce samples matching
the data distribution after a finite time. Transitions of this
chain include two processes: the diffusion process gradually adds noise to a data distribution and the sampling

process gradually reverses each step of the noise corruption over a long trajectory of timesteps. DPMs are able to
produce high-quality samples and even superior to the current SOTAs generative adversarial networks (GANs) [15]
on many tasks, such as image generation [11, 33, 10], video
generation [18], text-to-image generation [37], point cloud
generation [32, 34], shape generation [49, 47] and speech
synthesis [7, 8]. Despite their success, the sampling of
DPMs often requires iterating over thousands of timesteps,
which is two or three orders of magnitude slower [41, 3]
than single-step generative models GANs and VAEs [22].
To accelerate the sampling process, the community has
been focusing on fast DPMs. Existing works have successfully accelerated DPMs by knowledge distillation [38, 31],
or adjusting the variance schedule [39, 35, 26, 46] or the
denoising equation [41, 19, 44, 36, 28, 3, 30, 48]. However, as [23, 28] remarks, early fast samplers cannot maintain the quality of samples and even introduce new noise at
a high speedup rate, which limits their practicability. Moreover, existing methods try to approximate a continuous diffusion process with a deep neural network, but ignore the
discontinuity of the target data manifold at the class boundary, which leads to mode mixture in the generated images.
To resolve the above issues, we cast the denoising process as an OT problem and then compute the Brenier potential [4, 5] to represent the OT map which is discontinuous
at singularity sets [13, 9, 1] and thus avoids mode mixture.
Then we construct an optimal trajectory between different
timestep latents, which combines multiple denoising processes into an OT map, thus greatly shortening the sampling
trajectory. Building upon it, we propose DPM-OT which
can generate high-quality images within around 10 steps of
inverse diffusion. In summary, our main contributions are:
• By combining OT and diffusion model, we propose a
unified learning framework DPM-OT for fast DPMs.
• DPM-OT computes the Brenier potential to represent
the OT map between different timesteps latents which
relieves mode mixture significantly.

* Corresponding author: Na Lei (nalei@dlut.edu.cn)

22624

