This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

P2C: Self-Supervised Point Cloud Completion from Single Partial Clouds
Ruikai Cui1 * Shi Qiu1† Saeed Anwar2
1

Australian National University

Jiawei Liu1
2

Chaoyue Xing1

Nick Barnes1

King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals

Abstract
Point cloud completion aims to recover the complete
shape based on a partial observation. Existing methods require either complete point clouds or multiple partial observations of the same object for learning. In contrast to previous approaches, we present Partial2Complete (P2C), the
first self-supervised framework that completes point cloud
objects using training samples consisting of only a single
incomplete point cloud per object. Specifically, our framework groups incomplete point clouds into local patches as
input and predicts masked patches by learning prior information from different partial objects. We also propose
Region-Aware Chamfer Distance to regularize shape mismatch without limiting completion capability, and devise
the Normal Consistency Constraint to incorporate a local planarity assumption, encouraging the recovered shape
surface to be continuous and complete. In this way, P2C
no longer needs multiple observations or complete point
clouds as ground truth. Instead, structural cues are learned
from a category-specific dataset to complete partial point
clouds of objects. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach on both synthetic ShapeNet data and real-world
ScanNet data, showing that P2C produces comparable results to methods trained with complete shapes, and outperforms methods learned with multiple partial observations. Code is available at https://github.com/
CuiRuikai/Partial2Complete.

1. Introduction
Point clouds are widely used for 3D shape representation and play a crucial role in a range of applications [18,
30, 28, 29]. However, real-world raw point clouds are collected from sources such as laser scanners [10] and depth
cameras [8], and so are often incomplete and noisy due to
occlusions and varying lighting conditions. For this reason,
* Email: ruikai.cui@anu.edu.au
† Corresponding author. Email: shi.qiu@anu.edu.au

Jing Zhang1

matching loss

𝑦# (")

matching loss

𝑦# (")

𝑦 (")
DNN
𝑥 (")

adversarial loss

DNN
𝑥 (")

𝑦 ($)

(a) supervised

(b) unpaired

view-consistency loss

self-supervised loss

(")

𝑦#%

(")

𝑦#&

… 𝑦# (")
'

DNN
(")

𝑥%

(")

𝑥&

… 𝑥 (")
'

(c) weakly-supervised

𝑦# (")
DNN
𝑥 (")
(d) Ours

Figure 1. Conceptual comparison of point cloud completion
(i)
schemes. Let xk be the k-th incomplete observation of object
(i)
i, while ŷ and y (i) be the corresponding completed prediction
and ground truth, respectively. (a) Supervised approaches rely on
paired partial-complete samples. (b) Unpaired methods require
partial point clouds and complete examples to guide predictions
to match the input shape and follow the complete shape distribution. (c) Weakly-supervised models learn completion based on
consistency across multi-view partial samples of an object. (d)
Our scheme differs from existing settings as only a single partial
observation per object instance is available for learning.

point cloud completion (PCC) [40, 9, 34, 14] is studied to
obtain complete point clouds from partial ones.
Supervised learning [39, 34, 24] offers a straightforward
solution, where both partial point clouds and ground truth
completions are required during training. Nevertheless, collecting complete point clouds is challenging. As a result,
training data pairs are often obtained by simulating occlusions on 3D model collections like ShapeNet [5]. Due to the
distribution gap between real and simulated data, the realworld performance of these approaches is often limited.
Unpaired (or unsupervised) PCC [6] is an alternative to

14351

