This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A skeletonization algorithm for gradient-based optimization
Martin J. Menten1,2 Johannes C. Paetzold1,2 Veronika A. Zimmer1 Suprosanna Shit1
Ivan Ezhov1 Robbie Holland2 Monika Probst1 Julia A. Schnabel1 Daniel Rueckert1,2
1
Technical University of Munich 2 Imperial College London

Abstract
The skeleton of a digital image is a compact representation of its topology, geometry, and scale. It has utility in
many computer vision applications, such as image description, segmentation, and registration. However, skeletonization has only seen limited use in contemporary deep learning
solutions. Most existing skeletonization algorithms are not
differentiable, making it impossible to integrate them with
gradient-based optimization. Compatible algorithms based
on morphological operations and neural networks have been
proposed, but their results often deviate from the geometry
and topology of the true medial axis. This work introduces
the first three-dimensional skeletonization algorithm that
is both compatible with gradient-based optimization and
preserves an object’s topology. Our method is exclusively
based on matrix additions and multiplications, convolutional
operations, basic non-linear functions, and sampling from
a uniform probability distribution, allowing it to be easily
implemented in any major deep learning library. In benchmarking experiments, we prove the advantages of our skeletonization algorithm compared to non-differentiable, morphological, and neural-network-based baselines. Finally, we
demonstrate the utility of our algorithm by integrating it with
two medical image processing applications that use gradientbased optimization: deep-learning-based blood vessel segmentation, and multimodal registration of the mandible in
computed tomography and magnetic resonance images.

1. Introduction
Skeletonization algorithms aim at extracting the medial
axis of an object, which is defined as the set of points that
have more than one closest point on the object’s boundary
[7]. This lower-dimensional representation compactly encodes various geometric, topological, and scale features. As
such, it is useful for many tasks in computer vision, including
object description, compression, recognition, tracking, registration, and segmentation [18, 22, 25, 40, 45]. While there
are several efficient approaches to calculate the medial axis in
continuous space, extracting the skeleton of a discrete digital

image is not trivial. The search for accurate skeletonization algorithms, which can process two-dimensional and
three-dimensional digital images, has spawned a plethora of
research works [5, 6, 8, 15, 18, 31, 42, 46]. For a comprehensive overview and taxonomy of skeletonization algorithms
and their applications, we refer to the excellent survey by
Saha et al. [32].
Today, computer vision tasks are commonly solved using deep learning. Skeletonization may be used as building
block or inductive bias in these image processing applications [13, 16, 38]. However, most established skeletonization methods are not compatible with backpropagation and
gradient-based optimization [32]. The few works that have
integrated skeletonization with deep learning pipelines rely
on morphological skeletonization algorithms [38]. This class
of algorithms is based on simple morphological operations,
such as erosion and dilation [20, 44]. However, they will often result in breaks in the skeleton, causing it to diverge from
the geometry and topology of the true medial axis. Recently,
learning-based methods have also been harnessed for skeletonization [9, 13, 16, 23, 24, 26, 36, 37]. Most of these works
train an encoder-decoder neural network on pairs of input
images and ground truth skeletons, which have previously
been obtained using a classical skeletonization algorithm.
While learned approaches are intrinsically compatible with
backpropagation, they are not guaranteed to preserve the
topology of the input. Additionally, they are susceptible
to domain shifts between the training and inference data
[10, 43].
Our contribution This work bridges the gap between traditional skeletonization principles with strict topology guarantees and their integration with gradient-based optimization.
We introduce a skeletonization algorithm that is topologypreserving, domain-agnostic, and compatible with backpropagation (see Figure 1). Our algorithm is exclusively based
on matrix additions and multiplications, convolutional operations, basic non-linear functions, and sampling from a uniform probability distribution, allowing it to be easily implemented in any major deep learning library, such as PyTorch
or Tensorflow [2, 27]. In benchmarking experiments, we
establish that our algorithm outperforms non-differentiable,

21394

