This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HandR2 N2 : Iterative 3D Hand Pose Estimation Using a Residual Recurrent
Neural Network
Wencan Cheng
Department of Artificial Intelligence
Sungkyunkwan University

Jong Hwan Ko
College of Information and Communication Engineering
Sungkyunkwan University

cwc1260@skku.edu

jhko@skku.edu

Abstract
iter 2

3D hand pose estimation is a critical task in various
human-computer interaction applications. Numerous deep
learning based estimation models in this domain have been
actively explored. However, the existing models follow a
non-recurrent scheme and thus require complex architectures or redundant parameters in order to achieve acceptable model capacity. To tackle this limitation, this paper
proposes HandR2 N2 , a compact neural network that iteratively regresses the hand pose using a novel residual recurrent unit. The recurrent design allows recursive exploitation of partial layers to gradually optimize previously estimated joint locations. In addition, we exploit graph reasoning to capture kinematic dependencies between joints
for better performance. Experimental results show that the
proposed model significantly outperforms the existing methods on three hand pose benchmark datasets in terms of
both accuracy and efficiency. Codes and pre-trained models are publicly available at https://github.com/
cwc1260/HandR2N2.

1. Introduction
3D hand pose estimation, which estimates the 3D positions of hand keypoints, provides a fundamental understanding of human hand activity. Thus, it is a critical task
for many human-computer interaction applications such as
robotics and augmented/virtual reality. With the assistance of deep learning techniques and low-cost depth cameras, numerous studies have contributed to the substantial
progress in the field of hand pose estimation. However, accurate and efficient hand pose estimation is still challenging
because of the various probability of hand orientations, severe self-occlusion, and noisy depth images [12, 9, 18, 6].
Most of the recent state-of-the-art approaches are based
on deep learning, especially deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Such CNN-based approaches [31, 10, 13,

iter 1
𝐣𝟎

𝐣𝟏

Target

Input points
Figure 1. Illustration of the recurrent concept. For each iteration,
our proposed recurrent architecture samples local points around
joints from previous iteration to generate displacements to refine
the joint locations.

25, 1, 8, 23, 6, 23] generally accept 2D depth images as
an input, which can be directly processed by the 2D convolutional layers. However, it is difficult for a 2D CNN
to capture the highly non-linear mapping from a 2D depth
image to the 3D hand pose, significantly restricting its efficiency and accuracy. Therefore, a line of works [11, 18]
discretized 2D input images into 3D volumetric representations and subsequently applied a 3D CNN for direct 3Dto-3D inference. However, a critical drawback of a 3D
CNN is its computational overhead that increases cubically
with an increase of the input resolution [4]. In contrast, another series of hand pose estimation models [9, 12, 2, 15, 4]
have presented remarkable performances by using PointNet
[20, 21], which allows the models to accept a set of continuous 3D coordinates converted from an input hand image
without discretization.
Despite the accuracy improvement achieved by the
aforementioned approaches, they still suffer from large and
complex model architectures that require substantial computational overheads. Thus, these methods are not suitable
for resource-limited devices such as wearable or hand-held
devices. Furthermore, all the existing approaches follow a
non-recurrent architecture. As a result, they are not flexible for varying resource constraints and accuracy targets.
1
20904

