This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MetaGCD: Learning to Continually Learn in Generalized Category Discovery
Yanan Wu1,2 ,* Zhixiang Chi3 ,* Yang Wang4 , Songhe Feng1,2 †
1
Key Laboratory of Big Data & Artificial Intelligence in Transportation,
Ministry of Education, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, 100044, China
2
School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, 100044, China
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, M5G1V7, Canada
4
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering,
Concordia University, Montreal, H3G2J1, Canada
{ynwu0510,shfeng}@bjtu.edu.cn, zhixiang.chi@mail.utoronto.ca, yang.wang@concordia.ca

1. Introduction
Object categories in real-world environments are dynamically evolving and expanding over time. However, conventional deep learning-based visual recognition methods normally focus on closed-world scenarios with pre-defined categories [19, 37]. Such systems are brittle when deployed to
* The authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding Author

clownfish

blackbear

...

robin

Train data

Time axis

?

?

?

?

?
?

?

Test data

?

...
?

?

?

...

?

Online Incremental Learn

In this paper, we consider a real-world scenario where a
model that is trained on pre-defined classes continually encounters unlabeled data that contains both known and novel
classes. The goal is to continually discover novel classes
while maintaining the performance in known classes. We
name the setting Continual Generalized Category Discovery (C-GCD). Existing methods for novel class discovery
cannot directly handle the C-GCD setting due to some unrealistic assumptions, such as the unlabeled data only containing novel classes. Furthermore, they fail to discover
novel classes in a continual fashion. In this work, we
lift all these assumptions and propose an approach, called
MetaGCD, to learn how to incrementally discover with
less forgetting. Our proposed method uses a meta-learning
framework and leverages the offline labeled data to simulate
the testing incremental learning process. A meta-objective
is defined to revolve around two conflicting learning objectives to achieve novel class discovery without forgetting.
Furthermore, a soft neighborhood-based contrastive network is proposed to discriminate uncorrelated images while
attracting correlated images. We build strong baselines and
conduct extensive experiments on three widely used benchmarks to demonstrate the superiority of our method.

Offline Train

Train samples of labeled set

Abstract

...
Session-1

Session-2

Session-T

unlabeled samples of novel classes and some previous encountered classses
test samples of previous encountered classes

test samples of novel classes

Figure 1: Illustration of our C-GCD setting. During the
offline training, we learn an initial model based on training
samples of the labeled set. During each subsequent online
incremental learning, we are given some unlabeled images
belonging to both known and novel classes. Our goal is to
update the model in each incremental session so that the
model can maintain the performance on old classes while
discovering novel classes.

an ever-changing realistic open-world setting, where object
instances may come from new categories. In contrast, recognizing the known categories and utilizing them to discern
the unknowns are intrinsic to human perception.
Recently, discovering the novel classes among unlabeled
data has been an active area of research [15, 11, 40, 35, 45].
However, most prior works make several assumptions that
are unrealistic in practice. For example, the works in
[15, 11, 40] assume the co-existence of both labeled data
(with known classes) and unlabeled data (contains potential
unknown classes to be discovered) at the training phase and

1655

