This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prototype-based Dataset Comparison
Nanne van Noord
University of Amsterdam
n.j.e.vannoord@uva.nl

Dataset-specific Prototypes

ImageNet

Shared Prototype

PASS

ImageNet

PASS

Figure 1: Prototypes discovered with ProtoSim. By training on both datasets ProtoSim is able to discover prototypes that
are dataset specific or shared. From left to right: ImageNet specific “Wedding”, PASS specific “sunset skyline”, and shared
“viaduct” prototypes.

Abstract
Dataset summarisation is a fruitful approach to dataset
inspection. However, when applied to a single dataset
the discovery of visual concepts is restricted to those most
prominent. We argue that a comparative approach can expand upon this paradigm to enable richer forms of dataset
inspection that go beyond the most prominent concepts.
To enable dataset comparison we present a module that
learns concept-level prototypes across datasets. We leverage self-supervised learning to discover these prototypes
without supervision, and we demonstrate the benefits of
our approach in two case-studies. Our findings show that
dataset comparison extends dataset inspection and we hope
to encourage more works in this direction. Code and usage instructions available at https://github.com/
Nanne/ProtoSim

1. Introduction
Image datasets are crucial for Computer Vision and due
to the algorithms’ need for more data they are ever growing
in size. At the same time datasets are a major source of bias
leading to negative social impact [29, 30]. Unfortunately,
it is challenging to determine what is contained in a dataset
as their large size combined with the visual nature of the

data makes manual inspection infeasible. To support users
and developers of large-scale datasets in ensuring that the
datasets match their usage and design goals it is necessary
to develop better tools for dataset inspection.
A promising direction for generic dataset inspection is
found in highly effective approaches that have been proposed for summarisation [35, 9, 14, 44, 24]. A major benefit
of these approaches is that they enable explorative dataset
inspection without needing supervised pretraining. However, a limitation of these approaches is that they use frequency as a proxy for importance, and on a single dataset
therefore only discover those visual concepts which are
most prominent. As such, we argue that a comparative approach, which enables discovery of a wider and more diverse range of concepts, is necessary to effectively perform
dataset inspection. For instance, the PASS dataset [1] is designed as an ImageNet [32] alternative whilst containing no
people, as such it provides us with a testable hypothesis that
is comparative in nature. Namely, when comparing these
two datasets there should be a disjoint set of visual peoplecentric concepts that are only found in ImageNet. In a case
study we will verify this hypothesis, and demonstrate that
dataset comparison can lead to new insights.
Moreover, an additional limitation of existing summarisation approaches is that they decouple the summarisation
process from representation learning, and treat these as
two distinct steps by performing the summarisation on a

1944

