This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SparseMAE: Sparse Training Meets Masked Autoencoders
Aojun Zhou1 * Yang Li2 Zipeng Qin1 Jianbo Liu1 Junting Pan1
Renrui Zhang13 Rui Zhao2 Peng Gao3 Hongsheng Li1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SenseTime Research 3 Shanghai AI Lab

Abstract
Masked Autoencoders (MAE) and its variants have
proven to be effective for pretraining large-scale Vision
Transformers (ViTs). However, small-scale models do not
benefit from the pretraining mechanisms due to limited capacity. Sparse training is a method of transferring representations from large models to small ones by pruning unimportant parameters. However, naively combining MAE finetuning with sparse training make the network task-specific,
resulting in the loss of task-agnostic knowledge, which is
crucial for model generalization. In this paper, we aim
to reduce model complexity from large vision transformers
pretrained by MAE with assistant of sparse training. We
summarize various sparse training methods to prune large
vision transformers during MAE pretraining and finetuning stages, and discuss their shortcomings. To improve
learning both task-agnostic and task-specific knowledge,
we propose SparseMAE, a novel two-stage sparse training method that includes sparse pretraining and sparse
finetuning. In sparse pretraining, we dynamically prune
a small-scale sub-network from a ViT-Base. During finetuning, the sparse sub-network adaptively changes its topology
connections under the task-agnostic knowledge of the full
model. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our method and its superiority on small-scale
vision transformers. Code will be available at https:
//github.com/aojunzz/SparseMAE.

1. Introduction
Recently, several pretrained Masked Image Modeling (MIM) methods, such as MAE [15] and data2vec [1],
have achieved great success in various computer vision tasks.
They usually involve a two-stage training scheme where the
model learns task-agnostic knowledge through a pretraining pretext task, and is subsequently finetuned on downstream tasks to acquire task-specific knowledge. Among
* The first two authors equally contribute to this paper.

these models, Masked Autoencoders (MAE) demonstrate
superior learning capability on large-scale vision transformers (Fig. 1 (a)), thanks to large models’ strong capacity to
learn powerful general representations in the pretraining
phase and versatile transferability to specific vision tasks.
Yet, the large deep models are burdensome and difficult to be
deployed to computationally restricted real-world scenarios.
On the other hand, smaller and more efficient models, such
as ViT-Tiny and ViT-Small, fail to perform well after pretrained by MAE or data2vec frameworks. For example, ViTTiny’s finetuning results are even inferior to fully-supervised
training (see Fig. 1 (b)). These empirical findings suggest
that, under MIM frameworks, when the model is scaled
down, it becomes more difficult to learn well via masked
pretraining due to its limited capacity during pretraining and
consequently hinders its performance when transferred to
downstream tasks. In the realm of MIM pretraining, model
capacity becomes a key ingredient to learning task-agnostic
knowledge via the pretext tasks.
In our studies, we try to tackle the issues of MIM pretraining for small-scale vision transformers. Particularly,
we apply pruning techniques [28, 20, 4, 42, 23] in the MIM
frameworks in order to obtain performant small-scale models
from larger ones. As a first step in our exploration, we use
existing sparse training methods [42, 23] for MAE pretraining and finetuning on unstructured and hardware-friendly
N:M sparsity to obtain a model with a similar scale to ViTTiny, which is pruned from ViT-Base (see Tab. 5 row 3). It
achieves notably improvements compared to directly training
ViT-Tiny using MAE on downstream ImageNet finetuning
accuracy (77.6% vs. 71.6%) and ADE20K [43] semantic
segmentation (39.8 mIoU vs. 37.6 mIoU). The empirical
results indicate that on small-scale ViTs sparse training via
pruning has promising applications under the MIM pretraining paradigm. However, there is still a large performance gap
between the sparse model and the vanilla ViT-Base trained
densely under MAE in their ImageNet finetuning accuracies (77.6% vs. 83.2%). The sparsity constraints adversely
limit the model capacity and prevent it from learning good
task-agnostic knowledge, similar to the predicament faced

16176

