This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Training Event-Based Networks Using
Contrastive Learning and Uncorrelated Conditioning
Dayuan Jian
University of Southern California

Mohammad Rostami
University of Southern California

djian@usc.edu

rostamim@usc.edu

Abstract
Event-based cameras offer reliable measurements for
preforming computer vision tasks in high-dynamic range
environments and during fast motion maneuvers. However,
adopting deep learning in event-based vision faces the challenge of annotated data scarcity due to recency of event
cameras. Transferring the knowledge that can be obtained
from conventional camera annotated data offers a practical solution to this challenge. We develop an unsupervised
domain adaptation algorithm for training a deep network
for event-based data image classification using contrastive
learning and uncorrelated conditioning of data. Our solution outperforms the existing algorithms for this purpose.

1. Introduction
Inspired by biological visual systems, event-based cameras are designed to measure image pixels independently
and asynchronously through recording changes in brightness, compared to a reference brightness level [25]. A
stream of events is measured which encodes the location,
time, and polarity of the intensity changes. Compared to
conventional frame-based cameras, they offer high dynamic
range, high temporal resolution, and low latency which
make them ideal imaging devices for preforming computer
vision (CV) tasks that involve high dynamic range and fast
movements. Despite this promising prospect, adopting artificial intelligence and particularly deep learning to automate
CV tasks in this domain is challenging. The primary reason
is that training deep neural networks relies on manually annotated large datasets [49]. However, annotated event-data
is scarce due to the recency of these cameras: event-based
data represent only 3.14% of existing vision data [18].
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [10] is a learning framework to train a model for a target domain with
unannotated data through transferring knowledge from a
secondary source domain with annotated data. The core

idea in UDA is to reduce the distributional domain gap by
mapping data from both domains into a shared domainagnostic embedding space [1, 2, 55, 36, 45, 46, 47]. Although event-based and frame-based cameras are significantly different, the intrinsic relationship between their outputs through the real-world relates the information content
of the outputs considerably. As a result, a frame-based annotated dataset can be served as a source domain for an
event-based domain as the target domain in the context of
a UDA problem. Even if the related frame-based data is
unannotated, annotating frame-based data is much simpler.
The above possibility has led to a line of UDA algorithms
for event-based CV tasks. Initial works in this area consider
datasets with paired events and frames, i.e., the pixel-level
recordings describe the same input [18, 63]. Despite being effective, these methods are highly limited because they
consider that both measurement types are preformed simultaneously. Recently, a few UDA algorithms have been developed for unpaired event-based data [43, 32]. An effective idea is to use the idea of translation in UDA [34] and
generate events for corresponding video data [12, 19]. An
alternative idea is to generate event-based annotated data
synthetically [41] and use it as the source domain [39].
We develop a new UDA algorithm for event-based data
using unpaired frame-based data. Our contribution is twofold. First, we use contrastive learning in combination with
data augmentation to improve the model generalizability.
The idea is to project different augmentation types of one
object to a latent representation and train an encoder to
maintain identities for all augmentation types. Second, we
introduce an uncorrelated conditioning loss term. The new
loss term is used to regularize the model with additional information: the latent vector representation of an object under event cameras should be uncorrelated to how the object
looks like under event cameras. Experiments show that our
method leads to learning a better representation of events in
an unsupervised fashion. Our results indicate 2.0% on Caltech101 → N-Caltech101 and 3.7% on CIFA10 → CIFA10DVS performance improvements over state-of-the-art.

18721

