This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DG-Recon: Depth-Guided Neural 3D Scene Reconstruction
Jihong Ju

Ching-Wei Tseng
Oleksandr Bailo
Georgi Dikov
XR Labs, Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

Mohsen Ghafoorian

{jihoju, chintsen, obailo, gdikov, mghafoor}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract

Multi-View Feature Back Projection and Fusion

A key challenge in neural 3D scene reconstruction from
monocular images is to fuse features back projected from
various views without any depth or occlusion information. We address this by leveraging monocular depth priors, which effectively guide the fusion to improve surface prediction and skip over irrelevant, ambiguous, or
occluded features. Furthermore, we revisit the averagebased fusion used by most neural 3D reconstruction methods and propose two alternatives, a variance-based and a
cross-attention-based fusion module, that are more efficient
and effective than the average-based and self-attentionbased counterparts. Compared to the NeuralRecon baseline, the proposed DG-Recon models significantly improve
the reconstruction quality and completeness while remaining in real-time. Our method achieves state-of-the-art online reconstruction results on the ScanNet dataset and is
on par with the current best offline method, which repeatedly accesses keyframes from the entire video sequence.
Our ScanNet-trained model also generalizes robustly to the
challenging 7-Scenes dataset and a subset of SUN3D containing scenes as big as an entire floor.

1. Introduction
Reconstruction of 3D scenes is a fundamental problem
in 3D perception of environments, constituting a crucial
component of various application domains ranging from
robotics and autonomous vehicles to augmented and virtual reality. For instance, in the augmented/virtual reality
use case, not only the accuracy of the reconstructed meshes
but also the runtime efficiency is important in enabling realtime safe user navigation, successful occlusion rendering,
and plausible physical simulations on edge devices.
Most traditional 3D scene reconstruction pipelines consist of dense depth prediction and a multi-view depth integration process [31, 6] to create truncated signed distance function (TSDF) as a geometrical representation that
enables mesh extraction using the marching cubes algorithm [26]. While such processes are simple and intuitive,

Average-based
Fusion
(NeuralRecon)

X X
X

…

Depth-Guided
Fusion
(DG-Recon)

…

Ground truth

…

O(1)

Reconstruction

X X X X X X

X X

O(K)

Figure 1. Depth-guided back projection and fusion. Each grid
on the left figure represents a digitized 2D world. The orange
rounded rectangle represents a table. The blue circle sketches a
chair and the grey rectangle indicates the wall. Non-white cells
picture back-projected features from K different camera views
O(1) , . . . , O(K) . A cell with a red cross in it indicates an erroneous back projection. The depth priors, denoted as the white surface curve in the middle row, introduce geometry awareness to the
back projection and cross-view fusion. Objects, e.g. chairs and the
monitor, become sharper, more complete, and better separated.

the non-learnable fusion part is unable to effectively incorporate higher-level inductive biases to handle inconsistent and/or noisy depth estimations from different views.
On the other hand, a newly emerging category of methods [30, 42, 1, 41] aims at learning to directly predict the
TSDF by back projecting representations from posed images and then fusing them into volumetric representations
of the underlying scenes. These neural methods are in practice either found to be suffering from lower accuracy and
incomplete geometries [42], or too costly for real-world and
real-time use cases on edge-devices [30, 1, 41].
Such undesirable properties can be attributed to bottlenecks in important components, i.e. feature back projection,
feature fusion, and occupancy prediction. More specifically, existing neural reconstruction methods back project
image features all along the rays into the volumetric representations resulting in 1) non-sparse representations and 2)

18184

