This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

σ-Adaptive Decoupled Prototype for Few-Shot Object Detection
Jinhao Du1∗ , Shan Zhang2 * , Qiang Chen1 , Haifeng Le3 ,
Yanpeng Sun4 , Yao Ni2 , Jian Wang1 , Bin He1 , Jingdong Wang1†
1
Baidu VIS, 2 Australian National University
3
Beijing Union University, 4 Nanjing University of Science And Technology
†
wangjingdong@baidu.com, ∗ {dujinhao02@gmail.com, shan.zhang@anu.edu.au}

Abstract
Meta-learning-based few-shot detectors use one Kaverage-pooled prototype (averaging along K-shot dimension) in both Region Proposal Network (RPN) and Detection head (DH) for query detection. Such plain operation
would harm the FSOD performance in two aspects: 1) the
poor quality of the prototype, and 2) the equivocal guidance
due to the contradictions between RPN and DH. In this paper, we look closely into those critical issues and propose
the σ-Adaptive Decoupled Prototype (σ-ADP) as a solution.
To generate the high-quality prototype, we prioritize salient
representations and deemphasize trivial variations by accessing both angle distance and magnitude dispersion (σ)
across K-support samples. To provide precise information
for the query image, the prototype is decoupled into taskspecific ones, which provide tailored guidance for ‘where to
look’ and ‘what to look for’, respectively.
Beyond that, we find our σ-ADP can gradually
strengthen the generalization power of encoding network
during meta-training. So it can robustly deal with intraclass variations and a simple K- average pooling is enough
to generate a high-quality prototype at meta-testing. We
provide theoretical analysis to support its rationality. Extensive experiments on Pascal VOC, MS-COCO and FSOD
datasets demonstrate that the proposed method achieves
new state-of-the-art performance. Notably, our method surpasses the baseline model by a large margin – up to around
5.0% AP50 and 8.0% AP75 on novel classes.

1. Introduction
In recent years, object detectors based on deep learning
have achieved impressive performance [36, 37, 14] due to a
large amount of human-annotated data. However, humans
can observe novel objects with limited instances. Thus,
* Equal contribution. Author ordering determined by coin flip.
† Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: The visualization of attention maps for a novel class
of ‘walking shoe’. The attention maps are generated by common
practice (average-pooling along K-shot dimension) vs. weighted
pooling (weights deriving from either angle distance or a combination with magnitude deviation), depicted as (b), (c) and (d),
respectively. Compared to other operations, σ-ADP (d) is able to
active salient regions and suppress trivial features among K support samples, resulting in the robust class representation. We have
only shown the two most representative samples for comparison,
as the activation map is the same for K samples.

few-shot object detection (FSOD) comes to rescue.
In general, there are two main categories of FSOD
approaches : fine-tuning and meta-learning based methods. The fine-tuning approaches [46, 41, 48, 50], without considering the class-level representations, may produce negative transfer when the differences among categories are obvious. Other meta-learning-based methods
[18, 19, 49, 8, 54, 56, 55] are designed to acquire classlevel meta-knowledge and improve model generalization
to novel classes through feature re-weighting. Currently,
FSOD meta-detectors use episodic training with inputs of
K-support images and a query image. A class-level prototype, generated from K-support images, re-weights the
query image and guides the learner for final detection results. Therefore, two main factors directly affect FSOD performance: 1) the quality of prototype and 2) the precision of
guidance information.
For the first one, most meta-learning-based methods employ some form of class prototypes (globally semantic-rich
or locally spatially-aware) from a set of support samples.

18950

