This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Two-in-One Depth: Bridging the Gap Between Monocular and Binocular
Self-supervised Depth Estimation
Zhengming Zhou and Qiulei Dong
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, CASIA
School of Artificial Intelligence, UCAS
zhouzhengming2020@ia.ac.cn qldong@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Monocular and binocular self-supervised depth estimations are two important and related tasks in computer vision, which aim to predict scene depths from single images and stereo image pairs respectively. In literature, the
two tasks are usually tackled separately by two different
kinds of models, and binocular models generally fail to predict depth from single images, while the prediction accuracy of monocular models is generally inferior to binocular models. In this paper, we propose a Two-in-One selfsupervised depth estimation network, called TiO-Depth,
which could not only compatibly handle the two tasks, but
also improve the prediction accuracy. TiO-Depth employs
a Siamese architecture and each sub-network of it could be
used as a monocular depth estimation model. For binocular depth estimation, a Monocular Feature Matching module is proposed for incorporating the stereo knowledge between the two images, and the full TiO-Depth is used to
predict depths. We also design a multi-stage joint-training
strategy for improving the performances of TiO-Depth in
both two tasks by combining the relative advantages of
them. Experimental results on the KITTI, Cityscapes, and
DDAD datasets demonstrate that TiO-Depth outperforms
both the monocular and binocular state-of-the-art methods
in most cases, and further verify the feasibility of a two-inone network for monocular and binocular depth estimation.
The code is available at https://github.com/ZM-Zhou/TiODepth pytorch.

1. Introduction
With the development of deep learning techniques, deepneural-network-based methods have shown their effectiveness for handling both the monocular and binocular depth
estimation tasks, which pursue depths from single images
and stereo image pairs respectively [5, 12, 14, 57]. Since
corresponding author

Figure 1. Diagrams of three kinds of self-supervised depth estimation models trained with stereo pairs: (a) Monocular model is
tested with a single image but needs stereo pairs during training.
(b) Binocular model is trained and tested with stereo pairs, but
could not predict depths from a single image; (c) TiO-Depth could
be tested with both single images and stereo pairs.

it is time-consuming and labor-intensive to obtain abundant high-quality ground truth scene depths, monocular and
binocular self-supervised depth estimation methods, which
do not require ground truth depths for training, have attracted increasing attention in recent years [15, 18, 51, 55].
It is noted that the above two tasks are closely related, as
shown in Fig. 1: both the monocular and binocular methods output the same type of results (i.e., depth maps), and
some self-supervised monocular methods [7, 17, 53] use the
same type of training data (i.e., stereo pairs) as the binocular models. Their main difference is that the monocular
task is to predict depths from a single image, while the
binocular task is to predict depths from a stereo pair. Due
to this difference, the two tasks have been handled separately by two different kinds of models (i.e., monocular and
binocular models) in literature. Compared with the monoc-

9411

