This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unfolding Framework with Prior of Convolution-Transformer Mixture and
Uncertainty Estimation for Video Snapshot Compressive Imaging
Siming Zheng
Computer Network Information Center,Chinese Academy of Science,
Beijing, 100190, China
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, 100049, China
zhengsiming@cnic.cn

Xin Yuan
School of Enginering, Westlake Universiy
Hangzhou, 310024, China
xylab@westlake.edu.cn

Truth

Abstract
We consider the problem of video snapshot compressive imaging (SCI), where sequential high-speed frames
are modulated by different masks and captured by a single measurement. The underlying principle of reconstructing multi-frame images from only one single measurement
is to solve an ill-posed problem. By combining optimization algorithms and neural networks, deep unfolding networks (DUNs) score tremendous achievements in solving
inverse problems. In this paper, our proposed model is under the DUN framework and we propose a 3D ConvolutionTransformer Mixture (CTM) module with a 3D efﬁcient and
scalable attention model plugged in, which helps fully learn
the correlation between temporal and spatial dimensions by
virtue of Transformer. To our best knowledge, this is the
ﬁrst time that Transformer is employed to video SCI reconstruction. Besides, to further investigate the high-frequency
information during the reconstruction process which are
neglected in previous studies, we introduce variance estimation characterizing the uncertainty on a pixel-by-pixel
basis. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our
proposed method achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) (with a
1.2dB gain in PSNR over previous SOTA algorithm) results. Code can be found on https://github.com/
zsm1211/CTM-SCI.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, due to the ability of capturing highdimensional data in an efﬁcient way, Snapshot Compres12738

PnP

BIRNAT

DUN-3DUnet

Ours

Truth

Figure 1. Illustration of comparison between the reconstruction results in the high-frequency details of previous SOTA algorithms
and Ours. We present the details both in image domain (ﬁrst line)
and frequency domain (second line). To be more visually clearly,
we also present the intensity proﬁles extracted from the crosssection yellow lines in the ﬁrst example. Our proposed algorithm
can reconstruct better high-frequency details.

sive Imaging (SCI) [32, 59] has attracted much attention.
SCI system just employs a low-speed 2D camera to capture
3D sequential video frames, hyperspectral data, etc. [66, 3],
where a digital micro-mirror device [17, 39] or a shifting
mask [61] is utilized to modulate consequent frames. With

