This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video OWL-ViT: Temporally-consistent open-world localization in video
Georg Heigold
Google DeepMind
Daniel Keysers
Google DeepMind

Matthias Minderer
Google DeepMind

Alexey Gritsenko
Google DeepMind

Mario Lučić
Google DeepMind

Abstract
We present an architecture and a training recipe that
adapts pretrained open-world image models to localization in videos. Understanding the open visual world (without being constrained by fixed label spaces) is crucial for
many real-world vision tasks. Contrastive pre-training on
large image-text datasets has recently led to significant improvements for image-level tasks. For more structured tasks
involving object localization applying pre-trained models
is more challenging. This is particularly true for video
tasks, where task-specific data is limited. We show successful transfer of open-world models by building on the
OWL-ViT open-vocabulary detection model and adapting
it to video by adding a transformer decoder. The decoder
propagates object representations recurrently through time
by using the output tokens for one frame as the object
queries for the next. Our model is end-to-end trainable on
video data and enjoys improved temporal consistency compared to tracking-by-detection baselines, while retaining
the open-world capabilities of the backbone detector. We
evaluate our model on the challenging TAO-OW benchmark
and demonstrate that open-world capabilities, learned from
large-scale image-text pretraining, can be transferred successfully to open-world localization across diverse videos.

1. Introduction
A central goal in computer vision is to develop models
that can understand diverse and novel scenarios in the visual
world. While this has been difficult for methods developed
on datasets with closed label spaces, web-scale image-text
pretraining has recently led to dramatic improvements in
† Work done while at Google.
Correspondence: heigold@google.com, tkipf@google.com

Fisher Yu†
ETH Zurich

Alex Bewley
Google DeepMind
Thomas Kipf
Google DeepMind

open-world performance on a range of image-level vision
tasks [12, 26, 19].
However, challenges still remain for object-level tasks on
images and especially videos. First, object-level tasks require predicting more complex output structures compared
to image-level tasks, making transfer of pretrained models more challenging. Second, training data for structured
tasks is limited due to the prohibitive labeling cost. Therefore, a key research question is how to transfer the openvocabulary capabilities of image-text models to object-level
tasks like object detection and tracking.
For object detection, works such as ViLD [12], RegionCLIP [40], OWL-ViT [26], F-VLM [19] etc. demonstrate
that image-level open-vocabulary capabilities can be transferred to object detection with relatively little detectionspecific training data. Most recent works achieve this by
combining image-text pre-trained encoder backbones (e.g.
CLIP [27]) with detection heads. By transferring semantic knowledge from the backbone, the resulting models are
capable of detecting objects for which no localization annotations were present in the detection training data.
Here, we extend this approach to video. We build on
OWL-ViT [26], which provides a simple open-world detection architecture in which light-weight box prediction
and classification heads are trained on top of a CLIP backbone. We transfer the open-world capabilities of OWL-ViT
to video understanding with minimal video-specific training data. The key idea behind our approach is to apply
the open-world detector autoregressively to the frames of
a video, propagating representations through time to track
objects. To allow representations to bind consistently to the
same object irrespective of its location, we depart from the
encoder-only OWL-ViT architecture: We decouple object
representations from the image grid by adding a transformer
decoder, as is common practice in end-to-end closed-world
detectors and trackers [6, 25, 36]. The decoder maps from
image-centric encoder tokens to object-centric “slots”. In-

13802

