This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deformable Model-Driven Neural Rendering for High-Fidelity 3D
Reconstruction of Human Heads Under Low-View Settings
Baixin Xu1 * Jiarui Zhang2 Kwan-Yee Lin 3,4 Chen Qian 5 Ying He1†
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 Peking University
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
5
SenseTime Research

Abstract
Reconstructing 3D human heads in low-view settings
presents technical challenges, mainly due to the pronounced
risk of overfitting with limited views and high-frequency signals. To address this, we propose geometry decomposition
and adopt a two-stage, coarse-to-fine training strategy, allowing for progressively capturing high-frequency geometric details. We represent 3D human heads using the zero
level-set of a combined signed distance field, comprising
a smooth template, a non-rigid deformation, and a highfrequency displacement field. The template captures features that are independent of both identity and expression
and is co-trained with the deformation network across multiple individuals with sparse and randomly selected views.
The displacement field, capturing individual-specific details, undergoes separate training for each person. Our
network training does not require 3D supervision or object
masks. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness
and robustness of our geometry decomposition and twostage training strategy. Our method outperforms existing
neural rendering approaches in terms of reconstruction accuracy and novel view synthesis under low-view settings.
Moreover, the pre-trained template serves a good initialization for our model when encountering unseen individuals.

1. Introduction
Accurately modeling and rendering human heads is crucial for various digital human-related applications as the
head is one of the most distinguishing features that helps us
identify individuals. Neural implicit functions [22, 34, 37,
35, 9, 46, 4] have recently emerged as a promising technique
for synthesizing novel views of complex objects, including human heads, by learning a continuous function from
multi-view images without being tied to a specific resolu* Project page: https://github.com/xubaixinxbx/3dheads.
† Corresponding author: Y. He (yhe@ntu.edu.sg).

tion. However, training such deep learning models often
requires a large number of images as input, which can be
costly and computationally inefficient. Moreover, a single
implicit field may not generalize well to unseen heads, particularly under setting of low or sparse views.
This paper aims to develop a robust method for learning neural implicit functions that can accurately reconstruct
3D human heads with high-fidelity geometry and appearance from low-view inputs, thereby reducing the need of
extensive data collection and annotation. To achieve this
goal, we learn a signed distance field (SDF) that consists of a smooth template, a non-rigid deformation, and a
high-frequency displacement map. The template represents
identity-independent and expression-neutral features, while
the deformation and displacement maps encode identitydependent geometric details that are trained for each specific individual. We represent 3D human heads as the zero
level-set of the composed SDF. Our training involves two
stages. The first stage takes the whole set of persons as
input, and learns an identity-independent and expressionneutral template head and a non-rigid deformation between
each observed head and the template head. In the second
stage, we learn an identity-dependent displacement map for
further refining the geometry. To train the proposed SDF
without any 3D supervision, we adopt a volume rendering
scheme [22, 37, 34] to minimize the difference between the
rendered colors and the ground-truth colors. We also adopt
regularization terms for the SDF, the deformation, the displacement map and the latent codes.
We evaluate our approach on both senior and young persons and demonstrate that it is robust and effective in learning SDFs for both types of inputs, resulting in 3D surfaces
with high-fidelity geometry. Our experiments show that our
method outperforms existing methods in terms of reconstruction accuracy and visual quality. We also demonstrate
that our method can generalize to unseen identities by using
the pre-trained template as a good initialization.

17924

