This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

C ORE: Cooperative Reconstruction for Multi-Agent Perception
Binglu Wang1,2 *, Lei Zhang1∗ , Zhaozhong Wang1 , Yongqiang Zhao1 , Tianfei Zhou2,3†
1

Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 Beijing Institute of Technology 3 Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich
https://github.com/zllxot/CORE

agent #1

Abstract
This paper presents C ORE, a conceptually simple, effective and communication-efficient model for multi-agent
cooperative perception. It addresses the task from a novel
perspective of cooperative reconstruction, based on two key
insights: 1) cooperating agents together provide a more
holistic observation of the environment, and 2) the holistic observation can serve as valuable supervision to explicitly guide the model learning how to reconstruct the ideal
observation based on collaboration. C ORE instantiates
the idea with three major components: a compressor for
each agent to create more compact feature representation
for efficient broadcasting, a lightweight attentive collaboration component for cross-agent message aggregation,
and a reconstruction module to reconstruct the observation
based on aggregated feature representations. This learningto-reconstruct idea is task-agnostic, and offers clear and
reasonable supervision to inspire more effective collaboration, eventually promoting perception tasks. We validate
C ORE on two large-scale multi-agent percetion dataset,
OPV2V and V2X-Sim, in two tasks, i.e., 3D object detection and semantic segmentation. Results demonstrate that
C ORE achieves state-of-the-art performance, and is more
communication-efficient.

1. Introduction
Perception – identifying and interpreting sensory information – is a crucial ability for intelligent agents to sense
the surrounding environment. Thanks to continued advances in deep learning, individual perception has demonstrated remarkable achievements in a number of tasks, e.g.,
detection [26, 45, 19, 24], segmentation [23, 35, 44] and
tracking [36, 43]. Though being promising, it tends to suffer from issues (e.g., occlusion) stemmed from limited lineof-sight visibility of individual agents and is challenged
by safety concerns. A more compelling paradigm is cooperative perception, i.e., a collection of agents to be* The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
† Corresponding author: Tianfei Zhou.

agent #2
agent #2

CORE
agent #3
agent #1

Lidar point cloud

agent #3

raw BEVs

reconstructed BEVs

Figure 1: C ORE addresses multi-agent perception from a
novel perspective of cooperative reconstruction. Take the
Lidar-based autonomous driving scenario as an example,
individual vehicles are confined to limited sensing capabilities of onboard sensors, yielding partial observations of the
whole scene (i.e., raw BEVs). C ORE takes a straightforward but remarkably effective step to address this: in addition to task-aware learning (e.g., object detection, semantic segmentation), C ORE explicitly learns to reconstruct the
complete scene (i.e., reconstructed BEVs) from incomplete
observations of cooperating agents. The reconstructionaware learning objective serves as a more sensible goal to
inspire more effective cooperation of connected agents, ultimately boosting perception performance.

have as a group by exchanging information with each other
so as to use their combined sensory experiences to perceive. Along this direction, recent efforts have been made
to deliver datasets [40, 39, 15, 5] and cooperative solutions
[22, 21, 1, 5, 28, 31, 10, 2, 34, 38, 39].
All these solutions hold a consensus promise that multiple agents together provide a holistic observation to
the environment. But there is a practical challenge of
performance-bandwidth trade-off to be addressed. On this
account, some studies explore adaptive communication architectures to reduce bandwidth requirements by dynamically determining for each agent, e.g., whom to communicate with [22], when to communicate [21], and what message to communicate [10], while others focus more on the
design of multi-agent collaborative strategies, e.g., early
collaboration [3, 1] to aggregate raw observations of cooperating agents, late collaboration [20, 33] to combine

8710

