This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Modal Continual Test-Time Adaptation for 3D Semantic Segmentation
Haozhi Cao1∗ Yuecong Xu2∗ Jianfei Yang1† Pengyu Yin1 Shenghai Yuan1 Lihua Xie1
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
{haozhi002, xuyu0014, yang0478, pengyu001, syuan003}@e.ntu.edu.sg

elhxie@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Continual Test-Time Adaptation (CTTA) generalizes
conventional Test-Time Adaptation (TTA) by assuming that
the target domain is dynamic over time rather than stationary. In this paper, we explore Multi-Modal Continual Test-Time Adaptation (MM-CTTA) as a new extension
of CTTA for 3D semantic segmentation. The key to MMCTTA is to adaptively attend to the reliable modality while
avoiding catastrophic forgetting during continual domain
shifts, which is out of the capability of previous TTA or
CTTA methods. To fulfill this gap, we propose an MM-CTTA
method called Continual Cross-Modal Adaptive Clustering
(CoMAC) that addresses this task from two perspectives.
On one hand, we propose an adaptive dual-stage mechanism to generate reliable cross-modal predictions by attending to the reliable modality based on the class-wise featurecentroid distance in the latent space. On the other hand,
to perform test-time adaptation without catastrophic forgetting, we design class-wise momentum queues that capture
confident target features for adaptation while stochastically
restoring pseudo-source features to revisit source knowledge. We further introduce two new benchmarks to facilitate
the exploration of MM-CTTA in the future. Our experimental results show that our method achieves state-of-the-art
performance on both benchmarks. Visit our project website
at https://sites.google.com/view/mmcotta.

1. Introduction
Test-Time Adaptation (TTA) proposes a realistic domain
adaptation scenario, which adapts pre-trained models to the
target domain during the testing process. Unlike previous
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) [17, 45, 52, 47],
TTA performs adaptation online without accessing the data
from the source domain. Typical TTA [40, 35, 36] methods
assume a stationary target domain, while real-world scenarios are dynamic over time. To fulfill this gap, a previous
work [42] proposes a general extension of TTA named Con∗ Equal contributions.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of how continual domain shifts affect multimodal segmentation and our method. Unlike the source domain
where predictions from both modalities are reliable, the reliability of each modality varies in MM-CTTA due to different domain
shifts. CoMAC tackles MM-CTTA by attending to the reliable
modality (3) rather than the noisy one (7). Meanwhile, source
knowledge is stochastically revisited to avoid catastrophic forgetting. Figure best viewed in color and zoomed in.

tinual Test-Time Adaptation (CTTA) which assumes that
the target domain is continually changing rather than static.
Compared to TTA, CTTA is more challenging since the performance is easily affected by error accumulation [6] and
catastrophic forgetting [27] during the continual adaptation.
For 3D semantic segmentation, multi-modal sensors are
frequently leveraged in different tasks, such as scene understanding [4, 28] and semantic map construction [29, 43].
For some specific applications like semantic-based localization [8] and autonomous driving [46, 44], multi-modal
information is the key to robust performance under adverse
conditions. However, their collaboration has been proven
to be sensitive toward domain drifts [1, 35]. In real-world
scenarios, such collaboration deterioration could be more
severe considering that the target domain is continually
changing as in CTTA (e.g., the operating environments of
24/7 AGVs are continually changing due to altering weather
or illumination conditions). Hence, it is essential for multi-

18809

