This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Transformers for Open-world Instance Segmentation
Jiannan Wu1 ,

Yi Jiang2 ,

Bin Yan3 ,

Huchuan Lu3 ,

Zehuan Yuan2 ,

Ping Luo1,4

1

The University of Hong Kong 2 ByteDance
3
Dalian University of Technology 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory

(a) Deformable-DETR

(c) SWORD†

(b) OLN

(d) Ground-truth

Figure 1: Comparison of SWORD† with different methods. The images are from the validation set of COCO [31]. All
the models are trained on the PASCAL-VOC [12] classes of COCO dataset, where elephants and zebras are not seen during
training. (a) Deformable-DETR [55] fails to segment the objects not labeled in the training set. (b) OLN [26] could localize
the novel objects, however, it also produce many false positives. (c) Our proposed SWORD† can predict the correct and
accurate masks for unseen categories.

Abstract
Open-world instance segmentation is a rising task,
which aims to segment all objects in the image by learning
from a limited number of base-category objects. This task
is challenging, as the number of unseen categories could
be hundreds of times larger than that of seen categories.
Recently, the DETR-like models have been extensively studied in the closed world while stay unexplored in the open
world. In this paper, we utilize the Transformer for openworld instance segmentation and present SWORD. Firstly,
we introduce to attach the stop-gradient operation before
classification head and further add IoU heads for discovering novel objects. We demonstrate that a simple stopgradient operation not only prevents the novel objects from
being suppressed as background, but also allows the network to enjoy the merit of heuristic label assignment. Secondly, we propose a novel contrastive learning framework
to enlarge the representations between objects and back-

ground. Specifically, we maintain a universal object queue
to obtain the object center, and dynamically select positive
and negative samples from the object queries for contrastive
learning. While the previous works only focus on pursuing
average recall and neglect average precision, we show the
prominence of SWORD by giving consideration to both criteria. Our models achieve state-of-the-art performance in
various open-world cross-category and cross-dataset generalizations. Particularly, in VOC to non-VOC setup, our
method sets new state-of-the-art results of 40.0% on ARb100
and 34.9% on ARm
100 . For COCO to UVO generalization,
SWORD significantly outperforms the previous best openworld model by 5.9% on APm and 8.1% on ARm
100 .

1. Introduction
The standard instance segmentation models [21, 42, 11]
are developed to segment the objects from a predefined taxonomy, which is not often reflective of the diversity of ob-

6611

