This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-1-to-3: Zero-shot One Image to 3D Object
Ruoshi Liu1 Rundi Wu1 Basile Van Hoorick1 Pavel Tokmakov2 Sergey Zakharov2 Carl Vondrick1
1
Columbia University 2 Toyota Research Institute
zero123.cs.columbia.edu
Input

Synthesized

Input

Down 30° Left: 90°
Input

Synthesized

Down: 25° Right: 95°

Synthesized

Input

Up 45° Right 60°
Input

Synthesized

Up: 45° Left: 60°

Synthesized

Up: 90°
Input

Synthesized

Left: 120°

Figure 1: Given a single RGB image of an object, we present Zero-1-to-3, a method to synthesize an image from a specified
camera viewpoint. Our approach synthesizes views that contain rich details consistent with the input view for large relative
transformations. It also achieves strong zero-shot performance on objects with complex geometry and artistic styles.

Abstract
We introduce Zero-1-to-3, a framework for changing the
camera viewpoint of an object given just a single RGB
image. To perform novel view synthesis in this underconstrained setting, we capitalize on the geometric priors
that large-scale diffusion models learn about natural images. Our conditional diffusion model uses a synthetic
dataset to learn controls of the relative camera viewpoint,
which allow new images to be generated of the same object under a specified camera transformation. Even though
it is trained on a synthetic dataset, our model retains a
strong zero-shot generalization ability to out-of-distribution
datasets as well as in-the-wild images, including impressionist paintings. Our viewpoint-conditioned diffusion approach can further be used for the task of 3D reconstruction
from a single image. Qualitative and quantitative experiments show that our method significantly outperforms stateof-the-art single-view 3D reconstruction and novel view
synthesis models by leveraging Internet-scale pre-training.

1. Introduction
From just a single camera view, humans are often able to
imagine an object’s 3D shape and appearance. This ability
is important for everyday tasks, such as object manipulation [18] and navigation in complex environments [7], but
is also key for visual creativity, such as painting [33]. While
this ability can be partially explained by reliance on geometric priors like symmetry, we seem to be able to generalize
to much more challenging objects that break physical and
geometric constraints with ease. In fact, we can predict the
3D shape of objects that do not (or even cannot) exist in the
physical world (see third column in Figure 1). To achieve
this degree of generalization, humans rely on prior knowledge accumulated through a lifetime of visual exploration.
In contrast, most existing approaches for 3D image reconstruction operate in a closed-world setting due to their
reliance on expensive 3D annotations (e.g. CAD models) or
category-specific priors [37, 23, 36, 67, 68, 66, 27, 26, 2].
Very recently, several methods have made major strides

9298

