This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Class-relation Knowledge Distillation for Novel Class Discovery
Peiyan Gu1,∗

Chuyu Zhang1,2, * Ruijie Xu1

Xuming He1,3

1

2
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China
Lingang Laboratory, Shanghai, China
3
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging, Shanghai, China

{zhangchy2,gupy,xurj2022,hexm}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

The recent development of deep learning has achieved
remarkable success in a broad range of visual recognition
tasks [14, 13, 22]. However, most traditional methods focus
on the closed-world setting, in which all the visual classes
are pre-deﬁned. As a result, it is usually difﬁcult to deploy the learned models in realistic settings with potential
novel classes. In contrast, human visual systems can ef* Both authors contributed equally.

forest

maple_tree

0.2
0.2

Palm tree
crab
beetle

瀖

lamp

0.1
0.1

瀖

1. Introduction

Encoder

We tackle the problem of novel class discovery, which
aims to learn novel classes without supervision based on
labeled data from known classes. A key challenge lies in
transferring the knowledge in the known-class data to the
learning of novel classes. Previous methods mainly focus
on building a shared representation space for knowledge
transfer and often ignore modeling class relations. To address this, we introduce a class relation representation for
the novel classes based on the predicted class distribution of
a model trained on known classes. Empirically, we ﬁnd that
such class relation becomes less informative during typical
discovery training. To prevent such information loss, we
propose a novel knowledge distillation framework, which
utilizes our class-relation representation to regularize the
learning of novel classes. In addition, to enable a ﬂexible knowledge distillation scheme for each data point in
novel classes, we develop a learnable weighting function
for the regularization, which adaptively promotes knowledge transfer based on the semantic similarity between the
novel and known classes. To validate the effectiveness and
generalization of our method, we conduct extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks, including CIFAR100, Stanford Cars, CUB, and FGVC-Aircraft datasets. Our results
demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms the previous state-of-the-art methods by a signiﬁcant margin on
almost all benchmarks. Code is available at here.

0.4

Palm Tree

0

Class-relation Rep.

Abstract

Figure 1. In the upper panel, we apply the encoder and the known
class classiﬁer to a novel sample of Palm tree, obtaining a classrelation representation. This representation encodes the relative
distances between the representations of novel and known categories. The triangles indicate a novel class, while the circles show
known classes. The lower panel shows the averaged class-relation
representation for all Palm Tree samples and displays the 5 nearest
known classes for both the known class Supervised Trained Model
and the Baseline Model [9]. We observe that the predictions from
a trained model on novel class data indicate meaningful class relation (e.g. maple tree, forest), which is lost in the Baseline Model.

ﬁciently acquire new concepts without supervision based
on learned knowledge. Inspired by such an ability, several
studies [12, 16] propose the task of Novel Class Discovery
(NCD) which aims to discover novel categories from unlabeled data based on known-class data.
A key strategy for discovering novel classes is to transfer knowledge in known classes to promote the learning of
novel classes. To achieve this, most existing NCD methods [11, 31, 9] involve two training stages, including a
supervised training stage followed by a discovery training stage. In the supervised training stage, they typically
initialize representation by learning from known classes.
In the discovery training stage, they transfer the learned
knowledge to novel classes via sharing the feature representation space. While they have shown promising results,
they are less effective in capturing the relationship between

16474

