This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

C2F2NeUS: Cascade Cost Frustum Fusion for High Fidelity and Generalizable
Neural Surface Reconstruction
Luoyuan Xu1 , Tao Guan1 , Yuesong Wang1 *, Wenkai Liu1 , Zhaojie Zeng1 , Junle Wang2 , Wei Yang1
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Tencent
{xu luoyuan, qd gt, yuesongwang, wenkai liu, zhaojiezeng, weiyangcs}@hust.edu.cn, wangjunle@gmail.com

Abstract

Dilemma for regular volume
High resolution

There is an emerging effort to combine the two popular
3D frameworks using Multi-View Stereo (MVS) and Neural
Implicit Surfaces (NIS) with a specific focus on the few-shot
/ sparse view setting. In this paper, we introduce a novel integration scheme that combines the multi-view stereo with
neural signed distance function representations, which potentially overcomes the limitations of both methods. MVS
uses per-view depth estimation and cross-view fusion to
generate accurate surfaces, while NIS relies on a common
coordinate volume. Based on this strategy, we propose to
construct per-view cost frustum for finer geometry estimation, and then fuse cross-view frustums and estimate the implicit signed distance functions to tackle artifacts that are
due to noise and holes in the produced surface reconstruction. We further apply a cascade frustum fusion strategy
to effectively captures global-local information and structural consistency. Finally, we apply cascade sampling and
a pseudo-geometric loss to foster stronger integration between the two architectures. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method reconstructs robust surfaces and outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D structures from a set of images is
a fundamental task in computer vision, with widespread
applications in fields such as architectural preservation,
virtual/augmented reality, and digital twins. Multi-view
stereo (MVS) is a widely-used technique for addressing
this task, exemplified by MVSNet [52] and its successors [51, 42, 43, 38, 49]. These methods construct 3D cost
volumes based on the camera frustum, rather than regular
euclidean space, to achieve precise depth map estimation.
However, these methods typically require post-processing
steps, such as depth map filtering, fusion, and mesh recon* Corresponding author. Contact him at yuesongwang@hust.edu.cn

Confusion
of different
voxels

Fusion of view-based frustums

Low resolution

Blurred
volume
feature

Volume feature related to
pixel-wise image feature

Figure 1. A regular volume doesn’t simultaneously fit all cameras
well, and can easily run into a dilemma when choosing the resolution. In a low-resolution volume, a single voxel may cover multiple pixels of an image, resulting in blurred volume features, such
as the blue pixel in view B. In a high-resolution volume, multiple
voxels may cover only a single pixel of an image, causing confusion of different voxels, such as the pink-purple pixels in view
A. Instead, frustum volume is view-dependent and extracts pixellevel image features. Hence, we build the cost frustum for each
view and adopt the fusion of per-view frustum so as to fit each
view.

struction, to reconstruct the 3D surface of the scene, and can
not well handle noises, textureless regions, and holes.
The implicit scene representation approaches, e.g., Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [27] and its peer Neural Signed
Distance Function [36, 35, 39], achieves remarkable results
in view synthesis and scene reconstruction. The implicit
surface reconstruction approaches typically employ Multilayer Perceptrons (MLPs) to implicitly fit a volume field.
We then can extract scene geometry and render views from
the implicit volume field. These approaches usually require
a large number of images from different viewpoints and
adopt a per-scene optimization strategy, which means they
are not generalizable to unknown scenes.
There is an emerging effort [4, 3, 59, 16] to merge the
two technical paths. MVSNeRF [4] combines NeRF [27]
with MVSNet [52] for generalizable view synthesis. RCMVSNet [3] utilizes NeRF’s neural volume rendering to

18291

