This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

XMem++: Production-level Video Segmentation From Few Annotated Frames
Maksym Bekuzarov1∗ , Ariana Bermudez1∗

Joon-Young Lee 3

Hao Li 1,2

{maksym.bekuzarov,ariana.venegas}@mbzuai.ac.ae

jolee@adobe.com

hao@hao-li.com

1

MBZUAI

2

3

Pinscreen

Adobe Research

Figure 1. A demonstration of partial region segmentation (left half of the face) for extreme poses. We compare our method with the current
SOTA, XMem [4], for a 1 min video (1800 frames), with only 6 frames (0.33%) annotated. No retraining or fine-tuning required.

Abstract
Despite advancements in user-guided video segmentation, extracting complex objects consistently for highly complex scenes is still a labor-intensive task, especially for
production. It is not uncommon that a majority of frames
need to be annotated. We introduce a novel semi-supervised
video object segmentation (SSVOS) model, XMem++, that
improves existing memory-based models, with a permanent memory module. Most existing methods focus on single frame annotations, while our approach can effectively
handle multiple user-selected frames with varying appearances of the same object or region. Our method can extract
highly consistent results while keeping the required number
of frame annotations low. We further introduce an iterative
and attention-based frame suggestion mechanism, which
computes the next best frame for annotation. Our method
is real-time and does not require retraining after each user
input. We also introduce a new dataset, PUMaVOS, which
covers new challenging use cases not found in previous
benchmarks. We demonstrate SOTA performance on challenging (partial and multi-class) segmentation scenarios
as well as long videos, while ensuring significantly fewer
frame annotations than any existing method. Project page:
https://max810.github.io/xmem2-project-page/
* These authors contributed equally to the work

1. Introduction
Video Object Segmentation (VOS) [48] is a widely performed vision task with applications ranging from object
recognition, scene understanding, medical imaging, to filter
effects in video chats. While fully automated approaches
based on pre-trained models for object segmentation are often desired, interactive user guidance is commonly practiced to annotate new training data or when precise rotoscoping is required for highly complex footages such as
those found in visual effects. This is particularly the case
when the videos have challenging lighting conditions and
dynamic scenes, or when partial region segmentation is required. While automatic VOS methods are designed to segment complete objects with clear semantic outlines, interactive video object segmentation (IVOS) and semi-supervised
video object segmentation (SSVOS) techniques [48] are
more flexible, and typically use a scribble or contour drawing interface for manual refinement such as those found
in commercial software solutions such as Adobe After Effects and Nuke. Despite advancements in IVOS and SSVOS
techniques, rotoscoping in film production is still a highly
labor-intensive task, and often requires nearly every frame
of a shot to be annotated and refined [36].
State-of-the-art IVOS and SSVOS techniques use
memory-based models [27] and have shown impressive
segmentation results on complex scenes based on userprovided mask annotations, but they are often designed to

635

