This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LiveHand: Real-time and Photorealistic Neural Hand Rendering
Akshay Mundra 1,2 , Mallikarjun B R 1 , Jiayi Wang 1 ,
Marc Habermann 1 , Christian Theobalt 1,2 , Mohamed Elgharib 1
1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics

2

Saarland University

mundra.akshay15@gmail.com, {mbr,jwang,mhaberma,theobalt,elgharib}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Figure 1: We present LiveHand, the first neural implicit approach for rendering articulated hands in real-time. (a) Our
method captures pose-dependent effects such as hand shadows, popping veins, and skin wrinkles. (b) We can use the handpose obtained from an input sequence to re-enact different identities. (c) Our method is designed to optimize rendering speed
and quality – we show a live demo where we track the 3D hand-pose and render a photo-realistic hand avatar, all in real-time.

Abstract
The human hand is the main medium through which we
interact with our surroundings, making its digitization an
important problem. While there are several works modeling the geometry of hands, little attention has been paid to
capturing photo-realistic appearance. Moreover, for applications in extended reality and gaming, real-time rendering
is critical. We present the first neural-implicit approach to
photo-realistically render hands in real-time. This is a challenging problem as hands are textured and undergo strong
articulations with pose-dependent effects. However, we
show that this aim is achievable through our carefully designed method. This includes training on a low-resolution
rendering of a neural radiance field, together with a 3Dconsistent super-resolution module and mesh-guided sampling and space canonicalization. We demonstrate a novel
application of perceptual loss on the image space, which is
critical for learning details accurately. We also show a live
demo where we photo-realistically render the human hand
in real-time for the first time, while also modeling poseand view-dependent appearance effects. We ablate all our
design choices and show that they optimize for rendering
speed and quality. Video results and our code can be accessed from https://vcai.mpi-inf.mpg.de/projects/LiveHand/

1. Introduction
As the popularity of VR/AR technology rises, providing a natural interface with these digital contents becomes
vital. Undoubtedly, hands are the most intuitive mode of interaction for users in a 3D environment. Therefore, it is
quintessential to digitize the users’ hands to render their
personalized, controllable, and photorealistic counterparts
in the virtual world. Achieving this is a challenging task
since hand appearance is a complex function varying with
both pose and viewing direction. Moreover, ensuring realtime performance of such a system is key to enabling applications such as telepresence, teleoperation, and computeraided design.
While the creation of photorealistic hand models is possible to some extent using traditional computer graphics
techniques, it typically requires extensive manual efforts
from experienced artists. Therefore, recent research has
started to investigate whether hand models can be directly
derived from 2D imagery. Here, most existing methods use some data-driven explicit model to constrain the
hand geometry and appearance to a low dimensional space

18035

