This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Delicate Textured Mesh Recovery from NeRF via Adaptive Surface Refinement
Jiaxiang Tang1 , Hang Zhou2 , Xiaokang Chen1 , Tianshu Hu2 , Errui Ding2 , Jingdong Wang2 , Gang Zeng1
1
Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE), School of IST, Peking University. 2 Baidu Inc.
{tjx, pkucxk, zeng}@pku.edu.cn

Geometry

Diffuse Texture

{zhouhang09,hutianshu01,dingerrui,wangjingdong}@baidu.com

Specular Texture

……
RGB Images

Textured Surface Mesh Reconstruction

MLP

Real-time Rendering

Geometry Editing

Texture Editing

Model Composition

Downstream Applications

Figure 1: Our framework, NeRF2Mesh, reconstructs high-quality surface meshes with diffuse and specular textures from
multi-view RGB images, generalizing well from object- to scene-level datasets. The exported textured meshes are ready-touse for common graphics hardware and software, facilitating various downstream applications.

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have constituted a remarkable breakthrough in image-based 3D reconstruction.
However, their implicit volumetric representations differ
significantly from the widely-adopted polygonal meshes and
lack support from common 3D software and hardware, making their rendering and manipulation inefficient. To overcome this limitation, we present a novel framework that
generates textured surface meshes from images. Our approach begins by efficiently initializing the geometry and
view-dependency decomposed appearance with a NeRF.
Subsequently, a coarse mesh is extracted, and an iterative surface refinement algorithm is developed to adaptively
adjust both vertex positions and face density based on reprojected rendering errors. We jointly refine the appearance with geometry and bake it into texture images for realtime rendering. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method achieves superior mesh quality and competitive rendering quality.

1. Introduction
The reconstruction of 3D scenes from RGB images is
a complex task in computer vision with many real-world
applications. In recent years, Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [31, 2, 8, 32] have gained popularity for their impressive ability to reconstruct and render large-scale scenes
with realistic details. However, NeRF representations often
use implicit functions and specialized ray marching algorithms for rendering, making them difficult to manipulate
and slow to render due to poor hardware support, which
limits their use in downstream applications. In contrast,
polygonal meshes are the most commonly used representation in 3D applications and are well-supported by most
graphic hardware to accelerate rendering. However, direct
reconstruction of meshes can be challenging due to their irregularity, and most approaches are limited to object-level
reconstructions [33, 9, 10].
Some recent works [33, 6, 11, 54] have focused on combining the advantages of both NeRF and mesh representation. MobileNeRF [11] presents a method of optimizing
NeRF on a grid mesh and incorporates rasterization for real-

17739

