This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LayoutDiffusion: Improving Graphic Layout Generation by
Discrete Diffusion Probabilistic Models
Junyi Zhang1 *
1

Jiaqi Guo2
Shizhao Sun2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

junyizhang@sjtu.edu.cn

2

Jian-Guang Lou2
Dongmei Zhang2
Microsoft Research Asia

{jiaqiguo, shizsu, jlou, dongmeiz}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Creating graphic layouts is a fundamental step in
graphic designs. In this work, we present a novel generative
model named LayoutDiffusion for automatic layout generation. As layout is typically represented as a sequence of discrete tokens, LayoutDiffusion models layout generation as
a discrete denoising diffusion process. It learns to reverse a
mild forward process, in which layouts become increasingly
chaotic with the growth of forward steps and layouts in the
neighboring steps do not differ too much. Designing such
a mild forward process is however very challenging as layout has both categorical attributes and ordinal attributes.
To tackle the challenge, we summarize three critical factors
for achieving a mild forward process for the layout, i.e., legality, coordinate proximity and type disruption. Based on
the factors, we propose a block-wise transition matrix coupled with a piece-wise linear noise schedule. Experiments
on RICO and PubLayNet datasets show that LayoutDiffusion outperforms state-of-the-art approaches significantly.
Moreover, it enables two conditional layout generation
tasks in a plug-and-play manner without re-training and
achieves better performance than existing methods. Project
page: https://layoutdiffusion.github.io.

1. Introduction
Graphic layout, i.e., the sizes and positions of elements,
is important to the interaction between the viewer and the
information. Recently, layout generation attracts growing
research interest. Leading approaches [11, 16, 17, 20] often represent a layout as a sequence of elements and leverage Transformer [40] to model element relationships. As
the placement of one element could depends on any part
of a layout, global context modeling plays a critical role
in layout generation. However, there is no satisfactory
solution to it. Some studies simply consider biased context [1, 11, 16, 17]. They generate layout sequences autoregressively, where the generation order for elements is pre* Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.

(a) Mild forward corruption process

(b) Absorbing [2]

(c) Uniform [37]
toolbar

icon

text

list item

image

input

text button

map view

(d) The mapping between colors and element types used in Figs. 1a to 1c

Figure 1. Comparison of different forward corruption processes.
We sample the layouts at the timesteps 0, 1/6, 2/6, 3/6, 4/6, 5/6,
and 1 of the total timestep. The blank page is used when the format
of the layout sequence is destroyed.

defined and the placement of one element only depends on
a certain part of layout. A few other studies try to utilize
global context by non-autoregressive generation [22]. Unfortunately, they fail to improve the generation quality significantly since it is too challenging to generate a sequence
in a single pass [7].
Meanwhile, the emerging diffusion probabilistic model
(DDPM) [13, 38] achieves amazing performance on many
generation tasks [12, 21, 33–36, 44]. It consists of multiple
rounds, each of which gradually denoises the latent variables towards the desired data distribution. This sort of process seems to be a promising solution to layout generation.
First, the layout generated in the last round could serve as
the global context for the generation in the next round. Second, by multiple rounds of denoising, a layout could be refined iteratively, overcoming the challenge of single-pass
generation from non-autoregressive models.

7226

