This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Harvard Glaucoma Detection and Progression: A Multimodal Multitask Dataset
and Generalization-Reinforced Semi-Supervised Learning
Yan Luo* Min Shi* Yu Tian* Tobias Elze Mengyu Wang
Harvard Ophthalmology AI Lab, Harvard University
{yluo16, mshi6, ytian11, tobias elze, mengyu wang}@meei.harvard.edu

Abstract
Glaucoma is the number one cause of irreversible blindness globally. A major challenge for accurate glaucoma
detection and progression forecasting is the bottleneck of
limited labeled patients with the state-of-the-art (SOTA)
3D retinal imaging data of optical coherence tomography (OCT). To address the data scarcity issue, this paper proposes two solutions. First, we develop a novel
generalization-reinforced semi-supervised learning (SSL)
model called pseudo supervisor to optimally utilize unlabeled data. Compared with SOTA models, the proposed
pseudo supervisor optimizes the policy of predicting pseudo
labels with unlabeled samples to improve empirical generalization. Our pseudo supervisor model is evaluated with
two clinical tasks consisting of glaucoma detection and progression forecasting. The progression forecasting task is
evaluated both unimodally and multimodally. Our pseudo
supervisor model demonstrates superior performance than
SOTA SSL comparison models. Moreover, our model also
achieves the best results on the publicly available LAG fundus dataset. Second, we introduce the Harvard Glaucoma
Detection and Progression (Harvard-GDP) Dataset, a multimodal multitask dataset that includes data from 1,000 patients with OCT imaging data, as well as labels for glaucoma detection and progression. This is the largest glaucoma detection dataset with 3D OCT imaging data and the
first glaucoma progression forecasting dataset that is publicly available. Detailed sex and racial analysis are provided, which can be used by interested researchers for fairness learning studies. Our released dataset is benchmarked
with several SOTA supervised CNN and transformer deep
learning models. The dataset and code are made publicly
available via https://ophai.hms.harvard.edu/
datasets/harvard-gdp1000.

1. Introduction
Glaucoma is the leading cause of irreversible blindness globally caused by retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL)
* First three authors contribute equally.

350 μm

Glaucoma

Non-glaucoma

350 μm

Progression

Non-progression

175 μm

175 μm

0 μm

0 μm

(a) Pointwise Similarity=0.95

(b) Pointwise Similarity=0.95

Figure 1: Examples of RNFLT maps with high similarities
but from different label groups.

damage[74, 58, 59, 69]. The global prevalence of glaucoma for the population between 40 and 80 years old is
3.54% [74]. Timely clinical treatment in the early stage
of glaucoma can significantly reduce the risk of further vision loss [18, 17]. However, most commonly, glaucoma
patients are not aware of their early VF loss until the VF
loss becomes severe enough to impair their daily activities
such as reading and driving due to the brain and fellow eye
compensation[4, 19, 34, 50, 51, 30].
It is desirable to develop automated glaucoma screen
tools to reduce societal disease burden [77]. The clinical diagnosis of glaucoma is a holistic decision primarily
based on RNFL damage and VF loss assessment supplemented with other patient clinical information and family
disease history [29, 47]. The VF test is only available in the
ophthalmology specialty. So existing automated screening
tools are based on the idea of predicting glaucoma diagnosis from evaluating RNFL damage using retinal images
[14, 57, 42, 5, 49, 37, 15, 35, 60, 81]. Before the massive
clinical adoption of the 3D retinal imaging tool of optical
coherence tomography (OCT) a decade ago [31, 12], 2D
fundus photos were used to assess RNFL damage. Therefore, most prior glaucoma detection models are based on
the 2D fundus photo [37, 57, 33, 14, 42, 1, 64, 15], which
is not the state of the art (SOTA) clinical imaging modality anymore. OCT has replaced fundus photos as the primary imaging tool for glaucoma clinical care due to its
superiority in measuring RNFL damage [48, 12]. There
have been a number of recent works using OCT scans
to automatically screen glaucoma with machine learning
[15, 60, 5, 35, 24, 80, 49]. Apart from glaucoma detection,
a more clinically significant task is progression forecasting
using OCT scans [52, 16, 32, 28], which could inform clini-

20471

