This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TextManiA: Enriching Visual Feature by Text-driven Manifold Augmentation
Moon Ye-Bin1

Jisoo Kim2

Hongyeob Kim3

Kilho Son4

Tae-Hyun Oh1,5,6

1

Dept. of Electrical Engineering and 5 Grad. School of Artificial Intelligence, POSTECH
2
3
4
Columbia University
Sungkyunkwan University
Microsoft Azure
6
Institute for Convergence Research and Education in Advanced Technology, Yonsei University
https://textmania.github.io/

Abstract
We propose TextManiA, a text-driven manifold augmentation method that semantically enriches visual feature
spaces, regardless of class distribution. TextManiA augments visual data with intra-class semantic perturbation by
exploiting easy-to-understand visually mimetic words, i.e.,
attributes. This work is built on an interesting hypothesis
that general language models, e.g., BERT and GPT, encompass visual information to some extent, even without training
on visual training data. Given the hypothesis, TextManiA
transfers pre-trained text representation obtained from a
well-established large language encoder to a target visual
feature space being learned. Our extensive analysis hints
that the language encoder indeed encompasses visual information at least useful to augment visual representation. Our
experiments demonstrate that TextManiA is particularly
powerful in scarce samples with class imbalance as well as
even distribution. We also show compatibility with the label
mix-based approaches in evenly distributed scarce data.

1. Introduction
Learning models, e.g., neural networks, are known to
perform well on visual recognition tasks when training
and testing datasets present similar distributions [4]. However, their performance often degrades considerably when
evaluated in subtly different distributions [69]. One effective way to enhance the generalization ability of a model
against such data distribution shifts would be data augmentation [18, 86, 85, 44, 41, 73]. Augmenting data enlarges the
support of the training distribution formed by given samples
and yields the effect of increasing the amount of data even
without additional laborious data collection. By training on
augmented data, decision boundaries are smoothed, and the
generalization ability of the model is improved [73].
There has been a distinctive and successful line of research for label mix-based data augmentation, such as

+ Red

Bull

Red Bull

Text Embedding

Augmented
Original

Target Visual Feature Space

Figure 1. Illustration of TextManiA. Our method augments the
target visual feature by leveraging text embedding of the visually mimetic words, which are comprehensible and semantically
rich. For example, when the text of the existing class “bull” is
manipulated as “red bull” by adding the attribute “red,” we can get
augmented visual features by reflecting the difference of text embeddings. In this way, TextManiA densifies sparse visual feature
space using various attributes text.

Mixup [86], CutMix [85], and manifold Mixup [73], which
are effective for model generalization and calibration [25].
The effectiveness of those label mix-based approaches is attributed to semantic perturbation by label mixing [86, 73, 85].
This is a distinctive property from other lines of data augmentation methods, e.g., [74, 44, 41, 64, 13], where they synthesize diverse virtual data that appear differently but retain
class semantics of original contents. However, we found that
the performance of mix-based augmentation methods is noticeably degraded when training with skewed class distribution having scarce samples for non-major classes, i.e., longtailed distribution. In real-world, data often exhibit longtailed class distribution (e.g., Pareto distribution), which
cannot be dealt with the prevalent mix-based approaches.
This motivates us to seek a semantically rich data augmentation effective for limited data regimes, including long-tailed
distribution, scarce data, and few-shot cases.
In this work, we propose TextManiA, a text-driven manifold augmentation for visual features, which is effective for
long-tail classes and scarce data. Our TextManiA is based

2526

