This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Humans in 4D: Reconstructing and Tracking Humans with Transformers
Shubham Goel

Georgios Pavlakos

Jathushan Rajasegaran

Angjoo Kanazawa∗

Jitendra Malik∗

{shubham-goel, pavlakos, jathushan, kanazawa}@berkeley.edu, malik@eecs.berkeley.edu

University of California, Berkeley

Figure 1: A “transformerized” view of Human Mesh Recovery. We describe HMR 2.0, a fully transformer-based approach for 3D
human pose and shape reconstruction from a single image. Besides impressive performance across a wide variety of poses and viewpoints,
HMR 2.0 also acts as the backbone of an improved system for jointly reconstructing and tracking Humans in 4D (4DHumans). Here, we
see output reconstructions from HMR 2.0 for each 2D detection in the left image.

Abstract
We present an approach to reconstruct humans and track
them over time. At the core of our approach, we propose
a fully “transformerized” version of a network for human
mesh recovery. This network, HMR 2.0, advances the state
of the art and shows the capability to analyze unusual poses
that have in the past been difficult to reconstruct from single images. To analyze video, we use 3D reconstructions
from HMR 2.0 as input to a tracking system that operates
in 3D. This enables us to deal with multiple people and
maintain identities through occlusion events. Our complete
approach, 4DHumans, achieves state-of-the-art results for
tracking people from monocular video. Furthermore, we
demonstrate the effectiveness of HMR 2.0 on the downstream task of action recognition, achieving significant improvements over previous pose-based action recognition
approaches. Our code and models are available on the
project website: https://shubham-goel.github.
io/4dhumans/.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we present a fully transformer-based approach for recovering 3D meshes of human bodies from single images, and tracking them over time in video. We obtain
unprecedented accuracy in our single-image 3D reconstructions (see Figure 1) even for unusual poses where previous
approaches struggle. In video, we link these reconstructions
over time by 3D tracking, in the process bridging gaps due
to occlusion or detection failures. These 4D reconstructions
can be seen on the project webpage.
Our problem formulation and approach can be conceived
as the “transformerization” of previous work on human
mesh recovery, HMR [30] and 3D tracking, PHALP [65].
Since the pioneering ViT paper [15], the process of “transformerization”, i.e., converting models from CNNs or
LSTMs to transformer backbones, has advanced rapidly
across multiple computer vision tasks, e.g., [8, 16, 24, 40,
61, 77]. Specifically for 2D pose (2D body keypoints) this
has already been done by ViTPose [81]. We take that as a
starting point and we develop a new version of HMR, which
we call HMR 2.0 to acknowledge its antecedent.

14783

