This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Preserving Modality Structure Improves Multi-Modal Learning
Sirnam Swetha1 , Mamshad Nayeem Rizve1 , Nina Shvetsova2,3 , Hilde Kuehne2,3,4 , Mubarak Shah1
1

CRCV, University of Central Florida , 2 Goethe University Frankfurt Germany,
3
University of Bonn Germany, 4 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
Self-supervised learning on large-scale multi-modal
datasets allows learning semantically meaningful embeddings in a joint multi-modal representation space without
relying on human annotations. These joint embeddings enable zero-shot cross-modal tasks like retrieval and classification. However, these methods often struggle to generalize well on out-of-domain data as they ignore the semantic
structure present in modality-specific embeddings. In this
context, we propose a novel Semantic-Structure-Preserving
Consistency approach to improve generalizability by preserving the modality-specific relationships in the joint embedding space. To capture modality-specific semantic relationships between samples, we propose to learn multiple anchors and represent the multifaceted relationship between samples with respect to their relationship with these
anchors. To assign multiple anchors to each sample, we
propose a novel Multi-Assignment Sinkhorn-Knopp algorithm. Our experimentation demonstrates that our proposed approach learns semantically meaningful anchors in
a self-supervised manner. Furthermore, our evaluation on
MSR-VTT and YouCook2 datasets demonstrates that our
proposed multi-anchor assignment based solution achieves
state-of-the-art performance and generalizes to both inand out-of-domain datasets. Code: https://github.
com/Swetha5/Multi_Sinkhorn_Knopp

1. Introduction
Humans often rely on multiple sensory inputs to have a
better understanding of everyday events. Most commonly,
we utilize vision, audio, and language to perceive an event
as they provide complementary information for robust reasoning. The closest approximation of this setup is video
data as it provides both visual and audio information along
with a text description as a caption. Recently, researchers
have started to explore learning meaningful representations

by leveraging multiple modalities to train efficient models at scale [5, 11, 42]. Such systems focus on representation learning that either improves features for each
modality separately [5] or learns a joint multi-modal embedding [11, 42] space that enables various zero-shot tasks
like retrieval or classification. However, given the inherent differences across the modalities, it is challenging to
learn effective joint embeddings. Furthermore, the realworld data presents additional challenges like misalignment
between modalities, leading to weak supervision.
Current pre-training approaches in this area usually employ a contrastive objective [33] to learn the joint embeddings that pulls the cross-modal embeddings of a sample
from the same temporal instance closer and pushes embeddings of other samples farther. Despite promising performances, these methods struggle with generalizability. This
is particularly evident in previous approaches trained on
HT100M [11, 42], which do well on the closely related
downstream dataset YouCook2 but struggle to improve on
the MSR-VTT dataset, which exhibits a relatively larger domain shift with respect to HT100M [42]. This is due to
the contrastive objective’s emphasis on strict alignment between modalities in the joint embedding space while ignoring the inherent weak alignment between different modalities [45], as well as the underlying semantic structure across
samples [43, 50]. Recent works have tackled these issues,
either by using joint multi-modal clustering [11] to preserve the semantic structure in the joint embedding space
or by incorporating a reconstruction objective [11, 25] to retain modality-specific features in the joint embedding space,
allowing for weak multi-modal alignment. However, the
usual reconstruction objective trivially tries to retain most
modality-specific features in the joint space, thus preventing the learning of optimal features for cross-modal tasks.
And the multi-modal clustering approaches perform hardclustering making it less flexible. Therefore, the limitations
of the contrastive objective cannot be adequately addressed
even after combining these independent objectives.
To address this, we propose a semantic-structure-

21993

