This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Continuous Exposure Value Representations for
Single-Image HDR Reconstruction
Su-Kai Chen1,2 Hung-Lin Yen1 Yu-Lun Liu1 Min-Hung Chen3
Hou-Ning Hu2 Wen-Hsiao Peng1 Yen-Yu Lin1
1
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University 2 MediaTek Inc. 3 NVIDIA
https://skchen1993.github.io/CEVR_web/

w/o corresponding GT

Inverse CRF

Debevec’s
method

Output HDR

LDR stack w/ predefined EVs

(b) Existing methods

CEVR

Inverse CRF

Input LDR

Debevec’s
method

Continuous EV
Predicted exposure stack

LDR stack w/ dense EVs

(a) Continuous exposure value representation (CEVR)

Output HDR

(c) Our continuous LDR stack benefits HDR reconstruction

Figure 1: Single-image HDR reconstruction from continuous LDR stack. (a) Continuous Exposure Value Representation
(CEVR) generates LDR images with continuous exposure values (EV) without corresponding ground truth during training.
(b) Existing methods build LDR stacks only with EVs covered by training data, which brings less visible details for Debevec’s
method [11] to estimate an accurate inverse camera response function (CRF), resulting in artifacts on HDR results. (c) Our
CEVR model enriches the LDR stack by including additional LDR images with continuous and dense EVs (red frames),
allowing Debevec’s method to predict a more precise inverse CRF and reconstruct more visually pleasing HDR images.

Abstract
Deep learning is commonly used to reconstruct HDR images from LDR images. LDR stack-based methods are used
for single-image HDR reconstruction, generating an HDR
image from a deep learning-generated LDR stack. However,
current methods generate the stack with predetermined exposure values (EVs), which may limit the quality of HDR
reconstruction. To address this, we propose the continuous
exposure value representation (CEVR), which uses an implicit function to generate LDR images with arbitrary EVs,
including those unseen during training. Our approach generates a continuous stack with more images containing diverse EVs, significantly improving HDR reconstruction. We
use a cycle training strategy to supervise the model in generating continuous EV LDR images without corresponding
ground truths. Our CEVR model outperforms existing methods, as demonstrated by experimental results.

1. Introduction
High dynamic range (HDR) images can capture detailed
appearances in regions with extreme lighting conditions,
like sun and shadow. As conventional cameras only capture
a limited dynamic range in real-world scenes, one approach
to address this issue is to blend multiple LDR images with
different exposures into a single HDR image. However, this
method is limited to static scenes and may result in ghosting
or blurring artifacts in dynamic scenes. Additionally, this
method is not applicable when multiple images of the same
scene are unavailable, such as an image on the internet.
Another branch of methods, e.g., [12, 13, 23, 24, 26, 32,
43], takes a single LDR image as input to generate the HDR
counterpart without suffering from misalignment, which is
referred to as single-image HDR reconstruction. These approaches, e.g., [23,24], are trained on particular datasets and
build an LDR stack with a single LDR image to generate an
HDR image using Debevec’s method [11].

12990

