This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Steered Diffusion: A Generalized Framework for Plug-and-Play
Conditional Image Synthesis
Nithin Gopalakrishnan Nair1∗ Anoop Cherian2 Suhas Lohit2 Ye Wang2
Toshiaki Koike-Akino2 Vishal M. Patel1 Tim K. Marks2
1

Johns Hopkins University

2

{ngopala2,vpatel36}@jhu.edu

Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL)
{acherian,slohit,yewang,koike,tmarks}@merl.com

https://merl.com/demos/steered-diffusion
(a) Inpainting

Input

(b) Colorization

Generated Samples

Input

(d) Semantic Generation

Input

Generated Samples

Generated Samples

(c) Super-resolution

Input

(e) Identity Replication

Input

Generated Samples

Generated Samples
(f) Text-based editing

Input

Generated Samples

Figure 1. An illustration of various applications of our method. We use a diffusion model trained unconditionally and condition using
our proposed algorithm only during the test time. We present the results on six tasks: (a) image inpainting, (b) colorization, (c) image
super-resolution, (d) semantic generation, (e) identity replication, and (f) text-based image editing. In part (f), the text prompts for the the
first and second columns, respectively, are “This person has blonde hair” and “This person has wavy hair.”

Abstract
Conditional generative models typically demand large
annotated training sets to achieve high-quality synthesis.
As a result, there has been significant interest in designing
models that perform plug-and-play generation, i.e., to use
a predefined or pretrained model, which is not explicitly
trained on the generative task, to guide the generative
process (e.g., using language). However, such guidance
is typically useful only towards synthesizing high-level
semantics rather than editing fine-grained details as
in image-to-image translation tasks. To this end, and
capitalizing on the powerful fine-grained generative
control offered by the recent diffusion-based generative
* Work done during internship at MERL.

models, we introduce Steered Diffusion, a generalized
framework for photorealistic zero-shot conditional image
generation using a diffusion model trained for unconditional
generation. The key idea is to steer the image generation
of the diffusion model at inference time via designing a
loss using a pre-trained inverse model that characterizes
the conditional task. This loss modulates the sampling
trajectory of the diffusion process. Our framework allows
for easy incorporation of multiple conditions during
inference. We present experiments using steered diffusion on
several tasks including inpainting, colorization, text-guided
semantic editing, and image super-resolution. Our results
demonstrate clear qualitative and quantitative improvements
over state-of-the-art diffusion-based plug-and-play models
while adding negligible additional computational cost.

20850

