This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Versatile 3D Shape Generation with Improved Auto-regressive Models
Simian Luo1,∗ , Xuelin Qian1,∗ , Yanwei Fu1,† , Yinda Zhang2 , Ying Tai3
Zhenyu Zhang3 , Chengjie Wang3 , Xiangyang Xue1
1
Fudan University; 2 Google; 3 Tencent Youtu Lab
{18300180157,xlqian,yanweifu,xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn, yindaz@gmail.com,
zhangjesse@foxmail.com, {yingtai,jasoncjwang}@tencent.com

Figure 1: We propose an improved AR model (ImAM) to learn versatile 3D shape generation. ImAM can either generate
diverse and faithful shapes with multiple categories via an unconditional way (one column to the left), or can be adapted for
conditional generation by incorporating various conditioning inputs given on the left-top (three columns to the right).

Abstract
Auto-Regressive (AR) models have achieved impressive
results in 2D image generation by modeling joint distributions in the grid space. While this approach has been extended to the 3D domain for powerful shape generation, it
still has two limitations: expensive computations on volumetric grids and ambiguous auto-regressive order along
grid dimensions. To overcome these limitations, we propose
the Improved Auto-regressive Model (ImAM) for 3D shape
generation, which applies discrete representation learning

based on a latent vector instead of volumetric grids. Our
approach not only reduces computational costs but also preserves essential geometric details by learning the joint distribution in a more tractable order. Moreover, thanks to
the simplicity of our model architecture, we can naturally
extend it from unconditional to conditional generation by
concatenating various conditioning inputs, such as point
clouds, categories, images, and texts. Extensive experiments demonstrate that ImAM can synthesize diverse and
faithful shapes of multiple categories, achieving state-ofthe-art performance.

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

14139

