This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GridMM: Grid Memory Map for Vision-and-Language Navigation
Zihan Wang1,2 , Xiangyang Li1,2 , Jiahao Yang1,2 , Yeqi Liu1,2 , Shuqiang Jiang1,2
1
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing Laboratory of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
zihan.wang@vipl.ict.ac.cn, lixiangyang@ict.ac.cn,
{jiahao.yang, yeqi.liu}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, sqjiang@ict.ac.cn

Instruction: Walk straight ahead and turn right to cross in front of
the refrigerator. Walk past the wood table and chairs on your right
and turn right. Stop in between the blue couch and the wood table.

Abstract
Vision-and-language navigation (VLN) enables the
agent to navigate to a remote location following the natural language instruction in 3D environments. To represent the previously visited environment, most approaches
for VLN implement memory using recurrent states, topological maps, or top-down semantic maps. In contrast to these
approaches, we build the top-down egocentric and dynamically growing Grid Memory Map (i.e., GridMM) to structure the visited environment. From a global perspective, historical observations are projected into a unified grid map in
a top-down view, which can better represent the spatial relations of the environment. From a local perspective, we further propose an instruction relevance aggregation method
to capture fine-grained visual clues in each grid region. Extensive experiments are conducted on both the REVERIE,
R2R, SOON datasets in the discrete environments, and the
R2R-CE dataset in the continuous environments, showing
the superiority of our proposed method. The source code is
available at https://github.com/MrZihan/GridMM.

1. Introduction
Vision-and-language navigation (VLN) tasks [4, 33, 40]
require an agent to understand natural language instructions
and act according to the instructions. Two distinct VLN
scenarios have been proposed, being navigation in discrete
environments (e.g., R2R [4], REVERIE [40], SOON [62])
and in continuous environments (e.g., R2R-CE [32], RxRCE [33]). The discrete environment in VLN is abstracted as
the topology structure of interconnected navigable nodes.
With the connectivity graph, the agent can move to an adjacent node on the graph by selecting a direction from navigable directions. Different from the discrete environments,
VLN in continuous environments require the agent to move
through low-level controls (i.e., turn left 15 degrees, turn

3

2

4

1

(a) The topological map
refrigerator
2

3

1

2

3

4

4

Blue couch
wood table

1

(b) The top-down semantic map

(c) Our grid memory map

Figure 1. Illustration of different methods to represent the environment with maps for VLN.

right 15 degrees, or move forward 0.25 meters), which is
closer to real-world robot navigation and more challenging.
Whether in discrete environments or continuous environments, historical information during navigation plays an
important role in environment understanding and instruction grounding. In previous works [4, 18, 49, 55, 25], recurrent states are most commonly used as historical information for VLN, which encode historical observations and
actions within a fixed-size state vector. However, such condensed states might be insufficient for capturing essential
information in trajectory history. Therefore, Episodic transformer [39] and HAMT [12] propose to directly encode
the trajectory history and actions as a sequence of previous observations instead of using recurrent states. Furthermore, in order to structure the visited environment and make
global planning, a few recent approaches [10, 14, 34] structure the topological map, as shown in Fig. 1(a). However,
these methods are difficult to represent the spatial relations
among objects and scenes in historical observations, thus a
lot of detailed information is lost. As shown in Fig. 1(b),

15625

