This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Toward Unsupervised Realistic Visual Question Answering
Yuwei Zhang* Chih-Hui Ho* Nuno Vasconcelos
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego
{yuz163,chh279, nvasconcelos}@ucsd.edu
(a) What food on the
table should we cut?

Abstract
The problem of realistic VQA (RVQA), where a model
has to reject unanswerable questions (UQs) and answer answerable ones (AQs), is studied. We first point out 2 drawbacks in current RVQA research, where (1) datasets contain
too many unchallenging UQs and (2) a large number of annotated UQs are required for training. To resolve the first
drawback, we propose a new testing dataset, RGQA, which
combines AQs from an existing VQA dataset with around
29K human-annotated UQs. These UQs consist of both
fine-grained and coarse-grained image-question pairs generated with 2 approaches: CLIP-based and Perturbationbased. To address the second drawback, we introduce an
unsupervised training approach. This combines pseudo
UQs obtained by randomly pairing images and questions,
with an RoI Mixup procedure to generate more fine-grained
pseudo UQs, and model ensembling to regularize model
confidence. Experiments show that using pseudo UQs significantly outperforms RVQA baselines. RoI Mixup and
model ensembling further increase the gain. Finally, human evaluation reveals a performance gap between humans
and models, showing that more RVQA research is needed.
Code and dataset is released on https://github.
com/chihhuiho/RGQA.

1. Introduction
Visual Question Answering (VQA) is a challenging task
that requires a machine to understand a question in natural
language, perceive an image, and produce an answer. Despite extensive research in VQA [3, 12, 19, 36, 20, 42, 7,
54], little attention has been given to VQA robustness. In
this work, we consider robustness to unanswerable questions (UQs), which cannot be answered by image inspection, as in Fig. 1(b). This is opposed to the traditional answerable questions (AQ), such as in Fig. 1(a).
Lack of robustness to UQs is problematic because, in the
* The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

Cake
Regular Bot
Cake
Realistic Bot

(b) Which side of the
food should we cut?
Top
Regular Bot
UQ
Realistic Bot

(c) RGQA
Result

Figure 1: Realistic VQA. In VQA, a vision system answers a question by
inspection of an image. However, existing approaches have no awareness if
the question is answerable (AQ), such as in (a), or unanswerable (UQ), as
in (b). A realistic VQA system only answers AQs. (c) RVQA performance
of prior (yellow) vs. proposed (blue) models.

absence of image information, the VQA system frequently
resorts to the answer statistically most correlated with the
question. In the figure, the absence of food in (b) entices
the robot to pick the answer corresponding to the “side of
food” most commonly “cut” in the dataset, which happens
to be the “top” (perhaps because the dataset is rich in cake
images). The problem is that a decision by the robot to act
on this answer would be catastrophic for the cat in the scene.
More generally, the inability to reject UQs signals a deeper
perceptual deficiency and exposes VQA systems to attacks.
Vulnerability to UQs can create safety hazards for indoor
robots [2] or assistants for the visually impaired [14] and
reduces user trust in VQA models (see appendix for various examples from the recent large-scale BLIP model [29]).
When faced with a UQ, the VQA system should refuse to
answer or ask for more information. More precisely, it
should assess the question, decide to (a) “accept” or “reject” it, and only (b) answer the accepted questions. Since
this resembles the idea of a “realistic model” for classification [50, 48], we denote it realistic VQA (RVQA).
Although some prior works have addressed RVQA, existing formulations are not conducive to practical RVQA

15613

