This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Detection Transformer with Stable Matching
Shilong Liu1,2 *†, Tianhe Ren2∗ , Jiayu Chen3∗ ,
Zhaoyang Zeng2 , Hao Zhang2,4 , Feng Li2,4 , Hongyang Li2,5 ,
Jun Huang 3 , Hang Su1 , Jun Zhu1‡ , Lei Zhang2‡.
1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., BNRist Center, State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Sys.,
Institute for AI, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint Center for ML, Tsinghua University
2
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA) 3 Platform of AI (PAI), Alibaba Group
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
5
South China University of Technology
liusl20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn {rentianhe, zengzhaoyang}@idea.edu.cn {yunji.cjy, huangjun.hj}@alibaba-inc.com
{hzhangcx, fliay}@connect.ust.hk ftwangyeunglei@mail.scut.edu.cn {suhangss, dcszj}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn leizhang@idea.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper is concerned with the matching stability problem across different decoder layers in DEtection TRansformers (DETR). We point out that the unstable matching
in DETR is caused by a multi-optimization path problem,
which is highlighted by the one-to-one matching design in
DETR. To address this problem, we show that the most important design is to use and only use positional metrics (like
IOU) to supervise classification scores of positive examples.
Under the principle, we propose two simple yet effective
modifications by integrating positional metrics to DETR’s
classification loss and matching cost, named positionsupervised loss and position-modulated cost. We verify our
methods on several DETR variants. Our methods show consistent improvements over baselines. By integrating our
methods with DINO, we achieve 50.4 and 51.5 AP on the
COCO detection benchmark using ResNet-50 backbones
under 1× (12 epochs) and 2× (24 epochs) training settings,
achieving a new record under the same setting. We achieve
63.8 AP on COCO detection test-dev with a Swin-Large
backbone. Our code will be made available at https://
github.com/IDEA-Research/Stable-DINO.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental task in vision with
wide applications. Great progress has been made in the last
* Equal contributions. List order is random.
† This work was done when Shilong Liu, Hao Zhang, Feng Li, and

Hongyang Li were interns at IDEA.
‡ Corresponding authors.

Figure 1: Comparison of our methods (named Stable-DINO
in figures) and baselines. We compare models with ResNet50 backbones in the left figure and models with SwinTransformer Large backbones in the right figure. All models use a maximum 1/8 resolution feature map from a backbone, except AdaMixer uses a maximum 1/4 resolution feature map.
decades with the development of deep learning, especially
the convolutional neural network (CNN) [36, 14, 16, 7].
Detection Transformer (DETR) [3] proposed a novel
Transformer-based object detector, which attracted a lot
of interest in the research community. It gets rid of the
need for all hand-crafted modules and enables end-to-end
training. One key design in DETR is the matching strategy, which uses Hungarian matching to one-to-one assign
predictions to ground truth labels. Despite its novel designs, DETR also has certain limitations associated with
this innovative approach, including slow convergence and
inferior performance. Many follow-ups tried to improve
DETR from many perspectives, like introducing positional
prior [32, 41, 28, 14], extra positive examples [22, 4, 5],
and efficient operators [47, 34]. With many optimizations,

6491

