This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unified Data-Free Compression: Pruning and Quantization without Fine-Tuning
Shipeng Bai* Jun Chen* Xintian Shen

Yixuan Qian

Yong Liu†

College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University
[shipengbai, junc, 22132133, 22260066]@zju.edu.cn, yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Structured pruning and quantization are promising approaches for reducing the inference time and memory footprint of neural networks. However, most existing methods
require the original training dataset to fine-tune the model.
This not only brings heavy resource consumption but also
is not possible for applications with sensitive or proprietary
data due to privacy and security concerns. Therefore, a few
data-free methods are proposed to address this problem, but
they perform data-free pruning and quantization separately,
which does not explore the complementarity of pruning and
quantization. In this paper, we propose a novel framework
named Unified Data-Free Compression(UDFC), which performs pruning and quantization simultaneously without any
data and fine-tuning process. Specifically, UDFC starts
with the assumption that the partial information of a damaged(e.g., pruned or quantized) channel can be preserved
by a linear combination of other channels, and then derives the reconstruction form from the assumption to restore
the information loss due to compression. Finally, we formulate the reconstruction error between the original network and its compressed network, and theoretically deduce
the closed-form solution. We evaluate the UDFC on the
large-scale image classification task and obtain significant
improvements over various network architectures and compression methods. For example, we achieve a 20.54% accuracy improvement on ImageNet dataset compared to SOTA
method with 30% pruning ratio and 6-bit quantization on
ResNet-34. Code will be available at here.

1. Introduction
Model compression is the most common way to reduce
the memory footprint and computational costs of the model,
and it mainly includes two methods: pruning[22, 28, 4] and
quantization[8, 17, 43, 5, 3]. Among the pruning domain,
structured pruning[41, 36] is more actively studied than
unstructured pruning[20, 34] since it eliminates the whole
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

channel or even the layer of the model while not requiring
any special hardware or libraries for acceleration. Under
such conditions, we also focus our attention on structured
pruning in this paper. Quantization methods attempt to reduce the precision of the parameters and/or activations from
32-bit floating point to low-precision representations. Thus
the storage requirement for the model can be diminished
substantially, as well as the power consumption.
Although the existing compression methods achieve a
satisfactory compression ratio with a reasonable final performance, most of them require the original training data
for a tedious fine-tuning process. The fine-tuning process
is not only data-dependent but also computationally expensive, while users may not have access to sufficient or complete data in many real-world applications, such as medical data and user data. Therefore, data-free compression
methods are proposed, which don’t require any real data
and fine-tuning process. For instance, Data-free parameter
pruning[38] first introduces the data-independent technique
to remove the redundant neurons, and Neuron Merging[18]
extends the data-free method from fully connected layers to convolutional layers. Meanwhile, there exist some
methods using the synthetic samples to perform the finetuning process, such as Dream[44]. In the field of quantization, recent works propose post-training quantization
methods[32, 2, 45, 24, 6, 46] that use the synthetic data to
replace the real data for quantization and achieve the SOTA
results. For instance, ZeroQ [2] uses the distilled data that
matches the statistics of batch normalization layers to perform post-training quantization. DSG[45] proposes a novel
Diverse Sample Generation scheme to enhance the diversity
of synthetic samples, resulting in better performance.
However, some problems still hinder the deployment of
data-free compression. On the one hand, the latest datafree quantization approaches focus on improving the quality
of synthetic samples rather than releasing the quantization
from its dependence on data. In this case, generating the
synthetic samples introduces extra computational costs. On
the other hand, current approaches perform data-free pruning and quantization separately, which does not explore the
complementarity of weight pruning and quantization.

5876

