This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Semantic Subspace Traverser: Empowering 3D Generative Model
with Shape Editing Capability
Ruowei Wang

Yu Liu

Qijun ZhaoB

Pei Su
Jianwei Zhang
Sichuan University

{ruoweiwang, liuyuvincent, supei}@stu.scu.edu.cn

{zhangjianwei, qjzhao}@scu.edu.cn

Part-level
Interpolation

Abstract
SP-GAN

Shape generation is the practice of producing 3D shapes
as various representations for 3D content creation. Previous studies on 3D shape generation have focused on shape
quality and structure, without or less considering the importance of semantic information. Consequently, such generative models often fail to preserve the semantic consistency
of shape structure or enable manipulation of the semantic
attributes of shapes during generation. In this paper, we
proposed a novel semantic generative model named 3D Semantic Subspace Traverser that utilizes semantic attributes
for category-specific 3D shape generation and editing. Our
method utilizes implicit functions as the 3D shape representation and combines a novel latent-space GAN with a linear subspace model to discover semantic dimensions in the
local latent space of 3D shapes. Each dimension of the subspace corresponds to a particular semantic attribute, and
we can edit the attributes of generated shapes by traversing
the coefficients of those dimensions. Experimental results
demonstrate that our method can produce plausible shapes
with complex structures and enable the editing of semantic
attributes. The code and trained models are available at
https://github.com/TrepangCat/3D Semantic Subspace Tra
verser

1. Introduction
Building a generative model to synthesize 3D shapes is
a predominant topic in computer graphics and 3D vision
since it is widely used in applications such as 3D content
creation/reconstruction [9, 20, 44, 42], autonomous driving
[3, 7, 16], AR/VR [21], and robotics [19, 57]. Typically,
a 3D shape generative model takes a random vector as input and produces a 3D shape as output. To evaluate the effectiveness of generative models, researchers consider three
aspects: quality, diversity, and controllability. The ideal
3D shape generative model should produce visually realistic and diverse 3D shapes while also enabling local structure

Inconsistent Results
Optimizing

MM-VADs

Editing Sketch

Subspace

Extra Arms

Traversing
In The Subspace

Ours
The Latent Space of 3D Shapes

Reasonable Semantic Structure

Figure 1. Different Editing Paradigm. Since SP-GAN is a point
cloud generative model, we present its results as point clouds. As
illustrated, the first row shows a typical method using part-level
interpolation for shape editing. The second row is an example of
the optimization-based method for shape editing. The last row
shows how we traverse the local linear subspace to produce edited
shapes with reasonable semantic structures.

manipulation to achieve controllability.
Previous 3D shape generative models like variational autoencoder (VAE) [18, 37, 39, 65, 61], generative adversarial
network (GAN) [60, 1, 38, 8, 29, 34, 69], flow-based models [64, 35, 33], and diffusion models [48, 66, 48, 70] have
been applied to various 3D representations, including point
clouds [1], voxels [60], mesh [18] and so on. By adopting
the rapidly developed implicit function-based shape representation [8, 4, 53], the generated shapes show promising
quality and diversity [69]. However, the ability to control
and manipulate the local structures of generated shapes during the generation process remains a challenging task. It is
crucial to develop methods for effective shape control that
allows for the modification of local structures during the
generation process.
Previous methods that edit local shapes can be classified into two groups: interpolation-based methods [58, 61,
38, 51, 26, 39, 43, 40] and optimization-based methods

14406

