This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Localizing Moments in Long Video Via Multimodal Guidance
Wayner Barrios1 , Mattia Soldan2 , Alberto Mario Ceballos-Arroyo3 ,
Fabian Caba Heilbron4 , Bernard Ghanem2
1

Dartmouth

2

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST) 3 Northeastern University

Abstract
Audio
The recent introduction of the large-scale, long-form
MAD and Ego4D datasets has enabled researchers to investigate the performance of current state-of-the-art methods for video grounding in the long-form setup, with interesting findings: current grounding methods alone fail at
tackling this challenging task and setup due to their inability to process long video sequences. In this paper, we
propose a method for improving the performance of natural language grounding in long videos by identifying and
pruning out non-describable windows. We design a guided
grounding framework consisting of a Guidance Model and
a base grounding model. The Guidance Model emphasizes
describable windows, while the base grounding model analyzes short temporal windows to determine which segments
accurately match a given language query. We offer two designs for the Guidance Model: Query-Agnostic and QueryDependent, which balance efficiency and accuracy. Experiments demonstrate that our proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art models by 4.1% in MAD and 4.52%
in Ego4D (NLQ), respectively. Code, data and MAD’s
audio features necessary to reproduce our experiments
are available at: https://github.com/waybarrios/guidancebased-video-grounding.

1. Introduction
The task of grounding natural language in long-form
videos within large-scale datasets, such as MAD [33] and
Ego4D [12], can be particularly challenging due to the possibility of encountering many video segments that do not
contain any interesting or relevant moments to search for.
Given the large search space, it is critical to develop approaches that can quickly scan the video and identify queryable moments via natural language.
For instance, Figure 1 illustrates various moments occurring in a long-form video, where certain moments could
have greater relevance than others based on the video’s storytelling. The dialogue moment, which spans more than

4

Adobe Research

Speech

Bark

Splash

Speech

Bark

Splash

Audio
52:15 -– 55:43
52:15
55:43

31:00 -–34:31
31:00
34:31

…

Video

Video

Non-describable

Non-Describable

Describable

Describable

Long-range Movie Sequence

Language
Query

Language
Query

Full Movie Sequence
“a dog jumps to rescue a little girl”

“A dog jumps in the pool to
rescue a little girl.”

Figure 1: Describable Window. We depict the difference between describable and non-describable windows. The former are
temporal windows with relevant visual and auditory events that
are likely to contain one or more noteworthy moments. The latter can be categorized as “boring” video segments (temporal windows) where little happens and no moment of interest happens for
grounding.

three minutes, would only be described as “two people sitting at a table”, whereas the action scene contains many
moments that can be described, such as “a girl falling into
a pool”, “a dog opening a fence”, and “a dog jumps to
rescue a little girl”. This demonstrates that certain slices
within a video can contain numerous notable moments that
users would be highly interested in searching for.
In consequence, we introduce the concept of Describable windows (as shown in Figure 1), which are video
slices shorter than the original long-form video and have
a high probability of containing remarkable and relevant
visual moments that can be queried through natural language. Conversely, video slices that do not contain such
visually-rich moments that cannot be queried through
natural language are considered non-describable windows.

13667

