This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SpinCam: High-Speed Imaging via a Rotating Point-Spread Function
Dorian Chan, Mark Sheinin, and Matthew O’Toole
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
dychan@andrew.cmu.edu, marksheinin@gmail.com, mpotoole@cmu.edu

Time

Abstract
High-speed cameras are an indispensable tool used for
the slow-motion analysis of scenes. However, the fixed
bandwidth of any imaging system quickly becomes a bottleneck, resulting in a fundamental trade-off between the
camera’s spatial and temporal resolutions. In recent years,
compressive high-speed imaging systems have been proposed to circumvent these issues by optically encoding the
signal and using a reconstruction procedure to recover a
video. Our work proposes a novel approach for compressive high-speed imaging based on temporally coding
the camera’s point-spread function (PSF). By mechanically
spinning a diffraction grating in front of a camera, the sensor integrates an image blurred by a PSF that continuously
rotates over time. We also propose a deconvolution-based
reconstruction algorithm to reconstruct videos from these
measurements. Our method achieves superior light efficiency and handles a wider scene class than prior methods. Also, our mechanical design yields flexible temporal
resolution that can be easily increased, potentially allowing capture at 192 kHz—far higher than prior works. We
demonstrate a prototype for various applications, including
motion capture and particle image velocimetry (PIV).

The world is full of high-speed events that are imperceptible to both the human eye and most conventional cameras (e.g., the flicker of electric lights or the motion of fastmoving objects). The traditional approach to capturing such
events is using slow-motion photography, i.e., use a camera
to shoot images at a high frame rate and display the results
at a lower frame rate. Slow-motion photography is often
used for artistic effects in film and as a measurement tool
in scientific applications. However, despite significant advancements in sensor technology, conventional high-speed
cameras tend to be expensive, bulky, and have high throughput requirements for recording visual content at both high
frame rates and high spatial resolutions. These hardware
limitations set an upper limit to the cameras’ capture rates.

Time

Capture long exposure frame with rotating PSF
Reconstruction

1. Introduction

Time

Long
exposure
Time

Time

Time

Recover high-speed video
Figure 1. Principle of high-speed imaging with a rotating
diffraction grating. A camera captures a long exposure image of
a moving scene. During the camera’s exposure period, the diffraction grating placed in front of the camera continuously rotates to
generate a time-varying point-spread function (PSF) that encodes
scene dynamics into a single frame. Solving a deconvolution problem yields a high-speed video from the captured frame.

Compressed sensing provides a framework to circumvent such issues. Since videos are highly compressible, it
is possible to recover a video from a single snapshot by (i)
compressively recording spatiotemporal visual information
onto a sensor and (ii) solving a reconstruction problem to recover the video using priors on the visual content. Among
the large body of work in compressive high-speed imaging, most techniques temporally modulate the light incident
on sensor pixels [48, 12, 20, 22, 9, 34, 32, 35, 14, 16, 19,

10789

