This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Clusterformer: Cluster-based Transformer for 3D Object Detection in Point
Clouds
Yu Pei†

Xian Zhao†

Hao Li Jingyuan Ma Jingwei Zhang
HikVision Research Institute

Shiliang Pu*

{peiyu, zhaoxian, lihao85, majingyuan, zhangjingwei6, pushiliang.hri}@hikvision.com

Abstract
Attributed to the unstructured and sparse nature of point
clouds, the transformer shows greater potential in point
clouds data processing. However, the recent query-based
3D detectors usually project the features acquired from a
sparse backbone into the structured and compact Bird’s Eye
View(BEV) plane before adopting the transformer, which
destroys the sparsity of features, introducing empty tokens
and additional resource consumption for the transformer.
To this end, in this paper, we propose a novel query-based
3D detector called Clusterformer, our Clusterformer regards each object as a cluster of 3D space which mainly
consists of the non-empty voxels belonging to the same object, and leverages the cluster to conduct the transformer
decoder to generate the proposals from the sparse voxel features directly. Such cluster-based transformer structure can
effectively improve the performance and convergence speed
of query-based detectors by making use of the object prior
information contained in the clusters. Additionally, we introduce a Query2Key strategy to enhance the key and value
features with the object-level information iteratively in our
cluster-based transformer structure. Experimental results
show that the proposed Clusterformer outperforms the previous query-based detectors with a lower latency and memory usage, which achieves state-of-the-art performance on
the Waymo Open Datasets and KITTI Datasets.

1. Introduction
LiDAR 3D object detection is a fundamental task in various application fields such as autonomous driving systems
and robotics navigation, which has attained wide attention
in recent years [27, 39, 34, 26, 14, 41]. Unlike the images with a regular structure in the 2D tasks, the point
clouds from LiDAR sensors are unstructured and sparse,
making it challenging to directly adopt the convolution neural network (CNN). To tackle this challenge, some detec† Equal contribution, *Corresponding author.

Figure 1. (a): The illustration of our cluster-based query initialization and interaction range. We group the foreground non-empty
voxels into different clusters(shown in different colors) based on
center voting, and leverage the cluster center(represented by purple rectangle) to initialize the queries. Additionally, we limit the
interaction range in the same cluster to make the query only focus
on an interest region. (b): Visualization of the attention map in
proposed intra-cluster cross-attention(the red color denotes higher
attention weight), which shows that the queries can adaptively aggregate crucial voxel features(such as the roof and corner area of
a vehicle) in each cluster by the intra-cluster cross-attention.

tors [27, 21, 35, 38] extract geometric features directly from
point clouds based on the PointNet [22] or PointNet++ [23],
while other approaches [34, 26, 14, 25] voxelize the raw
point clouds into discrete grids then utilize standard CNN.
Witnessing the remarkable research achievements in vision tasks [5, 17, 2, 42], the transformer has also drawn
growing attention in point clouds processing recently [18,
7, 12, 41, 1, 6, 20], and shows greater potential compared to CNN and PointNet since it can directly process sparse variable-length point clouds and holds powerful ability in capturing contextual dependencies among
points. Among them, [41, 1, 6, 20] mainly leverage the
transformer decoder to generate the detections from a set
of predefined queries in an end-to-end manner which are
also called query-based detectors. Following the currently
mainstream grid-based detectors, these query-based detectors also project the sparse features into the BEV plane
before adopting the transformer. Although we can obtain meaningful initial queries based on the learned BEV

6664

