This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Narrator: Towards Natural Control of Human-Scene Interaction Generation
via Relationship Reasoning
Haibiao Xuan1

Xiongzheng Li1 Jinsong Zhang1 Hongwen Zhang2 Yebin Liu2 Kun Li1,∗
1
Tianjin University 2 Tsinghua University
{hbxuan, lxz, jinszhang, lik}@tju.edu.cn {zhanghongwen, liuyebin}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
http://cic.tju.edu.cn/faculty/likun/projects/Narrator

(a)
A person sits on a chair
near a sink.

A person touches the wall
between two chairs.

A person stands by a window
and a bed.

A person sits on the sofa and
places right foot on the sofa.

A person stands and bends down
to touch the table with right hand.

A person sits on a chair and
touches a table with head down.

(b)

(c)

Three persons stand near a bed.

Many persons sit around the table.

(d)

Figure 1: Given a textual description, our approach can naturally and controllably generate semantically consistent and physically plausible human-scene interactions for various cases: (a) interactions guided by spatial relationships, (b) interactions
guided by multiple actions, (c) multi-human scene interactions, and (d) human-scene interactions combining the above interaction types, which cannot be generated using prior works.

Abstract
Naturally controllable human-scene interaction (HSI)
generation has an important role in various fields, such as
VR/AR content creation and human-centered AI. However,
existing methods are unnatural and unintuitive in their controllability, which heavily limits their application in practice. Therefore, we focus on a challenging task of naturally and controllably generating realistic and diverse HSIs
from textual descriptions. From human cognition, the ideal
generative model should correctly reason about spatial relationships and interactive actions. To that end, we propose Narrator, a novel relationship reasoning-based gen-

erative approach using a conditional variation autoencoder
for naturally controllable generation given a 3D scene and
a textual description. Also, we model global and local spatial relationships in a 3D scene and a textual description
respectively based on the scene graph, and introduce a partlevel action mechanism to represent interactions as atomic
body part states. In particular, benefiting from our relationship reasoning, we further propose a simple yet effective
multi-human generation strategy, which is the first exploration for controllable multi-human scene interaction generation. Our extensive experiments and perceptual studies
show that Narrator can controllably generate diverse interactions and significantly outperform existing works.

* Corresponding author

22268

