This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gradient-based Sampling for Class Imbalanced Semi-supervised Object
Detection
Jiaming Li1,2 *† Xiangru Lin2∗ Wei Zhang2 Xiao Tan2 Yingying Li2
Junyu Han2 Errui Ding2 Jingdong Wang2 Guanbin Li1,3‡
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc., China
3
Research Institute, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
lijm48@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn
{linxiangru,zhangwei99,tanxiao01,liyingying05,hanjunyu,dingerrui,wangjingdong}@baidu.com

Abstract

1. Introduction

Current semi-supervised object detection (SSOD) algorithms typically assume class balanced datasets (PASCAL
VOC etc.) or slightly class imbalanced datasets (MSCOCO, etc). This assumption can be easily violated since
real world datasets can be extremely class imbalanced in
nature, thus making the performance of semi-supervised object detectors far from satisfactory. Besides, the research
for this problem in SSOD is severely under-explored. To
bridge this research gap, we comprehensively study the
class imbalance problem for SSOD under more challenging scenarios, thus forming the ﬁrst experimental setting
for class imbalanced SSOD (CI-SSOD). Moreover, we propose a simple yet effective gradient-based sampling framework that tackles the class imbalance problem from the
perspective of two types of conﬁrmation biases. To tackle
conﬁrmation bias towards majority classes, the gradientbased reweighting and gradient-based thresholding modules leverage the gradients from each class to fully balance the inﬂuence of the majority and minority classes. To
tackle the conﬁrmation bias from incorrect pseudo labels
of minority classes, the class-rebalancing sampling module resamples unlabeled data following the guidance of
the gradient-based reweighting module. Experiments on
three proposed sub-tasks, namely MS-COCO, MS-COCO
→ Object365 and LVIS, suggest that our method outperforms current class imbalanced object detectors by clear
margins, serving as a baseline for future research in CISSOD. Code will be available at https://github.
com/nightkeepers/CI-SSOD.

* Equally-contributed authors.
† Work done during an internship at Baidu.
‡ Corresponding author.

16390

Different types of objects in nature appear at different
frequencies, and there is bound to be class imbalance in the
dataset corresponding to object detection. Class imbalance
refers to the scenario when a number of classes are overrepresented (also known as majority classes), having more
samples than others (also known as minority classes) in the
dataset. Semi-supervised object detection (SSOD) utilizes
both labeled and unlabeled data to improve the performance
of an object detector. Although current SSOD methods have
achieved promising performance on standard benchmark
datasets (MS-COCO, PASCAL VOC, etc), these datasets
are assumed to be class balanced or slightly class imbalanced. This underlying assumption can be easily violated
when applying current SSOD methods to real-world scenarios where datasets are extremely class imbalanced in nature.
For example, the sample distribution of corner cases in autonomous driving is scarce. As a result, the performance
of these SSOD methods often suffers, especially for those
minority classes. Besides, the research efforts dedicated to
tackling the class imbalance problem in SSOD are severely
under-explored.
In contrast, there are extensive literature on learning a
class-balanced detector in supervised settings such as Longtailed object detection (LTOD) and Few-shot object detection (FSOD). LTOD balances the inﬂuence of majority
and minority classes by data re-sampling [6, 36] and classbalanced losses [32, 16]. Current FSOD methods transfer
knowledge learned from the majority classes to the minority classes by ﬁne-tuning [26, 12] or meta-learning-based
strategies [15, 9]. However, both LTOD and FSOD methods are devised in a supervised manner and thus cannot
fully exploit the potential information in unlabeled data,
making them prone to overﬁt the limited labeled images
of minority classes. Besides, an increasing number of re-

