This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalizable Decision Boundaries: Dualistic Meta-Learning for
Open Set Domain Generalization
Xiran Wang1
Jian Zhang1
1
Nanjing University

2

Lei Qi2
Yinghuan Shi1 *
Southeast University

{zzwdx, zhangjian7369}@smail.nju.edu.cn, qilei@seu.edu.cn, syh@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain generalization (DG) is proposed to deal with the
issue of domain shift, which occurs when statistical differences exist between source and target domains. However,
most current methods do not account for a common realistic
scenario where the source and target domains have different
classes. To overcome this deficiency, open set domain generalization (OSDG) then emerges as a more practical setting
to recognize unseen classes in unseen domains. An intuitive
approach is to use multiple one-vs-all classifiers to define
decision boundaries for each class and reject the outliers as
unknown. However, the significant class imbalance between
positive and negative samples often causes the boundaries
biased towards positive ones, resulting in misclassification
for known samples in the unseen target domain. In this paper,
we propose a novel meta-learning-based framework called
dualistic MEta-learning with joint DomaIn-Class matching (MEDIC), which considers gradient matching towards
inter-domain and inter-class splits simultaneously to find a
generalizable boundary balanced for all tasks. Experimental results demonstrate that MEDIC not only outperforms
previous methods in open set scenarios, but also maintains
competitive close set generalization ability at the same time.
Our code is available at https://github.com/zzwdx/MEDIC.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved enormous success
in a wide range of computer vision tasks, usually assuming
that the training and test samples are drawn from the same
data distribution and label space. However, due to the un* Corresponding author: Yinghuan Shi. Xiran Wang, Jian Zhang and
Yinghuan Shi are with the State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology and National Institute of Healthcare Data Science, Nanjing University, China. Lei Qi is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Southeast University, China. This work is supported by NSFC Program
(62222604, 62206052, 62192783), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation Project (2023T160100), Jiangsu Natural Science Foundation Project
(BK20210224), and CCF-Lenovo Bule Ocean Research Fund.

Figure 1. An example for the variation of decision boundaries of a
one-vs-all classifier in open set domain generalization.

predictability of real-world application scenarios, the model
faces the risk of performance degradation when the above
constraints are not satisfied [26]. Domain generalization
(DG) [46] is then motivated as a more realistic setting to deal
with data distribution shift, which refers to using multiple
source domains via data augmentation [29,53], feature alignment [10, 27], meta-learning [23, 25] and so on, to obtain
a model with the generalization ability that can be directly
applied to arbitrary unseen target domains.
Most current domain generalization researches are based
on the assumption of close set recognition, i.e., the classes
in the source domains are consistent with that of the target
domains. However, in practice, the deployed model is often
exposed to some new classes that have never been encountered in the training phase [40]. For example, in self-driving
tasks, thousands of objects are fed into the model that the
known label space cannot guarantee complete coverage of
them; in medical image processing tasks, some diseases are
extremely rare that it is unrealistic to acquire their samples
for training. According to the logic of close set classification, these potential objects are forced to be identified into a
known class, which lays hidden dangers for the model’s robustness and security. To address this problem, it is necessary
to investigate a more practical setting of open set domain generalization (OSDG), which focuses on recognizing unknown
classes without losing the original classification accuracy.
In open set domain generalization [21, 43], the key is to
concurrently deal with the problems of domain shift and
category shift. We now turn our attention to a simple yet
elegant learning paradigm, meta-learning [19], which has

11564

