This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stable and Causal Inference for Discriminative Self-supervised Deep Visual
Representations
Yuewei Yang, Hai Li, Yiran Chen
Duke University
Durham, USA
yuewei.yang@duke.edu, hai.li@duke.edu, yiran.chen@duke.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Learning generalized representation with unlabeled data
is a challenging task in various fields, but Self-Supervised
Learning (SSL) has recently demonstrated remarkable success in learning semantic invariant representations without
labels [40, 41, 53]. There are two main types of selfsupervised learning (SSL) based on the pretext task used:
generative and discriminative SSL, with generative SSL reconstructing altered or distorted data to its original input
[9, 28, 31, 59, 65, 71]and early discriminative SSL predicting easily designed labels and task-specific representations
that are not very generalizable [25, 57, 75]. More recent

f (x)

z
Align (z, z̃)

Downstream
Task

z̃

f (x)

In recent years, discriminative self-supervised methods
have made significant strides in advancing various visual
tasks. The central idea of learning a data encoder that is
robust to data distortions/augmentations is straightforward
yet highly effective. Although many studies have demonstrated the empirical success of various learning methods,
the resulting learned representations can exhibit instability
and hinder downstream performance. In this study, we analyze discriminative self-supervised methods from a causal
perspective to explain these unstable behaviors and propose
solutions to overcome them. Our approach draws inspiration from prior works that empirically demonstrate the
ability of discriminative self-supervised methods to demix
ground truth causal sources to some extent. Unlike previous work on causality-empowered representation learning, we do not apply our solutions during the training process but rather during the inference process to improve time
efficiency. Through experiments on both controlled image
datasets and realistic image datasets, we show that our proposed solutions, which involve tempering a linear transformation with controlled synthetic data, are effective in addressing these issues.

Training

Score
0.99
0.52

Inferencing
Figure 1: During the training of discriminative SSL, aligning positive representations will be robust to the changes
applied as augmentations (red arrows). However, during the
inference stage, one small change in the data variable (such
as view angle) will result in an unexpected degradation on
downstream performance.

discriminative SSL trains the model to identify similarities and differences between pairs of augmented examples
[7, 10, 11, 26, 29, 74]. The success of SSL in deep image models has resulted in progress in other data modalities
[53, 52, 54, 61, 62] and attention-based models like transformers [12, 8, 49, 72]. Recent discriminative SSL aims
to learn content and semantic invariant representations that
are robust to data augmentations, but the learned representations can be unstable when one subtle factor of the data
is changed to a value that is not accessible through all augmentations. To avoid the high cost of incorporating all possible subtle changes during training, insights are needed to
uncover the root cause of instability and find a solution to
prevent performance deterioration during inference. Figure
1 summarizes this deterioration effect.
Causality [60] is a vital tool to investigate the causal

16109

