This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ProtoFL: Unsupervised Federated Learning via Prototypical Distillation
Hansol Kim* 1 , Youngjun Kwak* 12 , Minyoung Jung3 , Jinho Shin1 , Youngsung Kim4 , and Changick Kim†2
1

KakaoBank Corp., South Korea
Department of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, South Korea
3
KETI, Korea Electronics Technology Institute, South Korea
4
Inha University, South Korea
2

{han.kim,vivaan.yjkwak,william.shin}@lab.kakaobank.com, {yjk.kwak,changick}@kaist.ac.kr,
minyoung.jung@keti.re.kr, y.kim@inha.ac.kr

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is a promising approach for
enhancing data privacy preservation, particularly for authentication systems. However, limited round communications, scarce representation, and scalability pose significant challenges to its deployment, hindering its full potential. In this paper, we propose ‘ProtoFL’, Prototypical
Representation Distillation based unsupervised Federated
Learning to enhance the representation power of a global
model and reduce round communication costs. Additionally, we introduce a local one-class classifier based on normalizing flows to improve performance with limited data.
Our study represents the first investigation of using FL
to improve one-class classification performance. We conduct extensive experiments on five widely used benchmarks,
namely MNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, ImageNet-30, and
Keystroke-Dynamics, to demonstrate the superior performance of our proposed framework over previous methods
in the literature.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been a growing concern about
privacy, leading people to hesitate when it comes to uploading their biological data to central data servers. Moreover,
companies that possess personal information from users are
strictly bound by the General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) [44]. To address these privacy issues, Federated
Learning (FL), an emerging distributed data parallel machine learning approach, has been proposed. FL leverages the decentralized data available on individual clients
to collaboratively train a shared global model on a mediator
server without the need to share personal data.
* These authors contributed equally to this work
† Corresponding author

Distribute

Distribute

Prototypical
representation
Distilling

Figure 1: Visualization of extreme non-i.i.d. (α =0.0 is
a concentration parameter of Dirichlet distribution) data
based FL schema shows that each device has only the data
from its target class not shared among all joined devices,
and prototypical representation is distributed separately to
corresponding joined clients in secure from a central server.

In the context of FL, where data is decentralized across
individual clients, one-class classification (OCC) can be
used. This is because that OCC can determine whether a
new example belongs to the target distribution or not. Despite not using data from the non-target class, OCC has
shown impressive performance [31, 38, 43, 42, 39, 40, 15,
28]. In computer vision applications, OCC is particularly
useful for detecting fraud, defects, and unauthorized users.
Recent advancements in biometric authentication have
highlighted the importance of FL-based OCC in computer
vision (e.g., user-defined embedding-based methods [17,
26] and data-driven methods [2, 24, 32]). However, FLbased OCC methods face significant challenges, including
high communication costs, limited representation, and unstable learning processes. Additionally, centralized server-

6470

