This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MetaBEV: Solving Sensor Failures for 3D Detection and Map Segmentation
Chongjian Ge1∗ Junsong Chen3,1∗ Enze Xie2† Zhongdao Wang2
Lanqing Hong2 Huchuan Lu3 Zhenguo Li2 Ping Luo1,4†
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Dalian University of Technology 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
rhettgee@connect.hku.hk

jschen@mail.dlut.edu.cn

lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn

{xie.enze,wangzhongdao,honglanqing,li.zhenguo}@huawei.com

pluo@cs.hku.hk

Labels

MetaBEV BEVFusion

Project page: https://chongjiange.github.io/metabev.html

Missing
Camera

Missing
LiDAR

Missing
Camera

Missing
LiDAR

View
Noise

Obstacle
Occlusion

Limited
Field

Beams
Reduction

Figure 1. Selected 3D prediction results under various sensor failures. MetaBEV shows stronger robustness on both map segmentation
and 3D detection compared to the representative multi-modal method, e.g., BEVFusion [25]. Notably, in case of an entire sensor absent
(e.g., Camera or LiDAR), MetaBEV provides satisfactory outcomes while existing methods fail to. Top two rows: 3D prediction results.
Bottom row: the corresponding ground truths.

Abstract
Perception systems in modern autonomous driving vehicles typically take inputs from complementary multi-modal
sensors, e.g., LiDAR and cameras. However, in realworld applications, sensor corruptions and failures lead
to inferior performances, thus compromising autonomous
safety. In this paper, we propose a robust framework, called
MetaBEV, to address extreme real-world environments, involving overall six sensor corruptions and two extreme
sensor-missing situations. In MetaBEV, signals from multiple sensors are first processed by modal-specific encoders.
Subsequently, a set of dense BEV queries are initialized,
termed meta-BEV. These queries are then processed iteratively by a BEV-Evolving decoder, which selectively aggregates deep features from either LiDAR, cameras, or both

modalities. The updated BEV representations are further
leveraged for multiple 3D prediction tasks. Additionally,
we introduce a new M{}^{\mbox {\small 2}} oE structure to alleviate the performance drop on distinct tasks in multi-task joint learning. Finally, MetaBEV is evaluated on the nuScenes dataset with
3D object detection and BEV map segmentation tasks. Experiments show MetaBEV outperforms prior arts by a large
margin on both full and corrupted modalities. For instance,
when the LiDAR signal is missing, MetaBEV improves
35.5% detection NDS and 17.7% segmentation mIoU upon
the vanilla BEVFusion [25] model; and when the camera
signal is absent, MetaBEV still achieves 69.2% NDS and
53.7% mIoU, which is even higher than previous works that
perform on full-modalities. Moreover, MetaBEV performs
moderately against previous methods in both canonical perception and multi-task learning settings, refreshing state-ofthe-art nuScenes BEV map segmentation with 70.4% mIoU.

0 ∗ Equal contribution.
0 † Corresponding authors.

8721

