This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Domain Generalization via Balancing Training Difficulty and Model Capability
Xueying Jiang, Jiaxing Huang, Sheng Jin, Shijian Lu*
S-lab, Nanyang Technological University
xueying003@e.ntu.edu.sg
{Jiaxing.Huang, Sheng.Jin, Shijian.Lu}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) [23, 30, 48] have
achieved significant progress in recent years with numerous
network architectures and learning algorithms designed for
various discriminative tasks. In the area of computer vision,
DNNs have achieved great success in various visual recognition tasks such as image segmentation [7, 58, 52], object
detection [45, 5], etc. However, deep network training often
suffers from a misfitting problem, being either over-fitting
or under-fitting due to the misalignment between the capacity of networks under training and the complexity of train* Corresponding author.

Too hard

Under-fitting

Challenges

Domain generalization (DG) aims to learn domaingeneralizable models from one or multiple source domains
that can perform well in unseen target domains. Despite
its recent progress, most existing work suffers from the misalignment between the difficulty level of training samples
and the capability of contemporarily trained models, leading to over-fitting or under-fitting in the trained generalization model. We design MoDify, a Momentum Difficulty
framework that tackles the misalignment by balancing the
seesaw between the model’s capability and the samples’ difficulties along the training process. MoDify consists of two
novel designs that collaborate to fight against the misalignment while learning domain-generalizable models. The
first is MoDify-based Data Augmentation which exploits an
RGB Shuffle technique to generate difficulty-aware training samples on the fly. The second is MoDify-based Network Optimization which dynamically schedules the training samples for balanced and smooth learning with appropriate difficulty. Without bells and whistles, a simple implementation of MoDify achieves superior performance across
multiple benchmarks. In addition, MoDify can complement
existing methods as a plug-in, and it is generic and can work
for different visual recognition tasks.

Too easy

Over-fitting

Basic
Difficulty

Skills

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed MoDify framework. Training domain-generalizable models often suffer from clear underfitting (or over-fitting) if keep feeding over-difficult (or over-easy)
training samples, especially at the early (or later) training stage,
both leading to degraded generalization of the trained models
(as illustrated in yellow/blue lines). Inspired by the Flow Theory [16] that a learner usually has better learning outcome when
the learner’s skill and the task difficulty are well aligned (i.e., lying within the Flow Channel), the proposed MoDify schedules the
training samples adaptively according to the alignment between
the sample difficulty and the capability of contemporarily trained
models (as illustrated in red line).

ing data. While applying a misfit deep network model to the
data from a different domain, the misfitting problem can be
greatly enlarged due to the distribution bias and distribution
shift across domains.
Domain generalization aims to mitigate the misfitting
problem by learning a domain generalizable model that can
work well in new domains. It has been widely studied via
different augmentation strategies, e.g., domain randomization [41, 56, 26, 51], feature augmentation [31, 40, 11], and
data augmentation [61, 39], targeting to obtain generalization capability by seeing more training data with various
diverse characteristics. However, the aforementioned methods mostly neglect the misalignment between the difficulty
level of training samples and the capability of the contem-

18993

