This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Human Mesh Recovery with Sequentially Global Rotation Estimation
Dongkai Wang Shiliang Zhang
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
{dongkai.wang, slzhang.jdl}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

1

Model-based 3D human mesh recovery aims to reconstruct a 3D human body mesh by estimating its parameters from monocular RGB images. Most of recent works
adopt the Skinned Multi-Person Linear (SMPL) model to
regress relative rotations for each body joint along the kinematics chain. This pipeline needs to transform each relative rotation matrix into a global rotation matrix to articulate the canonical mesh, and suffers from accumulated
errors along the kinematics chain. This paper proposes to
directly estimate the global rotation of each joint to avoid
error accumulation and pursue better accuracy. The proposed Sequentially Global Rotation Estimation (SGRE) directly predicts the global rotation matrix of each joint on
the kinematics chain. SGRE features a residual learning
module to leverage complementary features and previously
predicted rotations of parent joints to guide the estimation
of subsequent child joints. Thanks to this global estimation
pipeline and residual learning module, SGRE alleviates error accumulation and produces more accurate 3D human
mesh. It can be flexibly integrated into existing regressionbased methods and achieves superior performance on various benchmarks. For example, it improves the latest method
3DCrowdNet by 3.3 mm MPJPE and 5.0 mm PVE on 3DPW
dataset and 3.0 AP on COCO dataset, respectively† .

1. Introduction
3D human mesh recovery aims to estimate the 3D surface mesh of a human body from monocular RGB images.
It has a wide range of applications in human-object interaction, action recognition and virtual/augmented reality.
Thanks to parametric human body models [2, 29, 33], 3D
human mesh recovery can be simplified, i.e., a realistic 3D
mesh of human body can be generated by a few parameters
like shape parameters and joint rotations. Most of recent
3D human mesh recovery methods can be regarded as the
† Code & Model: https://github.com/kennethwdk/SGRE

root

4

5

Joint angle error (°)

3

2

22
21
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12

relative
global

root

hip

knee ankle

toe

(a)
(b)
Figure 1. (a) Illustration of the five kinematics chains in SMPL
model. (b) Visualization of the joint rotation angle error along one
of kinematics chain from root to toe. It can be observed that error
increases along the chain, and our global estimation gets more accurate joint rotation than the relative estimation.

model-based method, which estimates shape and rotation
parameters to recover the 3D human mesh.
Current model-based human mesh recovery methods can
be summarized into two categories according to their followed pipelines. Optimization-based approaches [4, 25] estimate the body pose and shape parameters by an iterative
fitting process. Parameters of the statistical model are tuned
to reduce the error between its 2D projection and 2D evidences, e.g., 2D joint locations and silhouette, which can
be obtained by current advanced methods [5, 40, 38, 39].
These methods can typically produce well-aligned results,
but could take a long time because the optimization is nonconvex. These methods are also sensitive to the initialization. Regression-based methods adopt the powerful neural
networks to directly regress model parameters [18, 22, 7],
which have exhibited promising results. To tackle the difficulty of non-linear mapping from input image to parameter space, many regression-based methods have been proposed [27, 15, 42]. More detailed review of existing methods can be found in Sec. 2.
Existing regression-based methods regress the relative
rotation matrix for each joint with respect to (w.r.t) their
parent joints along the kinematics chain as illustrated in
Fig. 1 (a). This design is partially because parametric body

14953

