This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantic Information in Contrastive Learning
Shengjiang Quan1 ,* Masahiro Hirano2 and Yuji Yamakawa3
1
Graduate School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, Japan
2
Institute of Industrial Science, The University of Tokyo, Japan
3
Interfaculty Initiative in Information Studies, The University of Tokyo, Japan
quan@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp, {mhirano, y-ymkw}@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
This work investigates the functionality of Semantic information in Contrastive Learning (SemCL). An advanced
pretext task is designed: a contrast is performed between
each object and its environment, taken from a scene. This
allows the SemCL pretrained model to extract objects from
their environment in an image, significantly improving the
spatial understanding of the pretrained models. Downstream
tasks of semantic/instance segmentation, object detection
and depth estimation are implemented on PASCAl VOC,
Cityscapes, COCO, KITTI, etc. SemCL pretrained models
substantially outperform ImageNet pretrained counterparts
and are competitive with well-known works on downstream
tasks. The results suggest that a dedicated pretext task leveraging semantic information can be powerful in benchmarks
related to spatial understanding. The code is available at
https://github.com/sjiang95/semcl.

1. Introduction
Within the field of visual representation learning, contrastive learning attracts special attention for its inspiring
performance in transfer learning [57, 49, 31, 22, 8, 9]. The
concept of contrastive learning can literally be explained
as discovering the difference between positive and negative
samples. The definition of positive-negative samples is one
of the main subjects of contrastive learning, which directly
determines the pretext task and the corresponding loss function.
We humans can recognize an object from its even complicated environment because we have learned and bound the
typical geometric feature and the corresponding semantic
concept of the object class. For example, we can recognize a cat in a scene thanks to our knowledge of its appearance (typical geometric feature) and the concept of cat
(semantic information). Similarly, the target of prevalent
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1: Perceptual cognition of SemCL. Leveraging semantic information, SemCL separates an object from its
environment. Each sample is divided into objects and surroundings and considered as a contrastive pair. The task is
to maximize the distance between the object and its environment in the embedding space.

visual tasks, such as semantic/instance segmentation, object
detection, etc., can be summarized as distinguishing and
localizing subjects from surroundings. Inspired by and to
extend the spatial recognition mechanism to CV, we propose our method SemCL which directly teaches models to
extract a subject from its environment. Utilizing publicly
off-the-shelf datasets providing semantic labels, SemCL can
be considered as a supervised contrastive learning approach
whose samples consist of subjects and their corresponding
surroundings (semantically not the subject). The pretext task
of SemCL is to tell the difference between one subject and
its surroundings. From a representation learning perspective, the pretext task is to maximize the distance (L2 norm)
between a subject and its environment in the embedding
space (see Figure 1). The pretext task mimics the spatial
recognition mechanism to discriminate objects and surroundings, which significantly improves the spatial information
understanding of pretrained models.
In SemCL, contrast is performed pairwise between
positive-negative pairs from one image/scene. Inter-scene
contrast is considered inappropriate: only the contrasts

5686

