This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GaPro: Box-Supervised 3D Point Cloud Instance Segmentation
Using Gaussian Processes as Pseudo Labelers
Tuan Duc Ngo
Binh-Son Hua
Khoi Nguyen
VinAI Research, Hanoi, Vietnam
{v.tuannd42, v.sonhb, v.khoindm}@vinai.io

Heuristic pseudo labels

Abstract
Instance segmentation on 3D point clouds (3DIS) is a
longstanding challenge in computer vision, where state-ofthe-art methods are mainly based on full supervision. As
annotating ground truth dense instance masks is tedious and
expensive, solving 3DIS with weak supervision has become
more practical. In this paper, we propose GaPro, a new instance segmentation for 3D point clouds using axis-aligned
3D bounding box supervision. Our two-step approach involves generating pseudo labels from box annotations and
training a 3DIS network with the resulting labels. Additionally, we employ the self-training strategy to improve
the performance of our method further. We devise an effective Gaussian Process to generate pseudo instance masks
from the bounding boxes and resolve ambiguities when they
overlap, resulting in pseudo instance masks with their uncertainty values. Our experiments show that GaPro outperforms previous weakly supervised 3D instance segmentation methods and has competitive performance compared
to state-of-the-art fully supervised ones. Furthermore, we
demonstrate the robustness of our approach, where we can
adapt various state-of-the-art fully supervised methods to the
weak supervision task by using our pseudo labels for training. The source code and trained models are available at
https://github.com/VinAIResearch/GaPro.

1. Introduction
This paper addresses the challenging problem of boxsupervised 3D point cloud instance segmentation (BS-3DIS),
which seeks to segment every point into instances of predefined classes using only axis-aligned 3D bounding boxes as
supervision during training. This problem arises to address
the huge annotating cost of fully-supervised 3D point cloud
instance segmentation (3DIS) where every point in the point
cloud is manually labeled. Compared to 3DIS, BS-3DIS is
considered significantly harder. First, axis-aligned boxes
cannot capture the shape or geometry of objects as they only
represent the very coarse extent of the objects. Second, unlike instance mask where points only belong to at most one

GT labels

GT axis-aligned
bounding boxes

Our pseudo labels + uncertainty

Figure 1: Weakly supervised instance segmentation relies
on high-quality pseudo labels to achieve competitive performance. Given only axis-aligned bounding box annotations,
pseudo labels based on heuristics [5] often have large errors
in box overlapping regions and thus yield inferior performance. Our GaPro predicts the pseudo labels and their confidence using Gaussian Processes, via resolving the ambiguity
in box overlapping regions.
mask, points can belong to multiple boxes as visualized in
Fig. 1, resulting in the ambiguous point-object assignment.
The task of box-supervised 3D point cloud instance segmentation has received little attention, with Box2Mask [5]
being the first attempt. However, due to the ambiguity in
point-object assignments, the point-wise predicted boxes
are unreliable for clustering. This leads to a significant performance gap compared to fully supervised methods, such
as Mask3D [33], which achieves an mAP of 55.2 on ScanNetV2 [6], compared to Box2Mask’s 39.1 (around 30%)
using the same backbone. Furthermore, Box2Mask is not
adaptable to new advances in fully supervised 3DIS, as it is
designed as a standalone method.
To address these limitations, we propose a novel pseudolabeling method that can be used as a universal plugin for any
3DIS network and offers an instant solution for any new fully
supervised 3DIS approach, with a smaller performance gap
between fully supervised and BS-3DIS versions, typically

17794

