This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Masked Autoencoders are Efﬁcient Class Incremental Learners
Jiang-Tian Zhai 1 Xialei Liu 1, * Andrew D. Bagdanov 2 Ke Li 3 Ming-Ming Cheng 1
1
VCIP, CS, Nankai University 2 MICC, University of Florence 3 Tencent Youtu Lab
Abstract
Class Incremental Learning (CIL) aims to sequentially
learn new classes while avoiding catastrophic forgetting
of previous knowledge. We propose to use Masked Autoencoders (MAEs) as efﬁcient learners for CIL. MAEs
were originally designed to learn useful representations
through reconstructive unsupervised learning, and they can
be easily integrated with a supervised loss for classiﬁcation. Moreover, MAEs can reliably reconstruct original input images from randomly selected patches, which we use
to store exemplars from past tasks more efﬁciently for CIL.
We also propose a bilateral MAE framework to learn from
image-level and embedding-level fusion, which produces
better-quality reconstructed images and more stable representations. Our experiments conﬁrm that our approach
performs better than the state-of-the-art on CIFAR-100,
ImageNet-Subset, and ImageNet-Full. The code is available at https://github.com/scok30/MAE-CIL.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has had a broad and deep impact on most
computer vision tasks over the last ten years. Given the
way humans learn continually in their lifespan, it is natural to expect models also to be able to accumulate knowledge and build on past experiences to adapt to new tasks
incrementally. The real world is very dynamic, leading
to varying data distributions over time, while deep models
tend to catastrophically forget old tasks when learning new
ones [26].
Class Incremental Learning (CIL) aims to learn new
classiﬁcation tasks sequentially while avoiding catastrophic
forgetting [2, 25]. CIL approaches can be roughly divided into three categories [5], i.e., Rehearsal-based methods [13, 29, 31], Regularization-based methods [15, 17],
and Architecture-based methods [1, 23, 24]. Among them,
Rehearsal-based methods achieve state-of-the-art performance by storing exemplars from past tasks or generating
synthetic samples for replay.
* Corresponding author (xialei@nankai.edu.cn)

Original Output
Current Task
Data

Main
Encoder

Main
Decoder
Reconstruction

Replay Buffer

Embedding
Fusion

Detailed
Encoder

Image
Classification Fusion

Detailed
Decoder
Residual Detail

Figure 1. Our proposed bilateral MAE for efﬁcient CIL. The Replay Buffer contains random patches selected from past task images, which is more efﬁcient than storing whole images. Combining these with masked input data from the current task, the MAE
simultaneously learns to classify and reconstruct images from the
masked input. To further improve the reconstructed image quality
and learned representations, embedding-level and image-level fusion is used to learn more stable representations and more detailed
reconstructions for CIL.

Normally, only a ﬁxed size of memory is allowed during
incremental learning. Therefore, it limits the stored exemplars from past tasks. Other works exploit generative networks [35, 38, 43] (e.g., GANs) to synthesize samples from
old tasks for replay. Although they can generate replay data
to mitigate forgetting, a typical drawback is the quality of
generated images, and that forgetting can also happen in
generative models. In this work, we introduce Masked Autoencoders (MAEs) [11] as a base model to replay. It allows efﬁcient exemplar storage by only requiring a small
subset of patches to reconstruct whole images. Therefore,
we can store more exemplars with the same amount of limited memory as other exemplar-based approaches. Compared to previous generative methods, replay by MAE is
more stable because it uses partial cues to infer global information, which is task-agnostic and suffers less forgetting
across tasks. This relieves the unstable generation effect of
GANs across tasks with stationary image patches.
Masked Autoencoders (MAEs) [11] were initially proposed to learn better feature representations in selfsupervised learning scenarios. In this work, we see it as
efﬁcient incremental learners and propose a novel bilat-

19104

