This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantically Structured Image Compression via
Irregular Group-Based Decoupling
Ruoyu Feng1*
1

Yixin Gao1*

Xin Jin2

University of Science and Technology of China

Runsen Feng1 Zhibo Chen 1,†
2

Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo

Abstract
Grouping

Image compression techniques typically focus on compressing rectangular images for human consumption, however, resulting in transmitting redundant content for downstream applications. To overcome this limitation, some previous works propose to semantically structure the bitstream,
which can meet specific application requirements by selective transmission and reconstruction. Nevertheless, they divide the input image into multiple rectangular regions according to semantics and ignore avoiding information interaction among them, causing waste of bitrate and distorted reconstruction of region boundaries. In this paper,
we propose to decouple an image into multiple groups with
irregular shapes based on a customized group mask and
compress them independently. Our group mask describes
the image at a finer granularity, enabling significant bitrate saving by reducing the transmission of redundant content. Moreover, to ensure the fidelity of selective reconstruction, this paper proposes the concept of group-independent
transform that maintain the independence among distinct
groups. And we instantiate it by the proposed GroupIndependent Swin-Block (GI Swin-Block). Experimental
results demonstrate that our framework structures the bitstream with negligible cost, and exhibits superior performance on both visual quality and intelligent task supporting.

1. Introduction
Image signal serves as a critical information carrier for
various applications in modern society. Image compression
techniques aim at converting images into compact representations (i.e. bitstreams) to save transmission and storage resources. Lossy image compression is one of the most practical techniques, as it allows for the restoration of important
content while discarding a small amount of inessential information. In the past decades, traditional image compres* First two authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

Decoder

Encoder

Shared Weights

Person Identification

Decoder

Shared Weights

Dog Classification:
Bernese Mountain

Decoder

Human Consumption

Figure 1. The input image is decoupled into groups according to distinct semantics. Then the semantically structured bitstream (SSB) is generated by compressing the image based on the partitioned groups. The SSB facilitates
downstream applications by selective bitstream transmission and partial reconstruction, depending on the specific
task requirements.

sion standards [10,54,61,65,67] have been extensively studied and utilized. With the fast development of deep learning, neural image codecs [7, 8, 16, 27, 34, 40, 41, 50–52, 75]
rapidly evolved and achieved promising results. Meanwhile, more and more media contents tend to be handled by machine vision algorithms, such as recognition
[17, 26, 29, 32, 47], detection [43, 44, 55–57], and segmentation [5,9,11,12,28,46,48,69,73]. However, most compression methods are mainly developed for compressing regular rectangular images for human consumption, without
considering the efficiency and functionality for downstream
tasks or human-machine interaction scenarios.
Recently, the field of image coding for machines (ICM)
has emerged to develop a joint efficient and analytical
framework for supporting intelligent analytics. End-to-end
optimization of the trade-off between specific task loss and
compression rate is a promising way [4, 13, 14, 18, 19, 38,
39, 49, 60], but it lacks generalization for massively diverse

17237

