This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Large Selective Kernel Network for Remote Sensing Object Detection
Yuxuan Li† , Qibin Hou, Zhaohui Zheng, Ming-Ming Cheng, Jian Yang* and Xiang Li*
VCIP, CS, Nankai University
yuxuan.li.17@ucl.ac.uk† , {csjyang, xiang.li.implus}@nankai.edu.cn*

Abstract
Recent research on remote sensing object detection has
largely focused on improving the representation of oriented
bounding boxes but has overlooked the unique prior knowledge presented in remote sensing scenarios. Such prior
knowledge can be useful because tiny remote sensing objects may be mistakenly detected without referencing a sufficiently long-range context, which can vary for different
objects. This paper considers these priors and proposes
the lightweight Large Selective Kernel Network (LSKNet).
LSKNet can dynamically adjust its large spatial receptive
field to better model the ranging context of various objects
in remote sensing scenarios. To our knowledge, large and
selective kernel mechanisms have not been previously explored in remote sensing object detection. Without bells
and whistles, our lightweight LSKNet sets new state-ofthe-art scores on standard benchmarks, i.e., HRSC2016
(98.46% mAP), DOTA-v1.0 (81.85% mAP), and FAIR1Mv1.0 (47.87% mAP).

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Successfully detecting remote sensing objects requires
using a wide range of contextual information. Detectors with a
limited receptive field may easily lead to incorrect results.

performance of these approaches.
Despite these advances, relatively few works have considered the strong prior knowledge of remote sensing images. Aerial images are typically captured at high resolutions from a bird’s eye view. In particular, most objects in
aerial images may be small and difficult to identify based
on their appearance alone. Instead, recognizing these objects relies on their context, as the surrounding environment
can provide valuable clues about their shape, orientation,
and other characteristics. According to an analysis of the
remote sensing data, we identify two important priors:

Remote sensing object detection [47, 57, 82] focuses on
identifying and locating objects of interest in aerial images,
such as vehicles, ships or aircraft. In recent years, one mainstream trend has been to generate bounding boxes that accurately fit the orientation of the objects being detected rather
than simply drawing horizontal boxes around them. Consequently, much research has focused on improving the representation of oriented bounding boxes for remote sensing
object detection. This has largely been achieved through the
development of specialized detection frameworks (i.e., RoI
Transformer [12], Oriented R-CNN [69], and R3Det [75])
and oriented box encoding (i.e., gliding vertex [71] and
midpoint offset box encoding [69]). Additionally, several
loss functions, including GWD [77], KLD [79], and Modulated Loss [54], have been further proposed to enhance the

• Accurate detection often requires a wide range of
contextual information. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the
limited context used by object detectors in remote
sensing images can often lead to incorrect classifications. Rather than their appearance, the context distinguishes the ship from the vehicle.
• The contextual information required for different
objects is very different. As shown in Fig. 2, the
soccer field requires relatively less contextual information because of the unique distinguishable court
borderlines. In contrast, the roundabout may require
more context information to distinguish between gardens and ring-like buildings. Intersections, especially
those partially covered by trees, require an extremely
large receptive field due to the long-range dependencies between the intersecting roads.

* Corresponding authors.
Team URL: https://github.com/IMPlus-PCALab
Project page: https://github.com/zcablii/LSKNet

To address the challenge of accurately detecting objects

16794

