This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scale-MAE: A Scale-Aware Masked Autoencoder for Multiscale Geospatial
Representation Learning
Colorado J Reed1,2 *, Ritwik Gupta1 *, Shufan Li1 *,
Sarah Brockman3 , Christopher Funk3 , Brian Clipp3 ,
Kurt Keutzer1 , Salvatore Candido2 , Matt Uyttendaele2 , Trevor Darrell1
1

Berkeley AI Research; 2 Meta AI, FAIR; 3 Kitware Inc.
correspondence to ritwikgupta@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Large, pretrained models are commonly finetuned with
imagery that is heavily augmented to mimic different conditions and scales, with the resulting models used for various
tasks with imagery from a range of spatial scales. Such
models overlook scale-specific information in the data for
scale-dependent domains, such as remote sensing. In this
paper, we present Scale-MAE, a pretraining method that explicitly learns relationships between data at different, known
scales throughout the pretraining process. Scale-MAE pretrains a network by masking an input image at a known input
scale, where the area of the Earth covered by the image determines the scale of the ViT positional encoding, not the image
resolution. Scale-MAE encodes the masked image with a
standard ViT backbone, and then decodes the masked image
through a bandpass filter to reconstruct low/high frequency
images at lower/higher scales. We find that tasking the network with reconstructing both low/high frequency images
leads to robust multiscale representations for remote sensing
imagery. Scale-MAE achieves an average of a 2.4 − 5.6%
non-parametric kNN classification improvement across eight
remote sensing datasets compared to current state-of-the-art
and obtains a 0.9 mIoU to 1.7 mIoU improvement on the
SpaceNet building segmentation transfer task for a range of
evaluation scales.

1. Introduction
Remote sensing data is captured from satellites and planes
through a mixture of sensors, processing pipelines, and viewing geometries. Depending on the composition and relative
geometry of the sensor to the Earth, each image’s Ground
Sample Distance (GSD - the physical distance between two
* Denotes co-first authorship. Co-first authors will prioritize their names
on their resumes/websites.

Input Image Ground Truth

Scale-MAE

Vanilla MAE

Correct

Incorrect

0.3m GSD

3.0m GSD

Figure 1. Scale-MAE learns better representations for multiscale
tasks compared to vanilla MAE. (Column 1) The top image spans
an area at 0.3m GSD and the bottom image shows the same region
at a coarser GSD. (Columns 2-4) The following columns show
a ground truth building segmentation, Scale-MAE segmentation
from a finetuned UperNet, and segmentation from an analogously
finetuned UperNet from a vanilla MAE, respectively. Scale-MAE
demonstrates better performance across images at both scales. See
the supplementary material for more examples.

adjacent pixels in an image) can vary from 0.3m to 1km, so a
100x100 pixel image could span anywhere from an Olympicsize swimming pool (900 m2 ) to almost the entire country of
Jamaica (10,000 km2 ). The data within each image, and the
corresponding objects and points of interest, can therefore
vary across wide spatial ranges. Data from these multiscale
sensors provide critical and complementary information for
various operational and research applications in areas such
as atmospheric, hydrologic, agricultural, and environmental
monitoring [45, 52].
Few modern computer vision methods have explicitly addressed multiscale remote sensing imagery [35]. Nevertheless, the remote sensing vision community has increasingly
used large, pretrained models [13, 20], where such applications finetune a pretrained model for a single source of

4088

