This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Going Beyond Nouns With Vision & Language Models Using Synthetic Data
Paola Cascante-Bonilla*†1,2 Khaled Shehada∗2,3 James Seale Smith2,4 Sivan Doveh6,7
Donghyun Kim2,7 Rameswar Panda2,7 Gül Varol5 Aude Oliva2,3
Vicente Ordonez1 Rogerio Feris2,7 Leonid Karlinsky2,7
1

Rice University 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 3 MIT 4 Georgia Institute of Technology
5
LIGM, École des Ponts 6 Weizmann Institute of Science 7 IBM Research

Abstract

a) Use synthetic data to teach a model new relationships:

Large-scale pre-trained Vision & Language (VL) models have shown remarkable performance in many applications, enabling replacing a fixed set of supported classes
with zero-shot open vocabulary reasoning over (almost arbitrary) natural language prompts. However, recent works
have uncovered a fundamental weakness of these models.
b) Add human interactions to generate complex scenes:
For example, their difficulty to understand
Visual Language
b) Generate
complex and meaningful image/text pairs by
Concepts (VLC) that go ‘beyond nouns’ such as the meanincorporating
human interactions:
ing of non-object words (e.g., attributes,
actions, relations,
states, etc.), or difficulty in performing compositional rea+ synthetic humans
+ diversifying poses
Diversify human
soning such as understanding the significance
of the or+ enabling physics
interactions:
der of the words in a sentence. In this work, we investigate to which extent purely synthetic data could be lever+ adding objects
aged to teach these models to overcome such shortcomings
+ textured humans
+ different views
without compromising their zero-shot capabilities. We contribute Synthetic Visual Concepts (SyViC) - a million-scale
Figure 1. Overview of our proposed synthetic set: we place differsynthetic dataset and data generation codebase allowing to
ent objects in a scene and change their position, color, size, and
generate additional suitable data to improve VLC undermaterial. We further emphasize on human-level interactions, samstanding and compositional reasoning of VL models. Addipling a wide set of body poses and behaviors to cover transitive
and intransitive human actions.
tionally, we propose a general VL finetuning strategy for
effectively leveraging SyViC towards achieving these improvements. Our extensive experiments and ablations on
nizing attributes, relations, states) and in terms of comVL-Checklist, Winoground, and ARO benchmarks demonpositional reasoning capabilities (i.e.., understanding substrate that it is possible to adapt strong pre-trained VL modtle changes in meaning due to small changes in word orels with synthetic data significantly enhancing their VLC
der). Recently, several benchmark tests have been devised
understanding (e.g. by 9.9% on ARO and 4.3% on VLto demonstrate the extent to which these models lack these
Checklist) with under 1% drop in their zero-shot accuracy.
capabilities [51, 62, 59] 1 . As noted in several recent
works [59, 62, 9], this behavior of VL models is likely due
to the contrastive pre-training prevalent for all of them and
1. Introduction
likely inducing ‘bag-of-objects’ kind of representations (for
both images and text alike). Indeed, for (even large) random
There have been impressive advances in the performance
batches of paired image-text samples, the collection of obof zero-shot recognition through the use of large-scale prejects (nouns) in the image (or text) is likely to uniquely detrained Vision & Language (VL) models [45, 20, 50, 28,
termine the image (or text) in the batch, making contrastive
15, 57, 29, 13]. However, these VL models still face
batch losses focus on the objects (nouns) while regarding
some important challenges in understanding Visual Language Concepts (VLC) beyond object nouns (e.g., recog* Equal contribution. Project page: https://synthetic-vic.github.io/
† Work partially done while interning at the MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab.

1 Please also see supplementary material for the expanded set of results
of [62] including results for all the most recent open-sourced VL models,
all exhibiting poor VLC understanding performance.

20155

