This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GameFormer: Game-theoretic Modeling and Learning of Transformer-based
Interactive Prediction and Planning for Autonomous Driving
Zhiyu Huang† , Haochen Liu† , Chen Lv∗
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
†

Equal contribution {zhiyu001,haochen002}@e.ntu.edu.sg
∗

Corresponding author lyuchen@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

Vectorized Scene

Initial Modality Query
Level-0

Autonomous vehicles operating in complex real-world
environments require accurate predictions of interactive behaviors between traffic participants. This paper tackles
the interaction prediction problem by formulating it with
hierarchical game theory and proposing the GameFormer
model for its implementation. The model incorporates a
Transformer encoder, which effectively models the relationships between scene elements, alongside a novel hierarchical Transformer decoder structure. At each decoding level,
the decoder utilizes the prediction outcomes from the previous level, in addition to the shared environmental context,
to iteratively refine the interaction process. Moreover, we
propose a learning process that regulates an agent’s behavior at the current level to respond to other agents’ behaviors from the preceding level. Through comprehensive
experiments on large-scale real-world driving datasets, we
demonstrate the state-of-the-art accuracy of our model on
the Waymo interaction prediction task. Additionally, we validate the model’s capacity to jointly reason about the motion plan of the ego agent and the behaviors of multiple
agents in both open-loop and closed-loop planning tests,
outperforming various baseline methods. Furthermore, we
evaluate the efficacy of our model on the nuPlan planning
benchmark, where it achieves leading performance. Project
website: https://mczhi.github.io/GameFormer/

1. Introduction
Accurately predicting the future behaviors of surrounding traffic participants and making safe and sociallycompatible decisions are crucial for modern autonomous
driving systems. However, this task is highly challenging
due to the complexities arising from road structures, traffic
norms, and interactions among road users [14, 23, 24]. In
recent years, deep neural network-based approaches have
shown remarkable advancements in prediction accuracy and
scalability [7, 11, 15, 22, 40]. In particular, Transformers
have gained prominence in motion prediction [25,31,32,35,

Future trajectories

Level-1
Neighboring
Agents

Common
background

Level-k

AV

Agent History + Map

Level-K
Plan
Trajectory

Predicted
Trajectory

Figure 1. Hierarchical game theoretic modeling of agent interactions. The historical states of agents and maps are encoded as
background information; a level-0 agent’s future is predicted independently based on the initial modality query; a level-k agent
responds to all other level-(k − 1) agents.

45, 47] because of their flexibility and effectiveness in processing heterogeneous information from the driving scene,
as well as their ability to capture interrelationships among
the scene elements.
Despite the success of existing prediction models in
encoding the driving scene and representing interactions
through agents’ past trajectories, they often fail to explicitly model agents’ future interactions and their interaction
with the autonomous vehicle (AV). This limitation results
in a passive reaction from the AV’s planning module to the
prediction results. However, in critical situations such as
merge, lane change, and unprotected left turn, the AV needs
to proactively coordinate with other agents. Therefore, joint
prediction and planning are necessary for achieving more
interactive and human-like decision-making. To address
this, a typical approach is the recently-proposed conditional
prediction model [17,34,36,37,39], which utilizes the AV’s
internal plans to forecast other agents’ responses to the AV.
Although the conditional prediction model mitigates the interaction issue, such a one-way interaction still neglects the
dynamic mutual influences between the AV and other road
users. From a game theory perspective, the current prediction/planning models can be regarded as leader-follower
games with limited levels of interaction among agents.

3903

