This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bidirectionally Deformable Motion Modulation For
Video-based Human Pose Transfer
Wing-Yin Yu, Lai-Man Po, Ray C.C. Cheung, Yuzhi Zhao, Yu Xue, Kun Li
Department of Electrical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
{wingyinyu8, yzzhao2, yuxue22, kunli25}-c@my.cityu.edu.hk {eelmpo, r.cheung}cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Video-based human pose transfer is a video-to-video
generation task that animates a plain source human image based on a series of target human poses. Considering
the difficulties in transferring highly structural patterns on
the garments and discontinuous poses, existing methods often generate unsatisfactory results such as distorted textures
and flickering artifacts. To address these issues, we propose
a novel Deformable Motion Modulation (DMM) that utilizes geometric kernel offset with adaptive weight modulation to simultaneously perform feature alignment and style
transfer. Different from normal style modulation used in
style transfer, the proposed modulation mechanism adaptively reconstructs smoothed frames from style codes according to the object shape through an irregular receptive field of view. To enhance the spatio-temporal consistency, we leverage bidirectional propagation to extract the
hidden motion information from a warped image sequence
generated by noisy poses. The proposed feature propagation significantly enhances the motion prediction ability
by forward and backward propagation. Both quantitative
and qualitative experimental results demonstrate superiority over the state-of-the-arts in terms of image fidelity and
visual continuity. The source code is publicly available at
github.com/rocketappslab/bdmm.

1. Introduction
The video-based human pose transfer is a task to animate
a plain source image according to a series of desired postures. It is challenging due to problems of spatio-temporally
discontinuous poses and highly structural texture misalignment as depicted in Figure 1. In this paper, we aim to
tackle these problems with an end-to-end generative model
to maximize the value of applications in various domains
including person re-identification [49], fashion recommendation [13, 20], and virtual try-on [8, 33, 42].
Existing works focus on three categories to solve the

Reference Image

Noisy Conditional Pose Sequence

Ground Truth

GFLA

Impersonator++

Ours

Timestamp

Figure 1. Examples of a synthesized video clip based on some
noisy poses. Existing methods such as GFLA [35] and Impersonator++ [25] fail to generate realistic videos due to problems of
spatio-temporally discontinuous poses and highly structural texture misalignment while our method can generate highly plausible texture with seamless transition between consecutive frames.
Please zoom in for more details.

spatial misalignment problem, including prior generation
[7, 27, 28, 45, 46], attention module [34, 39, 52], and flow
warping [35, 48]. There are many side effects in these
methods such as spatially misaligned content, blurry visual quality and unreliable flow prediction. Some methods
[22, 24, 25] proposed to obtain the spatial transformation
flow by computing the vertex matching in 3D neural rendering process. The main advantage is to preserve more
texture details of the source image. However, the generative networks struggle to render new content for occluded
regions since flows in such regions are not accurate.
To obtain animated sequences with smooth human gesture movements, the temporal coherence is the main determinant. Different from most of the generative tasks such as
inpainting or super-resolution, the conditional inputs of the
sequence in this task are noisy. It is because the existing
third-party human pose extractors [2, 10, 21] fail to extract

7502

