This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Organizing Pathway Expansion for
Non-Exemplar Class-Incremental Learning
Kai Zhu1,2,∗
Kecheng Zheng3,4,∗
Ruili Feng1,2
1
2,5,†
Deli Zhao
Yang Cao
Zheng-Jun Zha2
1
2
3
Alibaba Group
University of Science and Technology of China
Zhejiang University
4
5
Ant Group
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{kaizhuustc, zkechengzk, ruilifengustc, zhaodeli}@gmail.com

Abstract
Non-exemplar class-incremental learning aims to recognize both the old and new classes without access to
old class samples. The conflict between old and new
class optimization is exacerbated since the shared neural
pathways can only be differentiated by the incremental
samples. To address this problem, we propose a novel
self-organizing pathway expansion scheme. Our scheme
consists of a class-specific pathway organization strategy
that reduces the coupling of optimization pathway among
different classes to enhance the independence of the feature
representation, and a pathway-guided feature optimization
mechanism to mitigate the update interference between the
old and new classes. Extensive experiments on four datasets
demonstrate significant performance gains, outperforming
the state-of-the-art methods by a margin of 1%, 3%, 2% and
2%, respectively.

1. Introduction
Since deep neural networks have achieved good performance in fully supervised scenarios, how to extend this
learning capability to open environment has attracted great
attention. Particularly, it is essential to ensure that the
network can continuously learn new knowledge while maintaining the abilities to identify old tasks (i.e., incremental
learning [8, 18]). Fine-tuning the network directly with
new data can lead to a serious bias of the representation
and classifier, which is often referred to as catastrophic
forgetting. Due to privacy and hardware limits, old samples
are usually unavailable for joint training, making it more
difficult to maintain the old class performance in the subsequent optimization process. In this paper, we focus on
this ability to continuously learn new tasks without any old
∗Co-first Author. †Corresponding Author.

{forrest, zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn

samples or exemplars, which is called non-exemplar classincremental learning (NECIL) [25, 27, 30, 31, 33].
Most methods maintain the feature representation of
old classes by means of various distillation loss functions
[8, 10]. Although catastrophic forgetting is somewhat
mitigated, incremental performance still suffers from the
confusion between the old and new class in the feature
space. Furthermore, in the absence of old class samples,
the degree of forgetting is only related to the initial model
and incremental samples [31]. Existing NECIL works
[25, 30] mainly focus on enhancing the overall performance
by improving the discrimination and generalization of the
initial model, which brings a significant improvement on
the incremental performance.
Instead, we focus on the impact of incremental samples
on the optimization process. Intuitively, since different
incremental classes cause disparate feature confusion, the
interference on the old class performance is also different
even if initialized from the same model [31, 33]. To
further explore the association, we estimate the inter-class
confusion by measuring the status of feature activation [29]
in existing incremental model. As shown in Fig. 1 (b), we
filter out the positions of strongly activated modules as the
class-specific pathways [19], and find that the pathway of
incremental class is commonly confused with the previous
ones in the baseline. Furthermore, it can be seen in Fig.
1 (a) that the degree of pathway overlap (i.e., similarity)
between the old class and incremental class is positively
correlated with the forgetting degree, which motivates us
to address the interference problem from the perspective of
pathway optimization.
Based on the above observation, we propose a selforganizing pathway expansion scheme to learn a pathwayaware representation, mitigating the feature interference
during the subsequent incremental process. The scheme is
mainly manifested in two aspect. Firstly, during the initial
phase, we adopt the class-specific pathway organization

19204

