This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Anchor-Intermediate Detector: Decoupling and Coupling Bounding Boxes for
Accurate Object Detection
Yilong Lv, Min Li, Yujie He
Xi’an Institute of High Technology

Shaopeng Li
Tsinghua University
Department of Automation

{rfuyll@yeah.net, proflimin@163.com, ksy5201314@163.com}

sp-li16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Zhuzhen He
National University of Defense Technology

Aitao Yang
Xi’an Institute of High Technology

hezhuzhen@163.com

824360083@qq.com

Abstract

 
 

Anchor-based detectors have been continuously developed for object detection. However, the individual anchor box makes it difﬁcult to predict the boundary’s offset accurately. Instead of taking each bounding box as
a closed individual, we consider using multiple boxes together to get prediction boxes. To this end, this paper proposes the Box Decouple-Couple(BDC) strategy in the inference, which no longer discards the overlapping boxes,
but decouples the corner points of these boxes. Then, according to each corner’s score, we couple the corner points
to select the most accurate corner pairs. To meet the BDC
strategy, a simple but novel model is designed named the
Anchor-Intermediate Detector(AID), which contains two
head networks, i.e., an anchor-based head and an anchorfree Corner-aware head. The corner-aware head is able to
score the corners of each bounding box to facilitate the coupling between corner points. Extensive experiments on MS
COCO show that the proposed anchor-intermediate detector respectively outperforms their baseline RetinaNet and
GFL method by ∼2.4 and ∼1.2 AP on the MS COCO testdev dataset without any bells and whistles.

(a) Raw Image

(b) Anchor-based

(c) Keypoint-base Anchor-free

(d) Our AID

1. Introduction

Figure 1: The mechanism of the current mainstream detectors. Anchor-based detectors rely on predeﬁned anchor
boxes for localization. Anchor-free detectors recombine
key points to achieve localization. Our AID takes advantage
of both anchor-based and anchor-free methods. It decouples
the corner points of the bounding boxes and then, according
to the corner’s score, the corner points are coupled to select
the most accurate corner pair.

Object detection is a fundamental and challenging task
in computer vision to classify and localize objects in images. Recently, as transformer has achieved good results in
machine translation, it has begun to extend into the ﬁeld of
computer vision with success in tasks such as image classiﬁcation [25, 23, 13, 31] and object detection [2, 6, 37, 8].
However, most current mainstream detectors are still based
on convolutional neural networks.

Common anchor-based detectors, such as Faster RCNN
[28], Cascade RCNN [1], YOLO [27], and RetinaNet [20],
require pre-deﬁned dense anchor boxes to cover the whole
image. Although the anchor box are widely used, it is still
a lack of accuracy in locating the object’s boundary, because the anchor box is weakly perceptive to the boundary
as shown in ﬁgure 1b.
6275

