This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StyleDiffusion: Controllable Disentangled Style Transfer via Diffusion Models
Zhizhong Wang∗, Lei Zhao†, Wei Xing
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
{endywon, cszhl, wxing}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Content and style (C-S) disentanglement is a fundamental problem and critical challenge of style transfer. Existing
approaches based on explicit definitions (e.g., Gram matrix)
or implicit learning (e.g., GANs) are neither interpretable
nor easy to control, resulting in entangled representations
and less satisfying results. In this paper, we propose a new
C-S disentangled framework for style transfer without using
previous assumptions. The key insight is to explicitly extract
the content information and implicitly learn the complementary style information, yielding interpretable and controllable C-S disentanglement and style transfer. A simple
yet effective CLIP-based style disentanglement loss coordinated with a style reconstruction prior is introduced to
disentangle C-S in the CLIP image space. By further leveraging the powerful style removal and generative ability of
diffusion models, our framework achieves superior results
than state of the art and flexible C-S disentanglement and
trade-off control. Our work provides new insights into the
C-S disentanglement in style transfer and demonstrates the
potential of diffusion models for learning well-disentangled
C-S characteristics.

1. Introduction
Given a reference style image, e.g., Starry Night by Vincent Van Gogh, style transfer aims to transfer its artistic
style, such as colors and brushstrokes, to an arbitrary content target. To achieve such a goal, it must first properly
separate the style from the content and then transfer it to another content. This raises two fundamental challenges: (1)
“how to disentangle content and style (C-S)” and (2) “how
to transfer style to another content”.
To resolve these challenges, valuable efforts have been
devoted. Gatys et al. [18] proposed A Neural Algorithm
of Artistic Style to achieve style transfer, which explicitly
defines the high-level features extracted from a pre-trained
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) (e.g., VGG [71]) as
∗ This work was done when Zhizhong Wang was an intern at Huawei.
† Corresponding author.

content, and the feature correlations (i.e., Gram matrix) as
style. This approach acquires visually stunning results and
inspires a large number of successors [32, 27, 50, 1, 90].
Despite the successes, by diving into the essence of style
transfer, we observed three problems with these approaches:
(1) The C-S are not completely disentangled. Theoretically, the C-S representations are intertwined. For example, matching the content representation of an image may
also match its Gram matrix, and vice versa. (2) What CNN
learned is a black box rugged to interpret [92], which makes
the C-S definitions [18] uninterpretable and hard to control.
(3) The transfer process is modeled as a separate optimization of content loss and style loss [18], so there lacks a deep
understanding of the relationship between C-S. These problems usually lead to unbalanced stylizations and disharmonious artifacts [6], as will be shown in later Fig. 3.
On the other hand, disentangled representation learning [24] provides other ideas to implicitly disentangle CS, either supervised [44, 34] or unsupervised [9, 93]. For
style transfer, Kotovenko et al. [42] utilized fixpoint triplet
style loss and disentanglement loss to enforce a GAN [20]based framework to learn separate C-S representations in
an unsupervised manner. Similarly, TPFR [74] learned
to disentangle C-S in latent space via metric learning and
two-stage peer-regularization, producing high-quality images even in the zero-shot setting. While these approaches
successfully enforce properties “encouraged” by the corresponding losses, they still have three main problems: (1)
Well-disentangled models seemingly cannot be identified
without supervision [54, 64], which means the unsupervised
learning [42, 74] may not achieve truly disentangled C-S, as
will be shown in later Fig. 3. (2) These approaches are all
based on GANs and thus often confined to the GAN predefined domains, e.g., a specific artist’s style domain [69].
(3) The implicitly learned C-S representations are still black
boxes that are hard to interpret and control [54].
Facing the challenges above, in this paper, we propose
a new C-S disentangled framework for style transfer without using previous assumptions such as Gram matrix [18]
or GANs [42]. Our key insight stems from the fact that
the definition of an image’s style is much more complex

7677

