This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FBLNet: FeedBack Loop Network for Driver Attention Prediction
Yilong Chen, Zhixiong Nan∗ , Tao Xiang
Chongqing University, Chongqing, China

Abstract

Model architectures adopted in existing methods
CNN Encoder

The problem of predicting driver attention from the driving perspective is gaining increasing research focus due to
its remarkable significance for autonomous driving and assisted driving systems. The driving experience is extremely
important for safe driving, a skilled driver is able to effortlessly predict oncoming danger (before it becomes salient)
based on the driving experience and quickly pay attention to
the corresponding zones. However, the nonobjective driving experience is difficult to model, so a mechanism simulating the driver experience accumulation procedure is absent in existing methods, and the current methods usually
follow the technique line of saliency prediction methods to
predict driver attention. In this paper, we propose a FeedBack Loop Network (FBLNet), which attempts to model the
driving experience accumulation procedure. By over-andover iterations, FBLNet generates the incremental knowledge that carries rich historically-accumulative and longterm temporal information. The incremental knowledge in
our model is like the driving experience of humans. Under
the guidance of the incremental knowledge, our model fuses
the CNN feature and Transformer feature that are extracted
from the input image to predict driver attention. Our model
exhibits a solid advantage over existing methods, achieving
an outstanding performance improvement on two driver attention benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Accurately predicting where a driver should look is extremely important for assisted driving [14], accident avoidance [19], and driverless driving [37]. According to the road
traffic injuries report 1 of WHO in 2022, nearly 1.3 million
Zhixiong Nan∗ is the corresponding author.
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant (62006180 and 62106026) and CCF-AFSG Research
Fund (RF20220009, 02160026050171).
1 https://www.who.int/zh/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/road-trafficinjuries

Decoder

CNN Encoder

Transformer

Decoder

（a）

（b）

Our model architecture

（c）

CNN Encoder
Incremental
knowledge

Feedback loop

Transformer
Encoder

Fusion

Decoder

Figure 1: The comparison of the mainstream existing architectures (i.e., (a) CNN based encoder-decoder architecture
and (b) CNN- Transformer based encoder-decoder architecture) and our architecture (i.e., (c) FBLNet).
people die in traffic accidents every year, and a high proportion of death result from driver attention distraction. Many
accidents could be avoided if a system is able to accurately
predict where a driver should look and timely send the attention distraction warning. Therefore, driver attention prediction is significant for developing safer autonomous driving or assisted driving systems. On account of the remarkable research significance of driver attention prediction, it
is attracting increasingly wide research focuses, and many
excellent models [36, 21, 39, 30] have been proposed.
The traffic scene is challenge and complex. It is highly
dynamic, random and diverse. A driver may confront various scenarios, such as cutting in cars, crossing pedestrians and emergently-appearing motorbikes. To safely drive
in such scenarios, driving experience is the key point. A
skilled driver could effortlessly predict the most likely area
where the danger may appear. For example, when a side
front car is following another slowly driving car in front
of it, the side front car may change to our lane, which is
dangerous and we should pay more attention to it to avoid
the collision. What’s more, an experienced driver could predict the potentially dangerous zones according to the current
traffic scene even if the danger is not visible at the current
time, and pay attention to the dangerous zones to guarantee
13371

