This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LA-Net: Landmark-Aware Learning for Reliable Facial Expression Recognition
under Label Noise
Zhiyu Wu, Jinshi Cui*
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
wuzhiyu@pku.edu.cn, cjs@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Facial expression recognition (FER) remains a challenging task due to the ambiguity of expressions. The derived
noisy labels significantly harm the performance in realworld scenarios. To address this issue, we present a new
FER model named Landmark-Aware Net (LA-Net), which
leverages facial landmarks to mitigate the impact of label
noise from two perspectives. Firstly, LA-Net uses landmark information to suppress the uncertainty in expression
space and constructs the label distribution of each sample by neighborhood aggregation, which in turn improves
the quality of training supervision. Secondly, the model incorporates landmark information into expression representations using the devised expression-landmark contrastive
loss. The enhanced expression feature extractor can be less
susceptible to label noise. Our method can be integrated
with any deep neural network for better training supervision without introducing extra inference costs. We conduct
extensive experiments on both in-the-wild datasets and synthetic noisy datasets and demonstrate that LA-Net achieves
state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Facial expression recognition (FER) is a fundamental
task in the computer vision community, as it holds significance in various applications, such as human-computer interaction and fatigue driving detection. Given its wide applicability, researchers have developed multiple FER models in recent years [32, 20, 24]. Despite the progress made
so far, FER remains challenging due to noisy labels. Specifically, individuals may interpret one expression differently,
resulting in inconsistent annotations. Besides, facial expressions have inherent inter-class similarity, which further exacerbates the problem of label noise. Accordingly, mitigating label noise has become one of the primary tasks in FER.
Mainstream noise-tolerant FER models can be divided
* Corresponding author

into two groups: selecting clean samples and using label distributions as auxiliary training targets. For example, SCN [39] estimates the uncertainty of each sample and
corrects the mislabeled samples during training. Moreover,
DMUE [33] utilizes multiple learnable branches to estimate
the label distribution of each sample. While these methods
promote FER performance under label noise, they still encounter some problems. Firstly, sample selection methods
assume that the neural network will fit clean samples before
overfitting noisy labels [1, 44], which can lead to confusion
between hard samples and noisy samples. Secondly, label
distributions calculated based solely on expression information can still be noisy, since corrupt labels will disrupt both
class and feature spaces [23].
To address the above problems, this paper proposes a
new noise-tolerant FER model, called Landmark-Aware
Net (LA-Net). The overview of LA-Net is plotted in Fig. 1.
LA-Net leverages facial landmark information to combat
label noise based on the underlying assumption that expressions with analogous landmark patterns probably belong to the same emotion category. The model comprises
two key modules: label distribution estimation (LDE) and
expression-landmark contrastive loss (EL Loss).
LDE calculates the label distribution of each sample and
uses it as an auxiliary supervision signal. Based on the assumption that expressions should have similar emotions to
their neighbors in feature space, LDE identifies neighbors
in both expression and landmark spaces for each sample.
The landmark information is utilized to correct the errors in
the expression space. The module then learns pairwise contribution scores and performs neighborhood aggregation to
obtain target label distributions. Furthermore, to mitigate
the impact of batch division on online aggregation, the target label distributions are summed over previous epochs using exponential moving average (EMA).
EL Loss incorporates landmark information into expression representations to develop a robust backbone that is
less susceptible to label noise. The algorithm treats landmarks and expressions as two views of facial images and
establishes interactions between them via supervised con-

20698

