This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fg-T2M: Fine-Grained Text-Driven Human Motion Generation via Diffusion
Model
Yin Wang1 , Zhiying Leng1,2 , Frederick W. B. Li3 , Shun-Cheng Wu2 , Xiaohui Liang1,4, *
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
3

Technical University of Munich, Germany

Department of Computer Science, University of Durham, U.K.
4

Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China.

{wang yin,zhiyingleng,liang xiaohui}@buaa.edu.cn, frederick.li@durham.ac.uk, shuncheng.wu@tum.de

Abstract
Text-driven human motion generation in computer vision is both significant and challenging. However, current methods are limited to producing either deterministic
or imprecise motion sequences, failing to effectively control the temporal and spatial relationships required to conform to a given text description. In this work, we propose
a fine-grained method for generating high-quality, conditional human motion sequences supporting precise text description. Our approach consists of two key components: 1)
a linguistics-structure assisted module that constructs accurate and complete language feature to fully utilize text
information; and 2) a context-aware progressive reasoning
module that learns neighborhood and overall semantic linguistics features from shallow and deep graph neural networks to achieve a multi-step inference. Experiments show
that our approach outperforms text-driven motion generation methods on HumanML3D and KIT test sets and generates better visually confirmed motion to the text conditions.

1. Introduction
Human motion generation is a crucial task in computer
vision with various applications in animation production,
gaming, robot control, and movie script visualization. Obtaining human motion sequences through traditional software is a labor-intensive and tedious process, while motion
capture is complex and expensive. Recently, with the advancements in deep learning and computer vision, learningbased human motion generation has emerged as a solution
to this problem, leading to the development of associated
generation methods based on multimodal data. The input
multimodal data include music [12, 15, 25, 27], motion cat* Corresponding author.

Figure 1: Our approach generates human motion sequences
that grasp fine-grained details.

egories [4, 9, 20], text [2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 16, 21, 23, 28, 33],
among others. Text-driven human motion generation has
been a popular research topic, because of its convenience
and human-friendliness. In particular, natural language
comprises nouns, verbs, adverbs, etc. The mutual connections among different words in a sentence establish its semantics. Verbs define the action’s category, while adverbs
control the fineness of the action. The interaction between
words in syntax plays a vital role in determining the structure and meaning of a sentence. Failure to fully incorporate
these text features may result in inadequate text modeling,
causing the generated motion sequence to deviate from the
intended meaning of the original text.
Existing methods can be divided into two branches, including 1) cross-modal alignment of motion and text [2, 3,
5, 7, 8, 16, 21]; 2) conditional diffusion models [28, 33]. In
the first methods, text sequences and motion sequences are
mapped onto separate feature spaces and forcibly aligned,
leading to a loss of original information from both domains.
In the second methods, the diffusion model incorporates

22035

