This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Gabor Texture Features for Fine-Grained Recognition
Lanyun Zhu1 Tianrun Chen2 Jianxiong Yin3 Simon See3 Jun Liu1 *
Singapore University of Technology and Design 1 Zhejiang University 2 NVIDIA AI Tech Centre 3
lanyun zhu@mymail.sutd.edu.sg
{jianxiongy, ssee}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Extracting and using class-discriminative features is
critical for fine-grained recognition. Existing works have
demonstrated the possibility of applying deep CNNs to exploit features that distinguish similar classes. However,
CNNs suffer from problems including frequency bias and
loss of detailed local information, which restricts the performance of recognizing fine-grained categories. To address
the challenge, we propose a novel texture branch as complimentary to the CNN branch for feature extraction. We
innovatively utilize Gabor filters as a powerful extractor to
exploit texture features, motivated by the capability of Gabor filters in effectively capturing multi-frequency features
and detailed local information. We implement several designs to enhance the effectiveness of Gabor filters, including imposing constraints on parameter values and developing a learning method to determine the optimal parameters.
Moreover, we introduce a statistical feature extractor to utilize informative statistical information from the signals captured by Gabor filters, and a gate selection mechanism to
enable efficient computation by only considering qualified
regions as input for texture extraction. Through the integration of features from the Gabor-filter-based texture branch
and CNN-based semantic branch, we achieve comprehensive information extraction. We demonstrate the efficacy of
our method on multiple datasets, including CUB-200-2011,
NA-bird, Stanford Dogs, and GTOS-mobile. State-of-theart performance is achieved using our approach.

1. Introduction
Recognizing fine-grained categories (e.g., different
flower types or bird species) is challenging due to the subtle differences in their visual appearance. Recently, deep
neural network technology [17, 8, 31, 57, 52, 12] has made
remarkable advancement, allowing for significant progress
in extracting deep class-discriminative features for finegrained recognition [10, 38, 41, 23, 3, 56]. For example,
[54] develops a graph-based module to extract cross-class
relationship features. [13, 26] use bilinear pooling to ex* Corresponding Author

tianrun.chen@zju.edu.cn
jun liu@sutd.edu.sg

ploit high-order features from different networks. [55, 38]
leverage multi-scale information to enhance feature effectiveness. The success of these methods highlights the crucial role of extracting powerful features in distinguishing
fine-grained categories.
To exploit class-discriminative features, previous methods [38, 41, 23, 3, 56] have primarily relied on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) as the model backbone.
CNNs have achieved significant success in many computer
vision tasks. However, due to the following limitations,
they may not be sufficient for capturing comprehensive information in fine-grained recognition. First, deep CNNs
generally extract information with high receptive fields and
resolution-reduced feature maps, leading to the loss of local
detailed information that is critical for fine-grained recognition. Second, as discussed in [33, 45, 46], due to the regularity of the commonly used activation [45] and loss functions [33], CNNs prioritize learning low-frequency components while ignoring high-frequency components. This bias
is detrimental to fine-grained classification, as the ignored
high-frequency information, such as ripples and spots in
bird feathers, can be important in distinguishing between
similar classes. Considering these limitations of CNNs, we
suggest that a more powerful feature extractor is required,
which should be able to capture local detailed information
and multi-frequency comprehensive features that are lost by
CNNs but crucial for fine-grained recognition.
Witnessing the challenge, in this work, we introduce a
novel branch that extracts texture features as complimentary
to the vanilla CNN features to facilitate fine-grained recognition. We employ Gabor filters as the texture extractor in
the novel branch. The Gabor filter is a windowed Fourier
transform that combines a sinusoidal signal with a Gaussian
wave. It is widely used in image processing for extracting
low-level texture features [30, 35, 29, 1, 40]. The motivations of using Gabor filters in fine-grained recognition can
be illustrated in two-folds. (1) First, Gabor filters are effective in capturing local-detailed information. Previous research [5, 6] has found that Gabor functions are similar to
the receptive field profiles in the mammalian cortical sim-

1621

