This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Not All Features Matter:
Enhancing Few-shot CLIP with Adaptive Prior Refinement
Xiangyang Zhu∗1 , Renrui Zhang∗†‡2,3 , Bowei He1 , Aojun Zhou2 , Dong Wang3 , Bin Zhao3 , Peng Gao‡3
∗

1

Equal contribution

† Project leader

‡ Corresponding author

City University of Hong Kong 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{xiangyzhu6-c, boweihe2-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk,
{zhangrenrui, gaopeng}@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
The advent of contrastive visual-language pre-training
has provided a new paradigm for multi-modal learning [16,
17, 22, 42]. Its popularity has been observed across diverse downstream vision tasks, including 2D or 3D classification [14, 39, 41, 9], segmentation [27, 48, 36, 44], and detection [38, 45, 29]. CLIP [26] is one of the most acknowl-

Accuracy (%)

The popularity of Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) has propelled its application to diverse
downstream vision tasks. To improve its capacity on
downstream tasks, few-shot learning has become a widelyadopted technique. However, existing methods either exhibit limited performance or suffer from excessive learnable
parameters. In this paper, we propose APE, an Adaptive
Prior rEfinement method for CLIP’s pre-trained knowledge, which achieves superior accuracy with high computational efficiency. Via a prior refinement module, we analyze the inter-class disparity in the downstream data and
decouple the domain-specific knowledge from the CLIPextracted cache model. On top of that, we introduce
two model variants, a training-free APE and a trainingrequired APE-T. We explore the trilateral affinities between
the test image, prior cache model, and textual representations, and only enable a lightweight category-residual
module to be trained. For the average accuracy over 11
benchmarks, both APE and APE-T attain state-of-the-art
and respectively outperform the second-best by +1.59%
and +1.99% under 16 shots with ×30 less learnable parameters. Code is available at https://github.com/
yangyangyang127/APE.

Our APE-T
૟૟

Tip-Adapter-F

૟૝

Our APE
Tip-X
Tip-Adapter

૟૛

CALIP
CLIP

૟૙
૙

૚૙ି૜

CLIP-Adapter

CoOp
CoCoOp

Zero-shot Methods
Non-prior Methods
Prior-based Methods

૚૙ି૛
૚૙ି૚
GFLOPs

૚૙૙ ૚૙૚

Figure 1: Comparison of Accuracy, Training GFLOPs,
and Learnable Parameters on 16-shot ImageNet [3] classification. We compare the training GFLOPs including gradient back-propagation, and the icon sizes denote the number of learnable parameters. Our APE and APE-T achieve
superior performance with high implementation efficiency.
edged contrastive visual-language models and has attained
widespread attention for its simplicity and superiority. Pretrained by massive image-text pairs sourced from the Internet, CLIP exhibits remarkable aptitude in aligning visionlanguage representations with favorable zero-shot performance on downstream tasks. To further enhance CLIP
in low-data regimes, many efforts propose few-shot learning techniques with additional learnable modules upon the
frozen CLIP for new semantic domains.
As shown in Figure 2 (a) and (b), existing CLIP-based
few-shot methods can be categorized as two groups concerning whether to explicitly construct learnable modules
by CLIP’s prior knowledge. 1) Non-prior Methods ran-

2605

