This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Robust Model Watermark via Reducing Parametric Vulnerability
Guanhao Gan1 , Yiming Li1,4 , Dongxian Wu2, *, Shu-Tao Xia1,3,∗
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
2
The University of Tokyo, Japan
3
Research Center of Artificial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
4
Ant Group, China
{ggh21,li-ym18}@mails.tinghua.edu.cn;
d.wu@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp; xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks are valuable assets considering
their commercial benefits and huge demands for costly annotation and computation resources. To protect the copyright of DNNs, backdoor-based ownership verification becomes popular recently, in which the model owner can
watermark the model by embedding a specific backdoor
behavior before releasing it. The defenders (usually the
model owners) can identify whether a suspicious thirdparty model is “stolen” from them based on the presence of the behavior. Unfortunately, these watermarks are
proven to be vulnerable to removal attacks even like finetuning. To further explore this vulnerability, we investigate
the parameter space and find there exist many watermarkremoved models in the vicinity of the watermarked one,
which may be easily used by removal attacks. Inspired
by this finding, we propose a mini-max formulation to find
these watermark-removed models and recover their watermark behavior. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method improves the robustness of the model watermarking against parametric changes and numerous watermarkremoval attacks. The codes for reproducing our main
experiments are available at https://github.com/
GuanhaoGan/robust-model-watermarking.

1. Introduction
While deep neural networks (DNNs) achieve great success in many applications [20, 9, 39] and bring substantial commercial benefits [31, 12, 18], training such a deep
model usually requires a huge amount of well-annotated
data, massive computational resources, and careful tuning
of hyper-parameters. These trained models are valuable as* Correspondence to: Dongxian Wu (d.wu@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp) and ShuTao Xia (xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn).

sets for their owners and might be “stolen” by the adversary
such as unauthorized copying. In many practical scenarios, such as limited open-sourcing [55] (e.g., only for noncommercial purposes) and model trading1 , the model’s parameters are directly exposed, and the adversary can simply
steal the model by copying its parameters. How to properly
protect these trained DNNs is significant.
To protect the intellectual property (IP) embodied inside
DNNs, several watermarking methods were proposed [45,
10, 35, 5, 29, 49]. Among them, backdoor-based ownership
verification is one of the most popular methods [1, 54, 22,
30]. Before releasing the protected DNN, the defender embeds some distinctive behaviors, such as predicting a predefined label for any images with “TEST” (watermark samples) as shown in Figure 4. Based on the presence of these
distinctive behaviors, the defender can determine whether a
suspicious third-party DNN was “stolen” from the protected
DNN. The more likely a DNN predicts watermark samples
as the pre-defined target label (i.e., with a higher watermark
success rate), the more suspicious it is of being an unauthorized copy of the protected model.
However, the backdoor-based watermarking is vulnerable to simple removal attacks [34, 41, 16]. For example,
watermark behaviors can be easily erased by fine-tuning2
with a medium learning rate like 0.01 (see Figure A17 in
Zhao et al. [56]). To explore such a vulnerability, considering that fine-tuning regards the watermarked model as the
start point and continues to update its parameters on some
clean data, we investigate how the watermark success rate
(WSR) / benign accuracy (BA) changes in the vicinity of the
watermarked model in the parameter space. For easier comparison, we use the relative distance ∥θ − θw ∥2 /∥θw ∥2 in
1 People are allowed to buy and sell pre-trained models on platforms
like AWS marketplace or BigML.
2 While many watermark methods were believed to be resistant to finetuning, they were only tested with small learning rates. For example,
Bansal et al. [3] only used a learning rate of 0.001 or even 0.0001.

4751

