This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Nonlinear-Motion-Aware and Occlusion-Robust
Rolling Shutter Correction
Delin Qu1,2,∗

Yizhen Lao4,∗ Zhigang Wang2,∗ Dong Wang2 Bin Zhao2,3,† Xuelong Li2,3,†
1
2
Fudan University
Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
4
Northwestern Polytechnical University
Hunan University

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of rolling shutter correction in complex nonlinear and dynamic scenes with extreme occlusion. Existing methods suffer from two main
drawbacks. Firstly, they face challenges in estimating the
accurate correction field due to the uniform velocity assumption, leading to significant image correction errors
under complex motion. Secondly, the drastic occlusion
in dynamic scenes prevents current solutions from achieving better image quality because of the inherent difficulties in aligning and aggregating multiple frames. To tackle
these challenges, we model the curvilinear trajectory of pixels analytically and propose a geometry-based Quadratic
Rolling Shutter (QRS) motion solver, which precisely estimates the high-order correction field of individual pixels.
Besides, to reconstruct high-quality occlusion frames in dynamic scenes, we present a 3D video architecture that effectively Aligns and Aggregates multi-frame context, namely,
RSA2 -Net. We evaluate our method across a broad range of
cameras and video sequences, demonstrating its significant
superiority. Specifically, our method surpasses the stateof-the-art by +4.98, +0.77, and +4.33 of PSNR on CarlaRS, Fastec-RS, and BS-RSC datasets, respectively. Code is
available at https://github.com/DelinQu/qrsc.

1. Introduction
The rolling shutter (RS) mechanism widely integrated in
consumer video cameras continues to gather photos during
the acquisition process, thus effectively increasing sensitivity [10]. The RS cameras donate CMOS sensors and scan
the scene sequentially instead of instantly taking a snapshot
of the entire scene, like the global shutter (GS) using the
CCD sensor [19]. The time slot between consecutive scan
lines causes motion artifacts called the RS effect, e.g., wob∗ Authors contributed equally: dlqu22@m.fudan.edu.cn
† Corresponding author

Figure 1: Illustration of the challenges in complex nonlinear
motion and dynamic scenes with occlusion. The proposed
method models the curvilinear trajectory and reconstructs
the high-quality occlusion region from adjacent frames of
the video stream. In contrast, the state-of-the-art fails to
correct the pole and causes significant unaligned artifacts
on the bottom right car.
ble and skew, under extreme motion conditions [1]. In addition to the detrimental visual artifacts, the RS effect damages numerous 3D vision algorithms based on GS assumptions, such as camera pose estimation [1, 4], structure-frommotion [34] and SLAM [20, 17]. Therefore, rolling shutter
correction (RSC) is significant in photography and has attracted considerable research attention in the last decades.
Existing works on RS correction are generally categorized into single-frame and multi-frame methods. The
single-frame methods are based on strict geometric assumptions [27, 24] or simplified camera motion [26, 15], thus
obtaining unsatisfied results in complex scenes. In comparison, multi-frame methods are more sensible and achieve
higher performance [36]. Typically, the correction field between two frames is estimated by a neural block [28] to recover the GS frame [18, 2, 7]. Nevertheless, existing RSC
methods cannot produce satisfying results because of the

10680

