This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Real-World Burst Image Super-Resolution: Benchmark and Method
Pengxu Wei1 Yujing Sun2 Xingbei Guo1 Chang Liu3 Guanbin Li1 Jie Chen2 Xiangyang Ji3 Liang Lin1
1

2

Sun Yat-sen University
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
3
Tsinghua University
{weipx3, liguanbin}@mail.sysu.edu.cn, yujingsun1999@gmail.com, guoxb7@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,
{liuchang2022,xyji}@tsinghua.edu.cn, chenj@pcl.ac.cn, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
Despite substantial advances, single-image superresolution (SISR) is always in a dilemma to reconstruct
high-quality images with limited information from one input image, especially in realistic scenarios. In this paper,
we establish a large-scale real-world burst super-resolution
dataset, i.e., RealBSR, to explore the faithful reconstruction
of image details from multiple frames. Furthermore, we introduce a Federated Burst Afﬁnity network (FBAnet) to investigate non-trivial pixel-wise displacements among images under real-world image degradation. Speciﬁcally, rather than
using pixel-wise alignment, our FBAnet employs a simple
homography alignment from a structural geometry aspect
and a Federated Afﬁnity Fusion (FAF) strategy to aggregate the complementary information among frames. Those
fused informative representations are fed to a Transformerbased module of burst representation decoding. Besides, we
have conducted extensive experiments on two versions of
our datasets, i.e., RealBSR-RAW and RealBSR-RGB. Experimental results demonstrate that our FBAnet outperforms
existing state-of-the-art burst SR methods and also achieves
visually-pleasant SR image predictions with model details.
Our dataset, codes, and models are publicly available at
https://github.com/yjsunnn/FBANet.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental research topic, Super-Resolution (SR)
attracts long-standing substantial interest, which targets highresolution (HR) image reconstruction from a single or a
sequence of low-resolution (LR) observations. In recent
years, we have witnessed the prosperity of Single Image
Super-Resolution (SISR), e.g., SRCNN [7], EDSR [19], SRGAN [16], RDN [33] and ESRGAN [28]. Nevertheless,
*Corresponding author: Liang Lin, Jie Chen

SR (single image) SR (4 images)

SR (10 images)

SR (14 images)

SR (8 images)

HR

Figure 1: SR predictions with different numbers of burst image inputs in our RealBSR dataset, where more burst inputs
facilitate more accurate reconstruction of image details.
SISR intrinsically suffers from a limited capacity of restoring details from only one LR image, typically yielding oversmooth LR predictions, especially for large-scale factors.
With real detailed sub-pixel displacement information, MultiFrame Super-Resolution (MFSR) [31, 1, 2, 21, 20] provides
a promising potential to reconstruct the high-quality image
from multiple LR counterparts, which is valuable for many
sensitive realistic applications, e.g., medical imaging, and
remote satellite sensing.
After the pioneering work [25] of Tsai and Huang in
1984, the research on MFSR has not achieved as tremendous
progress as SISR. Typically, they are overwhelmed by two
challenges: 1) the difﬁculty of fusing multiple LR inputs,
which especially is aggravated for real-world data; 2) the limitation of artiﬁcially-synthesized data, accounting for a poor
generalization for real-world scenarios; To address those
challenges, a recent work [1] has made seminal contributions
to the ﬁrst real-world burst SR dataset benchmark, BurstSR,
and a novel architecture, DBSR. Subsequently, MFIR proposes a deep reparametrization to reformulate the classical
MAP objective in a deep feature space [2]. BIPNet [8]
introduces a set of pseudo-burst features for information exchange among multiple burst frames. BSRT [20] employs a
13233

