This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

COOL-CHIC: Coordinate-based Low Complexity Hierarchical Image Codec
Théo Ladune, Pierrick Philippe, Félix Henry, Gordon Clare, Thomas Leguay
Orange Innovation, France
firstname.lastname@orange.com

Abstract
We introduce COOL-CHIC, a Coordinate-based Low
Complexity Hierarchical Image Codec. It is a learned alternative to autoencoders with 629 parameters and 680 multiplications per decoded pixel. COOL-CHIC offers compression performance close to modern conventional MPEG
codecs such as HEVC and is competitive with popular
autoencoder-based systems. This method is inspired by
Coordinate-based Neural Representations, where an image
is represented as a learned function which maps pixel coordinates to RGB values. The parameters of the mapping
function are then sent using entropy coding. At the receiver
side, the compressed image is obtained by evaluating the
mapping function for all pixel coordinates. COOL-CHIC
implementation is made open-source1 .

1. Introduction and related work
For years, ITU/MPEG image and video compression algorithms (HEVC [1], VVC [2]) have been refining a coding
scheme based on the separate optimization of hand-crafted
linear operations. These conventional methods are being
challenged by learned ones, relying on autoencoders to perform a non-linear mapping from the signal to a compact
representation. Ballé’s autoencoder with hyperprior [3] is
a popular example of such architecture. These systems are
optimized end-to-end on a large variety of samples. Once
the training stage is completed, autoencoders can generalize
to unseen data i.e. they compress all sort of images.
The recent JPEG-AI call for proposal [4] highlights
that learned image codecs outperform state-of-the-art
conventional codecs (VVC). Yet, the performance of these
autoencoders comes at the expense of a tremendous complexity increase. Indeed, these codecs [5, 6] have millions
of parameters and require up to a million multiplications to
decode a single pixel. Thus, learned decoders are several
orders of magnitude more complex than conventional ones,
which might hinder their adoption.
1 https://orange-opensource.github.io/Cool-Chic/

In 2021, Dupont introduced COIN [7], an image codec
relying on Coordinates Neural Representation (CNR) to obtain a compact representation of an image. COIN models a
signal by an overfitted Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP), performing the mapping from a pixel coordinates to its RGB
value. The encoding stage consists in overfitting the MLP
to reconstruct the image to code. The MLP parameters are
then quantized and sent to the receiver. Finally, performing a forward pass to evaluate the RGB value at each spatial location allows the receiver to reconstruct the image.
Thus, CNR-based codecs use a lightweight and overfitted
decoder, unlike the complex and universal decoder of autoencoder approaches. For instance COIN decoder features a
10 000-parameter MLP, with performance close to JPEG.
One of the major limitations of early CNR-based
approaches (COIN, NeRF [8]) is the non-local nature of the
MLP. Indeed all parameters of the MLP contribute to the
RGB value of all output pixels, regardless of their position,
making the optimization of the parameters difficult. Recent
work such as Instant-NGP [9] or NVP [10] circumvents this
by complementing the MLP with a latent representation
of the image, describing different spatial locations with
different latent parameters.
This paper introduces COOL-CHIC, a Coordinate-based
Low Complexity Hierarchical Image Codec. It supplements
COIN with a hierarchical latent representation, which contains most of the information about the image. To properly handle the latent representation, we rely on an autoregressive model to compress it through entropy coding. In
summary, the contributions of this work are as follows:
1. COOL-CHIC is a learned codec with 680 multiplications per decoded pixel. This is orders of magnitude
less complex than autoencoders, paving the way for
learned image decoding without dedicated hardware;
2. COOL-CHIC offers coding performance close to
HEVC and competitive with Ballé’s hyperprior-based
autoencoder, significantly improving COIN results;
3. COOL-CHIC software is made open-source.

13515

