This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Few-Shot Physically-Aware Articulated Mesh Generation
via Hierarchical Deformation

1

Xueyi Liu1,5 , Bin Wang2 , He Wang3 , Li Yi1,4,5
Tsinghua University Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence 3 Peking University
4
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 5 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
2

Abstract

Deformable Convexes

Generated Physically-Plausible
Articulated Meshes
𝑡!

We study the problem of few-shot physically-aware articulated mesh generation. By observing an articulated object
dataset containing only a few examples, we wish to learn
a model that can generate diverse meshes with high visual fidelity and physical validity. Previous mesh generative
models either have difficulties in depicting a diverse data
space from only a few examples or fail to ensure physical
validity of their samples. Regarding the above challenges,
we propose two key innovations, including 1) a hierarchical mesh deformation-based generative model based upon
the divide-and-conquer philosophy to alleviate the few-shot
challenge by borrowing transferrable deformation patterns
from large scale rigid meshes and 2) a physics-aware deformation correction scheme to encourage physically plausible generations. We conduct extensive experiments on
6 articulated categories to demonstrate the superiority of
our method in generating articulated meshes with better
diversity, higher visual fidelity, and better physical validity over previous methods in the few-shot setting. Further,
we validate solid contributions of our two innovations in
the ablation study. Project page with code is available at
meowuu7.github.io/few-arti-obj-gen.

1. Introduction
Generative models have aroused a wide spectrum of interests in recent years for their creativity and broad downstream application scenarios [29, 30, 34, 17, 8, 26]. Specific to 3D generation, a variety of techniques such as denoising diffusion [23, 42, 6, 39] have also been discussed
for a while. Among them, mesh generation is indeed important since the mesh representation can support a wider
range of downstream applications such as rendering and
physical simulation compared to other representations such
as point clouds. Existing works mainly focus on generating meshes for whole objects [8, 26, 6, 19, 30] considering
without modeling object functionalities at all. Besides, they

𝑡"

Pre-training
Large-Scale
Rigid Meshes

𝑡#

Convex-level
Deformation
Module

𝑡$

Fine-tuning

𝑡%
Diversity
Physical Validity

Simulation
Step

A Few
Articulated Meshes

Figure 1.

Overview. We present a hierarchical mesh deformationbased generative model to solve the challenging yet important few-shot
physically-aware articulated mesh generation problem. It tackles the fewshot challenge by borrowing shared convex level deformation patterns
from large-scale rigid meshes and incorporates a deformation correction
scheme to further enhance the model’s ability to generate physically realistic meshes.

mainly rely on reconstructing meshes from other kinds of
representations such as implicit fields [8, 6, 19] instead of
generating meshes directly. In this work, we go one step
further and consider mesh generation for articulated objects
that can support physically realistic articulations. This not
only helps understand the object distribution in real-world
assets, but also allows an intelligent agent to learn segmenting [20, 22], tracking [36], reasoning [10] and manipulating [38] articulated objects through a simulation environment. We focus on the articulated mesh generative model
that can generate object meshes with diverse geometry, high
visual fidelity, and correct physics.
Training a generative model on publicly available articulated mesh datasets to depict a diverse physically-plausible
data space not limited to training assets presents two main
challenges to the methodology. First, existing articulated
object datasets are usually very restricted in scale. For example, the PartNet-Mobility Dataset [37] contains an average of 51 meshes per category. This naturally requires
a few-shot generative model to learn from a very limited
number of meshes. Adapting previous approaches immediately without carefully considering the few-shot nature
would lead to models suffering from poor generative ability. Second, we need to pursue physically plausible generation to ensure the generated meshes are not only visu-

854

