This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAFL-Net: Semantic-Agnostic Feature Learning Network with Auxiliary Plugins
for Image Manipulation Detection
Zhihao Sun1,2 , Haoran Jiang3 , Danding Wang1,2 ,* Xirong Li4 , Juan Cao1,2
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Mathematics Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
MoE Key Lab of Data Engineering and Knowledge Engineering, Renmin University of China
{sunzhihao21s,wangdanding,caojuan}@ict.ac.cn,
jianghaoran21@mails.ucas.ac.cn, xirong@ruc.edu.cn

Tampered

Abstract
Since image editing methods in real world scenarios
cannot be exhausted, generalization is a core challenge
for image manipulation detection, which could be severely
weakened by semantically related features. In this paper
we propose SAFL-Net, which constrains a feature extractor to learn semantic-agnostic features by designing speciﬁc modules with corresponding auxiliary tasks. Applying
constraints directly to the features extracted by the encoder
helps it learn semantic-agnostic manipulation trace features, which prevents the biases related to semantic information within the limited training data and improves generalization capabilities. The consistency of auxiliary boundary prediction task and original region prediction task is
guaranteed by a feature transformation structure. Experiments on various public datasets and comparisons in multiple dimensions demonstrate that SAFL-Net is effective for
image manipulation detection.

1. Introduction
The proliferation of novel image editing techniques has
greatly enriched our visual world. However, these techniques have also brought signiﬁcant challenges to the authenticity and security of graphic media content. To address these issues, image manipulation detection methods
have been proposed to identify the speciﬁc regions that have
been modiﬁed. These techniques are crucial for enabling us
to distinguish between virtual and authentic components of
rich multimedia content.
The majority of tampering operations take place in regions that exhibit strong correlations with semantic proper* Corresponding author.

22424

Gt

Mantra-Net

SPAN

MVSS-Net PSCC-Net

Ours

Figure 1. Some cases of the phenomenon exhibit methods encountering noticeable semantic-related false alarms, as indicated by the
green boxes. Additionally, there are instances of signiﬁcant missed
detection, as denoted by the red boxes.

ties. However, the limited and biased nature of the available
training data means that this correlation is insufﬁcient to
accurately represent the distribution of real-world scenes.
For example, a dataset where tampered areas are concentrated in human regions can cause the detection model to
display signiﬁcant semantic association, leading to incorrect predictions, as illustrated by the regions marked with a
green box in Figure 1. Consequently, this semantic correlation can impact the learning of tampering trace features,
even though it may improve the model’s ﬁt to the training
data. When detecting tampering in an unseen scene, it is essential to identify evidence of tampering rather than rely on
the probabilistic semantic distribution inherent in this constrained training data. Therefore, the most critical issue for
generalization is to learn semantic-agnostic features.
To enhance the generalization ability of semanticagnostic tampering trace features, existing methods have
focused on restricting the semantic information of the input by utilizing hand-crafted feature extraction modules
[14, 26, 25, 10, 13], or by removing the guidance of semantic masks through the conversion of the task and changing
the structure of the segmentation network [19, 28, 2, 22].

