This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Proxy Anchor-based Unsupervised Learning for Continuous Generalized
Category Discovery
Hyungmin Kim1,2

Sungho Suh3,4

Daehwan Kim2
Daun Jeong2
Hansang Cho2
1
Junmo Kim
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, South Korea
2
Samsung Electro-Mechanics, Suwon, South Korea
3
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), Kaiserslautern, Germany
4
Department of Computer Science, RPTU Kaiserslautern-Landau, Kaiserslautern, Germany
{hyungmin83, junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr, sungho.suh@dfki.de
{daehwan85.kim, du33.jeong, hansang.cho}@samsung.com

Abstract
Recent advances in deep learning have significantly improved the performance of various computer vision applications. However, discovering novel categories in an incremental learning scenario remains a challenging problem
due to the lack of prior knowledge about the number and nature of new categories. Existing methods for novel category
discovery are limited by their reliance on labeled datasets
and prior knowledge about the number of novel categories
and the proportion of novel samples in the batch. To address the limitations and more accurately reflect real-world
scenarios, in this paper, we propose a novel unsupervised
class incremental learning approach for discovering novel
categories on unlabeled sets without prior knowledge. The
proposed method fine-tunes the feature extractor and proxy
anchors on labeled sets, then splits samples into old and
novel categories and clusters on the unlabeled dataset. Furthermore, the proxy anchors-based exemplar generates representative category vectors to mitigate catastrophic forgetting. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed
approach outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on finegrained datasets under real-world scenarios.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable performance in various computer vision tasks. However, current
systems are still subject to constraints that are manually
supervised and do not consider continual incremental categories. For extending to real-world environments, there
are still gaps to catch up by overcoming the constraints and
improving their abilities in fundamental tasks. Specifically,
humans still perform better than machines in object cognitive and grouping skills (e.g. recognizing new products

or clothing on shopping and categorizing undefined moving
objects while driving).
Various methods have been proposed to address the
limitations of the tasks by considering real-world circumstances, as presented in Figure 1 and Table 1. In detail,
Novel Category Discovery (NCD) [10, 11, 43] and Generalized Category Discovery (GCD) [36, 6] aim to recognize not only pre-trained categories but also discover novel
categories using a given dataset. NCD considers a disjoint
dataset where labeled and unlabeled novel samples have no
intersection with each other. In contrast, GCD exploits the
joint set with intersected categories, making GCD a more
complicated task than NCD. However, these approaches do
not consider the class incremental scheme. Class incremental NCD (class-iNCD) [33, 15] has been proposed to adopt
the incremental categories on NCD task, but they still focus on improving novel category discovery performance using the disjoint set, which is an unrealistic constraint. To
address this issue, Grow and Merge (GM) [42] proposes
a scenario that exploits the joint unlabeled dataset in the
incremental novel category discovery task, which is called
Continuous Category Discovery Mixed Incremental (CCDMI). However, most existing methods require prior knowledge, such as the number of unlabeled classes for NCD and
class-iNCD, or the proportion of the novel samples in the
batch for CCD-MI. Such prior knowledge requirements are
not enough to mimic the real-world, as we lack information
about the unlabeled sets.
To overcome these constraints, we propose a novel scenario that better represents real-world circumstances by removing constraints on the available data. We assume that
the given datasets are unlabeled joint sets without providing prior knowledge about the data. Employing the scenario, we propose a novel unsupervised class incremental

16688

