This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Inter-Realization Channels: Unsupervised Anomaly Detection Beyond One-Class
Classiﬁcation
Declan McIntosh
University of Victoria
Victoria, B.C., Canada

Alexandra Branzan Albu
University of Victoria
Victoria, B.C., Canada

declanmcintosh@uvic.ca

aalbu@uvic.ca

Abstract
Unsupervised anomaly detection and localization in images is a challenging problem, leading previous methods
to attempt an easier supervised one-class classiﬁcation formalization. Assuming training images to be realizations
of the underlying image distribution, it follows that nominal patches from these realizations will be well associated
between and represented across realizations. From this,
we propose Inter-Realization Channels (InReaCh), a fully
unsupervised method of detecting and localizing anomalies. InReaCh extracts high-conﬁdence nominal patches
from training data by associating them between realizations into channels, only considering channels with high
spans and low spread as nominal. We then create our
nominal model from the patches of these channels to test
new patches against. InReaCh extracts nominal patches
from the MVTec AD dataset with 99.9% precision, then
archives 0.968 AUROC in localization and 0.923 AUROC in detection with corrupted training data, competitive
with current state-of-the-art supervised one-class classiﬁcation methods. We test our model up to 40% of training
data containing anomalies with negligibly affected performance. The shift to fully unsupervised training simpliﬁes
dataset creation and broadens possible applications. Code:
github.com/DeclanMcIntosh/InReaCh

1. Introduction
As a general ﬁeld, beyond computer vision contexts,
anomaly detection seeks to detect abnormal data points
within a larger dataset [6, 26]. In this paper, we focus on
anomaly detection and localization in images, which proves
to be a highly challenging form of anomaly detection due
in part to the high dimensionality of the data [13, 34]. In
recent works, anomaly detection in images has solely focused on one-class classiﬁcation, also known as cold-start
anomaly detection [2, 13, 25, 33, 34, 37]. Unsupervised

Figure 1. Examples of qualitative results of InReaCh on the
MVTec AD dataset [4]. Ground truth anomaly contours are shown
in red. Anomaly localization scores are shown using the Jet Colormap, increasing from blue to red. The upper row shows example
object classes, and the bottom row shows textural classes.

problems have been avoided due to the increased difﬁcultly
from anomaly corruptions in the dataset. Our primary goal
is to reverse this trend by presenting a fully unsupervised
anomaly detection method with competitive results to existing one-class classiﬁcation methods. Industrial defect detection is a natural application for image anomaly detection,
with its expectation of entirely nominal outputs for quality assurance, leading to any anomaly being considered a
defect, referred to as defect detection [4]. This domain is
challenging due to the subtlety of possible anomalies, such
as thin cracks or minor cuts, and the variety of classes,
such as textural classes like leather contrasted with complex but small object classes such as transistors both from
the MVTec Anomaly Detection benchmark [4]. Figure 1
shows some examples of these challenges.
A wide assortment of methods has been proposed for
the one-class classiﬁcation anomaly detection problem that
generally work in two stages. First, from the corruption-free
training dataset, generate a model of nominal features found
therein, then test new images for outliers from this model,
16285

