This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Geometry-Preserving Depth Estimation Using Differentiable Rendering
Chi Zhang1∗ , Wei Yin2 ,* Gang Yu1†, Zhibin Wang1 , Tao Chen3 ,
Bin Fu1 , Joey Tianyi Zhou5 , Chunhua Shen4
1

2
3
4
Tencent
DJI Technology
Fudan University
Zhejiang University
5
5
Centre for Frontier AI Research, A∗ STAR
Institute of High Performance Computing , A∗ STAR

1

2

{johnczhang, skicyyu, billzbwang, brianfu}@tencent.com
yvanwy@outlook.com 3 eetchen@fudan.edu.cn 4 chunhua@me.com 5 joey.tianyi.zhou@gmail.com

SSI

Ours

Raw view

inconsistent

Raw view

Consistent

inconsistent

Consistent

Figure 1: An illustration of our motivation. Zero-shot depth estimation models trained with scale-and-shift invariant (SSI) loss [25]
produce geometry-incomplete depth prediction, which results in distorted 3D structures (left). A good 3D model should look realistic
across different views, such that the depth estimation results of them are consistent. Based on this intuition, we render novel views of the
generated 3D structure and design loss functions to promote the consistency of depth estimation across different views, which produces
realistic 3D structures (right).

Abstract
In this study, we address the challenge of 3D scene structure recovery from monocular depth estimation. While traditional depth estimation methods leverage labeled datasets
to directly predict absolute depth, recent advancements advocate for mix-dataset training, enhancing generalization
across diverse scenes. However, such mixed dataset training yields depth predictions only up to an unknown scale
and shift, hindering accurate 3D reconstructions. Existing solutions necessitate extra 3D datasets or geometrycomplete depth annotations, constraints that limit their versatility. In this paper, we propose a learning framework that

trains models to predict geometry-preserving depth without
requiring extra data or annotations. To produce realistic
3D structures, we render novel views of the reconstructed
scenes and design loss functions to promote depth estimation consistency across different views. Comprehensive experiments underscore our framework’s superior generalization capabilities, surpassing existing state-of-the-art methods on several benchmark datasets without leveraging extra
training information. Moreover, our innovative loss functions empower the model to autonomously recover domainspecific scale-and-shift coefficients using solely unlabeled
images.

* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding author.

8951

