This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RenderIH: A Large-scale Synthetic Dataset for 3D Interacting Hand Pose
Estimation
Lijun Li* 1,2 , Linrui Tian1 , Xindi Zhang1 , Qi Wang1 , Bang Zhang1 , Liefeng Bo1 , Mengyuan Liu3 , and
Chen Chen4
1

Alibaba Group, 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 3 Key Laboratory of Machine Perception,
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, 4 Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of
Central Florida

Abstract
The current interacting hand (IH) datasets are relatively
simplistic in terms of background and texture, with hand
joints being annotated by a machine annotator, which may
result in inaccuracies, and the diversity of pose distribution
is limited. However, the variability of background, pose
distribution, and texture can greatly influence the generalization ability. Therefore, we present a large-scale synthetic dataset –RenderIH– for interacting hands with accurate and diverse pose annotations. The dataset contains
1M photo-realistic images with varied backgrounds, perspectives, and hand textures. To generate natural and diverse interacting poses, we propose a new pose optimization algorithm. Additionally, for better pose estimation
accuracy, we introduce a transformer-based pose estimation network, TransHand, to leverage the correlation between interacting hands and verify the effectiveness of RenderIH in improving results. Our dataset is model-agnostic
and can improve more accuracy of any hand pose estimation method in comparison to other real or synthetic
datasets. Experiments have shown that pretraining on our
synthetic data can significantly decrease the error from
6.76mm to 5.79mm, and our Transhand surpasses contemporary methods. Our dataset and code are available at
https://github.com/adwardlee/RenderIH.

1. Introduction
3D interacting hand (IH) pose estimation from a single
RGB image is a key task for human action understanding
and has many applications, such as human-computer interaction, augmented and virtual reality, and sign language
* Corresponding author: 4065156@qq.com

Figure 1. Randomly selected samples from RenderIH dataset.
The rendered hands are realistic and varied, capturing a variety of
poses, textures, backgrounds, and illuminations.

recognition. However, obtaining 3D interacting hand pose
annotations from real images is very challenging and timeconsuming due to the severe self-occlusion problem. Some
previous works [12, 18] have collected some real hand interaction data using a sophisticated multi-view camera system
and made manual annotations, but the amount of data is limited. Synthetic 3D annotation data has become increasingly
popular among researchers because of its easy acquisition
and accurate annotation [27, 22, 3, 7, 15, 24, 40]. However, there remain two main challenges: the validity of the
generated 3D hand poses and the diversity and realism of
the generated images. Therefore, in this paper, we present a
high-fidelity synthetic dataset of 3D hand interaction poses
for precise monocular hand pose estimation.
Firstly, ensuring the validity of the generated 3D interacting hand poses is a crucial challenge for a synthetic hand
system. For example, the pose of Ego3d [22] is randomized
which means a significant portion of the data is not valid. To
ensure effective hand interactions, the generated two-hand
poses must be proximal to each other, while increasing the
risk of hand interpenetration. Therefore, we design an op-

20395

