This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Effective Instance Discrimination Contrastive Loss
for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation

1

Yixin Zhang1,2 Zilei Wang*2 Junjie Li2 Jiafan Zhuang3 Zihan Lin2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
2
University of Science and Technology of China
3
Shantou University

{zhyx12, zlwang}@ustc.edu.cn, {hnljj, myustc}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jfzhuang@stu.edu.cn

Sample feature

Abstract
Domain adaptation (DA) aims to transfer knowledge
from a label-rich source domain to a related but labelscarce target domain. Recently, increasing research has
focused on exploring data structure of the target domain.
In light of the recent success of Instance Discrimination
Contrastive (IDCo) loss in self-supervised learning, we try
directly applying it to domain adaptation tasks. However,
the improvement is very limited, which motivates us to rethink its underlying limitations for domain adaptation tasks.
An intuitive limitation is that a pair of samples belonging to
the same class could be treated as negatives. Here we argue
that using low-confidence samples to construct positive and
negative pairs can alleviate this issue and is more suitable
for IDCo loss. Another limitation is that IDCo loss cannot
capture enough semantic information. We address this by
introducing domain-invariant and accurate semantic information from classifier weights and input data. Specifically,
we propose a class relationship enhanced features. It uses
probability weighted class prototpyes as the input features
of IDCo loss, which can implicitly transfer the domaininvariant class relationship. We further propose a targetdominated cross-domain mixup that can incorporate accurate semantic information from the source domain. We evaluate the proposed method in unsupervised DA and other
DA settings, and extensive experimental results reveal that
our method can make IDCo loss more effective and achieve
state-of-the-art performance.1

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have shown considerable effectiveness in a variety of machine learning challenges [29,
5, 56]. However, the impressive performance gain heavily
* Corresponding author
1 Code is available at https://github.com/zhyx12/EIDCo

Classifier weight

Class Relationship Enhanced Features

Prediction 𝒑𝒑

Class 2

Class 3

Pull together

Low-confidence Features

Push away
Target-Dominated Mixup
Feature of Low-confidence
Target Image

Weighted
Sum

Sample
Similarity

Classifier
weights

Prediction 𝒒𝒒

Class 1

Feature of Source Image

Weighted
Sum

Target Features during Training

Feature of
Mixed Image

Effective Instance Discrimination
Contrastive Loss

Target Features after Training

Figure 1. Illustration of our proposed method. The bottom left represents the target-domain feature distribution during training. The
bottom right is the feature distribution obtained by our method.
The upper part is our proposed effective instance discrimination
contrastive loss, which contains three key designs. Best viewed in
color.

relies on massive well-labeled training data. Additionally,
manually annotating sufficient training data is often time
and expense prohibitive in reality. Besides, another disadvantage of traditional deep learning is its inability to generalize to new datasets due to the domain shift problem [2, 1].
Domain Adaptation (DA) addresses this issue by utilizing
the knowledge of a label-rich source domain to assist the
learning in a related but label-scarce target domain.
The most popular way to deal with domain shift is to
learn domain-invariant representations. We can roughly
classify these DA approaches as either discrepancy metricbased methods [45, 83] or adversarial-based methods [72,
42, 9]. Recently, there have been more methods exploring
the inherent structures of unlabeled target domains, such as
self-training through pseudo labels [15, 101, 27, 43] and
aligning prototypes across domains [25, 95]. The majority
of them rely on trustworthy samples selected by some criteria, such as probability [52, 3] and sample ratio [101]. This
can create reliable pseudo labels or prototypes, leading to
better discriminability on the target domain. However, this

11388

