This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Event-based Temporally Dense
Optical Flow Estimation with Sequential Learning
Wachirawit Ponghiran

Chamika Mihiranga Liyanagedera
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA

Kaushik Roy

{wponghir,cliyanag,kaushik}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Event cameras provide an advantage over traditional
frame-based cameras when capturing fast-moving objects
without a motion blur. They achieve this by recording
changes in light intensity (known as events), thus allowing them to operate at a much higher frequency and making them suitable for capturing motions in a highly dynamic scene. Many recent studies have proposed methods
to train neural networks (NNs) for predicting optical flow
from events. However, they often rely on a spatio-temporal
representation constructed from events over a fixed interval,
such as 10 Hz used in training on the DSEC dataset. This
limitation restricts the flow prediction to the same interval
(10 Hz) whereas the fast speed of event cameras, which can
operate up to 3 kHz, has not been effectively utilized. In this
work, we show that a temporally dense flow estimation at
100 Hz can be achieved by treating the flow estimation as a
sequential problem using two different variants of recurrent
networks – Long-short term memory (LSTM) and spiking
neural network (SNN). First, We utilize the NN model constructed similar to the popular EV-FlowNet but with LSTM
layers to demonstrate the efficiency of our training method.
The model not only produces 10× more frequent optical
flow than the existing ones, but the estimated flows also
have 13% lower errors than predictions from the baseline
EV-FlowNet. Second, we construct an EV-FlowNet SNN
but with leaky integrate and fire neurons to efficiently capture the temporal dynamics. We found that simple inherent
recurrent dynamics of SNN lead to significant parameter reduction compared to the LSTM model. In addition, because
of its event-driven computation, the spiking model is estiThis work was supported in part by, Center for Brain-inspired Computing (C-BRIC), a DARPA sponsored JUMP center, Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC), National Science Foundation, the DoD Vannevar Bush Fellowship, and IARPA MicroE4AI.
Code is available at https://github.com/wponghiran/
temporally_dense_flow

mated to consume only 1.5% energy of the LSTM model,
highlighting the efficiency of SNN in processing events and
the potential for achieving temporally dense flow.

1. Introduction
Optical flow estimation is a core problem in computer
vision that evaluates the motion of each pixel between any
two consecutive images captured by a frame-based camera. Optical flow information enables an observer to visualize a motion field which is useful for numerous applications such as object trajectory prediction [21], robotic control [25], and autonomous driving [16]. The problem has
been traditionally addressed using various classical computer vision techniques like correlation-based [27], blockmatching [1] and energy minimization-based [14] techniques, but their computational costs have shown to be
prohibitively expensive for real-time applications. Neural
network (NN) based techniques for optical flow prediction
[6, 22, 28] have been proposed and remain a popular lowcost computing method. Generally, NN models receive two
consecutive images taken by a frame-based camera as input and predict the optical flow that best warps pixels from
one image to another. However, due to the limited dynamic
range of such frame-based cameras, the performance of the
aforementioned techniques may be affected by motion blur
or temporal aliasing.
Methods to estimate optical flow from event camera outputs offer a promising alternative to the frame-based approaches [12, 18, 19, 31, 33, 34]. An event camera logs light
intensity change at each pixel (so-called events) rather than
measuring actual light intensity for a fixed duration. Thus,
an event camera can generate a stream of events at high
temporal resolution as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). The resolution may be as small as 300 µs [7], making event-based
optical flow estimation less susceptible to motion blur and
more suitable for a highly dynamic scene. Nonetheless,
being able to effectively extract information from a high-

9827

