This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SegRCDB: Semantic Segmentation via Formula-Driven Supervised Learning
Risa Shinoda1 , Ryo Hayamizu1 , Kodai Nakashima1 , Nakamasa Inoue2 , Rio Yokota2 , Hirokatsu Kataoka1
1
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST)
2
Tokyo Institute of Technology

Abstract
Pre-training is a strong strategy for enhancing visual
models to efficiently train them with a limited number of
labeled images. In semantic segmentation, creating annotation masks requires an intensive amount of labor and time,
and therefore, a large-scale pre-training dataset with semantic labels is quite difficult to construct. Moreover, what
matters in semantic segmentation pre-training has not been
fully investigated. In this paper, we propose the Segmentation Radial Contour DataBase (SegRCDB), which for the
first time applies formula-driven supervised learning for semantic segmentation. SegRCDB enables pre-training for
semantic segmentation without real images or any manual
semantic labels. SegRCDB is based on insights about what
is important in pre-training for semantic segmentation and
allows efficient pre-training. Pre-training with SegRCDB
achieved higher mIoU than the pre-training with COCOStuff for fine-tuning on ADE-20k and Cityscapes with the
same number of training images. SegRCDB has a high potential to contribute to semantic segmentation pre-training
and investigation by enabling the creation of large datasets
without manual annotation. The SegRCDB dataset will be
released under a license that allows research and commercial use. Code is available at: https://github.com/
dahlian00/SegRCDB

1. Introduction
Preparing a semantic segmentation dataset requires
pixel-level, dense annotation, and therefore, creating a fully
annotated dataset incurs a huge amount of effort. For a
dataset such as Cityscapes [7], around 90 minutes per image
is required for pixel-level annotation. This makes it difficult
to create a large semantic segmentation dataset.
To perform training with a limited dataset, using a pretrained model with a large-scale image dataset is a promising method for enhancing network performance in terms of
recognition accuracy. The use of a model pre-trained on a
larger-scale image dataset has become a standard approach.
Undoubtedly, ImageNet [8] is one of the de-facto-standard

What Matters in Semantic Segmentation Pre-training?
w/ occlusion

w/o occlusion

w/o color

Pre-training Image

Fine-tuning

𝑚!

w/ color

@ ADE-20k
COCO-Stuff-164k 43.39
RCDB
41.07
SegRCDB (Ours) 43.85

𝑁=6

𝑚"

𝑚#

Ground Truth Mask

@ Cityscapes
GTA5
71.00
RCDB
69.66
SegRCDB (Ours) 73.06

Figure 1. Segmentation Radial Contour DataBase (SegRCDB).
We developed the first formula-driven supervised learning (FDSL)
method for semantic segmentation. We created a precise pixelwise ground truth mask without manual effort.

datasets, even in the semantic segmentation field. However,
ethical issues have been reported in terms of dataset biases
and privacy violations [24, 40, 41]. There have also been reports [42, 34] that one of the most frequently used segmentation datasets (Microsoft COCO [18]) also raises concerns
regarding transfer learning due to ethical issues.
To overcome these technical (manual annotation) and
ethical (fairness and dataset transparency) problems, a synthetic dataset can be implemented to construct a pre-trained
segmentation model. Synthetic datasets for semantic segmentation have been created for specialized use in certain
domains [27, 29, 22]. However, even though the annotation time is reduced, McCormac et al. reported that it took
up to approximately one month using 4-12 GPUs to produce a 5M-image dataset [22]. For automatic dataset creation, we must define a 3D scene design that includes object
categories and positional content, and consider the camera

20054

