This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

XVO: Generalized Visual Odometry via Cross-Modal Self-Training
Lei Lai∗

Zhongkai Shangguan∗ Jimuyang Zhang
Boston University

Eshed Ohn-Bar

{leilai, sgzk, zhangjim, eohnbar}@bu.edu

Teacher Model

Abstract
1. Supervised Training

We propose XVO, a semi-supervised learning method
for training generalized monocular Visual Odometry (VO)
models with robust off-the-self operation across diverse
datasets and settings. In contrast to standard monocular VO approaches which often study a known calibration
within a single dataset, XVO efficiently learns to recover
relative pose with real-world scale from visual scene semantics, i.e., without relying on any known camera parameters. We optimize the motion estimation model via selftraining from large amounts of unconstrained and heterogeneous dash camera videos available on YouTube. Our
key contribution is twofold. First, we empirically demonstrate the benefits of semi-supervised training for learning a general-purpose direct VO regression network. Second, we demonstrate multi-modal supervision, including
segmentation, flow, depth, and audio auxiliary prediction
tasks, to facilitate generalized representations for the VO
task. Specifically, we find audio prediction task to significantly enhance the semi-supervised learning process while
alleviating noisy pseudo-labels, particularly in highly dynamic and out-of-domain video data. Our proposed teacher
network achieves state-of-the-art performance on the commonly used KITTI benchmark despite no multi-frame optimization or knowledge of camera parameters. Combined
with the proposed semi-supervised step, XVO demonstrates
off-the-shelf knowledge transfer across diverse conditions
on KITTI, nuScenes, and Argoverse without fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
Monocular Visual Odometry (VO) methods for recovering ego-motion from a sequence of images have mostly
been studied within a restricted scope, where a single
dataset, such as KITTI [28], may be used for both training
and evaluation under a fixed pre-calibrated camera [37, 45,
54, 77, 109, 112, 116, 124, 126, 128]. However, very few
∗ Equally contributed.

2. Pseudo-Labeling

yaux

y

y
~

~
yaux

3. Filtering
4. Supervised Training

Student Model

Figure 1: Learning General-Purpose Monocular Visual Odometry (VO) Models from Multi-Modal and
Pseudo-Labeled Videos. Our proposed XVO framework
first trains an ego-motion prediction teacher model over a
small initial dataset, e.g., nuScenes [7]. We then expand
the original dataset through pseudo-labeling of in-the-wild
videos. Motivated by how humans learn general representations through observation of large amounts of multimodal data, we employ multiple auxiliary prediction tasks,
including segmentation, flow, depth, and audio, as part of
the semi-supervised training process. Finally, we leverage uncertainty-based filtering of potentially noisy pseudolabels and train a robust student model.
studies have analyzed the task of generalized VO, i.e., relative pose estimation with real-world scale across differing
scenes and capture setups.
For instance, consider an autonomous robot or vehicle
deployed at a large scale. The robot is highly likely to encounter environments for which no ground truth ego-motion
data was previously collected. In such novel settings, current VO methods will quickly exhibit poor ego-motion estimation and drift [23, 24, 29, 46, 47, 65, 96, 128]. Moreover,
our robot may be required to adjust its camera setup over its
lifetime (e.g., to a new camera) or leverage data from a fleet
of robots with varying or perhaps unknown camera configurations. Yet, existing VO methods generally assume care-

10094

