This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Retrospect to Multi-prompt Learning across Vision and Language
Ziliang Chen1,3 , Xin Huang2 , Quanlong Guan1 ,* Liang Lin2 Weiqi Luo1
1

Jinan University

2

Sun Yat-sen University

3

Pazhou Laboratory

c.ziliang@yahoo.com, huangx353@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {Gql,lwq}@jnu.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
The vision community is undergoing the unprecedented
progress with the emergence of Vision-Language Pretraining Models (VLMs). Prompt learning plays as the holy grail
of accessing VLMs since it enables their fast adaptation to
downstream tasks with limited resources. Whereas existing
researches milling around single-prompt paradigms, rarely
investigate the technical potential behind their multi-prompt
learning counterparts. This paper aims to provide a principled retrospect for vision-language multi-prompt learning.
We extend the recent constant modality gap phenomenon to
learnable prompts and then, justify the superiority of visionlanguage transfer with multi-prompt augmentation, empirically and theoretically. In terms of this observation, we propose an Energy-based Multi-prompt Learning (EMPL) to
generate multiple prompt embeddings by drawing instances
from an energy-based distribution, which is implicitly defined by VLMs. So our EMPL is not only parameter-efficient
but also rigorously lead to the balance between in-domain
and out-of-domain open-vocabulary generalization. Comprehensive experiments have been conducted to justify our
claims and the excellence of EMPL.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the rise of multimodal intelligence, in particular, Vision-Language Pre-training models
(VLMs), e.g., CLIP [40], ALIGN [24], achieving downstream tasks in low resources by converting the prior knowledge behind large language models (LLMs) [10, 4]. Given a
pair of image encoder (e.g., ResNet [19], ViT [11], etc) and
text encoder (i.e., LLMs), VLMs align visual features with
their corresponding textual description embeddings via contrastive learning [12, 18, 56]. So provided a text known as
prompt, VLMs may rapidly adapt to diverse tasks [12, 32]
by matching harmony visual patterns with the textual description. The principle sheds a new light in computer vision for in-domain and out-of-domain generalization.
The impressive cross-modal transferability behind VLM
* indicate corresponding author.

Figure 1. The overview of cross-modal single-prompt learning and
multi-prompt learning (MPL). With more prompt templates, MPL
brings new opportunities and challenges as discussed in the community, yet seldom giving a systematic investigation and solution.

typically owes to the problem-customized prompting style,
yet demanding a great magnitude of trials and errors for selecting the ideal prompt template from a pool of candidates.
Tedious workloads are consumed and do not guarantee the
optimal prompt template either. Instead of the prompt engineering, prompt learning / tuning [55] sidesteps the obstacle using soft prompting: outside of the words related with
what we are interested in, the rest of textual slots in the template are replaced by a sequence of learnable context vectors ahead of the text encoder. In this principle, the optimal
prompt template could be achieved by fine-tuning the learnable context vectors along with the given textual semantic
while keeping the rest parameters of VLMs frozen for the
optimization. The data-driven merit increasingly arouses a
flood of interests in the community [54, 42, 46].
Despite the significant progress, existing work of prompt
learning focused on a single template whereas multi-prompt
learnable context templates remain under-explored (Fig.1).
Recent NLP advance argue that instructing LLMs via more
prompts may trigger its underlying in-context learning ability to master new skills [4]. In this regard, multi-prompting

22190

