This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FaceCLIPNeRF: Text-driven 3D Face Manipulation using Deformable
Neural Radiance Fields
Sungwon Hwang1

Junha Hyung1
1

Daejin Kim2
2

KAIST

Min-Jung Kim1

Jaegul Choo1

Scatter Lab

{shwang.14, sharpeeee, emjay73, jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr, daejin@scatterlab.co.kr

Reference

(a) Dynamic Scene

“closed eyes and
opened mouth”

“frowning eyes and
pursed lips”

“happy face”

“crying face”

“scared face”

(b) Text-driven manipulations to (left) locally descriptive and (right) emotional expression texts

Figure 1: FaceCLIPNeRF reconstructs a video of a dynamic scene of a face, and conducts face manipulation using texts
only. Manipulated faces and their depths in top and bottom rows in (b), respectively, are rendered from novel views.

Abstract

a manipulated scene with spatially varying latent codes.
Their renderings with the scene manipulator are then optimized to yield high cosine similarity to a target text in
CLIP embedding space for text-driven manipulation. To the
best of our knowledge, our approach is the ﬁrst to address
the text-driven manipulation of a face reconstructed with
NeRF. Extensive results, comparisons, and ablation studies
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

As recent advances in Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF)
have enabled high-ﬁdelity 3D face reconstruction and novel
view synthesis, its manipulation also became an essential
task in 3D vision. However, existing manipulation methods require extensive human labor, such as a user-provided
semantic mask and manual attribute search unsuitable for
non-expert users. Instead, our approach is designed to require a single text to manipulate a face reconstructed with
NeRF. To do so, we ﬁrst train a scene manipulator, a latent
code-conditional deformable NeRF, over a dynamic scene
to control a face deformation using the latent code. However, representing a scene deformation with a single latent
code is unfavorable for compositing local deformations observed in different instances. As so, our proposed Positionconditional Anchor Compositor (PAC) learns to represent

1. Introduction
Easy manipulation of 3D face representation is an
essential aspect of advancements in 3D digital human
contents[33]. Though Neural Radiance Field[21] (NeRF)
made a big step forward in a 3D scene reconstruction, many
of its manipulative methods targets color[4, 35] or rigid ge3469

