This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Structure–Aware Surface Reconstruction via Primitive Assembly
*

Jingen Jiang1,2,3,4

*

Mingyang Zhao1,5

Shiqing Xin4

Yanchao Yang6
†

Hanxiao Wang1,3 Xiaohong Jia2,3 Dong-Ming Yan1,3
1
MAIS & NLPR, CASIA 2 KLMM, AMSS, CAS
3
4
UCAS
Shandong University 5 BAAI 6 The University of Hong Kong

Figure 1: Surface reconstruction for measurement point clouds. In contrast to piecewise approximations (KSR), our method
not only delivers manifold and watertight surfaces but also retains the primitive structures (planes, cylinders, spheres, cones,
and tori) faithfully. Also, our method enables the recovery of the sharp geometry of objects (e.g., feature lines) as a byproduct.

Abstract
We propose a novel and efficient method for reconstructing manifold surfaces from point clouds. Unlike previous approaches that use dense implicit reconstructions or
piecewise approximations and overlook inherent structures
like quadrics in CAD models, our method faithfully preserves these quadric structures by assembling primitives.
To achieve high-quality primitive extraction, we use a variational shape approximation, followed by a mesh arrangement for space partitioning and candidate primitive patches
generation. We then introduce an effective pruning mechanism to classify candidate primitive patches as active or
inactive, and further prune inactive patches to reduce the
search space and speed up surface extraction significantly.
Finally, the optimal active patches are computed by a binary linear programming and assembled as manifold and
watertight surfaces. We perform extensive experiments on a
wide range of CAD objects to validate its effectiveness.

* The authors contribute equally to this work.
† Corresponding author (yandongming@gmail.com).

1. Introduction
The problem of converting unorganized point clouds into
surface meshes, also known as surface reconstruction, has
various applications in 3D vision, computer graphics, and
architecture geometry. In recent decades, although many
powerful algorithms have been devoted to pursuing faithful and accurate reconstructions [19, 21, 34, 28, 27, 49], it
remains a challenging task due to the inherent ill-posed nature [11, 36, 5].
The popular Poisson reconstruction methods [24, 25] implicitly generate dense smooth surfaces for point clouds,
while others mainly focus on giving a compact approximation to objects by piecewise planar shapes or polygonal meshes [7, 13, 3, 35]. However, man-made objects
in real-world scenarios are typically composed of nonplanar quadratic surfaces or quadric structures, such as the
Computer-Aided Design (CAD) models (see Fig. 1 as an example). Therefore, reconstructing manifold surface meshes
from measurement data meanwhile retaining their intrinsic primitive structures in principle shall generate higherquality approximation results than solely relying on poly-

14171

