This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiLiGenT-Π: Photometric Stereo for Planar Surfaces with Rich Details –
Benchmark Dataset and Beyond
Feishi Wang1,2,3,†

Jieji Ren4,†

Heng Guo5,6,†

Mingjun Ren4,‡

Boxin Shi1,2,3,‡

1

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
AI Innovation Center, School of Computer Science, Peking University
4
School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
5
6
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Osaka University
{wangfeishi, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn, {jiejiren, renmj}@sjtu.edu.cn, guoheng.bupt@gmail.com

Abstract
Photometric stereo aims to recover detailed surface
shapes from images captured under varying illuminations.
However, existing real-world datasets primarily focus on
evaluating photometric stereo for general non-Lambertian
reflectances and feature bulgy shapes that have a certain height. As shape detail recovery is the key strength
of photometric stereo over other 3D reconstruction techniques, and the near-planar surfaces widely exist in cultural relics and manufacturing workpieces, we present a
new real-world dataset DiLiGenT-Π containing 30 nearplanar scenes with rich surface details. This dataset enables us to evaluate recent photometric stereo methods
specifically for their ability to estimate shape details under diverse materials and to identify open problems such as
near-planar surface normal estimation from uncalibrated
photometric stereo and surface detail recovery for translucent materials. To inspire future research, this dataset will
open soruced at https://photometricstereo.
github.io/diligentpi.html.

1. Introduction
Photometric stereo [47, 44] aims at single view threedimensional (3D) reconstruction from image observations
captured under varying lights. Compared to structured
light-based 3D reconstruction techniques that are widely
applied in commercial scanners, the key strength of photometric stereo is the detailed surface shape recovery, which is
of great interest for additive manufacturing and rendering.
To evaluate the effectiveness of photometric stereo methods, a batch of real-world benchmark datasets have been
† Equally contributed authors

‡ Corresponding authors.

built such as DiLiGenT [43, 41] (and its multi-view extension DiLiGenT-MV [29]), DiLiGenT102 [39] for distant
lights, and LUCES [34] for near lights. Existing datasets
focus on evaluating the effectiveness of photometric stereo
techniques on non-Lambertian surfaces, revealing the performance of existing methods on real-world scenes. Since
the majority of target objects in these datasets are smooth
surfaces (some of them with a portion of detailed structures
on the surface), it is hard to evaluate the accuracy of surface detail recovery, which is unique to photometric stereo
over other 3D reconstruction techniques. On the other hand,
near-planar surfaces usually accompanied with rich details
are commonly observed in our daily life, such as reliefs,
badges, and coins. However, existing photometric stereo
datasets mainly choose statue-like objects or other bulgy
shapes with a certain height as targets, lacking sophisticated
evaluation on near-planar surfaces.
In this paper, we build a new dataset named DiLiGenTΠ1 for photometric stereo focusing on the recovery of nearplanar shape and surface details. As shown in Fig. 1, we collect 30 representative real-world planar objects with rapidly
varied geometric details. The dataset can be categorized
into 4 groups containing metallic, specular, rough, and
translucent surface reflectance, respectively. The metallic group contains 10 metallic coins; the specular group includes 10 enamel badges; the translucent group has 5 3Dprinted objects made by photo-polymer resin, and the rough
group contains 5 surfaces sharing the same geometry of the
translucent group but sprayed with a matte paint [35]. In
addition, our DiLiGenT-Π takes an optical profilometer to
capture the ultra-precise surface 3D structure in nanometer
1 ‘DiLiGenT’ [41] as the abbreviation of Directional Lighting, General

reflectance, with the ‘ground Truth’ shapes for photometric stereo benchmarking. As we take the similar assumptions, we refer DiLiGenT as prefix
and use Π to indicate planar objects.

9477

