This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

C HAMPAGNE: Learning Real-world Conversation
from Large-Scale Web Videos
Seungju Han
 Seoul National University

Jack Hessel~

Nouha Dziri~

~ Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence

Yejin Choi~}

Youngjae Yu~|

} University of Washington

wade3han@snu.ac.kr

| Yonsei University

20M videos

1. Extracting & filtering videos

[Automatically Generated Transcript] it's only a matter of time before someone else sees this investment
we have that how do you know the bonds are worthless aren't they filled with thousands I read them you …

2. Converter turns noisy transcript to dialog format

No, the person is NOT positive.

[Converted Video-based Dialog; 18M dialogs]
It's only a matter of time before someone
else sees this investment we have.
How do you know the bonds are worthless?
Aren't they filled with thousands?
I read them.
You read them?
I read yes.

[Understanding Social Interaction]
Is the Person B positive?

[Visually-grounded Dialog]
What would Person B say next?

Learns about real-world
conversations from
18M video-based dialogs

“No one reads them, only the lawyers
who put them together read them.”

Figure 1:
C HAMPAGNE is a generative model of real-world conversational frames trained on
YTD-18M, a dataset
of 18M video-based dialogues. YTD-18M is derived from public videos and their associated transcripts; a language model
automatically grounds the conversation turns to the speakers. C HAMPAGNE attains state-of-the-art results on four competitive
vision-language benchmarks after fine-tuning.

Abstract
Visual information is central to conversation: body gestures and physical behaviour, for example, contribute to
meaning that transcends words alone. To date, however,
most neural conversational models are limited to just text.
We introduce C HAMPAGNE, a generative model of conversations that can account for visual contexts. To train
C HAMPAGNE, we collect and release
YTD-18M, a
large-scale corpus of 18M video-based dialogues. YTD18M is constructed from web videos: crucial to our data
collection pipeline is a pretrained language model that converts error-prone automatic transcripts to a cleaner dialogue format while maintaining meaning.
Human evaluation reveals that YTD-18M is more sensible and specific than prior resources (MMDialog [17], 1M

dialogues), while maintaining visual-groundedness. Experiments demonstrate that 1) C HAMPAGNE learns to conduct conversation from YTD-18M; and 2) when fine-tuned,
it achieves state-of-the-art results on four vision-language
tasks focused on real-world conversations. We release data,
models, and code at https://seungjuhan.me/champagne.

1. Introduction
Conversation often relies on non-verbal cues: visual information like physical expressions, body gesture, or the
surrounding environment are used by interlocutors to shape
and understand meaning. Figure 1: the two conversation
participants appear stressed (in the first image: one person
strikes the desk with his fists; in the second, the other person
is rubbing his face); but the tension is not apparent simply

15498

