This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bridging Vision and Language Encoders:
Parameter-Efficient Tuning for Referring Image Segmentation
Zunnan Xu1 * Zhihong Chen2,3 * Yong Zhang4 Yibing Song5 Xiang Wan3 Guanbin Li1†
1
Sun Yat-sen University 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data 4 Tencent AI Lab 5 AI3 Institute, Fudan University
xuzn3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
{zhangyong201303, yibingsong.cv}@gmail.com

Abstract
Parameter Efficient Tuning (PET) has gained attention
for reducing the number of parameters while maintaining
performance and providing better hardware resource savings, but few studies investigate dense prediction tasks and
interaction between modalities. In this paper, we do an investigation of efficient tuning problems on referring image
segmentation. We propose a novel adapter called Bridger
to facilitate cross-modal information exchange and inject
task-specific information into the pre-trained model. We
also design a lightweight decoder for image segmentation.
Our approach achieves comparable or superior performance
with only 1.61% to 3.38% backbone parameter updates, evaluated on challenging benchmarks. The code is available at
https://github.com/kkakkkka/ETRIS.

zhihongchen@link.cuhk.edu.cn
wanxiang@sribd.com

liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Step1: Vision Language Pre-training

Image-Text
Pair

Vision Encoder
Language Encoder

Self-Supervised
Learning Task

Step2: Fine tuning
Image

Vision Encoder

Text

Language Encoder

Task
Decoder

Seg
Mask

Task
Decoder

Seg
Mask

(a) Previous Method
Step2: Fine tuning with Bridger
Image

Vision Encoder
Bridger

Text

Language Encoder

(b) Ours Method

1. Introduction
Referring image segmentation (RIS) aims to predict a
mask for the target object described by a given natural language sentence based on the input image and text. This task
is distinct from semantic segmentation, which assigns each
pixel in an image with a label from a fixed word set. Instead,
RIS needs to recognize the objects indicated by the language
expression, which is of greater complexity due to its arbitrary
context length and involving an open-world vocabulary such
as object names, attributes, positions, etc.
Recent studies [43, 12, 11] have shown the effectiveness
of fine-tuning general-purpose pre-trained models for visual
grounding. However, these approaches have a separate copy
of fine-tuned model parameters for each dataset, making it
expensive to deploy models across multiple scenarios. This
issue is particularly significant for large-scale pre-trained
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Figure 1: Previous method vs. our method. (a) The conventional method pre-trains visual language models on datasets
with image-text pairs using self-supervised learning and finetunes them on downstream tasks. (b) We propose Bridger,
an Adapter-like module that incorporates inductive biases
and task-specific information into the pre-trained model.

models, which now consist of hundreds of millions to trillions of parameters [31, 50, 5].
Therefore, we ask an essential question: can the model
maintain a competitive performance with pre-trained backbone network parameters fixed?. Various parameter-efficient
training methods [16, 20, 15, 4, 9, 50] have been proposed to
achieve a balance between parameter efficiency and performance. However, most of the existing methods are limited to
either single-modal tasks [16, 20, 9] or simple classification
tasks [15, 4, 50] with few studies focusing on dense prediction tasks and the interaction between different modalities,

17503

