This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Supervised Homography Learning with Realistic Dataset Generation
†

†

Hai Jiang1,2,*, Haipeng Li3,2,*, Songchen Han1, , Haoqiang Fan2 , Bing Zeng3 , Shuaicheng Liu3,2,
1
Sichuan University 2 Megvii Technology
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

{jianghai1@stu., hansongchen@}scu.edu.cn, {jianghai,lihaipeng,fhq,liushuaicheng}@megvii.com
{lihaipeng@std.,eezeng@,liushuaicheng@}uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an iterative framework, which
consists of two phases: a generation phase and a training phase, to generate realistic training data and yield a
supervised homography network. In the generation phase,
given an unlabeled image pair, we utilize the pre-estimated
dominant plane masks and homography of the pair, along
with another sampled homography that serves as ground
truth to generate a new labeled training pair with realistic motion. In the training phase, the generated data is
used to train the supervised homography network, in which
the training data is refined via a content consistency module and a quality assessment module. Once an iteration
is finished, the trained network is used in the next data
generation phase to update the pre-estimated homography.
Through such an iterative strategy, the quality of the dataset
and the performance of the network can be gradually and
simultaneously improved. Experimental results show that
our method achieves state-of-the-art performance and existing supervised methods can be also improved based on
the generated dataset. Code and dataset are available at
https://github.com/JianghaiSCU/RealSH.

1. Introduction
Homography estimation is a fundamental task in computer vision that has been widely used for high-dynamic
range imaging [40, 24, 25], image stitching [32, 31], and
video stabilization [23, 43]. Traditional methods typically
use feature extraction and matching methods [26, 3] with
outlier suppression [9, 2] to obtain feature matches of two
images and subsequently solve direct linear transformation (DLT) [11] to obtain the homography matrix. However, these methods highly rely on the extracted matching
keypoints and may crash in challenging scenes that lack
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding authors

label criteria

realism criteria

(a) Previous strategy

label criteria

realism criteria

(b) Ours

Figure 1. The first row shows the target images generated by the
previous strategy [6] and our proposed method, visualized by superimposing the source image warped by GT homography on the
generated target image, where the misaligned pixels are represented as colored ghosts. As highlighted in yellow boxes, the
dominant plane is fully aligned by the GT homography, proving
that both our method and the previous strategy can satisfy the label criteria. In contrast, only our method can maintain realistic
motion between the two images thus satisfying the realism criteria, as shown in the red boxes, the car is a moving object that
cannot be aligned by a homography.

sufficient high-quality feature matches. With the rise of
deep learning, such problems have been partially solved,
learning-based methods [22, 20, 13] take a pair of images
as input and directly output the corresponding homography, thus are more robust than traditional methods due to
their keypoint-free estimation strategy. The learning-based
methods can be divided into two categories: supervised and
unsupervised. At the moment, benefiting from the labelfree characteristic, unsupervised methods can be trained
on enormous amounts of real-world data, delivering better
performance and generalization capability than supervised
ones. We find that the lack of qualified training data is one
of the main barriers to the development of supervised methods. Previously supervised dataset generation strategy [6]
synthesizes an image pair by using pre-defined ground truth
(GT) homography to warp a single image, such strategy
considers the whole image as a single plane, neglecting par-

9806

