This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Activate and Reject: Towards Safe Domain Generalization under Category Shift
Chaoqi Chen1 ,* Luyao Tang2 ,* Leitian Tao3 , Hong-Yu Zhou1 , Yue Huang2 , Xiaoguang Han4†, Yizhou Yu1†
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Xiamen University
3
University of Wisconsin - Madison 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
cqchen1994@gmail.com, lytang@stu.xmu.edu.cn, taoleitian@gmail.com, whuzhouhongyu@gmail.com
yhuang2010@xmu.edu.cn, hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn, yizhouy@acm.org

Source Domain (Train)

Abstract
Albeit the notable performance on in-domain test points,
it is non-trivial for deep neural networks to attain satisfactory accuracy when deploying in the open world, where
novel domains and object classes often occur. In this paper, we study a practical problem of Domain Generalization under Category Shift (DGCS), which aims to simultaneously detect unknown-class samples and classify knownclass samples in the target domains. Compared to prior DG
works, we face two new challenges: 1) how to learn the concept of “unknown” during training with only source knownclass samples, and 2) how to adapt the source-trained
model to unseen environments for safe model deployment.
To this end, we propose a novel Activate and Reject (ART)
framework to reshape the model’s decision boundary to accommodate unknown classes and conduct post hoc modification to further discriminate known and unknown classes
using unlabeled test data. Specifically, during training, we
promote the response to the unknown by optimizing the unknown probability and then smoothing the overall output
to mitigate the overconfidence issue. At test time, we introduce a step-wise online adaptation method that predicts
the label by virtue of the cross-domain nearest neighbor
and class prototype information without updating the network’s parameters or using threshold-based mechanisms.
Experiments reveal that ART consistently improves the generalization capability of deep networks on different vision
tasks. For image classification, ART improves the H-score
by 6.1% on average compared to the previous best method.
For object detection and semantic segmentation, we establish new benchmarks and achieve competitive performance.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved unprecedented success in a myriad of vision tasks over the past decade. Despite the promise, a well-trained model deployed in the open
* First two authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding authors.

Known

Target Domain (Test)
Known

Unknown

Figure 1. DGCS in image classification and object detection tasks.

and ever-changing world often struggles to deal with the
domain shifts—the training and testing data do not follow
the independent and identically distributed (i.i.d) assumption, and therefore deteriorates its safety and reliability in
many safety-critical applications, such as autonomous driving and computer-aided disease diagnosis. This gives rise to
the importance of Domain Generalization (DG) [101, 83],
a.k.a. out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization, which aims
at generalizing predictive models trained on multiple (or a
single) source domains to unseen target distributions.
In order to unearth domain-agnostic knowledge and alleviate domain-specific components, a plethora of DG algorithms have been proposed, spanning invariant risk minimization [2, 1], augmentation [81, 87, 105, 9], feature disentanglement [63, 49, 93], meta-learning [43, 44, 21], to
name a few. Among them, a common assumption is that
the label spaces of source and target domains are identical, which may not always hold in practice. Suppose that
we wished to deploy modern vision systems to recognize
objects in an autonomous vehicle. When only the environment (e.g., weather and illumination) and appearance (e.g.,
size and viewpoint) of previously seen objects can change,
principled approaches are capable of correcting for the po-

11552

