This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CFCG: Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation via Cross-Fusion and Contour
Guidance Supervision
Shuo Li,* Yue He∗ , Weiming Zhang∗ , Wei Zhang†, Xiao Tan, Junyu Han, Errui Ding, Jingdong Wang
Baidu Inc
{lishuo16, heyue04, zhangweiming, zhangwei99, tanxiao, hanjunyu, dingerrui,
wangjingdong}@baidu.com

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art semi-supervised semantic segmentation (SSSS) methods typically adopt pseudo labeling
and consistency regularization between multiple learners
with different perturbations. Although the performance is
desirable, many issues remain: (1) supervisions from a single learner tend to be noisy which causes unreliable consistency regularization (2) existing pixel-wise confidencescore-based reliability measurement causes potential error accumulation as the training proceeds. In this paper,
we propose a novel SSSS framework, called CFCG, which
combines cross-fusion and contour guidance supervision to
tackle these issues. Concretely, we adopt both image-level
and feature-level perturbations to expand feature distribution thus pushing the potential limits of consistency regularization. Then, two particular modules are proposed to enable effective semi-supervised learning under heavy coherent perturbations. Firstly, Cross-Fusion Supervision (CFS)
mechanism leverages multiple learners to enhance the quality of pseudo labels. Secondly, we introduce an adaptive
contour guidance module (ACGM) to effectively identify unreliable spatial regions in pseudo labels. Finally, our proposed CFCG achieves gains of mIoU +1.40%, +0.89% with
a single learner and +1.85%, +1.33% by fusion inference
on PASCAL VOC 2012 and on Cityscapes respectively under 1/8 protocols, clearly surpassing previous methods and
reaching the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, an essential task of the pixelwise classification task, has been remarkably successful
* Co-first author
† Corresponding author

This work was done when Shuo Li was an intern at Baidu Inc.

with the development of deep learning. However, the
training for such a problem is rather a challenge owing
to costly and laborious pixel-wise manual labeling[18].
To alleviate this problem, semi-supervised semantic segmentation(SSSS) with the precious labeled data and large
amounts of unlabeled data is urgently needed to liberate labor and ensure accuracy. Under such a setting, how to adequately leverage unlabeled data becomes critical.
Recently, approaches based on the combination of consistency regularization and pseudo labeling dominate SSSS
research [27, 23, 6, 11]. Specially, it encourages high similarity between the predictions of perturbation for the same
input but expands a confidence prediction map of an unlabeled image to a one-hot pseudo label’s map. However,
it still exists some problems: (1) supervisions from a single learner tend to be noisy which causes unreliable consistency regularization (2) existing pixel-wise confidencescore-based reliability measurement causes potential error
accumulation as the training proceeds.
In this paper, we propose a novel SSSS framework,
called CFCG, which combines cross-fusion and contour
guidance supervision to tackle the above issues. First, we
conduct a detailed analysis of consistency regularization.
Weak-to-strong consistency regularization(WS)[27], one of
the representative image-level consistency regularization
methods, tries to make weakly and strongly-augmented images pair. Specifically, weak augmentation includes only
flip-and-shift data augmentation while strong augmentation is heavily-distorted versions of a given image, including the noise, blur, and erasure operations. Its success
comes from weak branch can produce high-quality pseudo
labels while strong branch can make the training process
hard by injecting noise. While in the feature-level, various
types of perturbations for consistency are designed, such
as VAT[25], random dropout, random noise, etc. We find
that image-level strong perturbations reflected in pixel noise

16348

