This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SOAR: Scene-debiasing Open-set Action Recognition
Yuanhao Zhai1 *, Ziyi Liu2†, Zhenyu Wu2 , Yi Wu2 , Chunluan Zhou2 , David Doermann1 ,
Junsong Yuan1 , Gang Hua2
1
University at Buffalo 2 Wormpex AI Research
{yzhai6, doermann, jsyuan}@buffalo.edu, {wuzhenyusjtu, ywu.china, czhou002, ganghua}@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep learning models have a risk of utilizing spurious
clues to make predictions, such as recognizing actions based
on the background scene. This issue can severely degrade the
open-set action recognition performance when the testing
samples have different scene distributions from the training samples. To mitigate this problem, we propose a novel
method, called Scene-debiasing Open-set Action Recognition (SOAR), which features an adversarial scene reconstruction module and an adaptive adversarial scene classification
module. The former prevents the decoder from reconstructing the video background given video features, and thus
helps reduce the background information in feature learning.
The latter aims to confuse scene type classification given
video features, with a specific emphasis on the action foreground, and helps to learn scene-invariant information. In
addition, we design an experiment to quantify the scene bias.
The results indicate that the current open-set action recognizers are biased toward the scene, and our proposed SOAR
method better mitigates such bias. Furthermore, our extensive experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms
state-of-the-art methods, and the ablation studies confirm
the effectiveness of our proposed modules.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed significant progress in action recognition [10, 69, 70, 41, 20, 77, 79, 26, 72]. Yet,
most works follow a closed-set paradigm, where both training and testing videos belong to a set of pre-defined action
categories. This limits their application as the real world
is naturally open with unknown actions. Open-set recognition is proposed to identify unknown samples from known
ones while maintaining classification performance on known
samples [57, 31, 4]. It is challenging due to missing knowledge of the unknown world. Moreover, deep models are
* Work done during an internship at Wormpex AI Research.
† Corresponding author.

Known action in unfamiliar scene

Training
Horse riding

Known testing
Horse riding

Unknown action in familiar scene

Training
Parallel bars

Unknown testing
Somersault

Unfamiliar testing scene

Familiar testing scene

Falsely recognize as unknown action

Falsely recognize as known action

Low precision on open-set detection

Low recall on open-set detection

Figure 1. Scene-biased open-set action recognizers fail in two typical scenarios: known actions in unfamiliar scenes, and unknown
actions in familiar scenes. The former leads to low precision on
open-set detection, while the latter leads to low recall. Our method
focuses on mitigating the scene bias to improve OSAR.

found to rely on spurious information to make predictions,
e.g., classify images using local textures [24, 44] and recognize actions using background scene [40, 13]. This not
only hurts the performance under the closed-set setting when
training and testing sets are not independent and identically
distributed, but also severely degrades the open-set recognition performance, as the distribution of the open-set testing
set is unknown.
Open-set action recognition (OSAR) is especially vulnerable to the spurious information for two main reasons:
(1) current benchmark datasets are found to be severely biased, and action classification using non-action information
(e.g., scene, object, or human) achieves high accuracy [40];
(2) without a specific module design, the model tends to focus on static information learning instead of temporal action
modeling [83, 16, 59, 68, 52].
This paper focuses on mitigating the scene bias in OSAR:
we speculate that current OSAR methods are biased toward
the scene, and the performance degrades when the testing
set exhibits different scene distributions from the training
set. Specifically, existing methods may fail in two typical
scenarios: known action in unfamiliar scene and unknown
action in familiar scene, as illustrated in Fig. 1. For the

10244

