This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Low-Light Image Enhancement with Illumination-Aware Gamma Correction
and Complete Image Modelling Network
Yinglong Wang1*
Zhen Liu2*
Jianzhuang Liu3
Songcen Xu4
Shuaicheng Liu5,2†
1
2
3
Meituan Inc. Megvii Technology Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology
4
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 5 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
ylwanguestc@gmail.com, liuzhen03@megvii.com, jz.liu@siat.ac.cn
xusongcen@huawei.com, liushuaicheng@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper presents a novel network structure with
illumination-aware gamma correction and complete image
modelling to solve the low-light image enhancement problem. Low-light environments usually lead to less informative large-scale dark areas, directly learning deep representations from low-light images is insensitive to recovering normal illumination. We propose to integrate the effectiveness of gamma correction with the strong modelling
capacities of deep networks, which enables the correction
factor gamma to be learned in a coarse to elaborate manner via adaptively perceiving the deviated illumination. Because exponential operation introduces high computational
complexity, we propose to use Taylor Series to approximate gamma correction, accelerating the training and inference speed. Dark areas usually occupy large scales in
low-light images, common local modelling structures, e.g.,
CNN, SwinIR, are thus insufﬁcient to recover accurate illumination across whole low-light images. We propose a
novel Transformer block to completely simulate the dependencies of all pixels across images via a local-to-global hierarchical attention mechanism, so that dark areas could
be inferred by borrowing the information from far informative regions in a highly effective manner. Extensive experiments on several benchmark datasets demonstrate that our
approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

SCI [28]

URetinexNet [41]

SNR [43]

Ours

GT

Figure 1. This ﬁgure shows a challenging low-light image, whose
middle areas are completely swallowed by the dark. Our IAGC
obtains higher illumination and recovers more image details than
SOTA methods. This is attributed to illumination-aware gamma
correction which effectively enhances illumination as well as
COMO-ViT which recovers better image details by completely
modelling the dependencies among all pixels of images.

[12, 21, 25, 44]. Many attempts have been made to solve the
Low-Light Image Enhancement (LLIE) task. Besides the
early methods, e.g., histogram equalization [33], Retinexbased optimization methods [8, 31, 34, 23, 10], CNNs are
introduced to learn illumination-recovering deep representations from low-light images. Many CNN-based methods [49, 51, 50, 41, 40] solve LLIE by combining Retinex
theory [14], which decomposes an image I into reﬂectance
R and illumination L:

1. Introduction
Images captured in low-light environments usually contain large scales of dark areas. They are of low contrast and intensities, which submerge the useful image contents, making them invisible to humans as well as damaging
the performances of numerous computer vision algorithms

Input

I=RL

(1)

where  is point-wise multiplication. There still exist
some other deep networks learning a mapping from lowlight images to normal-light ones, e.g., the supervised methods [2, 27, 15, 45, 18, 53, 4], and unsupervised methods
[7, 13, 28].
However, the convolutional mechanism is usually limited by its inductive biases [30]. The locality is unable to

13128

