This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seal-3D: Interactive Pixel-Level Editing for Neural Radiance Fields
Qi Ye1†
Yuchi Huo3,2
Jingsen Zhu2 *
Zhihua Zhong2
Jiming Chen1

Xiangyu Wang1 *

Yunlong Ran1

1

2

Zhejiang University, Key Lab of CS&AUS of Zhejiang Province
3
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
Zhejiang Lab

{xy wong, zhujingsen, qi.ye}@zju.edu.cn

huo.yuchi.sc@gmail.com

{yunlong ran, zhongzhihua, cjm}@zju.edu.cn

Pretrain
(0.9s)

Bounding Shape (Scaling)

Brush

Anchor

Color

Finetune

Figure 1: Seal-3D: The first interactive pixel level NeRF editing tool. We design an interactive user editing method and
system Seal-3D, which achieves instant (≈1s) preview (left) by our novel pretraining strategy. High-quality editing results
can be further obtained by a short period (in 1 or 2 minutes) of finetuning. The editing results of our implemented editing
tools (right) are view-consistent with rich shading details (e.g. shadows) on the original surface (left).

Abstract
With the popularity of implicit neural representations,
or neural radiance fields (NeRF), there is a pressing need
for editing methods to interact with the implicit 3D models for tasks like post-processing reconstructed scenes and
3D content creation. While previous works have explored
NeRF editing from various perspectives, they are restricted
in editing flexibility, quality, and speed, failing to offer direct editing response and instant preview. The key challenge is to conceive a locally editable neural representation that can directly reflect the editing instructions and update instantly. To bridge the gap, we propose a new interactive editing method and system for implicit representations,
called Seal-3D 1 , which allows users to edit NeRF models
in a pixel-level and free manner with a wide range of NeRF∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Project page: https://windingwind.github.io/seal-3d/
1 “Seal” derived from the name of rubber stamp in Adobe Photoshop.

like backbone and preview the editing effects instantly. To
achieve the effects, the challenges are addressed by our proposed proxy function mapping the editing instructions to the
original space of NeRF models in the teacher model and a
two-stage training strategy for the student model with local
pretraining and global finetuning. A NeRF editing system
is built to showcase various editing types. Our system can
achieve compelling editing effects with an interactive speed
of about 1 second.

1. Introduction
Implicit neural representations, e.g. neural radiance
fields (NeRF) [24], have gained increasing attention as
novel 3D representations with neural networks to model a
3D scene. Benefiting from the high reconstruction accuracy and rendering quality with relatively low memory consumption, NeRF and its variations [50, 3, 33, 26, 4, 45, 41]
have demonstrated great potential in many 3D applications like 3D reconstruction, novel view synthesis, and Vir17683

