This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Deformable Models for 3D Bi-Ventricular Heart Shape Reconstruction
and Modeling from 2D Sparse Cardiac Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Meng Ye1 , Dong Yang2 , Mikael Kanski3 , Leon Axel3 , Dimitris Metaxas1
Rutgers University, 2 NVIDIA, 3 New York University School of Medicine

1

{my389, dnm}@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel neural deformable model (NDM)
targeting at the reconstruction and modeling of 3D biventricular shape of the heart from 2D sparse cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging data. We model the biventricular shape using blended deformable superquadrics,
which are parameterized by a set of geometric parameter
functions and are capable of deforming globally and locally. While global geometric parameter functions and deformations capture gross shape features from visual data,
local deformations, parameterized as neural diffeomorphic
point flows, can be learned to recover the detailed heart
shape. Different from iterative optimization methods used in
conventional deformable model formulations, NDMs can be
trained to learn such geometric parameter functions, global
and local deformations from a shape distribution manifold.
Our NDM can learn to densify a sparse cardiac point cloud
with arbitrary scales and generate high-quality triangular
meshes automatically. It also enables the implicit learning of dense correspondences among different heart shape
instances for accurate cardiac shape registration. Furthermore, the parameters of NDM are intuitive, and can be used
by a physician without sophisticated post-processing. Experimental results on a large CMR dataset demonstrate the
improved performance of NDM over conventional methods.

1. Introduction
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) is the gold
standard for non-invasive evaluation of global cardiac function, i.e., blood pumping of the left ventricle (LV). Due to
the relatively slow imaging speed of MR, current clinical
CMR scan protocols are 2D-based. To recover the 3D geometry of the LV and right ventricle (RV), we usually scan
a stack of short axis (SAX) and several long axis (LAX) images. As shown in Fig. 1 (a-f), SAX images cover the range
from the base to the apex of the heart and LAX images in-

clude 2-, 3-, 4-chamber views. Although in-plane resolution
of the image is high enough to capture 2D cardiac anatomical details, the through-plane resolution is much lower, in
order to reduce imaging time. Therefore, the SAX and LAX
images together can only produce a sparse 3D point cloud
of the heart, as shown in Fig. 1 (g). The dense and accurate
3D geometry reconstruction, as shown in Fig. 1 (h), is thus
needed for not only the downstream image analysis tasks,
such as the estimation of LV mass and volume[40], and 3D
cardiac wall strain fields [26, 17, 19], but also other clinical
applications, such as image-guided interventions [32] and
biomechanics finite element-based simulations [39, 37, 16].
3D cardiac geometry reconstruction has a long history [24, 26, 40, 23, 38, 8, 31, 20]. Most of the previous methods reconstruct the 3D shape from a sparse point
cloud generated from segmentation results on CMR images.
Those segmentations delineate the myocardium wall, blood
pool of the LV and RV, as shown by the green points in
Fig. 1. As one of the conventional methods, template mesh
adaptation first constructs a template mesh that describes
the mean shape of the target and then registers this template
with the sparse point cloud [38]. The resulting meshes are
usually not accurate for data that have large shape variation
from the mean shape, which leads to a generalization problem of this kind of approach.
We are inspired by the success of conventional deformable models (CDMs) for their efficiency in shape reconstruction and ability to provide intuitive and explainable
shape parameters [26, 28, 23]. CDMs can efficiently describe the target shape using a set of global and local deformation parameters. However, to fit a shape primitive
to a target shape, conventional methods use iterative optimization and fit the primitive to the given data. We propose a neural deformable model (NDM), which is composed of global deformations using parameter functions and
local deformations using neural diffeomorphic flows. It
can be trained to learn the global and local deformation
parameters, conditioning on the sparse given data, from a
shape distribution manifold. As shown in Fig. 1 (h), NDM
can accurately reconstruct the bi-ventricle shape from the

14247

