This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TrajectoryFormer: 3D Object Tracking Transformer with Predictive
Trajectory Hypotheses
Xuesong Chen1 Shaoshuai Shi2 * Chao Zhang3 Benjin Zhu1 Qiang Wang3
Ka Chun Cheung4 Simon See4 Hongsheng Li1, 5, 6 *
1
MMLab, CUHK 2 Max Planck Institute for Informatics 3 Samsung Telecommunication Research
4
NVIDIA AI Technology Center 5 CPII 6 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{chenxuesong@link, hsli@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk, shaoshuaics@gmail.com

Abstract
3D multi-object tracking (MOT) is vital for many applications including autonomous driving vehicles and service robots. With the commonly used tracking-by-detection
paradigm, 3D MOT has made important progress in recent
years. However, these methods only use the detection boxes
of the current frame to obtain trajectory-box association results, which makes it impossible for the tracker to recover
objects missed by the detector. In this paper, we present TrajectoryFormer, a novel point-cloud-based 3D MOT framework. To recover the missed object by detector, we generates multiple trajectory hypotheses with hybrid candidate
boxes, including temporally predicted boxes and currentframe detection boxes, for trajectory-box association. The
predicted boxes can propagate object’s history trajectory
information to the current frame and thus the network can
tolerate short-term miss detection of the tracked objects.
We combine long-term object motion feature and short-term
object appearance feature to create per-hypothesis feature
embedding, which reduces the computational overhead for
spatial-temporal encoding. Additionally, we introduce a
Global-Local Interaction Module to conduct information
interaction among all hypotheses and models their spatial
relations, leading to accurate estimation of hypotheses. Our
TrajectoryFormer achieves state-of-the-art performance on
the Waymo 3D MOT benchmarks. Code is available at
https://github.com/poodarchu/EFG.

1. Introduction
3D multi-object tracking (MOT) is an essential and critical task in the fields of autonomous driving and robotics.
It plays a vital role in enabling systems to accurately perceive their surrounding dynamic environment and make appropriate responses. Among the various sensors used in au* Corresponding authors

tonomous driving, LiDAR-based systems have emerged as
a popular choice because they can capture accurate and detailed 3D information of the environment, enabling more
precise object detection and tracking. Therefore, 3D MOT
based on LiDAR point clouds shows great potential to improve the safety and efficiency of autonomous vehicles.
Tracking-by-detection is a popular paradigm that has
demonstrated excellent performance on the 3D MOT
task [34, 13, 27, 1, 15]. Previous methods, such as CenterPoint [34] and SimpleTrack [13], rely on heuristic rules to
associate objects across frames. These methods use manually designed affinity metrics such as distance, intersection
over union (IoU), and GIoU to match a history trajectory
with a current detection box based on their positional relationship. However, these heuristic rules are not robust as
they cannot be trained and different categories may prefer
different association metrics [13]. Moreover, these methods only consider pair-wise position relationships between
boxes, without considering comprehensive global context
information, which often results in low-quality trajectories.
Other methods have attempted to enhance 3D MOT by
modeling the spatial context among different boxes. PolarMOT [8] adopts Graph Neural Network (GNN) to establish
the spatial-temporal relationship between trajectories and
different boxes, followed by edge classification to conduct
association. Similarly, InterTrack [30] employs attention
mechanisms to interact between trajectories and all boxes,
generating the affinity matrix for association. These methods generally leverage global context information, resulting in improved tracking performance compared to heuristic
methods. However, they still only rely on detection boxes
for associating with existing trajectories, which limits the
recall rate when the detector misses objects. Thus, incorporating additional box candidates for association has great
potential to improve the recall and performance of 3D MOT.
To overcome the limitations of existing approaches, we
present TrajectoryFormer, a point-cloud-based 3D MOT
18527

