This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FedPD: Federated Open Set Recognition with Parameter Disentanglement
Chen Yang1
Meilu Zhu1
1
City University of Hong Kong

Yifan Liu2
Yixuan Yuan1,2 *
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

{cyang53, meiluzhu2}-c@my.cityu.edu.hk 1155195605@link.cuhk.edu.hk yxyuan@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Existing federated learning (FL) approaches are deployed under the unrealistic closed-set setting, with both
training and testing classes belong to the same set, which
makes the global model fail to identify the unseen classes
as ‘unknown’. To this end, we aim to study a novel problem of federated open-set recognition (FedOSR), which
learns an open-set recognition (OSR) model under federated paradigm such that it classifies seen classes while
at the same time detects unknown classes. In this work,
we propose a parameter disentanglement guided federated
open-set recognition (FedPD) algorithm to address two
core challenges of FedOSR: cross-client inter-set interference between learning closed-set and open-set knowledge
and cross-client intra-set inconsistency by data heterogeneity. The proposed FedPD framework mainly leverages two
modules, i.e., local parameter disentanglement (LPD) and
global divide-and-conquer aggregation (GDCA), to first
disentangle client OSR model into different subnetworks,
then align the corresponding parts cross clients for matched
model aggregation. Specifically, on the client side, LPD decouples an OSR model into a closed-set subnetwork and an
open-set subnetwork by the task-related importance, thus
preventing inter-set interference. On the server side, GDCA
first partitions the two subnetworks into specific and shared
parts, and subsequently aligns the corresponding parts
through optimal transport to eliminate parameter misalignment. Extensive experiments on various datasets demonstrate the superior performance of our proposed method.

1. Introduction
Deep learning algorithms rely on the availability of
large-scale data to achieve remarkable performance. However, in reality, data is scattered across different organiza* Yixuan Yuan is the corresponding author.
This work was supported by Hong Kong Research Grants Council(RGC)
General Research Fund 1422062214204321, and Innovation and Technology Commission-Innovation and Technology Fund ITS/100/20.

OSR
Model A

OSR
Model B

Closed-set
Parameters

Closed-set
Subnetwork

Open-set
Parameters

Open-set
Subnetwork

Shared
Parameters
Destroyed
Parameters

OSR
Model A

OSR
Model B

OSR
Model A

OSR
Model B
OT

(a) FedAvg

(b) FedPD (Ours)

Figure 1. Parameter disentanglement on FedOSR models and
comparison of various aggregation strategies on FedOSR setting.
(a) FedAvg simply aggregates multiple OSR models, leading to
model collapse; (b) Our FedPD first aligns corresponding closespecific, open-specific and shared parts by optimal transport (OT),
then aggregates aligned parameters. The curves inside the network
box represent different parameter distribution of each parts.

tions and difficult to integrate into a centralized dataset, owing to increasing privacy and ethical concerns, especially
for those sensitive data such as location-based services or
health information [22]. To break this dilemma, federated learning (FL) [5, 23, 20] provides a privacy-preserving
paradigm that allows local clients to collaboratively train a
shared global model without data sharing.
Although FL has recently achieved promising progress,
existing FL works [23, 20, 5] are generally evaluated in a
closed-set scenario, where the categories of training and
testing samples are identical. The closed-set setting is irrational since unknown classes may appear at the test time and
would be classified into known classes. This problem seriously impedes the deployment of FL models in many realworld applications due to enormous risk, such as clinical
diagnosis and autonomous driving. Current open-set recognition (OSR) methods [3, 43, 2, 6] attempt to improve the
14882

