This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Toward Multi-Granularity Decision-Making: Explicit Visual Reasoning
with Hierarchical Knowledge
Yifeng Zhang, Shi Chen, Qi Zhao
University of Minnesota
{zhan6987, chen4595}@umn.edu,

Abstract
Answering visual questions requires the ability to parse
visual observations and correlate them with a variety of
knowledge. Existing visual question answering (VQA) models either pay little attention to the role of knowledge or do
not take into account the granularity of knowledge (e.g.,
attaching the color of “grassland” to “ground”). They
have yet to develop the capability of modeling knowledge of multiple granularity, and are also vulnerable to
spurious data biases. To fill the gap, this paper makes
progresses from two distinct perspectives: (1) It presents
a Hierarchical Concept Graph (HCG) that discriminates
and associates multi-granularity concepts with a multilayered hierarchical structure, aligning visual observations
with knowledge across different levels to alleviate data biases. (2) To facilitate a comprehensive understanding of
how knowledge contributes throughout the decision-making
process, we further propose an interpretable Hierarchical
Concept Neural Module Network (HCNMN). It explicitly
propagates multi-granularity knowledge across the hierarchical structure and incorporates them with a sequence
of reasoning steps, providing a transparent interface to
elaborate on the integration of observations and knowledge. Through extensive experiments on multiple challenging datasets (i.e., GQA,VQA,FVQA,OK-VQA), we demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in answering questions in different scenarios. Our code is available at
https://github.com/SuperJohnZhang/HCNMN.

1. Introduction
The ability to reason about knowledge is a fundamental
type of generally intelligent behavior [35]. A long-standing
goal of artificial intelligence is to develop intelligent systems that can answer a variety of questions with relevant
knowledge. Visual question answering [6] has gained considerable attention in recent years. With broad coverage of
problems with different types, e.g., factual reasoning [11],

qzhao@cs.umn.edu

commonsense reasoning [55], and knowledge-driven reasoning [44, 30], it offers a practical platform for examining
models’ reasoning capability.
A series of progress has been made on improving the
knowledge grounding [4, 17, 51, 18] and enriching the
knowledge pools [46, 56] for VQA models. While showing the effectiveness of incorporating external knowledge,
they commonly struggle with the granularity of concepts
and lack the capability of identifying relevant knowledge
in diverse contexts. As a result, they fall short of generalizing to out-of-distribution problems [25] and justifying
models’ underlying decision-making process. For instance,
as illustrated in Figure 1, the concept “grassland” defines
a specific type of “ground” that consists of “grass”, while
“ground” refers to a more general concept that includes
“grassland”, “playground” etc. Existing models have difficulty in discriminating these multi-granularity concepts,
and falsely bind the dominant property in the dataset (e.g.,
hasProperty(green)) to a dominant concept (e.g., ground)
despite the discrepancies between their granularity. The
mismatched property of a general concept (e.g., groundhasProperty-green) distracts the decision-making process of
its non-dominant subtypes (e.g., identifying the color of the
playground).
The mismatch between multi-granularity concepts rarely
occurs in human intelligence. When interacting with the
complexity of the visual world, humans leverage a hierarchical structure to associate each object with concepts
of different granularity. Such a representation is critical
for separating different knowledge facts to their designated
granularity, and unifying general knowledge with specific
ones for a context-rich and bias-resistant decision-making
process. Aiming to enhance models’ reasoning capability
among diverse sets of knowledge, in this paper, we propose
(1) a Hierarchical Concept Graph (HCG) to incorporate the
granularity of concepts and (2) a Hierarchical Concept Neural Module Network (HCNMN) to model the integration between observations and knowledge throughout the reasoning process.
With an overarching goal of endowing VQA models

2573

