This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Foreground-Background Separation through Concept Distillation from
Generative Image Foundation Models
Mischa Dombrowski1
Hadrien Reynaud2
Matthew Baugh2
Bernhard Kainz1,2
1
2
Friedrich–Alexander–Universität Erlangen–Nürnberg
Imperial College London
mischa.dombrowski@fau.de

Abstract
Curating datasets for object segmentation is a difficult
task. With the advent of large-scale pre-trained generative models, conditional image generation has been given
a significant boost in result quality and ease of use. In this
paper, we present a novel method that enables the generation of general foreground-background segmentation models from simple textual descriptions, without requiring segmentation labels. We leverage and explore pre-trained latent diffusion models, to automatically generate weak segmentation masks for concepts and objects. The masks are
then used to fine-tune the diffusion model on an inpainting task, which enables fine-grained removal of the object,
while at the same time providing a synthetic foreground
and background dataset. We demonstrate that using this
method beats previous methods in both discriminative and
generative performance and closes the gap with fully supervised training while requiring no pixel-wise object labels. We show results on the task of segmenting four different objects (humans, dogs, cars, birds) and a use case
scenario in medical image analysis. The code is available
at https://github.com/MischaD/fobadiffusion.

1. Introduction
Supervised pretraining, e.g., with ImageNet[16], has
demonstrated reduced training times and boosted performance. This gave rise to models that could be trained once
over large amounts of data before being adapted to specialised tasks, such as image recognition, object detection,
image segmentation[52], and medical image analysis[50].
The recent development of self-supervision techniques and
their ability to learn without manual labels led to much
larger scale training datasets [9] and to the creation of foundation models [6]. At present, the use of pre-trained models
for a wide range of diverse downstream tasks defines a very
active and intriguing area of research.
Large scale foundation models are already established in

Figure 1. High level overview of our proposed method: Without
needing a single labelled image, our method is able to generate
foreground, background, and segmentation masks for any concept
that is known to a text-to-image generative network.

natural language processing, with most of them being based
on the Transformer architecture [57, 17, 7]. A crucial part of
this architecture are cross- and self-attention layers, which
compute interpretable importance weightings [39, 12].
Diffusion models are based on the U-Net architecture
[45] with additional attention layers [37] to condition on
textual prompts. Therefore, we can extract inherently interpretable pixel importance scores from conditioning on textual prompts. Furthermore, the reverse diffusion process
teaches the U-Net to successively remove noise from images, starting from pure Gaussian noise. In the early steps
of this process, where the images resemble pure noise, the
texture is non-existent, and the model only learns structures.
Recently, latent diffusion models have emerged as stateof-the-art generative models for the task of text-to-image
generation [18, 44, 41]. However, training such models
requires a significant amount of CO2 -intensive resources
and until recently, pre-trained model weights have not been
publicly available. Rombach et al. were the first to published their weights and model architecture [44], which
facilitated the development of numerous derived applica-

988

