This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AffordPose: A Large-scale Dataset of Hand-Object Interactions with
Affordance-driven Hand Pose
Juntao Jian1
Xiuping Liu1
Manyi Li2⋆
Ruizhen Hu3
Jian Liu4⋆
1
2
Dalian University of Technology
Shandong University
3
4
Shenzhen University
Tsinghua University

Abstract
How human interact with objects depends on the functional roles of the target objects, which introduces the problem of affordance-aware hand-object interaction. It requires a large number of human demonstrations for the
learning and understanding of plausible and appropriate
hand-object interactions. In this work, we present AffordPose, a large-scale dataset of hand-object interactions
with affordance-driven hand pose. We first annotate the
specific part-level affordance labels for each object, e.g.
twist, pull, handle-grasp, etc, instead of the general intents such as use or handover, to indicate the purpose and
guide the localization of the hand-object interactions. The
fine-grained hand-object interactions reveal the influence of
hand-centered affordances on the detailed arrangement of
the hand poses, yet also exhibit a certain degree of diversity. We collect a total of 26.7K hand-object interactions,
each including the 3D object shape, the part-level affordance label, and the manually adjusted hand poses. The
comprehensive data analysis shows the common characteristics and diversity of hand-object interactions per affordance via the parameter statistics and contacting computation. We also conduct experiments on the tasks of handobject affordance understanding and affordance-oriented
hand-object interaction generation, to validate the effectiveness of our dataset in learning the fine-grained handobject interactions. Project page: https://github.
com/GentlesJan/AffordPose

1. Introduction
One of the long-standing goals of robotics is to imitate
all kinds of human-centered interactions, especially handobject interactions, ranging from general grasping to functional interactions such as unscrewing a cap or even tool
usage [22, 15]. Performing appropriate hand-object interaction is a complicated decision-making process. The agents
⋆ Corresponding Authors: manyili@sdu.edu.cn, jianliu2006@gmail.com

Figure 1: A Gallery of AffordPose. AffordPose is the first
large-scale dataset for fine-grained hand-object interactions
driven by the specific part-level affordance labeling, which
reveals the high correlation between the object affordance
and the detailed arrangement of hand poses.
need to understand the functional role of the object, select
the contacting location, and perform the specific hand pose
to complete the task [7, 1, 39].
There has been a trend to develop deep learning solutions to predict diverse hand-object interactions. The researchers build hand-object interaction datasets, such as
HO-3D [13], DexYCB [5], Obman [16], and train different networks [26, 44, 43, 27] to predict the hand poses for
the given objects. However, these works only consider the
general grasping task and focus on the stability of the generated hand poses, but overlook the semantic meaning of
the hand-object interactions. Recently, many related works
collect additional annotations, e.g. contact maps [2, 3, 24],
grasp type labels [8], and intent labels [40, 51], to learn how
human use different objects with appropriate hand-object
14713

