This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

U-RED: Unsupervised 3D Shape Retrieval and Deformation
for Partial Point Clouds
Yan Di1∗ , Chenyangguang Zhang2∗ , Ruida Zhang2∗ , Fabian Manhardt3 , Yongzhi Su4 ,
Jason Rambach4 , Didier Stricker4 , Xiangyang Ji2 and Federico Tombari1,3
1
Technical University of Munich, 2 Tsinghua University, 3 Google, 4 DFKI
{yan.di@, tombari@in.}tum.de, {zcyg22, zhangrd21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
OR

1. Introduction
3D semantic scene perception [36, 56] involves the decomposition of a scene into its constituent objects, understanding and reconstructing all the detected objects, and
putting them in place to formulate a holistic scene representation. Significant progress has been made recently in attaining the comprehensive analysis of multiple objects’ ge*Authors with equal contributions.
Codes: https://github.com/ZhangCYG/U-RED

RGB Input or

Partial Scan

Database with
with Part
Part Segmentations
Segmentations
Database

U-RED

Deformed CAD Models

CAD Scene Representation

Figure 1. Given a segmented RGB image with estimated depth or
a partial noisy object scan, U-RED utilizes an unsupervised joint
R&D network to retrieve the most suitable CAD model from the
database and deform it to tightly fit the target object. After aligning
all deformed shapes to the target scene via predicted poses [18], a
compact CAD scene representation is generated.

Un-RED

In this paper, we propose U-RED, an Unsupervised
shape REtrieval and Deformation pipeline that takes an arbitrary object observation as input, typically captured by
RGB images or scans, and jointly retrieves and deforms the
geometrically similar CAD models from a pre-established
database to tightly match the target. Considering existing
methods typically fail to handle noisy partial observations,
U-RED is designed to address this issue from two aspects.
First, since one partial shape may correspond to multiple
potential full shapes, the retrieval method must allow such
an ambiguous one-to-many relationship. Thereby U-RED
learns to project all possible full shapes of a partial target
onto the surface of a unit sphere. Then during inference,
each sampling on the sphere will yield a feasible retrieval.
Second, since real-world partial observations usually contain noticeable noise, a reliable learned metric that measures the similarity between shapes is necessary for stable
retrieval. In U-RED, we design a novel point-wise residualguided metric that allows noise-robust comparison. Extensive experiments on the synthetic datasets PartNet, ComplementMe and the real-world dataset Scan2CAD demonstrate
that U-RED surpasses existing state-of-the-art approaches
by 47.3%, 16.7% and 31.6% respectively under Chamfer
Distance.

ometry [17, 30, 42, 57, 61], dynamic reconstruction of both
scene and objects [11, 12], structure-aware scene completion [5], etc. These methods demonstrate promising results in overall reconstruction quality but typically fail in
preserving fine-grained geometric structures. To address
this problem, Retrieval and Deformation (R&D) methods [8, 25, 35, 40, 46, 47, 49, 54] are proposed. They leverage a pre-prepared 3D shape database (usually represented
as CAD models) as prior knowledge and typically follow a
two-stage scheme to generate a clean and compact scene
representation. First, based on manually picked metrics,
the most similar shape of the target is selected from the
database. Then, the retrieved shape is scaled, aligned and
rotated to match the target.
However, these methods suffer from two challenges,
making them vulnerable to noise and partial observations.
First, a partial shape may correspond to multiple full shapes.
For example, if only a plane is observed, it may be the back

8884

