This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DeePoint: Visual Pointing Recognition and Direction Estimation
Shu Nakamura∗ Yasutomo Kawanishi† Shohei Nobuhara∗ Ko Nishino∗,†
†
∗
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University
RIKEN
https://vision.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp/
https://grp.riken.jp/

Figure 1. We introduce DeePoint, a neural pointing recognition and 3D direction estimator. DeePoint trained on our newly constructed DP
Dataset recognizes when a person is pointing and estimates its 3D direction from video frames captured from a ﬁxed-view camera. Each
arrow depicts the pointing direction and its color is green when the person is pointing, red when not. DeePoint successfully recognizes
when a pointing starts and ends and can estimate its 3D direction from the complex spatio-temporal coordination of the person’s body.

Abstract
In this paper, we realize automatic visual recognition
and direction estimation of pointing. We introduce the ﬁrst
neural pointing understanding method based on two key
contributions. The ﬁrst is the introduction of a ﬁrst-of-itskind large-scale dataset for pointing recognition and direction estimation, which we refer to as the DP Dataset.
DP Dataset consists of more than 2 million frames of 33
people pointing in various styles annotated for each frame
with pointing timings and 3D directions. The second is
DeePoint, a novel deep network model for joint recognition and 3D direction estimation of pointing. DeePoint
is a Transformer-based network which fully leverages the
spatio-temporal coordination of the body parts, not just the
hands. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate the
accuracy and efﬁciency of DeePoint. We believe DP Dataset
and DeePoint will serve as a sound foundation for visual
human intention understanding.

1. Introduction
Gauging a person’s intent from passive visual observations is one of the key goals of computer vision research.
Successful visual intent understanding would be essential
for a wide range of applications including personal assistance, elderly care, and surveillance. Visual recognition of
the gesticulations of a person is essential for this as they directly express those intents. Pointing, the act of extending
one’s (usually index) ﬁnger towards something in the person’s view to call attention to it, is particularly important

as it conveys explicit information about the person’s interactions with the environment including conversations with
others.
Despite the broad interest in gesture recognition, research on visual understanding of pointing has been surprisingly limited. Visual pointing interpretation requires both
recognition (is the person pointing) and direction estimation (which direction is the person pointing). Past works
have relied on special cameras, such as RGB-D sensors,
or required the person to point in a speciﬁc way. For inthe-wild natural pointing understanding, we must be able to
recognize and estimate their directions in 3D from regular
RGB cameras. A typical scenario we consider is a person
in a room pointing at various things around her while freely
moving around, which is observed by cameras ﬁxed to room
corners.
Pointing recognition and direction estimation from ﬁxedview cameras is particularly challenging. The person is usually small in the view and the ﬁngers can hardly be discerned. The hand can even be completely occluded by the
person’s body. The pointing gesture would also typically
span only about half a second, which makes its recognition
in the video hard. Estimating the direction becomes even
more challenging. In a full HD video frame captured with a
ﬁxed corner camera in a typical living room, the index ﬁnger would span only about 30 pixels. Analytical modeling
such as line regression to such observations would be futile.
Even if that were possible, due to intra- and inter-personal
variations of pointing, such estimations would be prone to
error. Accounting for those variations would naturally necessitate a learning-based approach that directly regresses to

20577

