This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CHORUS: Learning Canonicalized 3D Human-Object Spatial Relations
from Unbounded Synthesized Images
Sookwan Han
Hanbyul Joo
Seoul National University
{jellyheadandrew, hbjoo}@snu.ac.kr

Category: Surfboard

“A person rides a surfboard”
“A person carries a surfboard”

Text-to-Image
Synthesis

3D HOI
Reasoning

Pose Variation

… paddles on surfboard”
“A person
…
“carry”
Auto-Generated Human-Object
Interaction Prompts

Synthesized
Multi-View Images

Canonicalized Human-Object
Spatial Distribution per Semantics

“ride”
Semantic Variation
Learned 3D Human-Object
Spatial Relations

Figure 1. Given an object category, our method, CHORUS, automatically learns human-object 3D spatial arrangements in a self-supervised
way. Our method leverages a generative model to synthesize an unbounded number of images to reason about the 3D spatial relationship. As
output, CHORUS produces the 3D spatial distribution in the canonical space, which can be deformed for any posed space.

Abstract
We present a method for teaching machines to understand
and model the underlying spatial common sense of diverse
human-object interactions in 3D in a self-supervised way.
This is a challenging task, as there exist specific manifolds
of the interactions that can be considered human-like and
natural, but the human pose and the geometry of objects can
vary even for similar interactions. Such diversity makes the
annotating task of 3D interactions difficult and hard to scale,
which limits the potential to reason about that in a supervised way. One way of learning the 3D spatial relationship
between humans and objects during interaction is by showing multiple 2D images captured from different viewpoints
when humans interact with the same type of objects. The
core idea of our method is to leverage a generative model
that produces high-quality 2D images from an arbitrary text
prompt input as an “unbounded” data generator with effective controllability and view diversity. Despite its imperfection of the image quality over real images, we demonstrate
that the synthesized images are sufficient to learn the 3D
human-object spatial relations. We present multiple strategies to leverage the synthesized images, including (1) the
first method to leverage a generative image model for 3D
human-object spatial relation learning; (2) a framework to
reason about the 3D spatial relations from inconsistent 2D
cues in a self-supervised manner via 3D occupancy reason-

ing with pose canonicalization; (3) semantic clustering to
disambiguate different types of interactions with the same
object types; and (4) a novel metric to assess the quality of
3D spatial learning of interaction.

1. Introduction
Humans interact with objects in specific ways. We wear
shoes on our feet, a hat on our heads, and ride a bike by
holding handles and putting two feet on the pedals. While
this common sense regarding the 3D arrangements of the way
we interact with objects is known to us, teaching such things
to robots and machines is challenging, requiring numerous
variations in diverse human-object interactions in 3D.
As providing 3D supervision by manually annotating
various cases is hard to scale, an alternative way of teaching such things is by showing 2D photos from the Internet
containing the interaction with the same object from many
viewpoints. A text-based image retrieval (e.g., Google Image Search) can be an option to crawl many images from a
text description similar to NEIL [8]. However, this approach
fundamentally suffers from several obstacles such as (other
than the challenges in 3D spatial relation reasoning): (1)
viewpoint variations are insufficient and hard to control; (2)
the number of related images decreases drastically as the
compositionality of the prompt increases; and (3) the images
are often biased due to commercial websites.
Project Page: https://jellyheadandrew.github.io/projects/chorus

15835

