This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DandelionNet: Domain Composition with Instance Adaptive Classification for
Domain Generalization

1

Lanqing Hu1,2 , Meina Kan1,2 , Shiguang Shan1,2,3 , Xilin Chen1,2
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100090, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100090, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, 518055, China
lanqing.hu@vipl.ict.ac.cn,{kanmeina,sgshan,xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Domain generalization (DG) attempts to learn a model
on source domains that can well generalize to unseen but
different domains. The multiple source domains are innately
different in distribution but intrinsically related to each other,
e.g., from the same label space. To achieve a generalizable
feature, most existing methods attempt to reduce the domain
discrepancy by either learning domain-invariant feature, or
additionally mining domain-specific feature. In the space of
these features, the multiple source domains are either tightly
aligned or not aligned at all, which both cannot fully take
the advantage of complementary information from multiple
domains. In order to preserve more complementary information from multiple domains at the meantime of reducing their
domain gap, we propose that the multiple domains should
not be tightly aligned but composite together, where all domains are pulled closer but still preserve their individuality
respectively. This is achieved by using instance-adaptive
classifier specified for each instance’s classification, where
the instance-adaptive classifier is slightly deviated from a
universal classifier shared by samples from all domains. This
adaptive classifier deviation allows all instances from the
same category but different domains to be dispersed around
the class center rather than squeezed tightly, leading to better generalization for unseen domain samples. In result, the
multiple domains are harmoniously composite centered on a
universal core, like a dandelion, so this work is referred to
as DandelionNet. Experiments on multiple DG benchmarks
demonstrate that the proposed method can learn a model
with better generalization and experiments on source free
domain adaption also indicate the versatility.

1. Introduction
In recent decades, the deep learning based methods
achieves significant progress in a few fields, including object

Figure 1: The importance of the design of the proposed
method. Conventional common feature constraint DG methods may result in feature space twist as in (a). While an
ideal well generalizable feature space should make different
domains pulled closer but still preserve their individuality
respectively, i.e., slightly deviated from the universal center
(the green star) as illustrated in (b).

detection, face recognition, natural language process, etc.
These methods mostly base on independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) assumption. However, in real world, those
unseen samples or domains usually lie in different distributions from that of the training set. In such situation, the learnt
model would perform poorly on those unseen samples.
The technique of domain generalization (DG) aims to
deal with the fore-mentioned problem by learning a robust
model that can generalize to unseen domains. In domain
generalization, the source domains and unseen domains are
assumed to share the same categories and domain labels are
known, while the unseen domains are unavailable during
training stage.
Previous DG methods mainly do domain invariant feature learning between multiple domains with domain alignment constraints [46, 18, 21, 45, 41, 40, 16, 24], where the

19050

