This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Why Is Prompt Tuning for Vision-Language Models Robust to Noisy Labels?
Cheng-En Wu1 * Yu Tian2 Haichao Yu2 Heng Wang2 Pedro Morgado1
Yu Hen Hu1 Linjie Yang2
1

2

University of Wisconsin-Madison

ByteDance Inc.

{cwu356, pmorgado, yhhu}@wisc.edu {yutian.yt, haichaoyu, heng.wang,
linjie.yang}@bytedance.com

Abstract

70
60

Accuracy (%)

Vision-language models such as CLIP [27] learn a
generic text-image embedding from large-scale training
data. A vision-language model can be adapted to a new
classiﬁcation task through few-shot prompt tuning. We ﬁnd
that such a prompt tuning process is highly robust to label noises. This intrigues us to study the key reasons contributing to the robustness of the prompt tuning paradigm.
We conducted extensive experiments to explore this property and ﬁnd the key factors are: 1) the ﬁxed classname tokens provide a strong regularization to the optimization of
the model, reducing gradients induced by the noisy samples; 2) the powerful pre-trained image-text embedding
that is learned from diverse and generic web data provides
strong prior knowledge for image classiﬁcation. Further,
we demonstrate that noisy zero-shot predictions from CLIP
can be used to tune its own prompt, signiﬁcantly enhancing
prediction accuracy in the unsupervised setting. The code
is available at https://github.com/CEWu/PTNL.

50
40
30
20

12.5

25
Noise rate (%)

50

(a) DTD

Accuracy (%)

80
70
60
50
40

1. Introduction

* Work mostly done during an internship at ByteDance Inc.

0

90

30

Large-scale vision-language models such as CLIP [27],
ALIGN [13], and CoCa [43] are transforming how we learn
and interact with visual representations. Since these models
learn to align the representations of a broad set of natural
images with their textual descriptions, they have shown an
exceptional ability to solve a wide range of tasks in a dataefﬁcient manner. For example, using the pre-trained text
encoder, one can obtain a set of class embeddings by encoding a canonical sentence such as “A photo of a <CLS>”
and use them to recognize objects without a labeled dataset.
While promising, Zhou et al. [50] showed that these humandeﬁned sentences (also known as class prompts) can be unstable, with seemingly equivalent descriptions leading to

ImageNet Finetuning
CLIP Zero-Shot
CLIP Linear Probe
CLIP Prompt Tuning
CLIP Prompt Tuning (+GCE)

ImageNet Finetuning
CLIP Zero-Shot
CLIP Linear Probe
CLIP Prompt Tuning
CLIP Prompt Tuning (+GCE)

0

12.5
25
Noise rate (%)

50

(b) UCF101

Figure 1: Comparison with transfer learning approaches on
two datasets with training labels that have incremental noisy
rates. ImageNet Finetuning is ﬁnetuning pre-trained model
on ImageNet. For the CLIP pre-trained model, Prompt Tuning is much more robust to the Linear Probe manner. By
combining the generalized cross-entropy (GCE) [46], we
further improve the robustness of Prompt Tuning to noisy
labels. ResNet-50 is used for all approaches as their image
encoders.
different predictions. To address this issue, researchers have
focused on prompt tuning [50], where a learnable prompt
is learned from a small target dataset by back-propagation.

15488

