This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Quality-Agnostic Deepfake Detection with Intra-model Collaborative Learning
Binh M. Le
Dept. of Computer Science & Engineering
Sungkyunkwan University
Suwon, South Korea

Simon S. Woo*
Dept. of Computer Science & Engineering
Sungkyunkwan University
Suwon, South Korea

bmle@g.skku.edu

swoo@g.skku.edu

1. Introduction
Deep learning approaches for facial manipulation, such
as deepfakes, have recently received considerable attention
[54, 31, 61, 25, 20, 23], because they can be abused for the
malicious purposes such as fake news, pornography, etc.
Due to the advancements made in Generative Adversarial
Networks and other deep learning-based computer vision
algorithms, deepfakes have also become more realistic and
* Corresponding author.

...

...

c40 c23 raw
...
AUC

Ours - one model
borative learning
Colla

Deepfake has recently raised a plethora of societal concerns over its possible security threats and dissemination of
fake information. Much research on deepfake detection has
been undertaken. However, detecting low quality as well
as simultaneously detecting different qualities of deepfakes
still remains a grave challenge. Most SOTA approaches are
limited by using a single specific model for detecting certain
deepfake video quality type. When constructing multiple
models with prior information about video quality, this kind
of strategy incurs significant computational cost, as well
as model and training data overhead. Further, it cannot
be scalable and practical to deploy in real-world settings.
In this work, we propose a universal intra-model collaborative learning framework to enable the effective and simultaneous detection of different quality of deepfakes. That
is, our approach is the quality-agnostic deepfake detection
method, dubbed QAD. In particular, by observing the upper
bound of general error expectation, we maximize the dependency between intermediate representations of images
from different quality levels via Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion. In addition, an Adversarial Weight Perturbation module is carefully devised to enable the model to
be more robust against image corruption while boosting the
overall model’s performance. Extensive experiments over
seven popular deepfake datasets demonstrate the superiority of our QAD model over prior SOTA benchmarks.

Baseline 2 - n models

...

Baseline 1 - one model

Abstract

Baseline 1
Baseline 2
Ours

98.8 98.6 99.4

raw

97.3
91.1 94.3

c23

67.5 73.6

80.1

c40

Figure 1. A summary of our goal. Our approach stands out from
previous works that detect deepfakes using separate models for
different qualities (e.g. Baseline 2 [28]) or a single model without considering the interaction between qualities (e.g. Baseline
1 [43]). Instead, our method employs all quality levels and improves the performance of the model on each quality level, leading
to overall enhanced performance.

natural, making it harder not only for humans, but also for
classifiers to tell them apart. Moreover, it has been simpler
than ever before to create convincing deepfakes using simple programs and apps without requiring advanced machine
learning knowledge. Such easy-to-create and realistic fake
images and videos can be maliciously exploited, raising significant security, privacy, and societal concerns such as fake
news propagation [39], and stealing personal information
via phishing and scams [10].
To mitigate such problems caused by deepfakes, there
has been a tremendous research effort put into constructing
reliable detectors [32, 25, 8, 38, 61, 44]. Although they have
achieved outstanding performance with high-quality deepfakes, most of them have failed to detect low-quality deepfakes effectively [8, 43]. While video compression steps do
not significantly impact on visualization, it drastically drop
deepfake detectors’ performance on low-quality deepfakes
(c40). A handful of research has been focused on detecting
low-quality deepfakes such as ADD [28] and BZNet [29].
However, their methods can only detect low-quality com-

22378

