This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Take-A-Photo: 3D-to-2D Generative Pre-training of Point Cloud Models
Ziyi Wang1,2 * Xumin Yu1,2 * Yongming Rao1,2 Jie Zhou1,2 Jiwen Lu1,2†
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University 2 BNRist
{wziyi22, yuxm20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
raoyongming95@gmail.com; {jzhou, lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
With the overwhelming trend of mask image modeling led
by MAE, generative pre-training has shown a remarkable
potential to boost the performance of fundamental models
in 2D vision. However, in 3D vision, the over-reliance on
Transformer-based backbones and the unordered nature of
point clouds have restricted the further development of generative pre-training. In this paper, we propose a novel 3D-to2D generative pre-training method that is adaptable to any
point cloud model. We propose to generate view images from
different instructed poses via the cross-attention mechanism
as the pre-training scheme. Generating view images has
more precise supervision than its point cloud counterpart,
thus assisting 3D backbones to have a finer comprehension
of the geometrical structure and stereoscopic relations of
the point cloud. Experimental results have proved the superiority of our proposed 3D-to-2D generative pre-training
over previous pre-training methods. Our method is also effective in boosting the performance of architecture-oriented
approaches, achieving state-of-the-art performance when
fine-tuning on ScanObjectNN classification and ShapeNetPart segmentation tasks. Code is available at https:
//github.com/wangzy22/TakeAPhoto.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, pre-training fundamental models with selfsupervised mechanisms has witnessed a thriving development in the computer vision community, given its low requirement in data annotation and its high transferability to
downstream applications. Self-supervised pre-training aims
to fully exploit the statistical and structural knowledge from
abundant annotation-free data and empowers the fundamental models with robust representation ability. In 2D vision,
self-supervised pre-training has shown strong potential and
achieved remarkable progress on diverse backbones in various downstream tasks. Successful pre-training strategies
* Equal contribution.

† Corresponding author.

View 1

3D
Backbone

Photograph
Module

2D
Generator

𝑉!

𝑉"
View 2

Figure 1: Principle illustration of 3D-to-2D generative
pre-training. The photograph module explicitly encodes
pose condition into 3D features from the backbone, and
the 2D generator decodes pose-conditioned features into
different view images.

in 2D domain such as contrastive learning [19, 7] and mask
modeling [18, 3] have also been adopted to 3D point cloud
analysis [58, 30, 23] in recent research.
However, the pre-training paradigm hasn’t become the
prevailing trend in 3D learning and architectural design is
still the mainstream to reach a new state-of-the-art performance, which is considerably different from the dominant
status of pre-training in 2D domain. In object-level analysis, generative pre-training inspired by MAE [18] has been
studied thoroughly, but their performances still lag behind
architecture-based methods like PointNeXt [35]. Two factors mainly contribute to the inferior status of generative pretraining in 3D learning. Since point clouds are unordered
sets of point coordinates, there is no direct and precise supervision like one-to-one MSE loss between generated point
clouds and their corresponding ground truth. Chamfer Distance supervision for point clouds only calculates a rough
set-to-set matching and its imprecision has been widely discussed in [24, 50, 20]. Additionally, existing advanced generative pre-training methods in object analysis are limited to
the Transformer-based backbone, and fail to be extended to
other sophisticated point cloud models.
To alleviate the aforementioned problems, we propose a
3D-to-2D generative pre-training method for point cloud
analysis that has higher preciseness in supervision and
broader adaptation to different backbones. Instead of re-

5640

