This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-view Spectral Polarization Propagation for Video Glass Segmentation
Yu Qiao, Bo Dong,* Ao Jin, Yu Fu, Seung-Hwan Baek, Felix Heide
Pieter Peers, Xiaopeng Wei*, Xin Yang*

Figure 1. A comparison of PGVS-Net on 3 selected frames from an RGB-P video sequence from our novel PGV-117
dataset against the method of Kalra et al. [14] and Mei et al. [29]. From left to right: RGB, AoLP, and DoLP input images;
glass segmentation results for selected frames compared to the ground truth segmentation; evolution of error over the video
sequence. Both prior methods are temporally unstable due to significant temporal changes in DoLP. In contrast, PGVS-Net
combines multi-view polarization cues for segmentation propagation, yielding a temporally stable glass segmentation.

Abstract
In this paper, we present the first polarization-guided
video glass segmentation propagation solution (PGVS-Net)
that can robustly and coherently propagate glass segmentation in RGB-P video sequences. By leveraging spatiotemporal polarization and color information, our method
combines multi-view polarization cues and thus can alleviate the view dependence of single-input intensity variations on glass objects. We demonstrate that our model
can outperform glass segmentation on RGB-only video sequences as well as produce more robust segmentation than
per-frame RGB-P single-image segmentation methods. To
train and validate PGVS-Net, we introduce a novel RGB-P
Glass Video dataset (PGV-117) containing 117 video sequences of scenes captured with different types of camera
paths, lighting conditions, dynamics, and glass types.

1. Introduction
Transparent objects, such as glass, are common in manmade environments. Despite their prevalence, such objects pose numerous challenges for industrial and academic
* Corresponding authors.

vision processing algorithms due to their view-dependent
appearance, statistical similarity to the background environment, and lack of texture. These challenges are particularly acute for segmentation tasks that underpin autonomous driving, robotics, and aerial drone navigation.
Traditional learning-based solutions [8, 30, 50, 51] that rely
on RGB textures for feature extraction often fail to adequately model the illumination and view-dependent glass
features. Consequently, recent advances have explored
richer modalities such as light fields [44] and polarization [14, 18, 21, 29, 46, 49] for more robust segmentation of
glass objects. Polarization has proven to be a strong cue for
glass segmentation in still images [14, 29]. The availability
of commercial off-the-shelf RGB-P cameras (e.g., Flir and
Lucid), makes this last category an attractive modality for
glass segmentation.
Polarization of reflected light depends on various factors such as surface normals, material types, and illumination and view directions [2]. Due to the polarimetric nearspecular behavior, glass materials are particularly challenging; small changes in object orientation and/or view/light
direction can induce a rapid change in polarization state.
For example, consider the glass areas ‘1’ in Figure 2 that
show a glass door in various stages of being closed. In this
example, the RGB textures remain almost unchanged, but
1
23218

