This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hallucination Improves the Performance of Unsupervised Visual Representation
Learning

1

Jing Wu1
Jennifer Hobbs2
Naira Hovakimyan1
2
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign,
Intelinair

{jingwu6, nhovakim} @illinois,

jennif erhobbs08+research@gmail.com

Abstract
Contrastive learning models based on Siamese structure have demonstrated remarkable performance in selfsupervised learning. Such a success of contrastive learning relies on two conditions, a sufficient number of positive pairs and adequate variations between them. If the
conditions are not met, these frameworks will lack semantic contrast and be fragile on overfitting. To address these
two issues, we propose Hallucinator that could efficiently
generate additional positive samples for further contrast.
The Hallucinator is differentiable and creates new data in
the feature space. Thus, it is optimized directly with the
pre-training task and introduces nearly negligible computation. Moreover, we reduce the mutual information of hallucinated pairs and smooth them through non-linear operations. This process helps avoid over-confident contrastive
learning models during the training and achieves more
transformation-invariant feature embeddings. Remarkably,
we empirically prove that the proposed Hallucinator generalizes well to various contrastive learning models, including MoCoV1&V2, SimCLR and SimSiam. Under the linear
classification protocol, a stable accuracy gain is achieved,
ranging from 0.3% to 3.0% on CIFAR10&100, Tiny ImageNet, STL-10 and ImageNet. The improvement is also observed in transferring pre-train encoders to the downstream
tasks, including object detection and segmentation.

1. Introduction
In the recent computer vision community, there has been
rapid progress in self-supervised learning (SSL), gradually closing the performance gap with supervised learning [23, 29, 10, 7, 51]. Among the diverse approaches of
SSL, contrastive learning, such as MoCoV1&V2 [29, 11],
SimCLR [10], and SimSiam [12], shows promising results.
Generally, contrastive learning treats each image as one
class which will be augmented into two separate views.
These two views form one positive pair and should ide-

Similar Pairs

One Similar Pair

Figure 1: The motivation of the proposed hallucination
methods. Given one pair of images with the same semantic meaning, such as a pair of horses, a person can envision further similar pairs by imagining one of the horses in
different poses and surroundings. If a contrastive learning
model could do such hallucination, it could have additional
novel pairs to contrast given the same data. Note that this
hallucination process is for illustration only. In the implementation, all the hallucinated samples are computed in the
feature space.

ally be close if mapped to feature space. With sufficient
contrast in the feature space, contrastive learning models
show a strong capacity to learn transformation-invariant
features that are transferable to various downstream tasks,
such as classification, object detection, and segmentation
[18, 30, 39].
To ensure sufficient contrast, researchers from previous
work address the issue from two essential practices, either
introducing large amounts of positive pairs or adding additional variants&transformation among them. For example,
SimCLR uses a batch size that generates thousands of positives to facilitate the convergence of models [10]. Work

16132

