This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Illumination Mapping for Shadow Detection in Raw Images
Jiayu Sun1,2†
Ke Xu2†
Youwei Pang1
Lihe Zhang1‡
Huchuan Lu1 Gerhard Hancke2 Rynson Lau2‡
1

School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology
2

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong

{jiayusun666, kkangwing}@gmail.com,lartpang@mail.dlut.edu.cn,
{zhanglihe, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn, {gp.hancke,rynson.lau}@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Shadow detection methods rely on multi-scale contrast,
especially global contrast, information to locate shadows
correctly. However, we observe that the camera image signal processor (ISP) tends to preserve more local contrast
information by sacrificing global contrast information during the raw-to-sRGB conversion process. This often causes
existing methods to fail in scenes with high global contrast
but low local contrast in shadow regions. In this paper, we
propose a novel method to detect shadows from raw images.
Our key idea is that instead of performing a many-to-one
mapping like the ISP process, we can learn a many-to-many
mapping from the high dynamic range raw images to the
sRGB images of different illumination, which is able to preserve multi-scale contrast for accurate shadow detection.
To this end, we first construct a new shadow dataset with
∼ 7000 raw images and shadow masks. We then propose
a novel network, which includes a novel adaptive illumination mapping (AIM) module to project the input raw images
into sRGB images of different intensity ranges and a shadow
detection module to leverage the preserved multi-scale contrast information to detect shadows. To learn the shadowaware adaptive illumination mapping process, we propose
a novel feedback mechanism to guide the AIM during training. Experiments show that our method outperforms stateof-the-art shadow detectors. Code and dataset are available at https://github.com/jiayusun/SARA.

1. Introduction
Whenever there are light and objects in a scene, there
are shadows. Although usually unnoticed, shadows can tell
a lot of information about the scene, e.g., the shapes, volumes and locations of objects, and the sources, directions
of lights. The analysis of shadows can facilitate a lot of ap† Equal Contribution
‡ Corresponding Authors

(a) Input image

(b) MTMT [2]

(e) sRGB image A (f) sRBG image B

(c) BDRAR [38]

(d) FDRNet [39]

(g) Ours

(h) Ground truth

Figure 1. When a non-shadow region has low contrast to a shadow
region but high contrast to another non-shadow region (e.g., the
black boundary of the object), existing methods may fail to detect
the shadow region correctly (b-d). We propose to detect shadows
in the raw images. By learning to project raw images into sRGB
images of different intensity ranges adaptively, our method can
detect the shadow region correctly (g).

plications varying from scene understanding to the creation
and assessment of novel scenes. Hence, it is essential to
design effective shadow detection models.
There are many methods proposed for shadow detection. Conventional methods [5, 4, 14, 37, 7] typically handcraft statistical features (e.g., pixel color, intensity, gradient, and/or a combination of them) to represent the characteristics of shadows, and design heuristic models to detect
shadows. The key limitation of these methods is that their
low-level features often fail to represent shadows in realworld scenes. Deep learning-based shadow detectors avoid
the hand-craft feature engineering. In order to maximize
the discrepancies of deep features learned from shadow and
non-shadow regions, they typically focus on designing neural networks to mine both global and local contrast information via, e.g., directional context aggregation [10], crosslayer feature fusion [38, 33], negative example supervi-

12709

