This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Jumping through Local Minima: Quantization in the Loss Landscape
of Vision Transformers
Natalia Frumkin

Dibakar Gope

Diana Marculescu

The University of Texas at Austin

Arm Inc.

The University of Texas at Austin

nfrumkin@utexas.edu

dibakar.gope@arm.com

dianam@utexas.edu

Abstract
Quantization scale and bit-width are the most important parameters when considering how to quantize
a neural network. Prior work focuses on optimizing
quantization scales in a global manner through gradient
methods (gradient descent & Hessian analysis). Yet,
when applying perturbations to quantization scales, we
observe a very jagged, highly non-smooth test loss landscape. In fact, small perturbations in quantization
scale can greatly affect accuracy, yielding a 0.5 − 0.8%
accuracy boost in 4-bit quantized vision transformers
(ViTs). In this regime, gradient methods break down,
since they cannot reliably reach local minima. In our
work, dubbed Evol-Q, we use evolutionary search to effectively traverse the non-smooth landscape. Additionally, we propose using an infoNCE loss, which not only
helps combat overfitting on the small calibration dataset
(1, 000 images) but also makes traversing such a highly
non-smooth surface easier. Evol-Q improves the top1 accuracy of a fully quantized ViT-Base by 10.30%,
0.78%, and 0.15% for 3-bit, 4-bit, and 8-bit weight
quantization levels. Extensive experiments on a variety
of CNN and ViT architectures further demonstrate its
robustness in extreme quantization scenarios. Our code
is available at https: // github. com/ enyac-group/
evol-q .

1. Introduction
Quantization is a widespread technique for efficient
neural network inference: reducing data precision from
32 bits to ≤ 8 bits is an effective approach to aggressively reduce model footprint and speed up computation. Network quantization is an extremely important
tool for deploying models in cloud [28] and edge settings [27], where we aim to maximize accuracy while
reducing the computational burden. We consider the
post-training quantization (PTQ) setting, where there

(a) ResNet-18 Test Loss

(b) DeiT-Tiny Test Loss

Figure 1: We perturb along two basis vectors of one
layer/block’s quantization scales. The test loss landscape during perturbation is smooth in the CNN case
(a), and highly non-smooth in the ViT case (b).
is access to a small (∼1, 000 image) calibration dataset
but no access to the original training dataset. PTQ is
an integral component of model deployment, when a
carefully curated full-precision model is too expensive
to retrain. Our work, Evol-Q, is a PTQ method for
vision transformers which leverages four key observations:
1. Small perturbations in quantization scale
can lead to significant improvement in
quantization accuracy. For example, small adjustments in a self-attention block’s scale can induce a ± 1% change in accuracy.
2. As shown in Fig. 1, quantized vision transformers (ViTs) have an extremely nonsmooth loss landscape, particularly with respect to the perturbation in quantization
scales, making stochastic gradient descent a poor
choice for optimization. We use evolutionary
search to favor nearby local minima to significantly
improve accuracy (∼ 0.5 − 1%).
3. In comparison to non-contrastive loss functions
such as mean squared error, cosine similarity, and
the KL divergence, contrastive losses tend to

16978

