This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bold but Cautious: Unlocking the Potential of Personalized Federated Learning
through Cautiously Aggressive Collaboration
Xinghao Wu1 , Xuefeng Liu1,2 , Jianwei Niu * 1,2,3 , Guogang Zhu1 , and Shaojie Tang4
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, School of Computer Science and
Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{wuxinghao, liu xuefeng, niujianwei, buaa zgg}@buaa.edu.cn
2

3

Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
Zhengzhou University Research Institute of Industrial Technology, School of Information
Engineering, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China
4
Jindal School of Management, University of Texas at Dallas, USA
shaojie.tang@utdallas.edu

Abstract
Personalized federated learning (PFL) reduces the impact of non-independent and identically distributed (nonIID) data among clients by allowing each client to train a
personalized model when collaborating with others. A key
question in PFL is to decide which parameters of a client
should be localized or shared with others. In current mainstream approaches, all layers that are sensitive to non-IID
data (such as classifier layers) are generally personalized.
The reasoning behind this approach is understandable, as
localizing parameters that are easily influenced by non-IID
data can prevent the potential negative effect of collaboration. However, we believe that this approach is too conservative for collaboration. For example, for a certain client,
even if its parameters are easily influenced by non-IID data,
it can still benefit by sharing these parameters with clients
having similar data distribution. This observation emphasizes the importance of considering not only the sensitivity
to non-IID data but also the similarity of data distribution
when determining which parameters should be localized in
PFL. This paper introduces a novel guideline for client collaboration in PFL. Unlike existing approaches that prohibit
all collaboration of sensitive parameters, our guideline allows clients to share more parameters with others, leading
to improved model performance. Additionally, we propose
a new PFL method named FedCAC, which employs a quantitative metric to evaluate each parameter’s sensitivity to
non-IID data and carefully selects collaborators based on
* Corresponding author

this evaluation. Experimental results demonstrate that FedCAC enables clients to share more parameters with others,
resulting in superior performance compared to state-of-theart methods, particularly in scenarios where clients have
diverse distributions. The code is integrated into our FL
training framework: https://github.com/kxzxvbk/Fling.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) [25] enables institutions or devices to train a global model collaboratively without exposing raw data. It has been applied in many scenarios,
such as computer vision [20, 5, 34], finance [21], healthcare
[28, 29], etc. However, when the data among clients are
non-independent and identically distributed (non-IID), the
local tasks of clients are different, which brings a great challenge for training a global model for all clients [36, 7, 16].
Personalized federated learning (PFL) [6, 31, 17] allows
each client to train a personalized model to focus on its data
distribution. PFL aims to enable each client to get as much
help as possible from other clients while minimizing the impact of non-IID data. A key question in PFL is to decide
which parameters of a client should be localized to reduce
the influence of non-IID or shared with others to get help.
To deal with this question, according to the characteristics of different neural network layers, the current mainstream work localizes layers sensitive to non-IID data while
globally sharing the others. FedRep [4] and FedBN [18], for
example, personalize classifier layers and batch normalization (BN) layers, respectively. The rationale behind these

19375

