This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Point-Query Quadtree for Crowd Counting, Localization, and More
Chengxin Liu1 Hao Lu1 Zhiguo Cao1 * Tongliang Liu2
1
Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control, Ministry of Education
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
2
The University of Sydney, Australia
{cx liu, hlu, zgcao}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
We show that crowd counting can be viewed as a decomposable point querying process. This formulation enables
arbitrary points as input and jointly reasons whether the
points are crowd and where they locate. The querying processing, however, raises an underlying problem on the number of necessary querying points. Too few imply underestimation; too many increase computational overhead. To address this dilemma, we introduce a decomposable structure,
i.e., the point-query quadtree, and propose a new counting
model, termed Point quEry Transformer (PET). PET implements decomposable point querying via data-dependent
quadtree splitting, where each querying point could split
into four new points when necessary, thus enabling dynamic processing of sparse and dense regions. Such a
querying process yields an intuitive, universal modeling of
crowd as both the input and output are interpretable and
steerable. We demonstrate the applications of PET on a
number of crowd-related tasks, including fully-supervised
crowd counting and localization, partial annotation learning, and point annotation refinement, and also report stateof-the-art performance. For the first time, we show that a
single counting model can address multiple crowd-related
tasks across different learning paradigms. Code is available at https://github.com/cxliu0/PET.

1. Introduction
Crowd counting aims to estimate the number of crowd
from an image. Existing approaches typically address
counting by learning surrogate targets such as density maps,
where the count is acquired by integrating the inferred density map. Despite being effective, they cannot provide an
intuitive understanding of the crowd, i.e., no instance-level
information is provided, which impedes high-level crowd
* corresponding author

analysis. Instead of merely predicting a count value from
an image, some approaches focus on estimating the finegrained information of crowd by either a head bounding
box [21, 26] or a single head point [3, 17, 29]. The former
casts crowd counting as a head detection problem. However, the detection accuracy has no guarantee in theory due
to the lack of box information. In contrast, the latter directly
outputs the head points, bypassing the error-prone stage of
bounding box estimation. Nevertheless, they often require
post-processing [3, 17] to obtain the location of each person.
As a result, congested scenes may render failures of counting or localization. In addition, prior arts typically tackle a
specific counting task or a learning paradigm; each requires
a customized design. This impedes their use in different applications or tasks. For example, a fully-supervised counting model often cannot well address semi-supervised crowd
counting [39].
In this work, we formulate crowd counting as a decomposable point querying process. The point querying design
allows a model to receive arbitrary points as input and to
reason whether each point is a person and where it locates.
An appealing property of this design is that it provides an
intuitive and universal modeling of crowd. To be specific,
the intuition lies in that each querying point physically corresponds to a person or background. The arbitrariness of
querying points implies that the position and the number of
input points are both steerable. Therefore, by simply adjusting the input, our formulation naturally fits different crowdrelated tasks, such as fully-supervised crowd counting and
localization, partial annotation learning [39], and point annotation refinement (Fig. 1c).
However, since an input image may contain an arbitrary
number of crowd, it is non-trivial to predefine the number
of querying points. In practice, too few points lead to underestimation, while too many points yield a large computational cost. To tackle this pitfall, we present a decomposable structure—point-query quadtree. The key advantage of
the quadtree is that it allows data-dependent splitting, where

1676

