This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multiscale Representation for Real-Time Anti-Aliasing Neural Rendering
Dongting Hu
University of Melbourne

Zhenkai Zhang
University of Melbourne

Huan Fu∗
Alibaba Group

1. Introduction
The realm of computer vision and graphics is marked
by the captivating yet formidable challenge of novel view
synthesis. In recent times, neural volumetric representations, most notably the neural radiance field (NeRF) [35],
have emerged as a promising breakthrough in reconstructing intricate 3D scenes from multi-view image collections.
* Equal contribution

Tongliang Liu
University of Sydney

Mingming Gong*
University of Melbourne

Abstract
The rendering scheme in neural radiance field (NeRF) is
effective in rendering a pixel by casting a ray into the scene.
However, NeRF yields blurred rendering results when the
training images are captured at non-uniform scales, and
produces aliasing artifacts if the test images are taken in
distant views. To address this issue, Mip-NeRF proposes
a multiscale representation as a conical frustum to encode
scale information. Nevertheless, this approach is only suitable for offline rendering since it relies on integrated positional encoding (IPE) to query a multilayer perceptron
(MLP). To overcome this limitation, we propose mip voxel
grids (Mip-VoG), an explicit multiscale representation with
a deferred architecture for real-time anti-aliasing rendering. Our approach includes a density Mip-VoG for scene
geometry and a feature Mip-VoG with a small MLP for
view-dependent color. Mip-VoG represents scene scale using the level of detail (LOD) derived from ray differentials
and uses quadrilinear interpolation to map a queried 3D
location to its features and density from two neighboring
down-sampled voxel grids. To our knowledge, our approach
is the first to offer multiscale training and real-time antialiasing rendering simultaneously. We conducted experiments on multiscale dataset, results show that our approach
outperforms state-of-the-art real-time rendering baselines.

Tingbo Hou
Google

Method
Mip-NeRF [3]
SNeRG [21]
MobileNeRF [10]
Ours

Multiscale
Training
✓

✓

Real-time
Rendering
✓
✓
✓

Anti-aliasing
Rendering
✓
✓
✓

Table 1: Our method is the first one concurrently addresses
multiscale training, real-time and anti-aliasing rending.

NeRF employs a coordinate-based multilayer perceptron
(MLP) architecture to map a 5D input coordinate (including 3D spatial position and 2D viewing direction) to intrinsic scene attributes (namely, volume density and viewdependent emitted radiance) at that precise location. The
pixel rendering process in NeRF involves casting a ray
through the pixel into the scene, extracting the scene representation for points sampled along the ray, and ultimately
fusing these components to produce the final color output.
While this rendering methodology excels when the training and testing images share a uniform resolution, challenges arise when the training images encompass varying
resolutions. This discrepancy in resolutions leads NeRF to
produce blurred rendering outputs due to the altered pixel
footprints originating from diverse scales. Besides, in case
that test viewpoints significantly deviate from the spatial
distance of the training views, the sample rate for per pixel
would be inadequacy, thereby results in aliasing artifacts.
To surmount this challenge, Mip-NeRF [3] emerges as a
noteworthy solution, presenting a continuously-valued scale
representation for coordinate-based models. Mip-NeRF introduces a pioneering technique, known as integrated positional encoding (IPE), which facilitate the scene representation with the knowledge of scale. Departing from the
conventional ray-based approach, Mip-NeRF adopts a novel
rendering strategy involving conical frustums. This representation not only enables effective multiscale training but
also tangibly mitigates the persisting issue of aliasing ar-

17772

