This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bring Clipart to Life
Nanxuan Zhao 1 , Shengqi Dang 2 , Hexun Lin 2 , Yang Shi 2 , Nan Cao 2
1
Adobe Research 2 Tongji University

Source

Ours

Change Components

Reference

Ours

TargetCLIP

StyleCLIP

BlendGAN

Reference

Figure 1: Clipart-driven facial editing. Given a clipart image, our model can transfer its facial attributes (e.g., hair, beard, etc.)
to the input source image. It allows the users to efﬁciently conduct facial editing by simply adding/swapping components in
the reference clipart (as shown on the left). Compared with prior works [3, 28], our model can transfer facial attributes while
maintaining the identity (as shown on the right). Clipart © from Open Peeps [37].

Abstract
The development of face editing has been boosted since
the birth of StyleGAN. While previous works have explored
different interactive methods, such as sketching and exemplar photos, they have been limited in terms of expressiveness and generality. In this paper, we propose a new interaction method by guiding the editing with abstract clipart, composed of a set of simple semantic parts, allowing users to control across face photos with simple clicks.
However, this is a challenging task given the large domain
gap between colorful face photos and abstract clipart with
limited data. To solve this problem, we introduce a framework called ClipFaceShop 1 built on top of StyleGAN. The
key idea is to take advantage of W+ latent code encoded
rich and disentangled visual features, and create a new
lightweight selective feature adaptor to predict a modiﬁable path toward the target output photo. Since no pairwise
* Nanxuan Zhao is with Adobe Research.
E-mail: nanxuanzhao@gmail.com.
* Shengqi Dang, Hexun Lin, Yang Shi and Nan Cao are with Intelligent
Big DataVisualization Lab, Tongji University. Nan Cao is the corresponding author. E-mail: dangsq123@tongji.edu.cn, linhexun@pku.edu.cn,
{shiyang1230, nan.cao}@gmail.com.
1 Code: https://github.com/dangsq/ClipFaceShop

labeled data exists for training, we design a set of losses
to provide supervision signals for learning the modiﬁable
path. Experimental results show that ClipFaceShop generates realistic and faithful face photos, sharing the same
facial attributes as the reference clipart. We demonstrate
that ClipFaceShop supports clipart in diverse styles, even
in form of a free-hand sketch.

1. Introduction
Face editing aims to manipulate the attributes speciﬁed
by the users while maintaining the non-modiﬁable attributes
unchanged. With the rapid development of Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [12], this task attracts many recent works [45, 32, 9] for achieving impressive results.
In particular, because of the powerful disentangled latent
space, StyleGAN [18] has become a de facto building block
for generating realistic editing results. To express the user’s
intention, there are mainly three ways of editing including sketching, text-guiding, and exemplar photo. Unfortunately, these interaction methods may not enable effective
and precise editing across different face photos for people
without design experience.

23341

