This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Data-Free Class-Incremental Hand Gesture Recognition
Shubhra Aich1∗ † Jesus Ruiz-Santaquiteria1∗ Zhenyu Lu1 Prachi Garg1 K J Joseph2
Alvaro Fernandez Garcia1 Vineeth N Balasubramanian2 Kenrick Kin3 Chengde Wan3
Necati Cihan Camgoz3 Shugao Ma3 Fernando De la Torre1
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad 3 Meta Reality Labs
Equal contribution

BOAT-MI

Base
Model

Corresponding author: saich@andrew.cmu.edu
TASK 1

TASK 2

Register Pinch

Register Right Swipe

Continual
Learner

Continual
Learner

.. ..

INFERENCE

TRAINING

BASE

†

BOAT-MI

∗

Figure 1: Data-Free Class-Incremental Learning for Hand Gesture Recognition. When interacting with gestures in a
virtual reality (VR) environment, the user may want to add new gestures to customize their VR experience. Given that the
training data of the gesture model is proprietary and inaccessible for future tasks, finetuning the existing model on a new
class can lead to catastrophic forgetting of all old classes. Our proposed BOundary Aware ProTotypical Model Inversion
(BOAT-MI) enables the model to continually adapt to new gestures while retaining previous knowledge.

Abstract
This paper investigates data-free class-incremental learning (DFCIL) for hand gesture recognition from 3D skeleton sequences. In this class-incremental learning (CIL)
setting, while incrementally registering the new classes,
we do not have access to the training samples (i.e. datafree) of the already known classes due to privacy. Existing DFCIL methods primarily focus on various forms
of knowledge distillation for model inversion to mitigate
catastrophic forgetting. Unlike SOTA methods, we delve
deeper into the choice of the best samples for inversion.
Inspired by the well-grounded theory of max-margin classification, we find that the best samples tend to lie close
to the approximate decision boundary within a reasonable
margin. To this end, we propose BOAT-MI – a simple and
effective boundary-aware prototypical sampling mechanism
for model inversion for DFCIL. Our sampling scheme outperforms SOTA methods significantly on two 3D skeleton
gesture datasets, the publicly available SHREC 2017, and
EgoGesture3D – which we extract from a publicly available RGBD dataset. Both our codebase and the EgoGesture3D skeleton dataset are publicly available: https:
//github.com/humansensinglab/dfcil-hgr.

1. Introduction
Humans innately rely on their hands to communicate, feel
and interact with their environment. Recent studies have
shown that seeing one’s hands tracked in real-time in a virtual environment without controllers is the most compelling
method of user engagement in virtual reality (VR) [49].
The latest VR headsets such as Meta Quest [15, 16], and
VUZIX [3] leverage high-precision hand-tracking features
to render compelling user immersion abilities. The handtracking and individual finger-tracking technologies in these
platforms are mature enough for natural interactions in the
virtual world, and provide a highly immersive “user presence”
in virtual environments [29].
While existing VR systems are equipped with promising
hand gesture recognition performance, they are designed using a pre-defined set of hand gestures that an end user ought
to follow for interaction with the virtual world. However,
considering the variations in user preferences across cultures
and demographics [1, 2], individual users may also wish to
register custom gesture categories and personalize their VR
experience. Such a provision has several advantages. As
hands play a key role in the recognition and expression of
1
20958

