This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learned Image Reasoning Prior Penetrates Deep Unfolding Network for
Panchromatic and Multi-Spectral Image Fusion
Man Zhou1 *, Jie Huang2 *, Naishan Zheng2 , Chongyi Li3†
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
University of Science and Technology of China, China
3
Nankai University, China

Abstract
The success of deep neural networks for pan-sharpening
is commonly in a form of black box, lacking transparency
and interpretability. To alleviate this issue, we propose
a novel model-driven deep unfolding framework with image reasoning prior tailored for the pan-sharpening task.
Different from existing unfolding solutions that deliver the
proximal operator networks as the uncertain and vague priors, our framework is motivated by the content reasoning
ability of masked autoencoders (MAE) with insightful designs. Specifically, the pre-trained MAE with spatial masking strategy, acting as intrinsic reasoning prior, is embedded into unfolding architecture. Meanwhile, the pre-trained
MAE with spatial-spectral masking strategy is treated as
the regularization term within loss function to constrain
the spatial-spectral consistency. Such designs penetrate the
image reasoning prior into deep unfolding networks while
improving its interpretability and representation capability. The uniqueness of our framework is that the holistic learning process is explicitly integrated with the inherent physical mechanism underlying the pan-sharpening
task. Extensive experiments on multiple satellite datasets
demonstrate the superiority of our method over the existing state-of-the-art approaches. Code will be released at
https://manman1995.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Pan-sharpening, a texture-rich panchromatic imageguided multi-spectral image super-resolution task, is to reason the unknown content at the pre-defined pixel positions according to the context of low-resolution (LR) multispectral (MS) image and high-resolution (HR) panchromatic (PAN) image. Owing to the physical constraints,
* Co-first authors contributed equally, † corresponding author. We also
gratefully acknowledge the support of MindSpore, CANN, and Ascend AI
Processor used for this research.

Figure 1: Motivation. Pan-sharpening is to reason the unknown content at the pre-defined pixel positions according
to the context of low-resolution multi-spectral image and
high-resolution panchromatic image.
satellites usually adopt both MS and PAN sensors to observe scenes, providing the MS images with high spectral
but limited spatial resolution and the PAN images with high
spatial but low spectral resolution. To obtain observation
with both high spectral and high spatial resolutions, the pansharpening technique has drawn increasing attention in both
image processing and remote sensing communities.
Many research efforts have been devoted to solving the
pan-sharpening problem, which can be categorized into
two groups: traditional optimization methods and deep
learning-based methods. Since an infinite number of HRMS images can be downsampled to produce the same LRMS image, reasoning the HR-MS images from the LR counterparts is highly ill-posed. To solve the ill-posedness, various natural images priors as regularization terms have been
developed in traditional optimization methods, e.g., lowrank prior [29] and sparse image priors [44]. However, these
priors are not easy to be devised. Moreover, it is challenging
to optimize these methods, hampering the practical applications. Besides, due to the hand-crafted designs, their limited
representation ability results in unsatisfactory performance.
The powerful learning capability of deep neural net-

12398

