This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BEV-DG: Cross-Modal Learning under Bird’s-Eye View for Domain
Generalization of 3D Semantic Segmentation
‡

‡

Miaoyu Li1 , Yachao Zhang2 , Xu Ma3 , Yanyun Qu1 , Yun Fu3
1
School of Informatics, Xiamen University
2
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
3
Department of ECE, Northeastern University
limiaoyu@stu.xmu.edu.cn, yachaozhang@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, yyqu@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross-modal Unsupervised Domain Adaptation aims to
exploit the complementarity of 2D-3D data to overcome
the lack of annotation in an unknown domain. However,
the training of these methods relies on access to target
samples, meaning the trained model only works in a specific target domain. In light of this, we propose crossmodal learning under bird’s-eye view for Domain Generalization (DG) of 3D semantic segmentation, called BEVDG. DG is more challenging because the model cannot access the target domain during training, meaning it needs
to rely on cross-modal learning to alleviate the domain
gap. Since 3D semantic segmentation requires the classification of each point, existing cross-modal learning is
directly conducted point-to-point, which is sensitive to the
misalignment in projections between pixels and points. To
this end, our approach aims to optimize domain-irrelevant
representation modeling with the aid of cross-modal learning under bird’s-eye view. We propose BEV-based Areato-area Fusion (BAF) to conduct cross-modal learning under bird’s-eye view, which has a higher fault tolerance for
point-level misalignment. Furthermore, to model domainirrelevant representations, we propose BEV-driven Domain
Contrastive Learning (BDCL) with the help of cross-modal
learning under bird’s-eye view. We design three domain
generalization settings based on three 3D datasets, and
BEV-DG significantly outperforms state-of-the-art competitors with tremendous margins in all settings.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation of LiDAR point clouds is fundamental for numerous vision applications, such as robotics,
autonomous driving and virtual reality. Given a LiDAR
‡ Corresponding Author

Figure 1. DG results of methods under different levels of pointto-pixel misalignment. The models are trained on A2D2 and SemanticKITTI datasets, and tested on nuScenes dataset. Area-toarea methods significantly outperform point-to-point methods under each level of misalignment. Moreover, point-to-point methods
degrade more dramatically with the increasing misalignment.

frame, the goal is to separate each point in the point cloud
into a cluster with corresponding semantic labels.
Recently, some 3D semantic segmentation approaches
continuously refresh the performance leader-boards on several benchmark datasets [2, 3, 4, 7, 9]. Nevertheless, the
training and testing data for these approaches originate from
identical datasets (domains). As each dataset has a different configuration of LiDAR sensors, these methods can
significantly degrade under domain shift. Specifically, due
to the number of laser beams varying from LiDAR to LiDAR, the obtained point cloud is also quite diverse in terms
of density (resolution), which results in a tremendous domain gap. To improve the generalization of the model,

11632

