This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Joint Demosaicing and Deghosting of Time-Varying Exposures
for Single-Shot HDR Imaging
Jungwoo Kim

Min H. Kim
KAIST

Abstract
The quad-Bayer patterned image sensor has made significant improvements in spatial resolution over recent years
due to advancements in image sensor technology. This
has enabled single-shot high-dynamic-range (HDR) imaging using spatially varying multiple exposures. Popular
methods for multi-exposure array sensors involve varying
the gain of each exposure, but this does not effectively
change the photoelectronic energy in each exposure. Consequently, HDR images produced using gain-based exposure variation may suffer from noise and details being saturated. To address this problem, we intend to use timevarying exposures in quad-Bayer patterned sensors. This
approach allows long-exposure pixels to receive more photon energy than short- or middle-exposure pixels, resulting
in higher-quality HDR images. However, time-varying exposures are not ideal for dynamic scenes and require an additional deghosting method. To tackle this issue, we propose
a single-shot HDR demosaicing method that takes timevarying multiple exposures as input and jointly solves both
the demosaicing and deghosting problems. Our method
uses a feature-extraction module to handle mosaiced multiple exposures and a multiscale transformer module to register spatial displacements of multiple exposures and colors.
We also created a dataset of quad-Bayer sensor input with
time-varying exposures and trained our network using this
dataset. Results demonstrate that our method outperforms
baseline HDR reconstruction methods with both synthetic
and real datasets. With our method, we can achieve highquality HDR images in challenging lighting conditions.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in image sensor technology, such as
interlaced and quad-Bayer patterned image sensors, have facilitated the development of multi-exposure color filter arrays, which enable single-shot high-dynamic-range (HDR)
imaging. Single-shot HDR imaging takes only one image
to generate an HDR image as input. This imaging technology has successfully expanded the dynamic range of

(a) Input RAW image

(b) Multi-exposure images

(c) HDR reconstruction result

Figure 1. (a) Input quad-Bayer patterned RAW image with different exposure times and colors. (b) Three multi-exposure images.
(c) Our method result. We jointly solve demosaicing and deblurring problems to achieve a high-quality single-shot HDR image
from the quad-Bayer pattern.

captured images beyond conventional low-dynamic-range
(LDR) images. However, multi-exposure color filter array
sensors must share pixel budgets to capture not only different colors but also different exposures, which can result in
severe degradation of spatial resolution. The reconstructed
HDR images may experience a reduction in spatial resolution by half due to the use of color filters and multiple
exposures. Current single-shot methods have focused on
enhancing spatial resolution by addressing multi-exposure
sampling artifacts, such as mosaicing [1, 17, 37] or interlacing artifacts [12, 10, 35, 4].
Current single-shot HDR imaging techniques use gainbased exposure variation to capture different levels of exposures simultaneously, but this approach provides only a
minor improvement in dynamic range compared to traditional static HDR imaging. Gain-based exposure variation
does not capture different amounts of photo energy, even
with a long exposure input, which limits the dynamic range
of reconstructed HDR images. Traditional HDR imaging
captures time-varying multi-exposures, which allows for a
wider range of photon energy and high signal-to-noise ratio in reconstructed HDR images. However, this approach
is not applicable to single-shot HDR imaging of dynamic
scenes or camera motions due to motion blur. Recent HDR

12292

