This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual Learning with Dynamic Knowledge Distillation for
Partially Relevant Video Retrieval
Jianfeng Dong1,2 , Minsong Zhang1*, Zheng Zhang1*, Xianke Chen1
Daizong Liu 3 , Xiaoye Qu 4 , Xun Wang 1,2 , Baolong Liu 1,2 †
1
Zhejiang Gongshang University, 2 Zhejiang Key Lab of E-Commerce
3
Peking University, 4 Huazhong University of Science and Technology
https://github.com/HuiGuanLab/DL-DKD
Query: A man opens the door and enters the room.

Abstract

Relevant moments

1. Introduction
With the explosion of online videos, searching the videos
of interest has been an indispensable activity in people’s
daily lives. Meanwhile, text-to-video retrieval (T2VR), retrieving videos w.r.t. a textual query from a large num* Both authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author: Baolong Liu (liubaolongx@gmail.com)

11302

...

Retrieval
...
...

Untrimmed Video Gallery

(a)
250

For mainstream T2VR
For PRVR

100

200

SumR

Average Duration

Almost all previous text-to-video retrieval works assume
that videos are pre-trimmed with short durations. However, in practice, videos are generally untrimmed containing much background content. In this work, we investigate
the more practical but challenging Partially Relevant Video
Retrieval (PRVR) task, which aims to retrieve partially relevant untrimmed videos with the query input. Particularly,
we propose to address PRVR from a new perspective, i.e.,
distilling the generalization knowledge from the large-scale
vision-language pre-trained model and transferring it to a
task-speciﬁc PRVR network. To be speciﬁc, we introduce a
Dual Learning framework with Dynamic Knowledge Distillation (DL-DKD), which exploits the knowledge of a large
vision-language model as the teacher to guide a student
model. During the knowledge distillation, an inheritance
student branch is devised to absorb the knowledge from
the teacher model. Considering that the large model may
be of mediocre performance due to the domain gaps, we
further develop an exploration student branch to take the
beneﬁts of task-speciﬁc information. In addition, a dynamical knowledge distillation strategy is further devised to adjust the effect of each student branch learning during the
training. Experiment results demonstrate that our proposed
model achieves state-of-the-art performance on ActivityNet
and TVR datasets for PRVR.

50

SOTA
CLIP

150
100
50

0

MSVD

VATEX MSRVTT

(b)

TVR ActivityNet

0

ActivityNet

TVR

(c)

Figure 1. (a) An illustrative example of the PRVR task; (b)
Mean values of video duration of different datasets; (c) Performance comparisons between the state-of-the-art (SOTA) [8] and
the vanilla CLIP-based [2] methods, where CLIP shows huge performance divergences for different PRVR datasets.

ber of unlabeled videos, attracts growing attention recently [1, 6, 25, 35, 50, 59]. One basic assumption prerequisite for mainstream T2VR is that videos are pre-trimmed
with short duration and supposed to be fully relevant to the
query [29, 48, 61]. However, in practical applications, the
majority of the existing videos are untrimmed. Besides, as
queries are not known a priori, pre-trimmed video clips may
not contain sufﬁcient content to fully meet the query. Therefore, there is a huge gap between the literature and the real
world for the mainstream T2VR task [8].
To ﬁll the gap, a new text-to-video retrieval subtask, i.e.,
Partially Relevant Video Retrieval (PRVR), has been proposed recently in [8]. Different from previous T2VR, PRVR
aims to retrieve the partially relevant untrimmed videos that
contain at least one internal moment relevant to the given

