This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semi-supervised Semantics-guided Adversarial Training for
Robust Trajectory Prediction
Ruochen Jiao
Northwestern University

Xiangguo Liu
Northwestern University

ruochen.jiao@u.northwestern.edu

xg.liu@u.northwestern.edu

Takami Sato
University of California, Irvine

Qi Alfred Chen
University of California, Irvine

Qi Zhu
Northwestern University

takamis@uci.edu

alfchen@uci.edu

qzhu@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Predicting the trajectories of surrounding objects is a
critical task for self-driving vehicles and many other autonomous systems. Recent works demonstrate that adversarial attacks on trajectory prediction, where small crafted
perturbations are introduced to history trajectories, may
significantly mislead the prediction of future trajectories
and induce unsafe planning. However, few works have addressed enhancing the robustness of this important safetycritical task. In this paper, we present a novel adversarial training method for trajectory prediction. Compared
with typical adversarial training on image tasks, our work
is challenged by more random input with rich context and
a lack of class labels. To address these challenges, we
propose a method based on a semi-supervised adversarial autoencoder, which models disentangled semantic features with domain knowledge and provides additional latent labels for the adversarial training. Extensive experiments with different types of attacks demonstrate that our
Semi-supervised Semantics-guided Adversarial Training
(SSAT1 ) method can effectively mitigate the impact of adversarial attacks by up to 73% and outperform other popular defense methods. In addition, experiments show that our
method can significantly improve the system’s robust generalization to unseen patterns of attacks. We believe that such
semantics-guided architecture and advancement on robust
generalization is an important step for developing robust
prediction models and enabling safe decision making.

1. Introduction
Connected and autonomous vehicles (CAVs) have shown
great promise to revolutionize the transportation systems,
1 Our codes: https://github.com/jrcblue/SSAT-for-Motion-Prediction

but also face significant concerns regarding their safety and
security [15, 36, 21, 17, 50, 51]. Many of these concerns,
which also apply to many other autonomous systems, arise
from the increasing adoption of advanced deep neural network (DNN)-based machine learning techniques across system sensing, perception, prediction, planning, control, and
general decision-making [52, 53].
In particular, the adversarial robustness of DNNs has
drawn significant attention in recent years. State-of-the-art
classifiers can be misled to make erroneous predictions by
slight but carefully-optimized perturbations [39], and addressing this is critical to the safety of autonomous systems
that employ these classifiers [11, 40]. Besides classification, adversarial attacks are also targeted at various other
tasks such as object detection, image generation and natural language processing. To defend against adversarial examples, adversarial training is commonly used to enhance
the intrinsic robustness of models and has been shown to be
very effective among various defense strategies [24, 25, 34].
On the other hand, the works in [30, 43, 37] show that adversarial training may suffer poor robust generalization on
unseen attacks and [33, 24, 38] demonstrate a trade-off between robustness and accuracy. In this paper, we address
trajectory prediction, a safety-critical task that is common
in self-driving vehicles and other autonomous systems, and
propose a novel architecture to enhance its adversarial robustness and robust generalization by introducing semantic features and a semi-supervised adversarial autoencoder
(AAE) [26] into the adversarial training process.
We focus on the trajectory prediction module in autonomous driving, where large DNNs have enabled breakthroughs in recent years. More specifically, an autonomous
driving system typically consists of several modules such
as perception, localization, prediction, planning (route, behavior, trajectory, and motion planning), and control. The
perception module is to detect agents and obstacles based

8207

