This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Controllable Visual-Tactile Synthesis
Ruihan Gao

Wenzhen Yuan
Jun-Yan Zhu
Carnegie Mellon University
https://visual-tactile-synthesis.github.io/

Object models

Sketch input

Visual output

Model

Haptic rendering

Tactile output (in the form of 3D height map)

Rendering
Friction map

Figure 1: Our method synthesizes visual and tactile outputs from an input sketch and renders the object on a haptic device (e.g., TanvasTouch
screen [15]). Our system allows users to see the visual pattern and feel the material texture at their fingertips simultaneously. Please see our
data capture and user interaction demos on our project page.

Abstract
Deep generative models have various content creation applications such as graphic design, e-commerce, and virtual
try-on. However, current works mainly focus on synthesizing
realistic visual outputs, often ignoring other sensory modalities, such as touch, which limits physical interaction with
users. In this work, we leverage deep generative models to
create a multi-sensory experience where users can touch
and see the synthesized object when sliding their fingers on
a haptic surface. The main challenges lie in the significant
scale discrepancy between vision and touch sensing and
the lack of explicit mapping from touch sensing data to a
haptic rendering device. To bridge this gap, we collect highresolution tactile data with a GelSight sensor and create a
new visuotactile clothing dataset. We then develop a conditional generative model that synthesizes both visual and
tactile outputs from a single sketch. We evaluate our method
regarding image quality and tactile rendering accuracy. Finally, we introduce a pipeline to render high-quality visual
and tactile outputs on an electroadhesion-based haptic device for an immersive experience, allowing for challenging
materials and editable sketch inputs.

1. Introduction
The past few years have witnessed significant progress in
content creation powered by deep generative models [30, 59]
and neural rendering techniques [45, 71]. Recent works
can synthesize realistic images with various user controls,
such as user sketches [28], text prompts [55], and semantic maps [51]. However, most works focus on synthesizing
visual outputs, ignoring other sensory outputs such as touch.
In real life, humans use vision and touch to explore objects. When shopping for clothing, we look at them to perceive their shape and appearance and touch them to anticipate the experience of wearing them. A single touch can
reveal the material’s roughness, hardness, and local geometry. Multimodal perceptual inputs enable humans to obtain
a more comprehensive understanding of the target objects,
enhancing user experiences, such as online shopping and
quick prototyping. Moreover, it opens up new possibilities
for content creation, such as touchable VR and movies.
In this work, we aim to expand the capability of content
creation. We introduce a new problem setting, controllable
visual-tactile synthesis, for synthesizing high-resolution images and haptic feedback outputs from user inputs of a sketch

7040

