This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Depth Estimation for Transparent and Mirror Surfaces
Alex Costanzino∗
Fabio Tosi

Pierluigi Zama Ramirez∗
Matteo Poggi∗
Stefano Mattoccia
Luigi Di Stefano

CVLAB, Department of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI)
University of Bologna, Italy
{alex.costanzino, pierluigi.zama, m.poggi, fabio.tosi5}@unibo.it

https://cvlab-unibo.github.io/Depth4ToM/

Abstract

1. Introduction
In our daily lives, we often interact with several objects
of various appearances. Among them are those made of
transparent or mirror surfaces (ToM), ranging from the glass
windows of buildings to the reflective surfaces of cars and
appliances. These might represent a hard challenge for an
autonomous agent leveraging computer vision to operate in
unknown environments. Specifically, among the many tasks
involved in Spatial AI, accurately estimating depth information on these surfaces remains a challenging problem for
both computer vision algorithms and deep networks [64],
yet necessary for proper interaction with the environment
in robotic, autonomous navigation, picking, and other application fields. This difficulty arises because ToM surfaces
introduce misleading visual information about scene geometry, which makes depth estimation challenging not only for
computer vision systems but even for humans – e.g., we
might not distinguish the presence of a glass door in front
of us due to its transparency. On the one hand, the definition of depth itself might appear ambiguous in such cases:
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

Ours

Mono

Base

Stereo

Inferring the depth of transparent or mirror (ToM) surfaces represents a hard challenge for either sensors, algorithms, or deep networks. We propose a simple pipeline for
learning to estimate depth properly for such surfaces with
neural networks, without requiring any ground-truth annotation. We unveil how to obtain reliable pseudo labels by
in-painting ToM objects in images and processing them with
a monocular depth estimation model. These labels can be
used to fine-tune existing monocular or stereo networks, to
let them learn how to deal with ToM surfaces. Experimental
results on the Booster dataset show the dramatic improvements enabled by our remarkably simple proposal.

RGB

Figure 1. Depth estimation on ToM surfaces. Two examples
for both monocular (top) and stereo (bottom) images. In the central column, the depth/disparity maps predicted by DPT [37] and
CREStereo [22] original weights. In the rightmost column, the
depth/disparity maps predicted by the models after being finetuned by our strategy without exploiting any ground-truth depth.

is depth the distance to the scene behind the glass door or to
the door itself? Nonetheless, from a practical point of view,
we argue that the actual definition depends on the task itself – e.g., a mobile robot should definitely be aware of the
presence of the glass door. On the other hand, as humans
can deal with this through experience, depth sensing techniques based on deep learning, e.g., monocular [38, 37] or
stereo [26, 22] networks, hold the potential to address this
challenge given sufficient training data [64].
Unfortunately, light reflection and refraction over ToM

9244

