This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AssetField: Assets Mining and Reconﬁguration
in Ground Feature Plane Representation
Yuanbo Xiangli1∗ , Linning Xu1∗ , Xingang Pan3,4 , Nanxuan Zhao5 , Bo Dai2 , Dahua Lin1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
Max Planck Institute for Informatics 4 Nanyang Technological University 5 Adobe Research
{xy019,xl020,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk xingang.pan@ntu.edu.sg
nanxuanzhao@gmail.com daibo@pjlab.org.cn
2ULJLQDO'6FHQH

$VVHW)LHOG
2SWLPL]HG)HDWXUH9ROXPHV

$VVHW0LQLQJ

YLD1HXUDO5HQGHULQJ

&DWHJRUL]DWLRQ

SK\VLFDOO\
DOLJQHG

*URXQG)HDWXUH3ODQHV
GHQVLW\FRORUVHPDQWLFV

&DSWXUHG
0XOWLYLHZ,PDJHV

2ULJLQDO6FHQH%LUG(\H9LHZ

*URXQG)HDWXUH3ODQH

$VVHW/LEUDU\

/D\RXW䐠

6FHQH
5HFRQILJXUDWLRQ

/D\RXW䐟

W
HF
EM
2 WH
W
F OD
WUD S
([ 7HP

5HQGHULQJ

5HQGHULQJ

Figure 1: Man-made environments are often characterized by repetitive scene objects, e.g. tables, chairs, and trees. AssetField represents
these environments with a set of informative ground feature planes aligning with the physical ground, from which neural representations of
scene objects are extracted and grouped into categories. The proposed mechanism allows users to manipulate and compose assets directly
on the ground feature plane and produces high-quality rendering on novel scene conﬁgurations.

Abstract
Both indoor and outdoor environments are inherently
structured and repetitive. Traditional modeling pipelines
keep an asset library storing unique object templates, which
is both versatile and memory efﬁcient in practice. Inspired
by this observation, we propose AssetField, a novel neural scene representation that learns a set of object-aware
ground feature planes to represent the scene, where an asset
library storing template feature patches can be constructed
in an unsupervised manner. Unlike existing methods which
require object masks to query spatial points for object editing, our ground feature plane representation offers a natural visualization of the scene in the bird-eye view, allowing
a variety of operations (e.g. translation, duplication, deformation) on objects to conﬁgure a new scene. With the template feature patches, group editing is enabled for scenes
with many recurring items to avoid repetitive work on ob-

ject individuals. We show that AssetField not only achieves
competitive performance for novel-view synthesis but also
generates realistic renderings for new scene conﬁgurations.

1. Introduction
The demand for bringing our living environment into a
virtual realm continuous to increase these days, with example cases ranging from indoor scenes such as rooms and
restaurants, to outdoor ones like streets and neighborhoods.
Apart from the realistic 3D rendering, real-world applications also require ﬂexible and user-friendly editing of the
scene. Use cases can be commonly found in interior design, urban planning etc. To save human labor and expense,
users need to frequently visualize different scene conﬁgurations before ﬁnalizing a plan and bringing it to reality,
like shown in Fig.1. For their interests, a virtual environment offering versatile editing choices and high rendering

3251

