This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Noise2Info: Noisy Image to Information of Noise
for Self-Supervised Image Denoising
Jiachuan Wang † , Shimin Di † , Lei Chen † ⇤ , Charles Wang Wai Ng † ⇤
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China
⇤
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangdong Province, China
†

jwangey@connect.ust.hk, sdiaa@connect.ust.hk, leichen@hkust-gz.edu.cn, charles.ng@ust.hk

Abstract
Unsupervised image denoising has been proposed to
alleviate the widespread noise problem without requiring clean images. Existing works mainly follow the selfsupervised way, which tries to reconstruct each pixel x of
noisy images without the knowledge of x. More recently,
some pioneer works further emphasize the importance of x
and propose to weigh the information extracted from x and
other pixels when recovering x. However, such a method is
highly sensitive to the standard deviation n of noise injected to clean images, where n is inaccessible without
knowing clean images. Thus, it is unrealistic to assume that
n is known for pursuing high model performance.
To alleviate this issue, we propose Noise2Info to extract
the critical information, the standard deviation n of injected noise, only based on the noisy images. Specifically,
we first theoretically provide an upper bound on n , while
the bound requires clean images. Then, we propose a novel
method to estimate the bound of n by only using noisy images. Besides, we prove that the difference between our estimation with the true deviation goes smaller as the model
training. Empirical studies show that Noise2Info is effective
and robust on benchmark data sets and closely estimates the
standard deviation of noise during model training.

1. Introduction
Generally, images are vulnerable to noise from latent observation and transmission [5, 26]. As an essential enhancement for digital images, image denoising aims to convert
noisy images X to clean ones Y , where the image denoising model F(X) is expected to output the near clean image
(i.e., F(X) ⇡ Y ). Assuming that clean images are available, deep learning models [23, 16] have been introduced to
the image denoising task, and achieved outstanding performance over traditional methods [10, 11, 12] on the supervised image denoising task [31, 22, 14].

However, in real-world scenarios, only noisy images can
be observed, i.e., we do not know whether an image has
been contaminated or what the ground truth of a noisy image (a clean one) looks like. Thus, it is hard to apply the
supervised deep learning approaches. To handle such cases,
Noise2Noise [19] assumes that pairwise noisy images of
one clean image can be accessible, which can be viewed
as noisy supervision [29]. On the other hand, many papers assume that the distribution of noise is known, named
noise model. A common setting for noise n ⇠ N is
zero-mean (µn = 0) with unknown standard deviation ( n )
[17, 18, 29, 3]. The Gaussian and multiplicative Bernoulli
noises have also been covered [21]. CBDNet [14] assumes
that photographs have Poisson-Gaussian noise. However,
their assumptions are not always held in reality and limit
the applicability of their methods.
To enable models to denoise on a more practical scenario, recent works (e.g., Noise2Self [3], Noise2Void [17]
and Convolutional blind-spot network [18]) develop selfsupervised models mainly based on available noisy images.
If a model F takes noisy image X as both input and target,
it will quickly collapse to the identity function F(X) = X.
Instead, these papers use the idea of J invariance [3].
Loosely speaking, given noise image X, a J invariant
model denoises each pixel x 2 X only based on any other
pixels (i.e., using pixels from X\{x}). This setting prevents model from learning the identity function. Though
the pixels used for supervision are noisy, with many samples drawn from the same image distribution, the model is
supposed to learn the expected ground truth value.
For the strictly J invariant model, each pixel is denoised without using the pixel itself, so that we call it external method. Based on the idea, many papers point out that
the extracted information based on the pixel itself, which
is the internal information of the pixel, can be utilized for
better results [3, 18, 29]. Noise2Same [29] considers both
the external and internal information to further outperform
these purely external models. Formally, Noise2Same builds
a self-supervised L(F, X) (i.e., the loss of F w.r.t. X) on

16034

