This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Invariant Training 2D-3D Joint Hard Samples for Few-Shot Point Cloud
Recognition
Xuanyu Yi1 , Jiajun Deng2 , Qianru Sun5 , Xian-Sheng Hua3 ,
Joo-Hwee Lim4 , Hanwang Zhang1
1
3

Nanyang Technological University, 2 The University of Sydney

Terminus Group, 4 Institute for Infocomm Research, 5 Singapore Management University

xuanyu001@e.ntu.edu.sg, jiajun.deng@sydney.edu.au, qianrusun@smu.edu.sg
xshua@outlook.com, joohwee@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
We tackle the data scarcity challenge in few-shot point
cloud recognition of 3D objects by using a joint prediction
from a conventional 3D model and a well-trained 2D model.
Surprisingly, such an ensemble, though seems trivial, has
hardly been shown effective in recent 2D-3D models. We
find out the crux is the less effective training for the “joint
hard samples”, which have high confidence prediction on
different wrong labels, implying that the 2D and 3D models
do not collaborate well. To this end, our proposed invariant
training strategy, called I NV J OINT, does not only emphasize the training more on the hard samples, but also seeks
the invariance between the conflicting 2D and 3D ambiguous predictions. I NV J OINT can learn more collaborative
2D and 3D representations for better ensemble. Extensive
experiments on 3D shape classification with widely adopted
ModelNet10/40, ScanObjectNN and Toys4K, and shape retrieval with ShapeNet-Core validate the superiority of our
I NV J OINT. Codes will be publicly Available 1 .

1. Introduction
As the point cloud representation of a 3D object is
sparse, irregularly distributed, and unstructured, a deep
recognition model requires much more training data than
the 2D counterpart [15, 19]. Not surprisingly, this makes
few-shot learning even more challenging, such as recognizing a few newly-collected objects in AR/VR display [20, 49] and robotic navigation [1]. Thanks to the recent progress of large-scale pre-trained multi-modal foundation models [39, 25, 33], the field of 2D few-shot or zeroshot recognition has experienced significant improvements.
Therefore, as shown in Figure 1(a), a straightforward solu1 https://github.com/yxymessi/InvJoint

Figure 1. Comparisons of our framework with existing 2D-3D
methods, which can be categorized into (a) Directly projecting
point cloud into multi-view images as inputs, and then fine-tuning
the 2D models with a frozen backbone. (b) Indirectly leveraging
the 2D pretrained knowledge as a constraint or supervision, transferring them via knowledge distillation or contrastive learning, and
then only using the optimized 3D pathway for prediction. (c) In
contrast, our I NV J OINT, based on ensemble paradigm, makes the
best of the 2D and 3D worlds by joint prediction in inference.

tion for 3D few-shot recognition is to project a point cloud
into a set of multi-view 2D images [10], through rendering
and polishing [54], and then directly fed the images into a
well-trained 2D model [67].
Although effective, the projected images are inevitably
subject to incomplete geometric information and rendering
artifacts. To this end, as shown in Figure 1(b), another popular solution attempts to take the advantage of both 2D and
3D by transferring the 2D backbone to the 3D counterpart
via knowledge distillation [63], and then use the 3D pathway for final recognition. So far, you may ask: as the data in
few-shot learning is already scarce, during inference time,
why do we still have to choose one domain or the other?
Isn’t it common sense to combine them for better predic-

14463

