This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tri-MipRF: Tri-Mip Representation for Efficient Anti-Aliasing
Neural Radiance Fields
Wenbo Hu1 Yuling Wang1,2 Lin Ma1 Bangbang Yang1
Lin Gao3 Xiao Liu1 Yuewen Ma1†
1
PICO, ByteDance, Beijing 2 Tsinghua University 3 Institute of Computing Technology, CAS

Abstract

1. Introduction
Neural radiance field (NeRF) [34], emerged as a groundbreaking implicit 3D representation, models the geometry
and view-dependent appearance by a multi-layer perceptron
(MLP) for rendering photo-realistic novel views. MipNeRF [3] further pushes the boundaries of rendering quality by integrated position encoding to formulate the prefiltered radiance fields. Such impressive visual quality, however, requires expensive computation in both reconstruction
and rendering stages, e.g., MipNeRF [3] takes more than
three days for the reconstruction and minutes for render† Corresponding author.

Tri-MipRF (Ours)
MipNeRF

34

PSNR

Despite the tremendous progress in neural radiance fields
(NeRF), we still face a dilemma of the trade-off between quality and efficiency, e.g., MipNeRF [3] presents fine-detailed
and anti-aliased renderings but takes days for training, while
Instant-ngp [36] can accomplish the reconstruction in a few
minutes but suffers from blurring or aliasing when rendering at various distances or resolutions due to ignoring the
sampling area. To this end, we propose a novel Tri-Mip
encoding (à la “mipmap”) that enables both instant reconstruction and anti-aliased high-fidelity rendering for neural
radiance fields. The key is to factorize the pre-filtered 3D
feature spaces in three orthogonal mipmaps. In this way,
we can efficiently perform 3D area sampling by taking advantage of 2D pre-filtered feature maps, which significantly
elevates the rendering quality without sacrificing efficiency.
To cope with the novel Tri-Mip representation, we propose
a cone-casting rendering technique to efficiently sample antialiased 3D features with the Tri-Mip encoding considering
both pixel imaging and observing distance. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate
our method achieves state-of-the-art rendering quality and
reconstruction speed while maintaining a compact representation that reduces 25% model size compared against Instantngp. Code is available at the project webpage: https:
//wbhu.github.io/projects/Tri-MipRF

35

33
32

Instant-ngp ↑!×

31
30

Plenoxels
1

Instant-ngp

10!

NeRF

TensoRF
10"

10#

10$

Reconstruction time (minutes) in logarithmic scale
Figure 1. Rendering quality vs. reconstruction time on the multiscale Blender dataset [3]. Our Tri-MipRF achieves state-of-the-art
rendering quality while can be reconstructed efficiently, compared
with cutting-edge radiance fields methods, e.g., NeRF [34], MipNeRF [3], Plenoxels [14], TensoRF [9], and Instant-ngp [36]. Equipping Instant-ngp with super-sampling (named Instant-ngp ↑5× )
improves the rendering quality to a certain extent but significantly
slows down the reconstruction.

ing a single frame. On the other hand, recent works proposed explicit or hybrid representation for efficient rendering [42, 17, 55, 19, 10, 6], and reconstruction [14, 46, 9, 36],
e.g., the hash encoding [36] significantly reduces the reconstruction time from days to minutes and achieves real-time
rendering. But all their rendering model is flawed in formulating the pixel as a single point without area, which would
cause the renderings excessively blurred in close-up views
and aliased in distant views. We face a dilemma of the tradeoff between quality and efficiency due to the lacking of a
representation to support efficient area sampling.
In this paper, we aim to design a radiance field representation that supports both high-fidelity anti-aliased renderings and efficient reconstruction. To address the aliasing
and blurring issue, super-sampling and pre-filtering (a.k.a.
area-sampling) are two popular streams of strategies in the
offline and real-time rendering literature, respectively. But
super-sampling each pixel by casting multiple rays through

19774

