This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OpenOccupancy: A Large Scale Benchmark for
Surrounding Semantic Occupancy Perception
Xiaofeng Wang1,3 * Zheng Zhu2 *† Wenbo Xu2 * Yunpeng Zhang2
Yi Wei4 Xu Chi2 Yun Ye2 Dalong Du2 Jiwen Lu4 Xingang Wang1†
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 PhiGent Robotics
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Tsinghua University

barrier

bicycle

bus

car

const. veh

motorcycle

pedestrian

traffic cone

trailer

truck

drivable surface

other

sidewalk

terrain

manmade

vegetation

Figure 1: The nuScenes-Occupancy provides dense semantic occupancy labels for all key frames in the nuScenes [3] dataset.
Here we showcase the annotated ground truth with the volumetric size of (40 × 512 × 512) and grid size of 0.2 m.

Abstract
Semantic occupancy perception is essential for autonomous driving, as automated vehicles require a finegrained perception of the 3D urban structures. However,
existing relevant benchmarks lack diversity in urban scenes,
and they only evaluate front-view predictions. Towards a
comprehensive benchmarking of surrounding perception algorithms, we propose OpenOccupancy, which is the first
surrounding semantic occupancy perception benchmark. In
the OpenOccupancy benchmark, we extend the large-scale
nuScenes dataset with dense semantic occupancy annotations. Previous annotations rely on LiDAR points superimposition, where some occupancy labels are missed due to
sparse LiDAR channels. To mitigate the problem, we introduce the Augmenting And Purifying (AAP) pipeline to ∼2×
densify the annotations, where ∼4000 human hours are
involved in the labeling process. Besides, camera-based,
LiDAR-based and multi-modal baselines are established
for the OpenOccupancy benchmark. Furthermore, considering the complexity of surrounding occupancy perception lies in the computational burden of high-resolution 3D
predictions, we propose the Cascade Occupancy Network
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors. zhengzhu@ieee.org, xingang.wang@ia.ac.cn
‡ https://github.com/JeffWang987/OpenOccupancy

(CONet) to refine the coarse prediction, which relatively
enhances the performance by ∼30% than the baseline. We
hope the OpenOccupancy benchmark ‡ will boost the development of surrounding occupancy perception algorithms.

1. Introduction
Accurately perceiving 3D structures of different objects
and regions in urban scenes is a fundamental requirement
for safe driving, thus there are growing interests in semantic occupancy perception [1, 35, 10, 36, 41, 16, 8]. Unlike
3D detection [13, 6, 34, 3, 38] and LiDAR segmentation
[1, 38, 11] that are designed for foreground objects or sparse
scanned points, the occupancy task targets at assigning semantic labels to every spatially-occupied region within the
perceptive range. Therefore, semantic occupancy perception is a promising and challenging research direction in
autonomous-driving perception.
Despite growing interests in semantic occupancy perception, most of the relevant benchmarks [35, 10, 36, 41, 16, 8]
are devised for indoor scenes. SemanticKITTI [1] extends
the occupancy perception to driving scenarios, but its
dataset is relatively small in scale and limited in diversity,
which hinders the generalization and evaluation of the
developed occupancy perception algorithms. Besides,
SemanticKITTI only evaluates the front-view occupancy

17850

