This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Handwritten and Printed Text Segmentation: A Signature Case Study
Sina Gholamian
Thomson Reuters AI Labs
Toronto, Canada

Ali Vahdat
Thomson Reuters AI Labs
Toronto, Canada

sina.gholamian@thomsonreuters.com

ali.vahdat@thomsonreuters.com

Abstract
While analyzing scanned documents, handwritten text
can overlap with printed text. This overlap causes difficulties during the optical character recognition (OCR) and
digitization process of documents, and subsequently, hurts
downstream NLP tasks. Prior research either focuses solely
on the binary classification of handwritten text or performs
a three-class segmentation of the document, i.e., recognition of handwritten, printed, and background pixels. This
approach results in the assignment of overlapping handwritten and printed pixels to only one of the classes, and
thus, they are not accounted for in the other class. Thus,
in this research, we develop novel approaches to address
the challenges of handwritten and printed text segmentation. Our objective is to recover text from different classes
in their entirety, especially enhancing the segmentation performance on overlapping sections. To support this task, we
introduce a new dataset, SignaTR6K, collected from real
legal documents, as well as a new model architecture for
the handwritten and printed text segmentation task. Our
best configuration outperforms prior work on two different
datasets by 17.9% and 7.3% on IoU scores. The SignaTR6K
dataset is accessible for download via the following link:
https://forms.office.com/r/2a5RDg7cAY.

1. Introduction
For various purposes, the digitization of hard-copy
documents and associated challenges are an active area
of research in both academia [25, 11, 27, 10, 6, 20] and
industry [18]. This digital transformation involves scanning
paper documents through an OCR process, making their
text accessible for downstream natural language processing
(NLP) tasks, such as named entity recognition (NER).
The documents of interest can originate from a variety of
domains, including historical documents [27], legal and
court-issued documents [18], business contracts [25], and
medical records and prescriptions [5]. Although various
studies, as cited above, have been conducted, there is
yet a considerable gap between current approaches and

Figure 1: Court documents are first printed and then signed
or annotated by various parties. This results in handwritten
text overlapping the underlying printed information, leading to
performance degradation in downstream tasks, such as named
entity recognition (NER). This is a fabricated example, however
very similar to the original documents, to protect personally
identifiable information (PII).

human-level performance in mixed-text scenarios (i.e.,
when handwritten and printed text overlap). For instance,
attorneys frequently sign legal documents, resulting in
their signatures overlapping with their information. This
overlap hampers the performance of OCR tools in character
recognition, subsequently making it challenging for downstream tasks to accurately identify information linked to the
attorneys and their associated law firms. Figure 1 provides
an illustration of handwritten text (HT) overlapping with
printed text (PT) in court documents. Extracting parties
names is a crucial step in the named-entity recognition
(NER) task for legal and court documents [24]. When
attorneys and other involved parties sign these documents,
which are later scanned using OCR tools, their signatures often obscure the details of names and law firms.
Consequently, the semantic segmentation of handwritten
elements, such as lawyers’ signatures and accompanying
handwritten notes, and printed text detailing the lawyer and
the law firm’s information, becomes vital.
In this research, we aim to address the challenges of HT
and PT segmentation, as there is still a large gap between
human-level performance and the existing approaches

582

