This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond the Pixel: a Photometrically Calibrated HDR Dataset
for Luminance and Color Prediction
Christophe Bolduc, Justine Giroux, Marc Hébert, Claude Demers, and Jean-François Lalonde
Université Laval

Abstract
Light plays an important role in human well-being.
However, most computer vision tasks treat pixels without
considering their relationship to physical luminance. To address this shortcoming, we introduce the Laval Photometric
Indoor HDR Dataset, the first large-scale photometrically
calibrated dataset of high dynamic range 360◦ panoramas.
Our key contribution is the calibration of an existing, uncalibrated HDR Dataset. We do so by accurately capturing RAW bracketed exposures simultaneously with a professional photometric measurement device (chroma meter) for
multiple scenes across a variety of lighting conditions. Using the resulting measurements, we establish the calibration
coefficients to be applied to the HDR images. The resulting
dataset is a rich representation of indoor scenes which displays a wide range of illuminance and color, and varied
types of light sources. We exploit the dataset to introduce
three novel tasks, where: per-pixel luminance, per-pixel
color and planar illuminance can be predicted from a single
input image. Finally, we also capture another smaller photometric dataset with a commercial 360◦ camera, to experiment on generalization across cameras. We are optimistic
that the release of our datasets and associated code will
spark interest in physically accurate light estimation within
the community. Dataset and code are available at https:
//lvsn.github.io/beyondthepixel/.

1. Introduction
Natural light has shaped the way our human visual system evolved [13], plays a key role in driving our circadian
rhythm [16], and affects our mental health [47] and social
organization [11]. It has also been shown [54] that human
vision relies on stable properties of light, measured in terms
of luminance (in cd m−2 ), in order to perceive object features such as shape and color.
Natural light is also at the heart of photography and
computer vision. However, most if not all computer vision approaches consider pixel values as a 3-channel input to be processed without considering the relationship be-

tween pixel intensity and luminance. This is understandable
since modern digital cameras pursue a goal different from
measuring physically accurate perceived brightness: they
strive to create visually pleasing photographs. In doing so,
their internal image signal processors (ISP) perform a series of operations on the measured light (denoising, contrast
enhancement, tonemapping, etc. [34]) in order to produce
pixel values which, while visually appealing, no longer correspond to the physical properties of the environment.
Modeling camera ISPs and inverting their image formation process has been the subject of many works (e.g.
[67, 29, 55]). Here, most approaches aim at recovering
an image where pixel values are linearly proportional to
the scene radiance (or luminance). Closely related are
approaches for capturing high dynamic range (HDR) images [15], or predicting HDR from low dynamic range
(LDR) photographs [17, 39, 49, 41, 45]. While linear pixel
values can be extremely useful for physics-based vision applications (e.g. [27]), the scale factor to absolute luminance
is still unknown. Can we go beyond (linear) pixel values
and recover per-pixel luminance from a single image?
In this paper, we propose the Laval Photometric Indoor
HDR Dataset: what we believe to be the first large-scale
dataset to help the community answer this question. The
novel dataset of physically accurate luminance and colors
acquired in a wide variety of indoor scenes. Our key idea
is to leverage the camera and RAW captures of an existing
dataset of HDR indoor 360◦ panoramas that was previously
captured [20]. We contribute by carefully calibrating the
camera with a chroma meter to determine the per-channel
correction factors to be applied to each panorama. Our analysis shows that the Laval Photometric Indoor HDR Dataset
contains a wide range of illuminance (e.g. [0 lx, 7000 lx])
and color, expressed in correlated color temperature (CCT)
(e.g. [2000 K, 8000 K]), capturing the diversity of indoor
environments. We also explore the luminance and color distributions of individual light sources in the dataset, which
span several orders of magnitude of average luminance.
We present three novel learning tasks that are enabled by
our calibrated dataset. Given a single image as input, we explore how per-pixel luminance, per-pixel color, and planar

8071

