This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Auxiliary Tasks Benefit 3D Skeleton-based Human Motion Prediction
Chenxin Xu1,2 , Robby T. Tan2 , Yuhong Tan1 , Siheng Chen1,3*, Xinchao Wang2 , Yanfeng Wang3,1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 National University of Singapore, 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{xcxwakaka,tyheeeer,sihengc,wangyanfeng}@sjtu.edu.cn, {robby.tan,xinchao}@nus.edu.sg

Exploring spatial-temporal dependencies from observed
motions is one of the core challenges of human motion prediction. Previous methods mainly focus on dedicated network structures to model the spatial and temporal dependencies. This paper considers a new direction by introducing
a model learning framework with auxiliary tasks. In our
auxiliary tasks, partial body joints’ coordinates are corrupted by either masking or adding noise and the goal is to
recover corrupted coordinates depending on the rest coordinates. To work with auxiliary tasks, we propose a novel
auxiliary-adapted transformer, which can handle incomplete,
corrupted motion data and achieve coordinate recovery via
capturing spatial-temporal dependencies. Through auxiliary tasks, the auxiliary-adapted transformer is promoted to
capture more comprehensive spatial-temporal dependencies
among body joints’ coordinates, leading to better feature
learning. Extensive experimental results have shown that
our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods by remarkable margins of 7.2%, 3.7%, and 9.4% in terms of 3D mean
per joint position error (MPJPE) on the Human3.6M, CMU
Mocap, and 3DPW datasets, respectively. We also demonstrate that our method is more robust under data missing
cases and noisy data cases. Code is available at https:
//github.com/MediaBrain-SJTU/AuxFormer.

1. Introduction
3D skeleton-based human motion prediction aims to forecast future human motions based on past observations, which
has a wide range of applications, such as human-machine
interaction [23, 21, 62] and autonomous driving [34, 9, 38].
One of the main challenges of this problem is extracting
spatial-temporal dependencies among observed motions to
make feature representations more informative. These dependencies arise due to the complex interactions between different joints and the temporal dynamics of motion. Therefore,
developing effective methods to capture these dependencies
* Corresponding author.

e
Ti
m

(b) Our method: Learning with auxiliary tasks

e

(a) Previous methods
Ti
m

Abstract

Input Motion

Input Motion

Dependency
Modeling Network

Dependency Modeling Network

RNN- GNN- Transformer
···
based based -based

AuxFormer
Requiring additional
spatial-temporal
dependency

Requiring additional
spatial-temporal
dependency
Future
prediction

Future
prediction
Denoising

Masked prediction

Figure 1: Compared to previous methods with various operation
designs, we propose a new direction: an auxiliary learning framework that incorporates auxiliary tasks, including denoising and
masking prediction. These auxiliary tasks impose additional requirements through recovery, forcing the network to exploit spatialtemporal dependencies more comprehensively.

is crucial for a more accurate human motion prediction.
Existing methods proposed dedicated network structures
to model the spatial and temporal dependencies. A few methods use RNN [48, 22] and TCN [11] structures to model
temporal dependencies, but neglect the spatial ones. To learn
spatial dependencies between joints, [47] proposes a GCN
network with learnable weights where nodes are body joints.
Following the GCN design, DMGNN [37] and MSR-GCN
[12] further build multiscale body graphs to model localglobal spatial features. PGBIG [43] additionally proposes
temporal graph convolutions to extract spatial-temporal features. SPGSN [36] proposes a graph scattering network to
further model temporal dependencies from multiple graph
spectrum bands. Besides GCN-based methods, transformer
architectures [1, 5] are also used to model pair-wise spatialtemporal dependencies. The structures of models to capture
spatial-temporal dependencies have been extensively studied. This raises a natural question: can we enhance spatialtemporal dependency modeling from other perspectives?
In this paper, besides network structures, we further consider an orthogonal approach: proposing a new auxiliary
model learning framework by adding auxiliary tasks to promote better learning of spatial-temporal dependencies. The
proposed framework jointly learns the primary motion pre19509

