This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Single Image Deblurring with Row-dependent Blur Magnitude
Xiang Ji1 Zhixiang Wang1,2
1
The University of Tokyo, Japan

Shin’ichi Satoh2,1 Yinqiang Zheng1†
2
National Institute of Informatics, Japan

{jixiang,wangzhixiang}@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp, satoh@nii.ac.jp, yqzheng@ai.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Image degradation often occurs during fast camera or
object movements, regardless of the exposure modes: global
shutter (GS) or rolling shutter (RS). Since these two exposure
modes give rise to intrinsically different degradations, two
restoration threads have been explored separately, i.e. motion deblurring of GS images and distortion correction of RS
images, both of which are challenging restoration tasks, especially in the presence of a single input image. In this paper,
we explore a novel in-between exposure mode, called global
reset release (GRR) shutter, which produces GS-like blur but
with row-dependent blur magnitude. We take advantage of
this unique characteristic of GRR to explore the latent frames
within a single image and restore a clear counterpart by only
relying on these latent contexts. Specifically, we propose
a residual spatially-compensated and spectrally-enhanced
Transformer (RSS-T) block for row-dependent deblurring of
a single GRR image. Its hierarchical positional encoding
compensates global positional context of windows and enables order-awareness of the local pixel’s position, along
with a novel feed-forward network that simultaneously uses
spatial and spectral information for gaining mixed global
context. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our
method outperforms the state-of-the-art GS deblurring and
RS correction methods on single GRR input.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental research task of computer vision, image restoration has been explored for many years, aiming to
recover a high-quality clean image from its corrupted counterpart by removing undesired degradation. Fast or even
extreme motion, which is a major inducement to image degeneration and highly correlated to the camera’s exposure
mode: global shutter (GS) and rolling shutter (RS).
In a GS image sensor, all pixels are reset simultaneously
and immediately charged with exposure, then stored for
sequential readout (Figure 1a). In the presence of fast and
sudden motion, blurring effects will happen. [25, 39] depict
† Corresponding author

this motion-blurred output IB as an average of N successive
latent sharp frames IG
i :
N −1

IB =

1 X G
I , i = 0, 1, · · · , N − 1 .
N i=0 i

In contrast, RS cameras expose image pixels row by row
(including reset and readout), leading to an invariant time
delay between consecutive scanlines (Figure 1b). Therefore,
RS distortion effects, also known as jello effects, will appear
if the camera is moving during the image acquisition, which
G
is formulated in [23] as [IR ]i = [IG
i ]i . [Ii ]i is an operator
that extracts the ith row from the ith latent GS frame IG
i and
N is also the height of RS image.
Although image deblurring itself is highly involved, it is
believed that restoring clear images from single degraded
captures of GS cameras is much more tractable than that
of RS cameras as mentioned in [23]. Intuitively, motionblur removal process aims to disentangle target GS frame
from redundant input without sophisticated displacement
estimation or speculation of unknown context. On the contrary, RS correction needs to shift pixels of each scanline
to one virtual GS canvas by building pixel-level correspondences. Moreover, the rectified output usually suffers from
missing boundaries not directly captured during RS exposure. Methodologically, the coarse-to-fine network design
has gained remarkable performance for single image deblurring [25, 30, 33, 45, 10, 46]. On the contrary, due to the
ill-posed nature, single image RS correction relies heavily
on strong prior assumptions, explicitly [35, 17, 32, 31] or
implicitly [34, 58], which limits their applicability to real
scenarios. So, recent research has moved onto multi-image
RS correction to bypass the ill-posedness. But both classical [57, 1] and learning-based methods [23, 9] still cannot
work well under complex dynamic scenes or drastic camera
motions because of nontrivial pixel alignment.
It is largely overlooked in computer vision that there exists an in-between shutter mode, called global reset release
(GRR) shutter, which can be easily enabled in some image
sensors that originally work in GS mode (e.g., EV76C560
in EO-1312C Camera) or in RS mode (e.g., IMX178 in
BFS-U3-63S4C camera). As shown in Figure 1c, GRR

12269

