This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Atmospheric Transmission and Thermal Inertia Induced Blind Road
Segmentation with a Large-Scale Dataset TBRSD
Junzhang Chen1 , Xiangzhi Bai1,2,3∗
Image Processing Center, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University
3
Advanced Innovation Center for Biomedical Engineering, Beihang University
1

chenjz@buaa.edu.cn, jackybxz@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Computer vision-based walking assistants are prominent tools for aiding visually impaired people in navigation.
Blind road segmentation is a key element in these walking
assistant systems. However, most walking assistant systems
rely on visual light images, which is dangerous in weak illumination environments such as darkness or fog. To address
this issue and enhance the safety of vision-based walking
assistant systems, we developed a thermal infrared blind
road segmentation neural network (TINN). In contrast to
conventional segmentation techniques that primarily concentrate on enhancing feature extraction and perception,
our approach is geared towards preserving the inherent
radiation characteristics within the thermal imaging process. Initially, we modelled two critical factors in thermal infrared imaging - thermal light atmospheric transmission and thermal inertia effect. Subsequently, we use
an encoder-decoder architecture to fuse the feathers extracted by the two modules. Additionally, to train the network and evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method,
we constructed a large-scale thermal infrared blind road
segmentation dataset named TBRSD consists 5180 pixellevel manual annotations. The experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms existing techniques and
achieves state-of-the-art performance in thermal blind road
segmentation, as validated on benchmark thermal infrared
semantic segmentation datasets such as MFNet and SODA. The dataset and our code are both publicly available
in https://github.com/chenjzBUAA/TBRSD or
http://xzbai.buaa.edu.cn/datasets.html.

1. Introduction
As of 2020, the estimated number of blind individuals worldwide was 43.3 million, and 295 million people
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Thermal infrared imaging is influenced by two key factors: atmospheric transmission and thermal inertia effect. All objects with a temperature above absolute zero emit thermal infrared
radiation, and the intensity of this radiation that is detected by the
camera is affected by atmospheric transmission. Once the incident radiation reaches the thermal microbolometer, the resulting
intensity measurement is also affected by the thermal inertia effect. Thus, we modeled the two effects and incorporated these
models into our blind road segmentation method, which allows us
to more accurately identify and segment thermal images of blind
roads, even in challenging environmental conditions.

had moderate to severe vision impairment. Between 1990
and 2020, the global number of people who were blind increased by 50.6%, while the number of individuals with
moderate to severe vision impairment rose by 91.7%. Projections indicate that by 2050, the number of blind individuals will increase to 51 million, and the number of people
with moderate to severe vision impairment will rise to 474
million [3]. Individuals with visual impairments often experience difficulty with navigation when engaging in social

1053

