This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Periodically Exchange Teacher-Student for Source-Free Object Detection
Qipeng Liu, Luojun Lin,* Zhifeng Shen, Zhifeng Yang
College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University
lqpwiki@gmail.com, linluojun2009@126.com, {shen zhifeng, yzf2001}@outlook.com

Abstract
Source-free object detection (SFOD) aims to adapt the
source detector to unlabeled target domain data in the absence of source domain data. Most SFOD methods follow
the same self-training paradigm using mean-teacher (MT)
framework where the student model is guided by only one
single teacher model. However, such paradigm can easily fall into a training instability problem that when the
teacher model collapses uncontrollably due to the domain
shift, the student model also suffers drastic performance
degradation. To address this issue, we propose the Periodically Exchange Teacher-Student (PETS) method, a simple yet novel approach that introduces a multiple-teacher
framework consisting of a static teacher, a dynamic teacher,
and a student model. During the training phase, we periodically exchange the weights between the static teacher and
the student model. Then, we update the dynamic teacher
using the moving average of the student model that has already been exchanged by the static teacher. In this way, the
dynamic teacher can integrate knowledge from past periods, effectively reducing error accumulation and enabling
a more stable training process within the MT-based framework. Further, we develop a consensus mechanism to merge
the predictions of two teacher models to provide higherquality pseudo labels for student model. Extensive experiments on multiple SFOD benchmarks show that the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance compared with other related methods, demonstrating the effectiveness and superiority of our method on SFOD task.

1. Introduction
Object detection has achieved significant progress with
rapid development of dataset scale and computation capability [31, 22, 4]. However, these detectors are typically
trained under an i.i.d assumption that the train and test data
are independently and identically distributed, which does
not always hold in real-world due to the existence of do* Corresponding author

T: 𝑡𝑒𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑟

ST: 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑐 𝑡𝑒𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑟

DT: 𝑑𝑦𝑛𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑐 𝑡𝑒𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑟

S: 𝑠𝑡𝑢𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑡

S

S

S

S

T

T

T

T

ST

ST

ST

ST

S

S

S

S

DT

DT

DT

DT

𝑡0

𝑡1

𝑡n−1

𝑡n

Mean
Teacher

Periodically
Exchange
Teacher-

Student

Figure 1: The training paradigms of the mean-teacher and the proposed periodically exchange teacher-student method. T and S denote the teacher model and student model, respectively. ST represents the static teacher with fixed weights in each period, and DT
is the dynamic teacher updated by the EMA of the student models.
ti represents the i-th period in whole training stage.

main shift between the train and test data. This can cause
significant performance degradation when applying a model
well-trained on source domain (train data) to the target domain (test data). Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA),
a recent research hotspot, can resolve this dilemma by enabling the model to adapt effectively to the target domain.
This is achieved through joint training, leveraging both labeled source domain data and unlabeled target domain data
to enhance the model’s performance in the target domain.
There are many UDA methods developed to address domain shift in image classification tasks [27, 35, 37, 46].
However, these methods cannot meet the growing demand
for data privacy protection. Moreover, directly applying
these UDA methods to object detection tasks cannot achieve
satisfactory performance. In light of the above considerations, source-free object detection (SFOD) has rapidly
emerged as an urgent task to attract the attention of researchers. The purpose of SFOD is to achieve effective
adaptation of a detector, originally trained on a labeled
source domain, to the unlabeled target domain, without accessing any source data during adaptation. Compared with
source-free image classification, SFOD is a more challenging task that not only requires regression, i.e., locating the

6414

