This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Unified Demosaicing for Bayer and Non-Bayer Patterned Image Sensors
Haechang Lee1,4,∗ , Dongwon Park2,3,∗ , Wongi Jeong1,∗ ,
Kijeong Kim4 , Hyunwoo Je4 , Dongil Ryu4 and Se Young Chun1,2,3,†
1
Dept. of ECE, 2 INMC, 3 IPAI, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea,
4
SK hynix, Republic of Korea
{harrylee,dong1park,wg7139,sychun}@snu.ac.kr {kijeong1.kim,hyunwoo.je,dongil.ryu}@sk.com

Abstract
As the physical size of recent CMOS image sensors (CIS)
gets smaller, the latest mobile cameras adopt unique nonBayer color filter array (CFA) patterns (e.g., Quad, Nona,
Q×Q), which consist of homogeneous color units with adjacent pixels. These non-Bayer CFAs are superior to conventional Bayer CFA thanks to their changeable pixel-bin
sizes for different light conditions, but may introduce visual
artifacts during demosaicing due to their inherent pixel pattern structures and sensor hardware characteristics. Previous demosaicing methods have primarily focused on Bayer
CFA, necessitating distinct reconstruction methods for nonBayer CIS with various CFA modes under different lighting
conditions. In this work, we propose an efficient unified demosaicing method that can be applied to both conventional
Bayer RAW and various non-Bayer CFAs’ RAW data in different operation modes. Our Knowledge Learning-based
demosaicing model for Adaptive Patterns, namely KLAP,
utilizes CFA-adaptive filters for only 1% key filters in the
network for each CFA, but still manages to effectively demosaic all the CFAs, yielding comparable performance to
the large-scale models. Furthermore, by employing metalearning during inference (KLAP-M), our model is able
to eliminate unknown sensor-generic artifacts in real RAW
data, effectively bridging the gap between synthetic images
and real sensor RAW. Our KLAP and KLAP-M methods
achieved state-of-the-art demosaicing performance in both
synthetic and real RAW data of Bayer and non-Bayer CFAs.

1. Introduction
Demosaicing (DM) is the process of interpolating singlechannel input images into RGB output images within an
embedded Image Signal Processor (ISP). With the growing demand for high-quality mobile camera images, CMOS
image sensor (CIS) resolution has increased dramatically,
even reaching 200 million pixels in the latest smartphones.
∗ Equal contribution, † Corresponding author.

However, as image sensors cannot infinitely increase in size,
pixel size has been reduced to enhance resolution. Smaller
CISs are more vulnerable to noise and degradation in image restoration capabilities because they are more sensitive to variations in light reception, especially in low-light
condition [13, 23, 38, 39]. As a result, modern high-end
smartphones have started using image sensors that group
adjacent homogeneous pixels, resulting in non-Bayer Quad,
Nona, and Quad-by-Quad (Q×Q) sensors [19, 38, 41],
while still retaining some of the properties of the standard
Bayer CFA [5] pattern. Quad, Nona, and Q×Q sensors
combine the same color pixel arrays of 2×2, 3×3, and 4×4
respectively, resulting in homogeneous pixel units (i.e., Gr,
R, B, and Gb) for each sensor, as shown in Fig. 1(a).
Demosaicing for modern non-Bayer CFAs is more complex and computationally demanding than for standard
Bayer CFAs. This is because as the number of pixel arrays within each unit increases, the distance between the
units becomes greater, requiring interpolation with inaccurate pixel values from distant locations. Therefore, there
is growing interest in using deep learning for demosaicing
methods, leading to active research on both Bayer pattern
demosaicing [64, 42, 12, 7, 56, 1, 34, 62, 45, 18, 26, 17]
and non-Bayer pattern demosaicing [28, 27, 20, 3, 46, 10].
However, the aforementioned methods focus on a single CFA DM task and do not cover DM tasks for multiple
CFA patterns. Modern mobile phones with non-Bayer patterned CIS adapt their CFA modes dynamically based on
lighting conditions, controlled by the CIS’s ISP. Using independent models (IMs) for each pattern, tailored to different
CFA modes, would demand loading and operating multiple models within the limited circuit space of the CIS. This
would result in excessive memory and power consumption
if the models were kept standby on the mobile application
processor (AP) and switched accordingly. Moreover, the
task of tuning models for each CFA would be laborious.
Currently, no existing method can handle dynamically
changing CFA modes in a non-Bayer patterned CIS as a unified model (UM). Several recent studies have explored the

12750

