This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-scale Residual Low-Pass Filter Network for Image Deblurring
Jiangxin Dong Jinshan Pan* Zhongbao Yang Jinhui Tang
Nanjing University of Science and Technology

Abstract
We present a simple and effective Multi-scale Residual
Low-Pass Filter Network (MRLPFNet) that jointly explores
the image details and main structures for image deblurring.
Our work is motivated by an observation that the difference between the blurry image and the clear one not only
contains high-frequency contents1 but also includes lowfrequency information due to the influence of blur, while using the standard residual learning is less effective for modeling the main structure distorted by the blur. Considering
that the low-frequency contents usually correspond to main
global structures that are spatially variant, we first propose a learnable low-pass filter based on a self-attention
mechanism to adaptively explore the global contexts for
better modeling the low-frequency information. Then we
embed it into a Residual Low-Pass Filter (RLPF) module,
which involves an additional fully convolutional neural network with the standard residual learning to model the highfrequency information. We formulate the RLPF module into
an end-to-end trainable network based on an encoder and
decoder architecture and develop a wavelet-based feature
fusion to fuse the multi-scale features. Experimental results
show that our method performs favorably against state-ofthe-art ones on commonly-used benchmarks.

1. Introduction
The camera shake and object motion are usually inevitable when taking photos with hand-held devices, which
lead to significant motion blur effects. Restoring clear photos from blurry ones has attracted lots of attention from both
research and industry communities [40]. However, motion
deblurring is quite challenging as only the blurred images
are available while the blur and latent images are unknown.
Significant progress has been made in image restoration
due to the development of deep neural networks that directly learn the mapping from the degraded observation to
* Corresponding author
1 Note that the high-frequency contents in an image correspond to the

image details, while the low-frequency ones denote the main structures of
an image.

the clear image. It is well known that the residual learning
strategy [7] has been widely used to ease the training of networks, where a latent clear image I can be restored by the
summation of the degraded input B and the output N (B)
of a residual learning network N . This strategy has been
proven to be effective in lots of image restoration tasks, e.g.,
image super-resolution, as the degraded image B shares the
same main structures as the clear one I, and the residual
between B and I mainly contains image details.
However, we note that the difference between a blurry input and its corresponding clear one not only contains image
details but also involves some structures. Taking Figure 1 as
an example, the main structures in the clear image (e.g., the
pillars enclosed in the red boxes of Figure 1(f)) disappear
due to the influence of the motion blur effect. Thus, in addition to the details smoothed by the blur, some main structures also exist in the residual between the blurry image and
the clear one (see the part enclosed in the red box of Figure
1(b)). As demonstrated in [22], the standard residual learning method [7] is effective for modeling the high-frequency
information but less effective to restore the low-frequency
contents. Figure 1(c) also shows that using the standard
residual learning method may not estimate the main structures of the residual image well, which thus affects the final
image restoration (Figure 1(h)). Therefore, it is important
for image deblurring to effectively model the main structures distorted by the motion blur.
To alleviate the above-mentioned problem, the recent
methods [15, 34] introduce a frequency branch based on
the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) in the residual network,
which achieves good performance. However, as such a frequency branch is achieved by applying Conv1 + ReLU +
Conv12 to the concatenation of the real and imaginary parts
of the residual image, it may not effectively model the
spatially-variant property of the global main structures in
the residual image (Figure 1(d)), resulting in fake structures
caused by the blur in the final deblurred image (Figure 1(i)).
In this paper, we propose a Multi-scale Residual LowPass Filter Network (MRLPFNet) for high-quality image
deblurring. Our goal is to effectively model both the low2 Conv1 + ReLU + Conv1 denotes two 1 × 1 convolutional layers
with the usual ReLU activation in between.

12345

