This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HaMuCo: Hand Pose Estimation via Multiview Collaborative
Self-Supervised Learning
†

†

Chao Wen 2
Zhou Xue 2
Pengfei Ren 1,2
Jingyu Wang 1 *
Xiaozheng Zheng 1,2
1
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
PICO IDL, ByteDance, Beijing
Abstract
Recent advancements in 3D hand pose estimation have
shown promising results, but its effectiveness has primarily
relied on the availability of large-scale annotated datasets,
the creation of which is a laborious and costly process.
To alleviate the label-hungry limitation, we propose a selfsupervised learning framework, HaMuCo, that learns a
single-view hand pose estimator from multi-view pseudo
2D labels. However, one of the main challenges of selfsupervised learning is the presence of noisy labels and the
“groupthink” effect from multiple views. To overcome these
issues, we introduce a cross-view interaction network that
distills the single-view estimator by utilizing the cross-view
correlated features and enforcing multi-view consistency to
achieve collaborative learning. Both the single-view estimator and the cross-view interaction network are trained
jointly in an end-to-end manner. Extensive experiments
show that our method can achieve state-of-the-art performance on multi-view self-supervised hand pose estimation.
Furthermore, the proposed cross-view interaction network
can also be applied to hand pose estimation from multi-view
input and outperforms previous methods under the same
settings.

1. Introduction
3D hand pose estimation is essential in various application scenarios, from action recognition and sign language
translation to AR/VR [19, 20]. Hand pose estimation has
achieved a significant improvement in recent years. However, the progress heavily relies on the emergence of many
hand pose datasets with accurate 3D annotations. Acquiring labeled datasets is quite time-consuming and laborious,
exposing a realistic challenge for deep learning models to
learn with limited and noisy data.
Self-supervised learning is an emerging solution to the
*

Project page: https : / / zxz267 . github . io / HaMuCo.
Corresponding author. † Equal contribution.

challenge posed by manual annotation. Though worth exploring, self-supervised pose estimation with RGB hand images is a challenging and relatively unexplored area with
only one pioneering method, S2 HAND [9]. S2 HAND aims
to conduct 3D hand reconstruction from a single RGB image with the noisy off-the-shell 2D hand pose estimation
results for supervision. Unfortunately, S2 HAND faces a
predicament where its performance is significantly reliant
on the quality of the pseudo label, and inferior labeling may
result in reduced performance. Moreover, evaluating the
quality of the pseudo label is an ill-posed problem that lacks
clear criteria or input, further complicating the issue.
This observation motivates us to leverage multi-view information for enhancing self-supervised learning, as the
complementary nature of multi-view observations can help
mitigate the ambiguity inherent in pose estimation. Although the first 3D hand dataset with synchronized multiview input (HanCo [62]) was proposed in 2021, to our
knowledge, there is no previous work exploring the potential of multi-view for self-supervised hand pose estimation.
Therefore, we turn to studies in the human body pose estimation, which share some similarities.
As mentioned in previous work [24], naively enforcing multi-view consistency is prone to generate degenerated solutions, thus they resorted to additional 2D labels
of unrelated datasets and proposed a solution under the
scope of weakly supervised learning. Other studies, such
as EpipolarPose [27] and CanonPose [52], utilized multiview data with special designs to enhance the supervision
and achieved promising results under the scope of selfsupervised learning.
In this paper, we push along this direction on hand pose
estimation via multi-view collaborative learning. We take
one step further by designing a learnable network, which
utilizes multi-view information, to tackle 1) noisy pseudo
labels and 2) unreliable multi-view “groupthink” issues
causing training collapse in the early training stage. Formally, we name the pipeline HaMuCo, which stands for

20763

