This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MatrixVT: Efficient Multi-Camera to BEV Transformation for 3D Perception
Hongyu Zhou, Zheng Ge, Zeming Li, Xiangyu Zhang*
MEGVII Technology
{zhouhongyu, gezheng, lizeming, zhangxiangyu}@megvii.com

Abstract

Existing Method

Predicted Depth

Geometric Info

1. Introduction
Vision-centric 3D perception in Bird’s-Eye-View
(BEV) [17, 20, 24] has recently drawn extensive attention.
Apart from their outstanding performance, the compact
and unified feature representation in BEV facilitates
straight-forward feature fusions [1, 5, 12, 10], and enables
various downstream tasks (e.g. object detection [6, 9, 10],
map segmentation [17, 30], motion planning, etc.) to be
applied thereon easily.
View Transformation (VT) is the key component that
converts multi-camera features to BEV, which has been
heavily studied in previous works [15, 20, 17, 24, 10, 6, 21,
9]. Existing VT methods can be categorized into geometrybased [13, 19, 17, 9, 18, 30] and learning-based meth* Corresponding author. This research was supported by National Key
R&D Program of China (No. 2017YFA0700800) and Beijing Academy of
Artificial Intelligence (BAAI).

Depth Pred.

“Lift”

“Splat”

Intermediate Tensor

BEV Feature

Image Feature
Predicted Depth

Our Method
Prime Depth

Depth Pred.

Image Feature

Prime Extraction

This paper proposes an efficient multi-camera to Bird’sEye-View (BEV) view transformation method for 3D perception, dubbed MatrixVT. Existing view transformers either suffer from poor efficiency or rely on device-specific
operators, hindering the broad application of BEV models. In contrast, our method generates BEV features efficiently with only convolutions and matrix multiplications
(MatMul). Specifically, we propose describing the BEV feature as the MatMul of image feature and a sparse Feature
Transporting Matrix (FTM). A Prime Extraction module is
then introduced to compress the dimension of image features and reduce FTM’s sparsity. Moreover, we propose the
Ring & Ray Decomposition to replace the FTM with two
matrices and reformulate our pipeline to reduce calculation further. Compared to existing methods, MatrixVT enjoys a faster speed and less memory footprint while remaining deploy-friendly. Extensive experiments on nuScenes and
Waymo benchmarks demonstrate that our method is highly
efficient but obtains results on par with the SOTA method in
object detection and map segmentation tasks.

Ring Matrix
Ray Matrix

Prime Feature
BEV Feature

Figure 1. The pipeline of Lift-Splat (upper) and our proposed MatrixVT (lower). We compress image features before VT to reduce
memory footprint and calculation. Note that only standard operators are adopted in MatrixVT.

ods [10, 20, 15]. Among these two categories, geometrybased methods show superior performance due to the use
of geometric constraints. Lift-Splat [17], as a representative geometry-based VT, predicts categorical depth distribution for each pixel and “lift” the corresponding features
into 3D space according to the predicted depth. These feature vectors are then gathered into pre-defined grids on a
reference BEV plane (i.e., “splat”) to form the BEV feature
(Fig. 1, upper). The Lift-Splat-based VT has shown great
potential to produce high-quality BEV features, achieving
remarkable performance on object detection [9, 5] and map
segmentation tasks.
Despite the effectiveness of Lift-Splat-like VT [9], two
issues remain. First, the “splat” operation is not universally
feasible. Existing implementations of “splat” relies on either the “cumsum trick” [17, 6] that is highly inefficient,
or customized operators [9] that can only be used on specific devices, making application of BEV perception methods costly. Second, the size of “lifted” multi-view image
features is huge, becoming the memory bottleneck of BEV
models. These two issues lead to a heavy burden on BEV
methods during both the training and inference phases. As

8548

