This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Breaking Common Sense: WHOOPS!
A Vision-and-Language Benchmark of Synthetic and Compositional Images

Prompts

Albert Einstein holding
a smartphone

A lit candle inside a
sealed bottle

Text-to-image Models

Weird, unusual, and uncanny images pique the curiosity of observers because they challenge commonsense. For
example, an image released during the 2022 world cup depicts the famous soccer stars Lionel Messi and Cristiano
Ronaldo playing chess, which playfully violates our expectation that their competition should occur on the football
field.1 Humans can easily recognize and interpret these unconventional images, but can AI models do the same? We
introduce W HOOPS !, a new dataset and benchmark for visual commonsense. The dataset is comprised of purposefully commonsense-defying images created by designers using publicly-available image generation tools like Midjourney. We consider several tasks posed over the dataset. In
addition to image captioning, cross-modal matching, and
visual question answering, we introduce a difficult explanation generation task, where models must identify and explain why a given image is unusual. Our results show
that state-of-the-art models such as GPT3 and BLIP2 still
lag behind human performance on W HOOPS !. We hope
our dataset will inspire the development of AI models with
stronger visual commonsense reasoning abilities. 2

What makes this image weird?
Explanations

Abstract

Image Generation Designers

Nitzan Bitton-Guetta‡ * Yonatan Bitton† * Jack Hessel∓
Ludwig Schmidt± Yuval Elovici‡ Gabriel Stanovsky†,∓ Roy Schwartz†
†
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem ‡ Ben Gurion University of the Negev
∓
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence ± University of Washington
{yonatan.bitton,gabriel.stanovsky,roy.schwartz1}@mail.huji.ac.il;
nitzangu,elovici@bgu.ac.il; jackh@allenai.org; schmidt@cs.washington.edu

Einstein’s death (1955)
was before the modern
smartphone was invented
(2007).

A candle needs a constant
supply of oxygen to burn,
which does not exist in a
sealed bottle.

Figure 1: We introduce W HOOPS !: a dataset of
commonsense-violating images. Designers create interesting, unusual images using prompt-based image-generation
tools like Midjourney.
We pose several tasks over
W HOOPS !, including an explanation generation task. While
humans easily identify the weird elements in each image,
we show that state-of-the-art AI models struggle.

1. Introduction
Upon viewing an unusual image, humans can readily
recognize odd, unusual, and incongruent factors. Consider
the examples in Fig. 1: smartphones did not exist when Einstein was alive (left), and an oxygen-starved candle would
not stay lit for long in a sealed bottle (right). While the
images consist of “normal” constituent objects, compositions make them unusual. Although it’s relatively easy
* Equal contribution.
2 Data, models and

for humans to identify/explain why an image is unusual,
the multi-step reasoning is sophisticated. Connecting visual cues to knowledge about the world goes beyond object recognition, and requires commonsense derived from
everyday experiences, physical/social knowledge, and cultural norms [35, 44, 20, 36].
In this work, we introduce W HOOPS !,3 a dataset of 500
synthetic images and 10,874 annotations designed to chal-

code are available at the project website:
whoops-benchmark.github.io/.

3 Weird and HeterogeneOus Objects, Phenomena, and Situations.

2616

