This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Navigational Visual Representations with Semantic Map Supervision
Yicong Hong12,: Yang Zhou1 Ruiyi Zhang1
Franck Dernoncourt1 Trung Bui1 Stephen Gould2 Hao Tan1
1
Adobe Research 2 The Australian National University
mr.yiconghong@gmail.com
stephen.gould@anu.edu.au, {yazhou,ruizhang,dernonco,bui,hatan}@adobe.com
Project URL: https://github.com/YicongHong/Ego2Map-NaViT

Abstract
Being able to perceive the semantics and the spatial
structure of the environment is essential for visual navigation of a household robot. However, most existing works
only employ visual backbones pre-trained either with independent images for classification or with self-supervised
learning methods to adapt to the indoor navigation domain,
neglecting the spatial relationships that are essential to the
learning of navigation. Inspired by the behavior that humans naturally build semantically and spatially meaningful
cognitive maps in their brains during navigation, in this paper, we propose a novel navigational-specific visual representation learning method by contrasting the agent’s egocentric views and semantic maps (Ego2 -Map). We apply
the visual transformer as the backbone encoder and train
the model with data collected from the large-scale HabitatMatterport3D environments. Ego2 -Map learning transfers
the compact and rich information from a map, such as objects, structure and transition, to the agent’s egocentric representations for navigation. Experiments show that agents
using our learned representations on object-goal navigation outperform recent visual pre-training methods. Moreover, our representations significantly improve vision-andlanguage navigation in continuous environments for both
high-level and low-level action spaces, achieving new stateof-the-art results of 47% SR and 41% SPL on the test server.

1. Introduction
Visual representations for navigation should capture the
rich semantics and the complex spatial relationships of the
observations, which helps the agent to recognize visual entities and its transition in space for effective exploration.
However, previous works usually adopt visual backbones
: Intern at Adobe Research.

which only focus on capturing the semantics of a static
image, ignoring its connection to the agent or the correspondence to other views in a continuous environment [3,
9, 40, 42, 51, 68, 98]. One common approach is to apply encoders pre-trained for object/scene classification (e.g.
ResNet [39] on ImageNet [80]/Places365 [102]), object detection (e.g. RCNN [38, 78] on VisualGenome [52]/MSCOCO [57]) or semantic segmentation (e.g. RedNet [45]
on SUN RGBD [87]), or more recently, to use CLIP [72],
which is trained for aligning millions of images and texts to
encode agent’s RGB observations [31, 46, 84]. Despite the
increasing generalization ability of the features and rising
zero-shot performance on novel targets, there still exists a
large visual domain gap between these features and the features suitable for navigation since they lack the expressiveness of spatial relationships. For example, the connection
between time-dependent observations and the correspondence between egocentric views and the spatial structure
of an environment, which are important to decision making
during navigation.
We suggest that there are two main difficulties in learning navigational-specific visual representations in previous research; First, there lacked a large-scale and realistic dataset of indoor environments. Popular datasets such
as Matterport3D [8] and Gibson [95] provide traversable
scenes rendered from real photos, but either the number
of scenes is very limited, or the quality of the 3D scan is
low. Synthetic datasets such as ProcTHOR [22] contain
10K generated scenes, but they are unrealistic and simple
and do not capture the full complexity of real-world environments. Second, fine-tuning visual encoders while learning to navigate is very expensive because of the long traveling horizon, especially in tasks that require extensive exploration [4, 53, 63, 86]. Moreover, due to the scene scarcity,
fine-tuning visual encoders is unlikely to generalize well
to the novel environments. To address these problems, a
large amount of research has been dedicated to augmenting the environments, either editing the agent’s observations

3055

