This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Adaptive Human-Object Interaction Detection with
Concept-guided Memory
Ting Lei1

Fabian Caba2 Qingchao Chen3 Hailin Jin2 Yuxin Peng1 Yang Liu1 *
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
Adobe Research 3 National Institute of Health Data Science, Peking University
1

{ting lei, qingchao.chen, pengyuxin, yangliu}@pku.edu.cn
{caba, hljin}@adobe.com

Abstract
Human Object Interaction (HOI) detection aims to localize and infer the relationships between a human and
an object. Arguably, training supervised models for this
task from scratch presents challenges due to the performance drop over rare classes and the high computational
cost and time required to handle long-tailed distributions
of HOIs in complex HOI scenes in realistic settings. This
observation motivates us to design an HOI detector that
can be trained even with long-tailed labeled data and can
leverage existing knowledge from pre-trained models. Inspired by the powerful generalization ability of the large
Vision-Language Models (VLM) on classification and retrieval tasks, we propose an efficient Adaptive HOI Detector with Concept-guided Memory (ADA-CM). ADA-CM
has two operating modes. The first mode makes it tunable without learning new parameters in a training-free
paradigm. Its second mode incorporates an instance-aware
adapter mechanism that can further efficiently boost performance if updating a lightweight set of parameters can
be afforded. Our proposed method achieves competitive results with state-of-the-art on the HICO-DET and V-COCO
datasets with much less training time. Code can be found at
https://github.com/ltttpku/ADA-CM .

1. Introduction
Human-object interaction (HOI) detection is essential
for comprehending human-centric scenes at a high level.
Given an image, HOI detection aims to localize human
and object pairs and recognize their interactions, i.e. a
set of <human, object, action> triplets. Recently, vision
Transformers [41], especially the DEtection TRansformer
(DETR) [1], have started to revolutionize the HOI detection
task. Two-stage methods use an off-the-shelf detector, e.g.
* Corresponding author

DETR, to localize humans and objects concurrently, followed by predicting interaction classes using the localized
region features. One-stage methods usually leverage the
pre-trained or fine-tuned weights and architecture of DETR
to predict HOI triplets from a global image context in an
end-to-end manner.
Despite the progress, most previous methods still face
two major challenges in solving the HOI detection task.
First, annotating HOI pairs requires considerable human
effort. Therefore, the model may experience data scarcity
when encountering a new domain. Even with the availability of ample data, the combinatorial nature of HOIs exacerbates challenging scenarios such as recognizing HOI classes
from long-tailed distributions. While people can efficiently
learn to recognize seen and even unseen HOI from limited
samples, most previous methods [19, 39, 28] suffer a significant performance drop on rare classes as shown in Figure 1(a). Second, training or fine-tuning an HOI detector
can contribute to high computational cost and time as shown
in Figure 1(b)1 . Training two-stage methods involves exhaustively combining instance-level features to predict pairwise relationships. In constast, training one-stage HOI detectors that adopt the architecture of DETR model can be
challenging due to the heavy reliance on transformers [31].
According to the challenges mentioned above, our goal
is to build an efficient adaptive HOI detector resilient to imbalanced data, which can not only adapt to a target dataset
without training but also quickly converge when fine-tuning.
To deal with the problem of lacking labeled data in a
target HOI visual domain, we propose a training-free approach with a concept-guided memory module that provides a balanced memory mechanism for all HOI classes.
The concept-guided memory module leverages not only
the domain-specific visual knowledge, but also the domain1 We exclude the training time for pre-training or fine-tuning the object
detector since all methods follow the same protocal to pre-train or fine-tune
the object detector.

6480

