This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Image-free Classifier Injection for Zero-Shot Classification
Anders Christensen1,2
Massimiliano Mancini3
A. Sophia Koepke1
Ole Winther2,4,5,6
Zeynep Akata1,7
1

2
3
University of Tübingen
Technical University of Denmark
University of Trento
4
5
6
7
University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen University Hospital
FindZebra
MPI for Intelligent Systems
andchri@dtu.dk

SICI

Abstract

“Antelope”
“Giraﬀe”

Elephant: long proboscis, tusks, ..

Zero-shot learning models achieve remarkable results
on image classification for samples from classes that were
not seen during training. However, such models must be
trained from scratch with specialised methods: therefore,
access to a training dataset is required when the need for
zero-shot classification arises. In this paper, we aim to equip
pre-trained models with zero-shot classification capabilities without the use of image data. We achieve this with
our proposed Image-free Classifier Injection with Semantics
(ICIS) that injects classifiers for new, unseen classes into
pre-trained classification models in a post-hoc fashion without relying on image data. Instead, the existing classifier
weights and simple class-wise descriptors, such as class
names or attributes, are used. ICIS has two encoder-decoder
networks that learn to reconstruct classifier weights from descriptors (and vice versa), exploiting (cross-)reconstruction
and cosine losses to regularise the decoding process. Notably, ICIS can be cheaply trained and applied directly
on top of pre-trained classification models. Experiments
on benchmark ZSL datasets show that ICIS produces unseen classifier weights that achieve strong (generalised)
zero-shot classification performance. Code is available at
https://github.com/ExplainableML/ImageFreeZSL.

“Leopard”

Zebra: black-and-white stripes, …

Antelope: dense coat, short fur, …
Giraffe: long neck, spotted coat, ..

Zebra

Leopard: long body, rosette, …

Antelope: dense coat, short fur, …

Add:

Giraffe: long neck, spotted coat, ..
Leopard: long body, rosette, …

1. Introduction
With the immense growth of user-generated data, object
categories are routinely discovered or re-defined, and requirements for models change constantly. Hence, pre-trained
visual classifiers can rapidly turn inadequate as their output
space is limited to classes seen during training. Updating a
decision maker commonly requires expensive data collection
and annotation, which can be unrealistic in some domains.
A cheaper and more appealing strategy is to use a zeroshot learning (ZSL) model [1, 57, 55, 56] that exploits side
information (e.g. class label word embeddings) to recognise
unseen classes in the specific domain of interest. However,

“Zebra”

Zebras are African
equines with
Elephant
black-and-white striped
Elephants have a long
coats…
proboscis called a
trunk, tusks, large ear
flaps, pillar-like legs, ...

ICIS

“Elephant”
“Zebra”
“Elephant”
“Antelope”
“Giraﬀe”
“Leopard”

Figure 1: We propose Image-free Classifier Injection with
Semantics (ICIS), a method that adds new classes to a pretrained model without access to any image for seen and
unseen classes, learning only from class-specific descriptors
(e.g. attributes) and their corresponding classifier weights.

i) standard classification models are not designed with zeroshot capabilities [19], and ii) state-of-the-art ZSL methods
are not applicable post training as one cannot regress descriptors from images [28, 1], train a feature generator [56], or
learn visual-semantic embeddings [60, 54] without images
from seen classes. Crucially, it can be infeasible for a practitioner to (re-)train a ZSL model due to computational costs
or data storage issues, and some visual data might not be
available for a particular task or user.
Since a large variety of pre-trained deep learning models
are readily available online, we pose the question: given a
specific image classification task and a pre-trained model,
can we extend it to desired but missing categories without
using images from seen or unseen classes? We name this
task Image-free ZSL (I-ZSL), where the aim is to categorise

19072

