This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

360VOT: A New Benchmark Dataset for Omnidirectional Visual Object Tracking
Huajian Huang
Yinzhe Xu
Yingshu Chen
Sai-Kit Yeung
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{hhuangbg, yxuck, ychengw}@connect.ust.hk, saikit@ust.hk

Figure 1: Example sequences and annotations of 360VOT benchmark dataset. The target objects in each 360◦ frame are
annotated with four different representations as ground truth, including bounding box, rotated bounding box, bounding fieldof-view, and rotated bounding field-of-view. 360VOT brings distinct challenges for tracking, e.g., crossing border (CB), large
distortion (LD) and stitching artifact (SA).

Abstract
360◦ images can provide an omnidirectional field of view
which is important for stable and long-term scene perception. In this paper, we explore 360◦ images for visual object tracking and perceive new challenges caused by large
distortion, stitching artifacts, and other unique attributes
of 360◦ images. To alleviate these problems, we take advantage of novel representations of target localization, i.e.,
bounding field-of-view, and then introduce a general 360
tracking framework that can adopt typical trackers for omnidirectional tracking. More importantly, we propose a new
large-scale omnidirectional tracking benchmark dataset,
360VOT, in order to facilitate future research. 360VOT contains 120 sequences with up to 113K high-resolution frames
in equirectangular projection. The tracking targets cover
32 categories in diverse scenarios. Moreover, we provide 4
types of unbiased ground truth, including (rotated) bounding boxes and (rotated) bounding field-of-views, as well
as new metrics tailored for 360◦ images which allow for
the accurate evaluation of omnidirectional tracking perfor-

mance. Finally, we extensively evaluated 20 state-of-the-art
visual trackers and provided a new baseline for future comparisons. Homepage: https://360vot.hkustvgd.com

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is an essential problem in computer vision since it is demanded in various applications
such as video analysis, human-machine interaction, and intelligent robots. In the last decade, a large number of visual tracking algorithms [19, 32, 11, 26, 1] and various
benchmarks [42, 30, 24, 16, 22] have been proposed to promote the development of the visual tracking community.
Whereas most existing research focuses on perspective visual object tracking, there is little attention paid to omnidirectional visual object tracking.
Omnidirectional visual object tracking employs a 360◦
camera to track the target object. With its omnidirectional
field-of-view (FoV), a 360◦ camera offers continuous observation of the target over a longer period, minimizing the
out-of-view issue. This advantage is crucial for intelligent

20566

