This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Grounding 3D Object Affordance from 2D Interactions in Images
Yuhang Yang1 , Wei Zhai1,∗ , Hongchen Luo1 , Yang Cao1,2 , Jiebo Luo3 , Zheng-Jun Zha1
1
3
University of Science and Technology of China
University of Rochester
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{yyuhang@mail., wzhai056@mail., lhc12@mail., forrest@}ustc.edu.cn
jluo@cs.rochester.edu

zhazj@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
The term “affordance” is described as “opportunities of
interaction” by J. Gibson [14]. Grounding 3D object affordance aims to comprehend the interactive regions of objects
in 3D space, which is not only simply to predict which interaction an object affords, but also to identify specific points
on the object that could support the interaction. It consti∗Corresponding Author.

2D Image

Interaction: Sit

Intention
Driven

3D (e.g. Point Cloud)

Grounding 3D object affordance seeks to locate objects’
“action possibilities” regions in the 3D space, which serves
as a link between perception and operation for embodied
agents. Existing studies primarily focus on connecting visual affordances with geometry structures, e.g., relying on
annotations to declare interactive regions of interest on the
object and establishing a mapping between the regions and
affordances. However, the essence of learning object affordance is to understand how to use it, and the manner
that detaches interactions is limited in generalization. Normally, humans possess the ability to perceive object affordances in the physical world through demonstration images
or videos. Motivated by this, we introduce a novel task setting: grounding 3D object affordance from 2D interactions
in images, which faces the challenge of anticipating affordance through interactions of different sources. To address
this problem, we devise a novel Interaction-driven 3D Affordance Grounding Network (IAG), which aligns the region
feature of objects from different sources and models the interactive contexts for 3D object affordance grounding. Besides, we collect a Point-Image Affordance Dataset (PIAD)
to support the proposed task. Comprehensive experiments
on PIAD demonstrate the reliability of the proposed task
and the superiority of our method. The project is available
at https://github.com/yyvhang/IAGNet.

Affordance
Anticipation

Interaction
Hint

Interaction: Lift

Figure 1. Grounding Affordance from Interactions. We propose
to ground 3D object affordance through 2D interactions. Given an
object point cloud with an interactive image, grounding the corresponding affordance on the 3D object.

tutes a link between perception and operation for embodied
agents, which has the potential to serve numerous practical
applications, e.g. action prediction [21, 63], robot manipulation [36, 45, 51], imitation learning [17, 50], and augmented/virtual reality [6, 9].
So far, the paradigm of perceiving 3D object affordance
has several branches. One of them involves establishing
an explicit mapping between affordance categories and geometry structures [10, 20, 46, 66], based on visual appearance. However, affordance is dynamic and multiple, these
geometric-specific manners have limited generalization for
unseen structures. Besides, locking the geometry with a
specific affordance category may lead to the anticipated region being inconsistent with its affordance when objects
possess multiple similar geometrics, resulting in affordance
regional confusion. Another paradigm is based on reinforcement learning, which puts the agent in 3D synthetic
scenarios to interact with several objects actively, taking
the reward mechanism to optimize the whole process [48].
While this type of approach transitions agents from passive
recognition to active reasoning, it needs repeated attempts
in a huge search space when meeting a novel structure, and
is therefore time-consuming.

10905

