This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving 3D Imaging with Pre-Trained Perpendicular 2D Diffusion Models
Suhyeon Lee1∗ , Hyungjin Chung1∗ , Minyoung Park2 , Jonghyuk Park2 , Wi-Sun Ryu2 , Jong Chul Ye1
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science & Technology, 2 JLK Inc.,
{suhyeon.lee, hj.chung, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr, {mypark, jhpark01, wsryu}@jlkgroup.com

Abstract
Diffusion models have become a popular approach for
image generation and reconstruction due to their numerous advantages. However, most diffusion-based inverse
problem-solving methods only deal with 2D images, and
even recently published 3D methods do not fully exploit the
3D distribution prior. To address this, we propose a novel
approach using two perpendicular pre-trained 2D diffusion
models to solve the 3D inverse problem. By modeling the
3D data distribution as a product of 2D distributions sliced
in different directions, our method effectively addresses the
curse of dimensionality. Our experimental results demonstrate that our method is highly effective for 3D medical
image reconstruction tasks, including MRI Z-axis superresolution, compressed sensing MRI, and sparse-view CT.
Our method can generate high-quality voxel volumes suitable for medical applications. The code is available at
https://github.com/hyn2028/tpdm

1. Introduction
The diffusion probabilistic model (DPM) uses neural
networks to learn the gradient of the log probability distribution, ∇x log pdata (x), also known as the score function.
Sampling is done by either using Langevin dynamics [38]
or solving the reverse stochastic differential equation (SDE)
using the learned score function [40].
DPM has emerged as a leading generative model in the
image field since its introduction [37, 15, 40], surpassing
other models like GAN in achieving state-of-the-art performance [10, 30]. The confluence of the diffusion model with
conditioning training is a noteworthy synergy, constituting
a foundational framework within the domain of text-guided
image generation [30, 32, 29]. Furthermore, its versatile
applicability extends to novel realms like brain vision decoding [3, 41]. It is also being explored as a generative
model in other various areas such as audio [28, 22, 18],
video [2, 36, 26], radiance field [27, 35], and graph [43, 17].
* These authors contributed equally to this work

Despite the slow sampling speed due to sequential sampling over multiple time steps, diffusion models offer significant advantages over other generative models, including sampling-time scalability. The pre-trained score function model can be used for conditional sampling without
retraining, thanks to Bayes’ theorem [10, 16]. This conditional sampling-based inverse problem-solving method can
be interpreted as posterior sampling with diffusion generative priors. Thus, it effectively avoids bias and regression to the mean phenomena from the supervised likelihood optimization methods. In due course, the paradigm
of diffusion-based inverse problem-solving methodology
[40, 20, 7, 5, 4, 39, 6, 45] has risen to the forefront as a
state-of-the-art technique within the realm of study.
Most contemporary diffusion-based inverse problemsolving methods are focused on 2D applications. However,
a recent method called DiffusionMBIR [6] has been proposed to address 3D inverse problems in medical imaging.
In DiffusionMBIR, the diffusion model trained on the primary XY-plane is used as the prior, and the generative prior
is augmented with a model-based prior, namely total variation (TV), to enforce smoothness to the adjacent slices (Zaxis). While this approach has been effective for various
tasks, it still has limitations because it does not fully learn
the 3D prior distribution of the data. More specifically, the
TV prior only imposes local dependencies that are derived
from finite difference operators, whereas the true 3D prior
should model global dependencies.
To overcome this limitation, we propose a new method
called Two Perpendicular 2D Diffusion Models (TPDM) for
3D generation. TPDM fully leverages the 3D generative
prior by modeling the 3D data distribution with a product distribution of 2D constituents, without relying on a
model-based prior. This approach allows TPDM to effectively learn the 3D prior using only two 2D diffusion models: the primary model that operates on the XY-plane and
an auxiliary model that learns the YZ-plane. Unlike the
previous DiffusionMBIR approach, TPDM can model the
global dependencies of the 3D structure, and it eliminates
the need for sub-optimization schemes required to impose
the TV constraint. It is worth mentioning that, unlike Diffu-

10710

