This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lecture Presentations Multimodal Dataset:
Towards Understanding Multimodality in Educational Videos
Dong Won Lee1

Chaitanya Ahuja2 Paul Pu Liang2 Sanika Natu2 Louis-Philippe Morency2
MIT1 , Carnegie Mellon University2
https://github.com/dondongwon/LPMDataset

Lecture Presentation Video

Slide

Manual
Segmentation

Figures

Figure Text

Manual
Annotation

OCR
Extraction

{x: 329, y: 238,
{x:
329, y:
238,
class:
“diagram”,
{x: 329,
y: 238,
class: … {
“diagram”,
x: 329, y: 238,
text:
“Cephalopods”}
class:
“diagram”,
text:
“Cephalopods”}
text:
“Visceral Mass” },
text: “Cephalopods”}
{x: 329, y: 294,
text: Intestine }…

Crossmodal
Retrieval

Aligned Audio

Multi-Instance
Learning

Spoken Text
ASR
Alignment

"...a nudibranch can be called a gastropod they ride on a
muscular stomach foot you have the bivalves which have
the two shells on both sides and then you have the
cephalopods where the muscular foot is actually in the head
and so that's why it named this way ‘lo’ meaning head and
‘pod’ meaning foot now the other things that they have is
the visceral mass which contains mostly internal organs..”

"...a nudibranch can be
called a gastropod they
ride on a muscular
stomach foot…”

you have the bivalves
which have the two
shells on both sides
and…

“ then now the other things
that they have is the
visceral mass which
contains mostly internal
organs..”

you have the cephalopods
where the muscular foot is
actually in the head and so
that's why it named this way
‘lo’ meaning head and ‘pod’
meaning foot

Figure 1: We present the Lecture Presentations Multimodal Dataset as a benchmark for developing AI technologies that can
understand multimodal knowledge in educational content. Our diversely sourced and richly annotated dataset contributes
three challenging vision-and-language research tasks: automatic retrieval of (1) spoken explanations given figures, (2) illustrative figures given spoken explanations and (3) generation of slide explanations. Through benchmarking existing and newly
proposed models, we outline future research directions to bring us closer to intelligent and accessible tutoring aids.

Abstract
Many educational videos use slide presentations, a sequence of visual pages that contain text and figures accompanied by spoken language, which are constructed and
presented carefully in order to optimally transfer knowledge to students. Previous studies in multimedia and psychology attribute the effectiveness of lecture presentations
to their multimodal nature. As a step toward developing
vision-language models to aid in student learning as intelligent teacher assistants, we introduce the Lecture Presentations Multimodal (LPM) Dataset as a large-scale benchmark testing the capabilities of vision-and-language models
in multimodal understanding of educational videos. Our
dataset contains aligned slides and spoken language, for
180+ hours of video and 9000+ slides, with 10 lecturers
from various subjects (e.g., computer science, dentistry, biology). We introduce three research tasks, (1) figure-totext retrieval, (2) text-to-figure retrieval, and (3) generation of slide explanations, which are grounded in multimedia learning and psychology principles to test a visionlanguage model’s understanding of multimodal content. We
provide manual annotations to help implement these tasks

and establish baselines on them. Comparing baselines and
human student performances, we find that state-of-the-art
vision-language models (zero-shot and fine-tuned) struggle in (1) weak crossmodal alignment between slides and
spoken text, (2) learning novel visual mediums, (3) technical language, and (4) long-range sequences. We introduce PolyViLT, a novel multimodal transformer trained with
a multi-instance learning loss that is more effective than
current approaches for retrieval. We conclude by shedding
light on the challenges and opportunities in multimodal understanding of educational presentation videos.

1. Introduction
Students today commonly learn through multimedia, including online lecture presentation recordings, educational
mobile applications, and other digital resources [28]. In
particular, slide-assisted instruction through lectures has become predominant in educational settings [38, 42, 43] and
is widely considered by teachers and students as the preferred instructional tool [42, 47]. The effectiveness of lecFor all authors, work was done at CMU

20087

