This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adding Conditional Control to Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala
Stanford University
{lvmin, anyirao, maneesh}@cs.stanford.edu

Input Canny edge

Default

“masterpiece of fairy tale, giant deer, golden antlers”

“…, quaint city Galic”

Input human pose

Default

“chef in kitchen”

“Lincoln statue”

Figure 1: Controlling Stable Diffusion with learned conditions. ControlNet allows users to add conditions like Canny edges
(top), human pose (bottom), etc., to control the image generation of large pretrained diffusion models. The default results use
the prompt “a high-quality, detailed, and professional image”. Users can optionally give prompts like the “chef in kitchen”.

Abstract
We present ControlNet, a neural network architecture to
add spatial conditioning controls to large, pretrained textto-image diffusion models. ControlNet locks the productionready large diffusion models, and reuses their deep and robust encoding layers pretrained with billions of images as a
strong backbone to learn a diverse set of conditional controls.
The neural architecture is connected with “zero convolutions”
(zero-initialized convolution layers) that progressively grow
the parameters from zero and ensure that no harmful noise
could affect the finetuning. We test various conditioning controls, e.g., edges, depth, segmentation, human pose, etc., with
Stable Diffusion, using single or multiple conditions, with
or without prompts. We show that the training of ControlNets is robust with small (<50k) and large (>1m) datasets.
Extensive results show that ControlNet may facilitate wider
applications to control image diffusion models.

1. Introduction
Many of us have experienced flashes of visual inspiration
that we wish to capture in a unique image. With the advent
of text-to-image diffusion models [54, 61, 71], we can now
create visually stunning images by typing in a text prompt.
Yet, text-to-image models are limited in the control they
provide over the spatial composition of the image; precisely
expressing complex layouts, poses, shapes and forms can be
difficult via text prompts alone. Generating an image that
accurately matches our mental imagery often requires numerous trial-and-error cycles of editing a prompt, inspecting
the resulting images and then re-editing the prompt.
Can we enable finer grained spatial control by letting
users provide additional images that directly specify their
desired image composition? In computer vision and machine
learning, these additional images (e.g., edge maps, human
pose skeletons, segmentation maps, depth, normals, etc.)
are often treated as conditioning on the image generation
process. Image-to-image translation models [34, 97] learn

3836

