This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MUVA: A New Large-Scale Benchmark for Multi-view Amodal Instance
Segmentation in the Shopping Scenario
Zhixuan Li1 Weining Ye1 Juan Terven2 Zachary Bennett2
Ying Zheng2 Tingting Jiang1, * Tiejun Huang1,3
1

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, National Key Laboratory for
Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
2
AiFi Inc., California 94010, United States
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing 100084, China
{zhixuanli,ywning}@pku.edu.cn, {juan,zachary}@aifi.com,
yingz@alumni.gsb.stanford.edu, {ttjiang,tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Amodal Instance Segmentation (AIS) endeavors to accurately deduce complete object shapes that are partially
or fully occluded. However, the inherent ill-posed nature
of single-view datasets poses challenges in determining occluded shapes. A multi-view framework may help alleviate this problem, as humans often adjust their perspective
when encountering occluded objects. At present, this approach has not yet been explored by existing methods and
datasets. To bridge this gap, we propose a new task called
Multi-view Amodal Instance Segmentation (MAIS) and introduce the MUVA dataset, the first MUlti-View AIS dataset
that takes the shopping scenario as instantiation. MUVA
provides comprehensive annotations, including multi-view
amodal/visible segmentation masks, 3D models, and depth
maps, making it the largest image-level AIS dataset in terms
of both the number of images and instances. Additionally,
we propose a new method for aggregating representative
features across different instances and views, which demonstrates promising results in accurately predicting occluded
objects from one viewpoint by leveraging information from
other viewpoints. Besides, we also demonstrate that MUVA
can benefit the AIS task in real-world scenarios. 1

1. Introduction
The amodal instance segmentation (AIS) task aims to
determine an object’s entire shape, encompassing its visible and occluded components. AIS task is more challenging than the visible instance segmentation task [23, 11]
* Corresponding author
1 The proposed MUVA dataset can be downloaded from this link:

https://zhixuanli.github.io/project 2023 ICCV MUVA.

ill-posed
problem

Figure 1. Comparison of the impact of ill-posed problems on
amodal prediction in single-view and multi-view input settings.
(a) In single-view input, ambiguity arises due to multiple candidates for the occluded object. (b) Multi-view input helps alleviate
ambiguity and improves amodal prediction accuracy.

as it lacks occluded region appearance. Despite its complexity, the AIS task has significant implications for various industrial applications that encounter occlusion problems, such as robotic arm grasping [1], pedestrian reidentification [34, 36, 29], automatic driving [27, 28], and
self-checkout systems in supermarkets [8].
Although numerous datasets [19, 40, 8, 27, 13] and
methods [19, 40, 8, 27, 13, 38, 33, 21] have been proposed
since the AIS task was firstly introduced in 2016 by Li
and Malik [19], current AIS datasets and methods rely on
a single-view approach, suffering from the ill-posed problem. For example, as shown in Fig. 1(a), directly deducting

23504

