This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Support and Trivial Prototypes for Interpretable Image Classification
Chong Wang1
Yuyuan Liu1
Yuanhong Chen 1
Fengbei Liu1
Yu Tian2
Davis McCarthy3
Helen Frazer4
Gustavo Carneiro5
1
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide
2
Harvard University 3 St Vincent’s Institute of Medical Research
4
St Vincent’s Hospital Melbourne 5 CVSSP, University of Surrey
Abstract
Prototypical part network (ProtoPNet) methods have
been designed to achieve interpretable classification by
associating predictions with a set of training prototypes,
which we refer to as trivial prototypes because they are
trained to lie far from the classification boundary in the
feature space. Note that it is possible to make an analogy between ProtoPNet and support vector machine (SVM)
given that the classification from both methods relies on
computing similarity with a set of training points (i.e., trivial prototypes in ProtoPNet, and support vectors in SVM).
However, while trivial prototypes are located far from the
classification boundary, support vectors are located close to
this boundary, and we argue that this discrepancy with the
well-established SVM theory can result in ProtoPNet models with inferior classification accuracy. In this paper, we
aim to improve the classification of ProtoPNet with a new
method to learn support prototypes that lie near the classification boundary in the feature space, as suggested by the
SVM theory. In addition, we target the improvement of classification results with a new model, named ST-ProtoPNet,
which exploits our support prototypes and the trivial prototypes to provide more effective classification. Experimental results on CUB-200-2011, Stanford Cars, and Stanford Dogs datasets demonstrate that ST-ProtoPNet achieves
state-of-the-art classification accuracy and interpretability
results. We also show that the proposed support prototypes
tend to be better localised in the object of interest rather
than in the background region.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) [28, 30, 16]
have had remarkable achievements in various visual tasks,
e.g., image recognition [16] and object detection [39]. Despite the excellent feature extraction and discrimination
ability, CNNs are generally treated as black-box models
due to their complex architectures, high-dimensional fea-

Classification boundary

Classification boundary

(a) The learning of trivial prototypes
Classification boundary

Classification boundary

(b) The learning of support prototypes (ours)
Feature vectors

Prototypes

Clustering

Separation

Our loss

Figure 1. The difference between the learning of trivial and support prototypes. (a) Trivial prototypes: the separation loss pushes
the prototypes of different classes as far as possible from the classification boundary. (b) Support prototypes: our new closeness
loss enforces the prototypes of different classes to be as close as
possible to the classification boundary.

ture spaces, and the enormous number of learnable parameters. Such lack of interpretability hinders their successful
application in fields that require understandable and transparent decisions [40], e.g., disease diagnosis [47, 13], financial risk assessment [33], and autonomous driving [23].
Recently, increasing attention has been dedicated to the
development of interpretable deep-learning models [25, 1,
4, 3]. A particularly interesting strategy is the prototypebased gray-box models, e.g., prototypical part network
(ProtoPNet) [4, 11]. These methods are inherently interpretable since they can explain the model’s decisions
by showing image classification activation maps associated
with a set of class-specific image prototypes. These prototypes are automatically learned from training samples, with
classification score being computed by comparing testing
image parts to the learned training prototypes.
ProtoPNet [4] is trained to learn a classifier from a set of
class-specific prototypes by minimising the cross-entropy
classification loss and two additional regularisation losses,
namely: 1) a clustering loss that pulls together training
image patches to at least one prototype of its own class;
and 2) a separation loss that pushes apart training image

2062

