This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLR: Channel-wise Lightweight Reprogramming for Continual Learning
Yunhao Ge1† , Yuecheng Li1∗ , Shuo Ni1∗ , Jiaping Zhao2 Ming-Hsuan Yang2 , Laurent Itti1†
1
University of Southern California 2 Google Research
∗

Equal contribution as second author,

†correspondence to {yunhaoge, itti}@usc.edu

https://github.com/gyhandy/Channel-wise-Lightweight-Reprogramming

Abstract
Continual learning aims to emulate the human ability to continually accumulate knowledge over sequential
tasks. The main challenge is to maintain performance on
previously learned tasks after learning new tasks, i.e., to
avoid catastrophic forgetting. We propose a Channel-wise
Lightweight Reprogramming (CLR) approach that helps
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) overcome catastrophic forgetting during continual learning. We show that
a CNN model trained on an old task (or self-supervised
proxy task) could be “reprogrammed” to solve a new task
by using our proposed lightweight (very cheap) reprogramming parameter. With the help of CLR, we have a better stability-plasticity trade-off to solve continual learning
problems: To maintain stability and retain previous task
ability, we use a common task-agnostic immutable part as
the shared “anchor” parameter set. We then add taskspecific lightweight reprogramming parameters to reinterpret the outputs of the immutable parts, to enable plasticity and integrate new knowledge. To learn sequential
tasks, we only train the lightweight reprogramming parameters to learn each new task. Reprogramming parameters
are task-specific and exclusive to each task, which makes
our method immune to catastrophic forgetting. To minimize the parameter requirement of reprogramming to learn
new tasks, we make reprogramming lightweight by only adjusting essential kernels and learning channel-wise linear
mappings from anchor parameters to task-specific domain
knowledge. We show that, for general CNNs, the CLR parameter increase is less than 0.6% for any new task. Our
method outperforms 13 state-of-the-art continual learning
baselines on a new challenging sequence of 53 image classification datasets. Code and data are in the top link.

1. Introduction
Continual Learning (CL) focuses on the problem of
learning from a stream of data, where agents continually
extend their acquired knowledge by sequentially learning
new tasks or skills, while avoiding forgetting of previous

Figure 1. Equipped with a task-agnostic immutable CNN model,
our approach ”reprogram” the CNN layers to each new task with
lightweight task-specific parameters (less than 0.6% of the original
model) to learn sequences of disjoint tasks, assuming data from
previous tasks is no longer available while learning new tasks.

tasks [40]. In the literature, CL is also referred to as lifelong
learning [10, 2, 40] and sequential learning [4]. This differs
from standard train-and-deploy approaches, which cannot
incrementally learn without catastrophic interference across
tasks [21]. How to avoid catastrophic forgetting is the main
challenge of continual learning, which requires that the performance on previous learned tasks should not degrade significantly over time when new tasks are learned. This is
also related to a general problem in neural network design,
the stability-plasticity trade-off [23], where plasticity represents the ability to integrate new knowledge, and stability
refers to the ability to retain previous knowledge [13].
Dynamic Network methods have been shown to be
among the most successful ones to solve continual learning, which usually shows great stability on previous tasks
and alleviates the influence of catastrophic forgetting by dynamically modify the network to solve new tasks, usually
by network expansion [40, 56, 12, 57]. For stability, a desirable approach would be to fix the backbone and learn extra task-specific parameters on top of it, which will have no
catastrophic forgetting. However, the number of parameters
in such methods can quickly become very large. How to re-

18798

