This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Online Clustered Codebook
Chuanxia Zheng Andrea Vedaldi
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
{cxzheng, vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Vector Quantisation (VQ) is experiencing a comeback in
machine learning, where it is increasingly used in representation learning. However, optimizing the codevectors in existing VQ-VAE is not entirely trivial. A problem is codebook
collapse, where only a small subset of codevectors receive
gradients useful for their optimisation, whereas a majority
of them simply “dies off” and is never updated or used. This
limits the effectiveness of VQ for learning larger codebooks
in complex computer vision tasks that require high-capacity
representations. In this paper, we present a simple alternative method for online codebook learning, Clustering VQVAE (CVQ-VAE). Our approach selects encoded features as
anchors to update the “dead” codevectors, while optimising the codebooks which are alive via the original loss. This
strategy brings unused codevectors closer in distribution to
the encoded features, increasing the likelihood of being chosen and optimized. We extensively validate the generalization capability of our quantiser on various datasets, tasks
(e.g. reconstruction and generation), and architectures (e.g.
VQ-VAE, VQGAN, LDM). CVQ-VAE can be easily integrated into the existing models with just a few lines of code.

(a) VQ-VAE [37]
Usage: 9.96%

(b) SQ-VAE [36]
Usage: 49.02%

(d) Codebook Perplexity

(c) CVQ-VAE
Usage: 100%

(e) Reconstruction error

Figure 1: Codebook usage and reconstruction error. The
setting is the same as VQ-VAE [37], except for the different quantisers. All models are trained and evaluated on the
CIFAR10 [20] dataset. VQ-VAE has many “dead” vectors
(green points) which are not used. CVQ-VAE updates these
unoptimized vectors by using online sampled feature anchors, leading to a 100% usage of the codebook. CVQ-VAE
achieves substantially higher codebook perplexity and better reconstruction results than with the fixed initialization.

1. Introduction
Vector Quantisation (VQ) [12] is a basic building block
of many machine learning techniques. It is often used to
help learning unsupervised representations for vision and
language tasks, including data compression [1, 39, 36],
recognition [26, 3, 44, 24, 23], and generation [37, 31, 11,
32, 47, 34, 33]. VQ quantises continuous feature vectors
into a discrete space by embedding them to the closest vectors in a codebook of representatives or codevectors. Quantisation has been shown to simplify optimization problems
by reducing a continuous search space to a discrete one.
Despite its success, VQ has some drawbacks when applied to deep networks [37]. One of them is that quantisation stops gradients from back-propagating to the codevectors. This has been linked to codebook collapse [36],

which means that only a small subset of active codevectors are optimized alongside the learnable features, while
the majority of them are not used at all (see the green
“dead” points in Fig. 1(a)). As a result, many recent methods [11, 10, 44, 32, 6, 47] fail to utilise the full expressive
power of a codebook due to the low codevector utilisation,
especially when the codebook size is large. This significantly limits VQ’s effectiveness.
To tackle this issue, we propose a new alternative quantiser called Clustering VQ-VAE (CVQ-VAE). We observe
that classical clustering algorithms, such as refined initialization k-means [4] and k-means++ [2], use a dynamic cluster initialization approach. For example, k-means++ randomly selects a data point as the first cluster centre, and

22798

