This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Attention Where It Matters: Rethinking Visual Document Understanding
with Selective Region Concentration
Haoyu Cao1*, Changcun Bao1* , Chaohu Liu1,2† , Huang Chen1 , Kun Yin1 , Hao Liu1 ,
Yinsong Liu1 , Deqiang Jiang1 , Xing Sun1
Tencent YouTu Lab1 , University of Science and Technology of China2
{rechycao, changcunbao, huaangchen, zhanyin, ivanhliu, jasonysliu, dqiangjiang}@tencent.com
liuchaohu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, winfred.sun@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose a novel end-to-end document understanding model called SeRum (SElective Region Understanding
Model) for extracting meaningful information from document images, including document analysis, retrieval, and
office automation. Unlike state-of-the-art approaches that
rely on multi-stage technical schemes and are computationally expensive, SeRum converts document image understanding and recognition tasks into a local decoding process of the visual tokens of interest, using a content-aware
token merge module. This mechanism enables the model
to pay more attention to regions of interest generated by
the query decoder, improving the model’s effectiveness and
speeding up the decoding speed of the generative scheme.
We also designed several pre-training tasks to enhance the
understanding and local awareness of the model. Experimental results demonstrate that SeRum achieves state-ofthe-art performance on document understanding tasks and
competitive results on text spotting tasks. SeRum represents
a substantial advancement towards enabling efficient and
effective end-to-end document understanding.

1. Introduction
Understanding document images is a fundamental task
that involves extracting meaningful information from them,
such as document information extraction [51] or answering
visual questions related to the document [34]. In today’s
world, where the volume of digital documents is increasing
exponentially, this task has become even more critical in
various applications, including document analysis [6], document retrieval [33], and office robotic process automation
(RPA) [1].
Current state-of-the-art approaches [15] rely on multistage technical schemes involving optical character recogni* Equal contribution. † Work done during internship at YouTu Lab.

OCR

Reading Order
Serialization

Document
Understanding
Model

Fax：
335-7733

(a) Multi-stage method
SeRum

Interested Token

Merged Token

Vision Encoder

335-7733
what is the Fax?

Query Decoder

Content-aware Token Merge

Text Decoder

(b) Our proposed end-to-end method

Figure 1. Comparison of multi-stage and SeRum end-to-end processing flows for visual document understanding. SeRum’s approach simplifies the pipeline by directly generating text output for
key visual tokens from the image, eliminating the need for OCR
and delivering highly efficient and effective document analysis.
Best viewed in color.

tion (OCR) [42] and other modules [37] to extract key information, as shown in Figure 1. However, these approaches
are suboptimal and computationally expensive, relying too
much on prefacing modules such as accurate OCR recognition and document content ordering [18].
To address these challenges, we propose a novel endto-end document understanding model with selective region concentration called SeRum (SElective Region Understanding Model). As shown in Figure 1, SeRum converts document image understanding and recognition tasks
into a local decoding process of the visual tokens of interest, which includes a vision encoder, a query-text decoder,
and a content-aware token merge module.
For document understanding tasks, the content to be extracted often takes up a small proportion of the whole document area but may change greatly in scale. Therefore, it is
crucial to accurately identify the key area of interest first.
SeRum extracts document image features using a vision
Transformer-based encoder. We use a self-encoding Transform query decoder inspired by MaskFormer [5], which decode the input query (question for tasks) and carries out

19517

