This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Label-Guided Knowledge Distillation for Continual Semantic Segmentation
on 2D Images and 3D Point Clouds
Ze Yang1 , Ruibo Li1 , Evan Ling2 , Chi Zhang1 , Yiming Wang1 ,
Dezhao Huang2 , Keng Teck Ma2 , Minhoe Hur3 , Guosheng Lin1 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Hyundai Motor Group Innovation Center in Singapore (HMGICS)
3
AIRS Company, Hyundai Motor Group
ze001@e.ntu.edu.sg, evan.ling@hmgics.com, minhoe.hur@hyundai.com, gslin@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Continual semantic segmentation (CSS) aims to extend
an existing model to tackle unseen tasks while retaining its
old knowledge. Naively fine-tuning the old model on new
data leads to catastrophic forgetting. A common solution is
knowledge distillation (KD), where the output distribution
of the new model is regularized to be similar to that of the
old model. However, in CSS, this is challenging because of
the background shift issue. Existing KD-based CSS methods continue to suffer from confusion between the background and novel classes since they fail to establish a reliable class correspondence for distillation. To address this
issue, we propose a new label-guided knowledge distillation (LGKD) loss, where the old model output is expanded
and transplanted (with the guidance of the ground truth label) to form a semantically appropriate class correspondence with the new model output. Consequently, the useful
knowledge from the old model can be effectively distilled
into the new model without causing confusion. We conduct extensive experiments on two prevailing CSS benchmarks, Pascal-VOC and ADE20K, where our LGKD significantly boosts the performance of three competing methods, especially on novel mIoU by up to +76%, setting new
state-of-the-art. Finally, to further demonstrate its generalization ability, we introduce the first CSS benchmark
for 3D point cloud based on ScanNet, along with several
re-implemented baselines for comparison. Experiments
show that LGKD is versatile in both 2D and 3D modalities without requiring ad hoc design. Codes are available
at https://github.com/Ze-Yang/LGKD.

1. Introduction
Fully supervised semantic segmentation has witnessed
tremendous success [33, 63, 27, 8, 16, 22, 47, 65, 9] in re* Corresponding author: Guosheng Lin

old model

Standard KD
(ILT)

Unbiased KD
(MiB)

mimic

mimic

Label‐Guided KD
(Ours)

expand
transplant

Input Image

remove

combine

mimic

add

new model

{person, background}
step t‐1

Probabilities on new class bicycle pixels output by
the old (upper row) and new model (bottom row)

{bicycle, background}
step t

{bicycle, person, car, background}
all class set

Figure 1. Illustration of knowledge distillation (KD) strategies in
continual semantic segmentation. Standard KD and unbiased KD
reduce the new class (bicycle) dimension(s) of the probabilities
output by the new model via remove and combine respectively,
which collapses the class correspondence across incremental steps
and raises confusion between background and new classes (see
Sec. 1). In contrast, our label-guided KD uses the ground truth
label as guidance to expand the probabilities predicted by the old
model. It builds a reliable class correspondence across different
learning steps without discrepancy (ILT) or entanglement (MiB)
mimic
(see Sec. 3.2). A ===⇒ B: encourage A to be similar to B.

cent years. These algorithms generally assume a fixed number of classes to be learned. However, in real-world applications, it is often expected that a deployed model can be
continuously generalized to handle new classes while not
forgetting the old ones. A simple solution is to expand the
original dataset with newly available samples and retrain a
new model from scratch, dubbed as Joint Training. Obviously, this is computationally expensive and requires an
increasing amount of space to store the old data over time.

18601

