This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video Action Recognition with Attentive Semantic Units
Yifei Chen1
1

Dapeng Chen1†

Ruijin Liu2⋆

Hao Li3⋆

Wei Peng1

IIRC, Huawei 2 Xi’an Jiaotong University 3 Xiamen University
chenyifei14@huawei.com chendapeng8@huawei.com

Abstract
Visual-Language Models (VLMs) have significantly advanced video action recognition. Supervised by the semantics of action labels, recent works adapt the visual branch
of VLMs to learn video representations. Despite the effectiveness proved by these works, we believe that the potential
of VLMs has yet to be fully harnessed. In light of this, we
exploit the semantic units (SU) hiding behind the action labels and leverage their correlations with fine-grained items
in frames for more accurate action recognition. SUs are
entities extracted from the language descriptions of the entire action set, including body parts, objects, scenes, and
motions. To further enhance the alignments between visual contents and the SUs, we introduce a multi-region attention module (MRA) to the visual branch of the VLM.
The MRA allows the perception of region-aware visual features beyond the original global feature. Our method adaptively attends to and selects relevant SUs with visual features of frames. With a cross-modal decoder, the selected
SUs serve to decode spatiotemporal video representations.
In summary, the SUs as the medium can boost discriminative ability and transferability. Specifically, in fullysupervised learning, our method achieved 87.8% top-1 accuracy on Kinetics-400. In K=2 few-shot experiments, our
method surpassed the previous state-of-the-art by +7.1%
and +15.0% on HMDB-51 and UCF-101, respectively.

1. Introduction
Video action recognition is the fundamental task toward intelligent video understanding. Facilitated by deep
learning, great advancements have been made in designing
end-to-end network architecture, including two-stream networks [50, 54, 67], 3D convolutional neural networks (3DCNN) [9, 16, 17, 23, 46, 52, 53, 59] and transformer-based
† Corresponding author. ⋆ Ruijin Liu and Hao Li were interns at
Huawei during the project.

networks [4, 14, 35, 44, 62]. The visual-languages models
(VLM)[47, 25] have achieved great success in the last few
years. Taking inspiration from this, recent works[55, 26, 41]
started exploiting video representation learning under semantic supervision. In particular, these works propose a
paradigm that trains video representations to align with
action-name text embeddings, which provide richer semantic and contextual information than conventional one-hot labels. Besides showing competitive performance in closedset action recognition scenarios, adopting VLM demonstrates great learning effectiveness toward recognizing unseen or unfamiliar categories compared to methods that do
not utilize text embeddings.
Despite the achieved improvements, we believe that relying solely on the semantic information of action labels is far
from enough to fully harness the advantages of the VLMs.
This is because action labels are abstract concepts, and directly mapping a video clip to them may confront a noticeable gap. We propose alleviating the problem by relating the
action labels with some common entity, ranging from static
scenes to moving body parts. For example, “playing golf”
can be associated with people, golf equipment, and grass,
which could provide fine-grained and specific guidance for
visual alignments. We refer to these action-related basic entities as semantic units (SU). In practice, SUs are extracted
from discriminative language descriptions of the whole action set, including body parts, objects, scenes, and motions.
Our basic idea is to use visual features to select related SUs
and then use SUs to guide the decoding of spatiotemporal
video features. Compared with the previous approaches,
utilizing SUs can bring two advantages: (1) The text corresponding to semantic units can better explain which factors
determine an action. (2) The re-usability of semantic units
can greatly alleviate learning difficulty in the zero-shot/fewshot scenario.
Another concern arises when we explore fine-grained
visual-language correlations through SUs: the visual branch
of current VLMs produces frame-level representations,
which may hinder the sensitive correspondences to SUs. To

10170

