This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Extensible and Efficient Proxy for Neural Architecture Search
Yuhong Li1 , Jiajie Li2 , Cong Hao3 , Pan Li3 , Jinjun Xiong2 , Deming Chen1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign1 , University at Buffalo2
Georgia Institute of Technology3 ,
1

{leeyh,dchen}@illinois.edu

2

{jli433,jinjun}@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Efficient or near-zero-cost proxies were proposed recently to address the demanding computational issues of
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) in designing deep neural networks (DNNs), where each candidate architecture
network only requires one iteration of backpropagation.
The values obtained from proxies are used as predictions
of architecture performance for downstream tasks. However, two significant drawbacks hinder the wide adoption
of these efficient proxies: (1) they are not adaptive to various NAS search spaces; and (2) they are not extensible
to multi-modality downstream tasks. To address these two
issues, we first propose an Extensible proxy (Eproxy) that
utilizes self-supervised, few-shot training to achieve nearzero costs. A key component to our Eproxy’s efficiency is
the introduction of a barrier layer with randomly initialized
frozen convolution parameters, which adds non-linearities
to the optimization spaces so that Eproxy can discriminate
the performance of architectures at an early stage. We
further propose a Discrete Proxy Search (DPS) method to
find the optimized training settings for Eproxy with only a
handful of benchmarked architectures on the target tasks.
Our extensive experiments confirm the effectiveness of both
Eproxy and DPS. On the NDS-ImageNet search spaces,
Eproxy+DPS achieves a higher average ranking correlation (Spearman ρ = 0.73) than the previous efficient proxy
(Spearman ρ = 0.56). On the NAS-Bench-Trans-Micro
search spaces with seven tasks, Eproxy+DPS delivers comparable performance with the early stopping method (146×
faster). For the end-to-end task such as DARTS-ImageNet1k, our method delivers better results than NAS performed
on CIFAR-10 while only requiring one GPU hour with a
single batch of CIFAR-10 images. Our code is available at
https://github.com/leeyeehoo/GenNAS-Zero.

3

{callie.hao,panli}@gatech.edu

an increasingly important technique to automate the design
of neural architectures for different tasks [21, 38, 53, 54].
Recent progress in NAS has demonstrated superior results,
surpassing those of human designs [49, 56, 66]. However,
one major hurdle for NAS is its high computation cost. For
example, the seminal work of NAS [66] consumed 2000
GPU hours to obtain a high-quality DNN, a prohibitively
high cost for many researchers. The high computation cost
of NAS can be attributed to three major factors: (1) the
large search space for candidate neural architectures, (2)
the training of various candidate neural architectures, and
(3) the comparison of the solution quality of candidate neural architectures to guide the NAS search process. Subsequent NAS work has proposed various techniques to address the above issues, such as the constraints on the search
space [30], the weight-sharing networks to reduce the training cost [43], and search with synthetic or random labels
[35, 65].
Out of the advancement, the latest efficient proxies
showed that the quality of a neural architecture could be
determined by a proxy metric computed within seconds
without full training. Hence they are near zero-cost (ZC).
The activations of an untrained network were analyzed as a
proxy in NASWOT [41] with promising results. Abdelfattah et al. [1] suggested various proxies for pruning. Zhang
et al. [64] proposed a zero-cost pruning method for differentiable NAS at initialization. ZenNAS [34] quantifies
network expressivity, which has a positive correlation with
model accuracy. ZiCo [31] leverages gradient properties
to improve neural network convergence rate. The efficient
proxies discussed above have, however, two primary drawbacks:
1. The quality of these efficient proxies is inconsistent
across different search spaces. While many proxies
show high correlations in the confined search spaces
of small NAS Benchmarks, their performance can
be vastly different in real-world applications where
the search spaces are orders of magnitude larger than
those of the tabular benchmarks. For instance, Synflow demonstrates a high ranking correlation on NAS-

1. Introduction
As deep neural networks (DNNs) find uses in a wide
range of applications, such as computer vision [23, 27, 46,
48] and natural language processing [11,24,47,50,58], Neural Architecture Search (NAS) [4,37,45,49,66] has become

6199

