This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Group Video Captioning with Efficient Relational Approximation
Wang Lin,* Tao Jin∗ , Ye Wang∗ , Wenwen Pan, Linjun Li, Xize Cheng, and Zhou Zhao†
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{linwanglw,jint zju,yew,wenwenpan,lilinjun21,chengxize,zhaozhou}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Current video captioning efforts most focus on describing a single video while the need for captioning videos in
groups has increased considerably. In this study, we propose a new task, group video captioning, which aims to infer the desired content among a group of target videos and
describe it with another group of related reference videos.
This task requires the model to effectively summarize the
target videos and accurately describe the distinguishing
content compared to the reference videos, and it becomes
more difficult as the video length increases. To solve this
problem, 1) First, we propose an efficient relational approximation (ERA) to identify the shared content among videos
while the complexity is linearly related to the number of
videos. 2) Then, we introduce a contextual feature refinery
with intra-group self-supervision to capture the contextual
information and further refine the common properties. 3) In
addition, we construct two group video captioning datasets
derived from the YouCook2 and the ActivityNet Captions.
The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method on this new task.

1. Introduction
Video captioning aimed to understand the scene and describe it in words has recently attracted extensive research
attention. Currently, mainstream video captioning works
mostly focus on describing individual videos [27, 8, 17, 34].
However, since the amount of online videos has been growing at an exponential rate, the need for captioning the video
groups has increased considerably like titling a categorized
video folder and query suggestions for text-based video retrieval. Although [16] has studied group image captioning
which boosts many real-world applications, there is no existing work in the literature that addresses the task of groupbased video captioning.
Thus, we are inspired by the group image captioning[16]
and propose the novel problem of group video caption:
*
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author

Figure 1. An example of context-aware group video captioning.
We aim to generate a description chop the onion that best describes
the target group (shown in the green area) with the contextual information from the reference group (shown in the yellow area).

given a group of target videos and a group of reference
videos, to generate a description that simultaneously identifies both important generalities arising in target videos, as
well as, particularities captured from reference videos. A
promising application scenario is shown in Figure 1, the
search engine returns a group of topically close videos with
the query of the onions and the user indicates his/her interest in some of the videos (i.e. the target group shown in
green area). With the remaining videos (i.e. the reference
group shown in yellow area), we can infer the user’s hidden
preferences among multiple events in the target videos and
suggest a refined search query chop the onions accordingly.
Compared to the conventional setting of single-based
video captioning, the challenges of our group-based video
captioning are two-fold: 1) identifying which temporal features correspond to the shared content for videos in the
group, and 2) distinguishing the shared content of target
videos from all videos in the reference group, i.e. grouplevel distinctiveness.
For identifying the shared content, the method of group
image captioning is not suitable for video since the dispar-

15281

