This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RIGID: Recurrent GAN Inversion and Editing of Real Face Videos
Yangyang Xu1 , Shengfeng He2 , Kwan-Yee K. Wong1 , and Ping Luo1,3 *
1
Deapartment of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong
2
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory

Inversion
+Chubby

(a) Original

(b) IGCI / 120,000s

(c) Latent-T. / 49.2s

(d) STIT / 1,600s

(e) TCSVE / 3,400s

(f) RIGID / 54.5s

Figure 1: Comparisons of video inversion and editing with existing methods. Number in each column denotes the average
editing time over 100 frames. Our RIGID achieves temporal coherent inversion and editing performances with much less time
cost. s. Please refer to the arXiv version to watch this figure as a video clip.

Abstract
GAN inversion is indispensable for applying the powerful
editability of GAN to real images. However, existing methods
invert video frames individually often leading to undesired
inconsistent results over time. In this paper, we propose a
unified recurrent framework, named Recurrent vIdeo GAN
Inversion and eDiting (RIGID), to explicitly and simultaneously enforce temporally coherent GAN inversion and facial
editing of real videos. Our approach models the temporal
relations between current and previous frames from three aspects. To enable a faithful real video reconstruction, we first
maximize the inversion fidelity and consistency by learning
a temporal compensated latent code. Second, we observe
incoherent noises lie in the high-frequency domain that can
be disentangled from the latent space. Third, to remove the
inconsistency after attribute manipulation, we propose an
in-between frame composition constraint such that the arbitrary frame must be a direct composite of its neighboring
* Corresponding author: pingluo@hku.hk.

frames. Our unified framework learns the inherent coherence
between input frames in an end-to-end manner, and therefore it is agnostic to a specific attribute and can be applied
to arbitrary editing of the same video without re-training.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that RIGID outperforms
state-of-the-art methods qualitatively and quantitatively in
both inversion and editing tasks. The deliverables can be
found in https://cnnlstm.github.io/RIGID.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have demonstrated powerful generative ability in synthesizing highquality faces from a latent code [9, 11, 12, 47]. It is evidenced that the latent space of a well-trained GAN is semantically organized, and shifting the latent code along with a
specific direction results in the manipulation of a corresponding attribute [23, 24, 5, 19, 45, 32]. Hence, many works
migrate this power to real face processing by inverting a real
face image to a latent code [49, 16, 39, 48, 40, 38]. Although
13691

