This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D REAMWALKER: Mental Planning for Continuous Vision-Language Navigation
Hanqing Wang1, 2
1

Beijing Institute of Technology
4

Wei Liang1,4
2

∗

Luc Van Gool2

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich

3

Wenguan Wang3*

ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University

Yangtze Delta Region Academy of Beijing Institute of Technology, Jiaxing
https://github.com/hanqingwangai/Dreamwalker

Abstract
VLN-CE is a recently released embodied task, where AI
agents need to navigate a freely traversable environment to
reach a distant target location, given language instructions.
It poses great challenges due to the huge space of possible
strategies. Driven by the belief that the ability to anticipate
the consequences of future actions is crucial for the emergence of intelligent and interpretable planning behavior, we
propose D REAMWALKER — a world model based VLN-CE
agent. The world model is built to summarize the visual, topological, and dynamic properties of the complicated continuous environment into a discrete, structured, and compact
representation. D REAMWALKER can simulate and evaluate
possible plans entirely in such internal abstract world, before executing costly actions. As opposed to existing modelfree VLN-CE agents simply making greedy decisions in the
real world, which easily results in shortsighted behaviors,
D REAMWALKER is able to make strategic planning through
large amounts of “mental experiments.” Moreover, the imagined future scenarios reﬂect our agent’s intention, making
its decision-making process more transparent. Extensive experiments and ablation studies on VLN-CE dataset conﬁrm
the effectiveness of the proposed approach and outline fruitful directions for future work.

1. Introduction
For decades, the AI community has strived to develop intelligent robots that can understand human instructions and
carry them out. As a small step towards this long-held goal,
vision-language navigation (VLN) [6] — the task of entailing autonomous agents to navigate in never-before-seen 3D
environments with language instructions — gained growing
attention. In the standard VLN setting, agent’s movement
is constrained to a small set of pre-deﬁned sparse locations.
As pointed out by [45], such over-simpliﬁed, discrete task
setup involves many unrealistic assumptions such as known
* Corresponding authors.

maR@
p@H]M
vUmUpMK
w@yiaU_p

9al]K!aKM]
U^@SU_S

U^@SU_MK
w@yiaU_p

sofa
table

continuous
environment
Instruction: Head out and turn left. Pass a fireplace and continue
towards the sofa. Enter the room and stop when seeing a table.

Figure 1: In partially observable, continuous VLN environments,
D REAMWALKER maps its surrounding into a discrete and structured
abstraction. In this internal world, it is able to conduct mental planning (
) by imagining future scenarios, before taking real action.

topology, perfect localization, and deterministic transition.
To better reﬂect the challenges of real world navigation,
Krantz et al.[45] update the discrete VLN to a continuous version – VLN-CE (VLN in continuous environments), where
the agent is free to traverse any unobstructed location with
low-level actions. VLN-CE proved much more challenging
than its discrete counterpart: the performance gap between
the state-of-the-arts in the two settings is more than 20%, in
terms of episode success rate. The main challenge posed by
VLN-CE lies in the demand of strategic planning in continuous environments with low-level actions.
As a direct response, we developed a world model based
VLN-CE agent, called D REAMWALKER. Previous studies in
cognitive science [17, 34, 35] suggest that humans build a
mental model of the local surrounding, based on our limited

10873

