This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GraphAlign: Enhancing Accurate Feature Alignment by Graph matching for
Multi-Modal 3D Object Detection
Ziying Song1 , Haiyue Wei2 , Lin Bai1 , Lei Yang3 , Caiyan Jia1 *
School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
School of Information Science and Engineering, Hebei University of Science and Technology
3
State Key Laboratory of Automotive Safety and Energy, Tsinghua University
1

{songziying, 22120349, cyjia}@bjtu.edu.cn
ezio59624@gmail.com yanglei20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
3D object detection, a vital computer vision task in autonomous driving, relies on deep learning for accurately
* Corresponding author

Project

LiDAR and cameras are complementary sensors for 3D
object detection in autonomous driving. However, it is challenging to explore the unnatural interaction between point
clouds and images, and the critical factor is how to conduct
feature alignment of heterogeneous modalities. Currently,
many methods achieve feature alignment by projection calibration only, without considering the problem of coordinate conversion accuracy errors between sensors, leading to sub-optimal performance. In this paper, we present
GraphAlign, a more accurate feature alignment strategy for
3D object detection by graph matching. Specifically, we
fuse image features from a semantic segmentation encoder
in the image branch and point cloud features from a 3D
Sparse CNN in the LiDAR branch. To save computation, we
construct the nearest neighbor relationship by calculating
Euclidean distance within the subspaces that are divided
into the point cloud features. Through the projection calibration between the image and point cloud, we project the
nearest neighbors of point cloud features onto the image
features. Then by matching the nearest neighbors with a
single point cloud to multiple images, we search for a more
appropriate feature alignment. In addition, we provide a
self-attention module to enhance the weights of significant
relations to fine-tune the feature alignment between heterogeneous modalities. Extensive experiments on nuScenes
benchmark demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of
our GraphAlign.

3D Feature

Concat

3D Feature

Q

Cross
Attention

3D Feature

Graph

KV

Max
Self
Attention

Index

2D Feature
2D Feature
(a) Projection-based (b) Attention-based

2D Feature
(c) GraphAlign

Figure 1. Comparison of feature alignment strategies: (a)
Projection-based quickly establishes the relationship between
modal features but may suffer from misalignment due to sensor error. (b) Attention-based preserves semantic information by learning alignment but has a high computational cost. (c) Our proposed GraphAlign uses graph-based feature alignment to match
more plausible alignments between modalities with reduced computation and improved accuracy.

identifying and locating objects [8, 36, 43, 50, 52, 65–67] in
3D space [34, 35, 58, 60, 86]. With the availability of diverse sensor data, such as cameras and LiDAR, 3D object
detection research has made significant progress. However,
challenges and difficulties remain due to the inherent limitations of each modality. While LiDAR point cloud provides
accurate depth information, it lacks semantic information.
Conversely, camera images contain semantic information
but lack depth information [34,58]. Therefore, multi-modal
3D object detection has been proposed to leverage the complementary advantages of both modalities to improve detection performance.
Despite the potential of multi-modal 3D object detection,
the effective fusion of heterogeneous modal features has not
been fully explored. In this work, we mainly attribute the
current difficulties of training multi-modal detectors to two

3358

