This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Regularized Mask Tuning: Uncovering Hidden Knowledge
in Pre-trained Vision-Language Models
Kecheng Zheng†,1,2 Wei Wu†,4 Ruili Feng4 Kai Zhu4 Jiawei Liu4
Deli Zhao3 Zheng-Jun Zha4 Wei Chen1 Yujun Shen2
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University 2 Ant Group 3 Alibaba Group

4

1. Introduction
The advent of large-scale pre-trained vision-language
models (VLMs) [30] has ushered in a new era of incorporating language features to supervise the image encoder
for a wide range of downstream visual tasks, such as fewshot learning [47] and open-world detection [8]. Thanks
to the multimodal architecture and millions of text-image
pairs from the web, VLMs exhibit exceptional zero-shot
transferability in downstream tasks. To further enhance
† indicates equal contribution.

Image Encoder
(a) Prompt Tuning

“a photo of a
[CLASS]”

Text Encoder
Image Encoder

Extra
Architecture

(b) Adapter Tuning
“a photo of a
[CLASS]”

Coop

+R-AMT

7.45 FPS

7.45 FPS

79.90%

83.16%
(+3.26%)

TipAdapter

+R-AMT

51.81 FPS 51.81 FPS

81.24%

84.37%
(+3.13%)

R-AMT

Text Encoder
Image Encoder

Accuracy Inference
Time

Learnable Image

Text Encoder

Key
Para.

Mask
(c) Regularized Mask Tuning - Ours

Inference
Time

Prompt tuning and adapter tuning have shown great potential in transferring pre-trained vision-language models
(VLMs) to various downstream tasks. In this work, we
design a new type of tuning method, termed as regularized
mask tuning, which masks the network parameters through
a learnable selection. Inspired by neural pathways, we
argue that the knowledge required by a downstream task
already exists in the pre-trained weights but just gets
concealed in the upstream pre-training stage. To bring the
useful knowledge back into light, we first identify a set of
parameters that are important to a given downstream task,
then attach a binary mask to each parameter, and finally
optimize these masks on the downstream data with the
parameters frozen. When updating the mask, we introduce a
novel gradient dropout strategy to regularize the parameter
selection, in order to prevent the model from forgetting old
knowledge and overfitting the downstream data. Experimental results on 11 datasets demonstrate the consistent
superiority of our method over previous alternatives. It is
noteworthy that we manage to deliver 18.73% performance
improvement compared to the zero-shot CLIP via masking
an average of only 2.56% parameters. Furthermore, our
method is synergistic with most existing parameter-efficient
tuning methods and can boost the performance on top of
them. Project page can be found here.

[CLASS]

62.11 FPS

Accuracy

Learnable Text

Accuracy Inference
Time

Abstract

USTC

83.96%

Figure 1. Concept diagrams of (a) prompt tuning [47, 39], (b)
adapter tuning [12, 43], and (c) our regularized mask tuning. The
tables on the right of (a)(b) demonstrate the inference time and
accuracy of the existing tuning method before and after combining
with our regularized mask tuning method (R-AMT). The RAMT significantly boosts their performance without introducing
additional inference time. “Key Para.” refers to the identified
key parameters (e.g., multi-head self-attetnion). Flames and
snowflakes refer to learnable and frozen parameters, respectively.

the transferability of VLMs, researchers have proposed
efficient tuning methods, such as adapter tuning [12, 43] or
prompt tuning [47, 39, 24]. These techniques incorporate
a small number of task-specific parameters and train them
solely on the downstream task, thus significantly improving
the performance and reducing computational requirements.
The essence of efficient tuning methods lies in two
fundamental components, i.e. leveraging the well-learned
knowledge structure of VLMs and efficiently exploring the
task-specific knowledge given few-shot data. Despite its
potential, however, most existing efficient transfer learning approaches direct utilize all parameters of pre-trained
VLMs and do not consider further unleashing the potential
11663

