This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LaRS: A Diverse Panoptic Maritime Obstacle Detection Dataset and Benchmark
Lojze Žust, Janez Perš, Matej Kristan
University of Ljubljana
{lojze.zust,matej.kristan}@fri.uni-lj.si, janez.pers@fe.uni-lj.si

sky
static obstacles
boat #7
boat #5

boat #1

buoy #1 boat #6

buoy #2

boat #4
boat #2
boat #3

water

Figure 1: LaRS features diverse and challenging USV-centric scenes with per-pixel panoptic annotations (right).

Abstract
The progress in maritime obstacle detection is hindered
by the lack of a diverse dataset that adequately captures the
complexity of general maritime environments. We present
the first maritime panoptic obstacle detection benchmark
LaRS, featuring scenes from Lakes, Rivers and Seas. Our
major contribution is the new dataset, which boasts the
largest diversity in recording locations, scene types, obstacle classes, and acquisition conditions among the related
datasets. LaRS is composed of over 4000 per-pixel labeled
key frames with nine preceding frames to allow utilization
of the temporal texture, amounting to over 40k frames. Each
key frame is annotated with 8 thing, 3 stuff classes and
19 global scene attributes. We report the results of 27 semantic and panoptic segmentation methods, along with several performance insights and future research directions.
To enable objective evaluation, we have implemented an
online evaluation server. The LaRS dataset, evaluation
toolkit and benchmark are publicly available at: https:
//lojzezust.github.io/lars-dataset

1. Introduction
The maritime industry is undergoing a fundamental
transformation. With over 90% of goods being moved over
water, substantial efforts are being invested in development
of autonomous unmanned surface vessels (USV) [19, 15].
These autonomous boats serve a wide range of purposes,
ranging from automated inspection, environmental monitoring, waste cleanup, cargo shipping, to civilian transporta-

tion. The autonomy of USVs critically depends on obstacle
detection capability for timely collision avoidance. Similarly to the automotive domain [18, 21], cameras have been
extensively explored for this task [26, 7, 36, 3, 35, 2].
There are several challenges associated with maritime
obstacle detection. The appearance of the navigable surface (water) is dynamic and reflects the environment, often
containing strong mirroring and sun glitter (Figure 1). Although modern detectors [45, 46, 8] can accurately detect
common dynamic obstacles such as ships and boats, the appearance of obstacles such as buoys, people and animals
can vary significantly, bringing the task closer to anomaly
detection [30, 9]. Furthermore, background static obstacles,
such as shorelines and piers, cannot be addressed by these
methods.
The currently dominant approach [26, 2] instead employs semantic segmentation to decompose the scene into
three semantic classes (water, obstacles and sky), which
jointly address static and dynamic obstacles. Nevertheless,
the recent detection benchmark [5] indicates that segmentation methods could benefit from the detection approach.
A natural approach that combines these two principles is
panoptic segmentation [24], which has proven highly effective in the related field of autonomous ground vehicles [18, 21, 14, 55]. Unfortunately, panoptic segmentation
has not been fully explored for maritime perception, primarily due to the lack of a diverse, publicly available, curated
panoptic dataset.
Several maritime evaluation [37, 3, 5] and training [4,
15] datasets have been proposed, as shown in Table 1. However, a common drawback of the major evaluation datasets

20304

