This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Measuring Asymmetric Gradient Discrepancy in Parallel Continual Learning
Fan Lyu, Qing Sun, Fanhua Shang, Liang Wan, Wei Feng*
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
{fanlyu, sssunqing, fhshang, lwan}@tju.edu.cn, wfeng@ieee.org

Abstract
In Parallel Continual Learning (PCL), the parallel multiple tasks start and end training unpredictably, thus suffering
from both training conflict and catastrophic forgetting issues.
The two issues are raised because the gradients from parallel
tasks differ in directions and magnitudes. Thus, in this paper,
we formulate the PCL into a minimum distance optimization
problem among gradients and propose an explicit Asymmetric Gradient Distance (AGD) to evaluate the gradient discrepancy in PCL. AGD considers both gradient magnitude
ratios and directions, and has a tolerance when updating
with a small gradient of inverse direction, which reduces
the imbalanced influence of gradients on parallel task training. Moreover, we present a novel Maximum Discrepancy
Optimization (MaxDO) strategy to minimize the maximum
discrepancy among multiple gradients. Solving by MaxDO
with AGD, parallel training reduces the influence of the
training conflict and suppresses the catastrophic forgetting
of finished tasks. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of our approach on three image recognition datasets
in task-incremental and class-incremental PCL. Our code is
available at https://github.com/fanlyu/maxdo.

1. Introduction
Continual Learning (CL) [25, 27, 31, 43], aims to continuously learn new knowledge from a sequence of tasks with
non-overlapping data streams over a lifelong time. In the era
of Internet of Things, people are using many smart devices,
where multi-source data and tasks would be accessed at any
time. A CL system should respond to parallel data streams
from multiple devices. We study Parallel Continual Learning (PCL), as shown in Fig. 1, where an unfixed number of
tasks are trained in a parallel way at any time. Specifically,
according to the access time of each task, PCL builds an
adaptive number of parallel data pipes, thus enabling instant
response to new-coming tasks without pending.
* Corresponding author.

Due to the parallel data streams from different tasks, PCL
suffers from not only the catastrophic forgetting but the training conflict among parallel tasks. Most existing methods in
CL are proposed to tackle the catastrophic forgetting [19, 25],
including regularization-based [25, 8, 16, 51, 1], rehearsalbased [31, 9, 21, 4, 41, 36], and architecture-based [33, 49,
39, 38] methods. In PCL, the training processes of different tasks are diverse, i.e., each task starts and ends training
unpredictably (see Fig. 1). Thereby the gradient from different task differs in direction and magnitude [50] and may be
neutralized. The gradient discrepancies lead to catastrophic
forgetting and training conflict issues, which may fail the
learning of some tasks. At any time in PCL, therefore, we
present that the problem can be formulated to find an optimal
gradient in a minimum distance multi-objective optimization,
where each objective is to minimize the distance to a target
gradient. In general, the distance metric is proportional to
the effect of the optimal gradient on the corresponding task.
In most situations, the mentioned distance metric D between gradients is set to symmetric intuitively, such as the
Euclidean distance and cosine distance. In other words, we
usually have D(x, y) = D(y, x) for any x and y. However,
the gradient influence is imbalanced among parallel tasks in
the gradient descent. For example, in Fig. 1, at the marked
time, we have three gradients with diverse directions and
magnitudes, and updating with any of them provides different influences to the other two. In the minimum distance
problem, the optimal solution should have the minimum
negative influence on all parallel tasks, but using symmetric
metrics means the influences are optimized indistinguishably
at the same time. Due to the fact that the gradients are with
wide differences, the solution may have large biases, which
would get the near-fitting task out of its local minimum but
has less impact on a new-coming task.
To measure the gradient discrepancy, we hold the opinion
that the distance metric in the min-distance problem should
be asymmetric. First, though the metric is bound up with
both the gradient magnitude and direction, the influences on
model training from gradients should be asymmetric, where
the model should have more tolerance to small gradients
even if they indicate an inverse direction. Second, because

11411

