This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continual Segment: Towards a Single, Unified and Non-forgetting Continual
Segmentation Model of 143 Whole-body Organs in CT Scans
Zhanghexuan Ji1,2† Dazhou Guo1† Puyang Wang1 Ke Yan1,3 Le Lu1 Minfeng Xu1,3
Qifeng Wang4 Jia Ge5 Mingchen Gao2 Xianghua Ye5∗ Dakai Jin1∗
1

DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 2 University at Buffalo 3 Hupan Lab, 310023, Hangzhou, China
4
Sichuan Cancer Hospital 5 The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University

Abstract
Deep learning empowers the mainstream medical image segmentation methods. Nevertheless, current deep segmentation approaches are not capable of efficiently and effectively adapting and updating the trained models when
new segmentation classes are incrementally added. In the
real clinical environment, it can be preferred that segmentation models could be dynamically extended to segment new
organs/tumors without the (re-)access to previous training
datasets due to obstacles of patient privacy and data storage. This process can be viewed as a continual semantic
segmentation (CSS) problem, being understudied for multiorgan segmentation. In this work, we propose a new architectural CSS learning framework to learn a single deep segmentation model for segmenting a total of 143 whole-body
organs. Using the encoder/decoder network structure, we
demonstrate that a continually trained then frozen encoder
coupled with incrementally-added decoders can extract sufficiently representative image features for new classes to
be subsequently and validly segmented, while avoiding the
catastrophic forgetting in CSS. To maintain a single network
model complexity, each decoder is progressively pruned using neural architecture search and teacher-student based
knowledge distillation. Finally, we propose a body-part and
anomaly-aware output merging module to combine organ
predictions originating from different decoders and incorporate both healthy and pathological organs appearing in
different datasets. Trained and validated on 3D CT scans of
2500+ patients from four datasets, our single network can
segment a total of 143 whole-body organs with very high
accuracy, closely reaching the upper bound performance
level by training four separate segmentation models (i.e.,
one model per dataset/task).

† ZJ and DG contribute equally. ∗ For correspondence, please contact
XY (hye1982@zju.edu.cn) and DJ (dakai.jin@alibaba-inc.com).

Figure 1. Illustration of the continual multi-organ segmentation.
At each continual learning step, only the previously trained model
is available (green arrow). Previous datasets are not accessible. We
allow organs from different datasets to have overlaps, and these
datasets may also contain diseased organs (with tumors).

1. Introduction
Multi-organ segmentation has been extensively studied
in medical imaging because of its core importance for
many downstream tasks, such as quantitative disease analysis [27, 17], computer-aided diagnosis [51, 7], and cancer radiotherapy planning [31, 67, 29]. With the emergence of many dedicated labeled organ datasets [2] and
the fast developments in deep learning segmentation techniques [26], deep segmentation networks trained on specific datasets achieve comparable performance with human
observers [59, 67, 56]. However, this setup can have serious limitations in practical deployment for clinical applications. These trained models are pre-trained to segment
a fixed number of organs, while in real clinical practice,
it is desirable that segmentation models can be dynamically extended to enable segmenting new organs without the
(re-)access to previous training datasets or without training
from scratch. In this way, patient privacy and data storage
issues can be solved, and model development and deployment can be much more efficient. This clinically preferred

21140

