This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Theory of Topological Derivatives for Inverse Rendering of Geometry
Ishit Mehta

Manmohan Chandraker

Ravi Ramamoorthi

University of California San Diego
Initial Previous Ours

Abstract
We introduce a theoretical framework for differentiable
surface evolution that allows discrete topology changes
through the use of topological derivatives for variational
optimization of image functionals. While prior methods for
inverse rendering of geometry rely on silhouette gradients
for topology changes, such signals are sparse. In contrast,
our theory derives topological derivatives that relate the introduction of vanishing holes and phases to changes in image
intensity. As a result, we enable differentiable shape perturbations in the form of hole or phase nucleation. We validate
the proposed theory with optimization of closed curves in
2D and surfaces in 3D to lend insights into limitations of
current methods and enable improved applications such as
image vectorization, vector-graphics generation from text
prompts, single-image reconstruction of shape ambigrams
and multiview 3D reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Recovering geometry from images is a central theme for
several problems in vision and graphics, where a common
approach is to derive the differential of the rendering functional. Depending on the type of surface representation used,
such as Bézier paths [25], triangle meshes [10, 24] or levelsets [12], corresponding gradient flow equations are derived.
These works formulate image differentials as shape derivatives, which we posit to be restrictive for inverse problems,
since deformations induced by shape derivatives (SD) are
limited to surface boundaries. This may lead to local minima when recovering geometry with high-genus topology.
In Figure 1 we illustrate two inverse problems where shape
derivatives do not suffice to recover the optimal shape. In
such cases the optimization is required to make updates far
away from the boundary by (a) nucleating additional volume
in the exterior, and (b) perforating the interior of the shape.
Our work theoretically characterizes such shape perturbations in the form of topological derivatives (TD) for inverse
rendering.
We derive TDs following the definition proposed by

419

(a)

Target

Initial Previous Ours

Target

(b)

Figure 1. Pathologies of shape derivatives. Previous work on
inverse surface reconstruction relies on shape derivatives which are
inadequate for instances when (a) the target geometry is far from
the initialization, and when (b) target has a hole in the interior. We
resolve these failure cases with topological derivatives.

Sokolowski and Zochowski [44]. In the case of planar
curves, vanishing balls are introduced in their interior or
exterior. In the limit, the TD is estimated as the difference
in the image functionals for the perturbed and unperturbed
shapes. The resulting gradient updates can prompt hole and
phase nucleation in regions of high-error (see Figure 1). For
closed surfaces in 3D, we introduce TDs with respect to
conic perturbations through the interior of the visible shape.
We observe that visibility terms in SDs are evaluated only
on the apparent contours of the visible shape. In contrast,
gradient flows using TDs can encourage visibility changes in
the interior, resulting in a more robust and accurate recovery.
Informed by recent successes in inverse rendering [2, 30,
46, 47, 49], we use level-sets [38] for surface representation. We build on the extensive literature on variational
level-sets [11, 19, 45, 52] for surface reconstruction. Our
approach differs from the more recent methods on differentiable rasterization [25] and rendering [2, 17, 24, 46] that
use differential calculus to derive geometry gradients. The
variational framework lends us a common structure to analyze the motion of continuous surfaces in both 2D and 3D.
It also provides a natural way to extend shape derivatives
to the formulation for topological derivatives. Additionally,
using this approach, we are able to draw theoretical insights
across literature spanning 3D reconstruction [6, 12], topology optimization [44], differentiable vector graphics [25]
and differentiable rendering [17, 22, 24, 41].
We structure this work as three theoretical results interspersed with empirical observations for closed curves in 2D
(§ 4) and surfaces in 3D (§ 5). Previous work on differentiable rasterization [25] proposes geometry gradients for

