This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting the Parameter Efficiency of Adapters from the Perspective of
Precision Redundancy
Shibo Jie
Haoqing Wang
Zhi-Hong Deng*
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
{parsley,wanghaoqing,zhdeng}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Large pre-trained vision models have demonstrated exceptional performance on various visual tasks via finetuning on task-specific data. In the traditional fine-tuning
paradigm, the entire model is updated for each downstream
task, resulting in the need to store a fine-tuned model sepa* Corresponding Author.

Full Fine-Tuning
VPT
SSF
Adapter-P
AdaptFormer
LoRA
Compacter
FacT
Bi-AdaptFormer (Ours)
Bi-LoRA (Ours)

76

Avg. Acc. (%)

Current state-of-the-art results in computer vision depend in part on fine-tuning large pre-trained vision models. However, with the exponential growth of model sizes,
the conventional full fine-tuning, which needs to store a
individual network copy for each tasks, leads to increasingly huge storage and transmission overhead. Adapterbased Parameter-Efficient Tuning (PET) methods address
this challenge by tuning lightweight adapters inserted into
the frozen pre-trained models. In this paper, we investigate how to make adapters even more efficient, reaching
a new minimum size required to store a task-specific finetuned network. Inspired by the observation that the parameters of adapters converge at flat local minima, we find that
adapters are resistant to noise in parameter space, which
means they are also resistant to low numerical precision. To
train low-precision adapters, we propose a computationalefficient quantization method which minimizes the quantization error. Through extensive experiments, we find that
low-precision adapters exhibit minimal performance degradation, and even 1-bit precision is sufficient for adapters.
The experimental results demonstrate that 1-bit adapters
outperform all other PET methods on both the VTAB-1K
benchmark and few-shot FGVC tasks, while requiring the
smallest storage size. Our findings show, for the first time,
the significant potential of quantization techniques in PET,
providing a general solution to enhance the parameter efficiency of adapter-based PET methods. Code: https:
//github.com/JieShibo/PETL-ViT

Results on VTAB-1K

78

74
72

2.4 KB

70
68

10 2

10 1

100

101

Storage size per task (MB)

102

Figure 1. Average accuracy vs. size of trainable parameters
in backbones (log scale) on VTAB-1K benchmark. Our lowprecision adapter-based methods outperform other baselines.

rately for each task. However, with the remarkable scalability of modern vision models, the size of pre-trained vision
models is increasing exponentially to achieve superior performance. As a result, the storage cost of the full fine-tuning
paradigm becomes prohibitive in multi-task scenarios.
Parameter-Efficient Tuning (PET) has recently emerged
as a promising approach for fine-tuning a limited number
of parameters while attaining performance comparable to
full fine-tuning on downstream tasks. Adapter-based methods [5, 18, 19, 23, 24, 38, 43, 45] are among the techniques
proposed for PET and have gained considerable attention
due to their effectiveness. Adapters are typically small
subnetworks with bottleneck architecture comprising two
fully-connected (FC) layers inserted into pre-trained models. Adapter-based methods freeze pre-trained weights and
update only the adapters, whose parameter efficiency is
achieved through their small hidden dimension.
Although the bottleneck adapters have been already
lightweight (e.g., 0.5 MB/task for ViT-B [9]), the storage
costs remain considerable when dealing with a huge number of tasks (e.g., platform that provides customized models
for millions of users). To address this issue, recent stud-

17217

