This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PhaseMP: Robust 3D Pose Estimation via Phase-conditioned Human Motion
Prior
Mingyi Shi
The University of Hong Kong

Sebastian Starke
Meta

Yuting Ye
Meta

myshi@cs.hku.hk

sebastian.starke@mail.de

yuting.ye@gmail.com

𝐿𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 𝑏𝑜𝑑𝑦 𝑖𝑛𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒

Taku Komura
The University of Hong Kong

Jungdam Won*
Seoul National University

taku@cs.hku.hk

jungdam@imo.snu.ac.kr

𝑆𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑠𝑒 𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑟 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎

𝑁𝑜𝑖𝑠y 𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑟 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎

Motion from Videos

Motion in betweenning

Figure 1. Our novel human motion prior PhaseMP enables us to further constrain the predictions in both nominal and challenging
scenarios, resulting in more natural and stable movements. The figure demonstrates the generated motions in several challenging scenarios,
which involve generation from incomplete observation in spatial or temporal domain (left), as well as generation from raw videos where
heavy occlusion
exists (right).
Motion from Videos

Abstract
We present a novel motion prior, called PhaseMP, modeling a probability distribution on pose transitions conditioned by a frequency domain feature extracted from a
periodic autoencoder. The phase feature further enforces
the pose transitions to be unidirectional (i.e. no backward
movement in time), from which more stable and natural motions can be generated. Specifically, our motion prior can
be useful for accurately estimating 3D human motions in the
presence of challenging input data, including long periods
of spatial and temporal occlusion, as well as noisy sensor
measurements. Through a comprehensive evaluation, we
demonstrate the efficacy of our novel motion prior, showcasing its superiority over existing state-of-the-art methods
by a significant margin across various applications, including video-to-motion and motion estimation from sparse sensor data, and etc.
* Corresponding Author

1. Introduction

Motion from Videos

Estimating human poses and motions from real-world
observations is a fundamental problem in computer vision with numerous potential applications, including human motion understanding, surveillance, motion capture,
and human-computer interaction. Recently, there have been
significant improvements in 3D human pose/motion estimation from 2D image/video via deep learning; specifically by deploying a data-driven system trained on a paired
dataset [23, 31] to learn a mapping from 2D input images
to 3D body motions [42, 47, 25, 57, 66]. However, these
algorithms still struggle in challenging scenarios given unconstrained real-world data. For example, highly dynamic
movements can cause motion blurs, and the blurry appearance of the body and the environment can lead to failures
in 2D key-point detection, which is a preprocessing step
widely used in many 3D pose estimation algorithms. Moreover, occlusions or a restricted camera field-of-view can result in partial or complete lack of pose information. Al-

14725

