This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Multi-modal Model Performance with Adaptive Gradient Modulation
Hong Li1,7,∗ Xingyu Li2, * Pengbo Hu3 Yinuo Lei1,7 Chunxiao Li6 Yi Zhou3,4,5, †
1
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
2
Shanghai Center for Brain Science and Brain-Inspired Technology, Shanghai, China
3
SIST, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
4
NEL-BITA, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
5
Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition
(University of Science and Technology of China), Ministry of Education
6
School of Management, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
7
Shanghai Innovation Center for Processor Technologies
{lihong1, leiyn2022}@shanghaitech.edu.cn xyli1905@bsbii.cn
pbhu@mail.ustc.edu.cn {chunxiao.li, yi zhou}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
While the field of multi-modal learning keeps growing
fast, the deficiency of the standard joint training paradigm
has become clear through recent studies. They attribute the
sub-optimal performance of the jointly trained model to the
modality competition phenomenon. Existing works attempt
to improve the jointly trained model by modulating the
training process. Despite their effectiveness, those methods can only apply to late fusion models. More importantly,
the mechanism of the modality competition remains unexplored. In this paper, we first propose an adaptive gradient
modulation method that can boost the performance of multimodal models with various fusion strategies. Extensive experiments show that our method surpasses all existing modulation methods. Furthermore, to have a quantitative understanding of the modality competition and the mechanism
behind the effectiveness of our modulation method, we introduce a novel metric to measure the competition strength.
This metric is built on the mono-modal concept, a function
that is designed to represent the competition-less state of
a modality. Through systematic investigation, our results
confirm the intuition that the modulation encourages the
model to rely on the more informative modality. In addition, we find that the jointly trained model typically has a
preferred modality on which the competition is weaker than
other modalities. However, this preferred modality need not
dominate others. Our code will be available at https:
//github.com/lihong2303/AGM_ICCV2023.
* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author: Yi Zhou.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen tremendous progress in deep
multi-modal learning. Despite these advances, integrating
information from multiple modalities remains challenging.
Many efforts have been made to design sophisticated fusion methods for better performance. However, adding additional modalities only slightly improves accuracy in some
multi-modal tasks. For example, trained on the CMUMOSEI [5] dataset, the accuracy of the text-based singlemodal model is only about 1% point lower than that of the
multi-modal model based on both text and audio modalities.
Similar phenomena have also been observed across a wide
variety of multi-modal datasets [25, 4].
Such an inefficiency in exploiting and integrating information from multiple modalities presents a great challenge
to the multi-modal learning field. It is commonly believed
that this inefficiency is a consequence of the existence of
the dominant modality, which prevents the model from fully
exploiting the other relatively weak modalities [18, 14]. Recent studies [1, 15, 10] theoretically investigate the training
process of late fusion models and explain the production of
the dominant modality with the concept of modality competition. In addition to the theoretical studies, there is a
group of empirical works that attempts to develop methods
to modulate the training of a multi-modal model and balance the learning of different modalities and, thus, achieve
better performance. To our best knowledge, existing modulation methods are confined to late fusion models which
greatly limits their application. More importantly, little effort has been paid to the study of the mechanism behind the
effectiveness of those modulation methods.

22214

