This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Strip-MLP: Efficient Token Interaction for Vision MLP
Guiping Cao1,2 Shengda Luo1 Wenjian Huang1 Xiangyuan Lan2,∗
Dongmei Jiang2 Yaowei Wang2 Jianguo Zhang1,2, *
1
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
12131099@mail.sustech.edu.cn, {luosd, huangwj, zhangjg}@sustech.edu.cn,
{lanxy, jiangdm, wangyw}@pcl.ac.cn

H W
  8C
8 8
H W
  4C
4 4

Abstract
Token interaction operation is one of the core modules in
MLP-based models to exchange and aggregate information
between different spatial locations. However, the power of
4:H×W
token interaction on the spatial dimension is highly Stage
depenStage
3:H×W
dent on the spatial resolution of the feature maps, which
Stagelay2:H×W
limits the model’s expressive ability, especially in deep
ers where the feature are down-sampled to a small Stage
spatial
1:
size. To address this issue, we present a novel method called
Strip-MLP to enrich the token interaction power in three
ways. Firstly, we introduce a new MLP paradigm called
Strip MLP layer that allows the token to interact with other
tokens in a cross-strip manner, enabling the tokens in a row
(or column) to contribute to the information aggregations
in adjacent but different strips of rows (or columns). Secondly, a Cascade Group Strip Mixing Module (CGSMM) is
proposed to overcome the performance degradation caused
by small spatial feature size. The module allows tokens
to interact more effectively in the manners of within-patch
and cross-patch, which is independent to the feature spatial
size. Finally, based on the Strip MLP layer, we propose a
novel Local Strip Mixing Module (LSMM) to boost the token interaction power in the local region. Extensive experiments demonstrate that Strip-MLP significantly improves
the performance of MLP-based models on small datasets
and obtains comparable or even better results on ImageNet. In particular, Strip-MLP models achieve higher average Top-1 accuracy than existing MLP-based models by
+2.44% on Caltech-101 and +2.16% on CIFAR-100. The
source codes will be available at https://github.com/MedProcess/Strip MLP.

1. Introduction
In computer vision, Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) are one of the most popular network backbones,
which have made a series of breakthroughs [8]. Inspired by
* Corresponding author.

H W
  2C
2 2

...

H W  C

(a) Down-sampled image.

(b) Token mixing of MLP layer.

Figure 1. Token interaction of the MLP layer on the down-sampled
image feature. (a) The process of which the feature resolution will
be down-sampled from H ×W ×C into a small spatial size of H
×
8
W
× 8C. (b) Token interaction on different feature resolutions.
8

the great success of self-attention-based architectures [32]
in natural language processing (NLP), the Transformer
models [5, 19, 34] are introduced into the field of computer vision, and have achieved comparable results with
state-of-the-art (SOTA) CNNs. Although ViT [5] and its
variants outperform traditional CNNs, the models introduce
high computational complexity to construct attention maps.
Recently, some studies [20, 26] in the vision community
suggest that the attention mechanism is not necessary and
simpler model architectures are proposed.
MLP-based models, like MLP-Mixer [28], gMLP [16]
and ViP [10] process the data with the Multilayer Perceptrons (MLP), showing great potential to improve the performance of vision models [29]. As the first visual deep MLP
network, MLP-Mixer [28] introduces two types of MLP
layers: Channel-Mixing MLPs (CMM) and Token-Mixing
MLPs (TMM). For CMM, the module mainly mixes the information between different channels of each token. For
TMM, it allows each spatial token to interact with all other
tokens (the whole image) in a single MLP layer. However,
this design also introduces a much larger number of parameters and higher computational complexity prone to overfitting. To address this problem, Sparse MLP (SMLP) [26]
and Vision Permutator (ViP) [10] propose a similar layer of
parallel structure, which applies one dimension MLP along
the axial directions, and parameters are shared among rows
or columns, respectively. Therefore, it reduces the number

1494

