This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ponder: Point Cloud Pre-training via Neural Rendering
Di Huang1,2

Sida Peng3

Tong He2,†

The University of Sydney1

Honghui Yang2,3

Xiaowei Zhou3

Shanghai AI Laboratory2

Wanli Ouyang2

Zhejiang University3

Abstract
Render

We propose a novel approach to self-supervised learning
of point cloud representations by differentiable neural rendering. Motivated by the fact that informative point cloud
features should be able to encode rich geometry and appearance cues and render realistic images, we train a pointcloud encoder within a devised point-based neural renderer
by comparing the rendered images with real images on massive RGB-D data. The learned point-cloud encoder can be
easily integrated into various downstream tasks, including
not only high-level tasks like 3D detection and segmentation
but also low-level tasks like 3D reconstruction and image
synthesis. Extensive experiments on various tasks demonstrate the superiority of our approach compared to existing
pre-training methods.

1. Introduction
We have witnessed the widespread success of supervised
learning in developing vision tasks, such as image classification [17, 10] and object detection [43, 16, 22]. In
contrast to the 2D image domain, current 3D point cloud
benchmarks only maintain limited annotations, in terms of
quantity and diversity, due to the extremely high cost of laborious labeling. Self-supervised learning (SSL) for point
cloud [52, 18, 23, 20, 6, 41, 62, 48, 59, 56, 36, 25, 61, 31],
consequently, becomes one of the main driving forces and
has attracted increasing attention in the 3D research community.
Previous SSL methods for learning effective 3D representation can be roughly categorized into two groups:
contrast-based [52, 18, 23, 20, 6, 41, 62] and completionbased [48, 59, 56, 36, 25, 61, 31]. Contrast-based methods are designed to maintain invariant representation under different transformations. To achieve this, informative
samples are required. In the 2D image domain, the above
challenge is addressed by (1) introducing efficient positive/negative sampling methods, (2) using a large batch size
† denote corresponding author.

Compare
RGB-D
Neural Scene
Representation

3D Object Detection

3D Semantic Segmentation

3D Scene Reconstruction

Image synthesis

Figure 1. This work proposes a novel point cloud pre-training
method via neural rendering, named Ponder. Ponder is directly
trained with RGB-D image supervision, and can be used for various applications, e.g. 3D object detection, 3D semantic segmentation, 3d scene reconstruction, and image synthesis.

and storing representative samples, and (3) applying various data augmentation policies. Inspired by these works,
many works [52, 18, 23, 20, 6, 41, 62] are proposed to learn
geometry-invariant features on 3D point cloud.
Completion-based methods are another line of research
for 3D SSL, which utilizes a pre-training task of reconstructing the masked point cloud based on partial observations. By maintaining a high masking ratio, such a simple
task encourages the model to learn a holistic understanding of the input beyond low-level statistics. Although the
masked autoencoders have been successfully applied for
SSL in images [14] and videos [11, 47], it remains challenging and still in exploration due to the inherent irregularity and sparsity of the point cloud data.
Different from the two groups of methods above, we propose point cloud pre-training via neural rendering (Ponder). Our motivation is that neural rendering, one of the
most amazing progress and domain-specific design in 3D
vision, can be leveraged to enforce the point cloud features
being able to encode rich geometry and appearance cues.
As illustrated in Figure 1, we address the task of learning
representative 3D features via point cloud rendering. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first exploration of neural
rendering for pre-training 3D point cloud models. Specif-

16089

