This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EgoObjects: A Large-Scale Egocentric Dataset for Fine-Grained Object
Understanding
Chenchen Zhu, Fanyi Xiao, Andrés Alvarado, Yasmine Babaei, Jiabo Hu
Hichem El-Mohri, Sean Chang Culatana, Roshan Sumbaly, Zhicheng Yan
Meta AI
{chenchenz, fanyix, zyan3}@meta.com
https://github.com/facebookresearch/EgoObjects

D: near
B: simple
L: bright
M: horizontal
D: near
B: simple
L: dim
M: horizontal
D: far
B: busy
L: bright
M: horizontal
D: medium
B: busy
L: bright
M: vertical
D: medium
B: busy
L: bright
M: combined

Figure 1: EgoObjects dataset. Left: It contains videos of objects captured from the first-person viewpoint under 10 diverse
conditions (only 5 are shown for clarity). Multiple objects in each video are annotated with instance ID and category label. In
each row, we visualize the annotations of one instance track (“can opener”) in one video captured under one set of condition
variable choices. For clarity, we use shorthand notations: D – Distance, B – Background, L – Lighting, M – Camera Motion.
Also annotations on other objects are not shown. Right: A visualization of a subset of non-leaf nodes in our hierarchical
object taxonomy, covering diverse object categories. Leaf nodes and other non-leaf nodes are omitted for clarity.

Abstract
Object understanding in egocentric visual data is arguably a fundamental research topic in egocentric vision.
However, existing object datasets are either non-egocentric
or have limitations in object categories, visual content,
and annotation granularities. In this work, we introduce EgoObjects, a large-scale egocentric dataset for finegrained object understanding. Its Pilot version contains
over 9K videos collected by 250 participants from 50+
countries using 4 wearable devices, and over 650K object annotations from 368 object categories. Unlike prior
datasets containing only object category labels, EgoObjects
also annotates each object with an instance-level identifier,
and includes over 14K unique object instances. EgoObjects was designed to capture the same object under diverse

background complexities, surrounding objects, distance,
lighting and camera motion. In parallel to the data collection, we conducted data annotation by developing a multistage federated annotation process to accommodate the
growing nature of the dataset. To bootstrap the research on
EgoObjects, we present a suite of 4 benchmark tasks around
the egocentric object understanding, including a novel instance level- and the classical category level object detection. Moreover, we also introduce 2 novel continual learning object detection tasks. The dataset and API are available at https://github.com/facebookresearch/EgoObjects.

1. Introduction
Object understanding tasks, such as classification and
detection, are arguably fundamental research topics in computer vision. Enormous amount of advances achieved so

20110

