This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hashing Neural Video Decomposition with Multiplicative Residuals in Space-Time
Cheng-Hung Chan

input frames

Cheng-Yang Yuan
Cheng Sun
Hwann-Tzong Chen
National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan

previous work

ours

editing

light condition

Figure 1: Integration of layer-based video editing and spatiotemporal lighting rendering. Our approach decomposes an
input video into layers with multiplicative residuals that characterize complex spatiotemporal lighting variations. Our method
efficiently fuses the user-edited components with the expected lighting conditions to produce high-quality video output.

Abstract
We present a video decomposition method that facilitates
layer-based editing of videos with spatiotemporally varying
lighting and motion effects. Our neural model decomposes
an input video into multiple layered representations, each
comprising a 2D texture map, a mask for the original video,
and a multiplicative residual characterizing the spatiotemporal variations in lighting conditions. A single edit on the texture maps can be propagated to the corresponding locations
in the entire video frames while preserving other contents’
consistencies. Our method efficiently learns the layer-based
neural representations of a 1080p video in 25s per frame via
coordinate hashing and allows real-time rendering of the
edited result at 71 fps on a single GPU. Qualitatively, we
run our method on various videos to show its effectiveness
in generating high-quality editing effects. Quantitatively, we
propose to adopt feature-tracking evaluation metrics for objectively assessing the consistency of video editing. Project
page: https:// lightbulb12294.github.io/ hashing-nvd/

1. Introduction
Unlike image editing, video editing involves modeling
the frame-to-frame relationships and addressing temporal

variations such as motion and illumination changes. The
task of video editing becomes challenging with the added
dimension of time for a user who attempts to apply edits to a
video while ensuring consistency across all frames. It is more
convenient if we can handle the spatiotemporally varying
components and reduce video editing to image editing—The
user thus only needs to do edits on images with ease, and the
editing results can seamlessly propagate to the entire video.
To achieve this goal, we may consider incorporating effective representations that can model and reconstruct the
static and dynamic information in videos. Furthermore, for
practical concerns, the algorithm must be efficient enough in
modeling and rendering to support interactive editing. Recent work on video decomposition has proposed to employ
neural-based representations, such as layered neural atlases
[16] and deformable sprites [39], to enable the conversion
between the space-time video domain and 2D texture domain for editing. Despite their successes in showcasing
impressive video editing effects, we notice that they often
require longer training time or restrict to limited frame resolution. For example, it takes more than ten hours to derive the layered neural atlases [16] from a 100-frame 480p
video. Deformable sprites [39] are relatively fast to derive
but require more computation resources (over 24GB of GPU
memory for a 480p video) and thus are unsuitable for editing

7743

