This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Part-Aware Transformer for Generalizable Person Re-identification
Hao Ni1
1

Yuke Li1

Lianli Gao2

Heng Tao Shen1

Jingkuan Song2 *

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC)
2
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, UESTC
{haoni0812, liyuke65535, jingkuan.song}@gmail.com,

Domain generalization person re-identification (DGReID) aims to train a model on source domains and generalize well on unseen domains. Vision Transformer usually yields better generalization ability than common CNN
networks under distribution shifts. However, Transformerbased ReID models inevitably over-fit to domain-specific biases due to the supervised learning strategy on the source
domain. We observe that while the global images of different IDs should have different features, their similar local
parts (e.g., black backpack) are not bounded by this constraint. Motivated by this, we propose a pure Transformer
model (termed Part-aware Transformer) for DG-ReID by
designing a proxy task, named Cross-ID Similarity Learning (CSL), to mine local visual information shared by different IDs. This proxy task allows the model to learn generic
features because it only cares about the visual similarity of
the parts regardless of the ID labels, thus alleviating the
side effect of domain-specific biases. Based on the local
similarity obtained in CSL, a Part-guided Self-Distillation
(PSD) is proposed to further improve the generalization
of global features. Our method achieves state-of-the-art
performance under most DG ReID settings. The code is
available at https://github.com/liyuke65535/
Part-Aware-Transformer.

1. Introduction
Person Re-Identification (ReID) [35, 2, 38, 37] aims to
find persons with the same identity from multiple disjoint
cameras. Thanks to the great success of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) in the field of computer vision [11, 24],
supervised, unsupervised person ReID has made significant
progress. However, a more challenging task, domain generalization (DG) ReID [31] which trains a model on source
domains yet generalizes well on unseen target domains, still
lags far behind the performance of the supervised ReID.
* Jingkuan Song is the corresponding author.

ViT-base

40

Abstract

CNNs

35

DeiT-base

Vision transformers

30

15

DeiT-tiny

ResNet152

ResNet101
ResNet50

ResNet34

(a)

ResNet18

10
5

ViT-small

DeiT-small

25

R1 20

5.9

11.6

21.7

22.3

25.1

44

49.3

59.7

87.1

87.1

Parameters(M)

Source

(b)
Target

Figure 1. (a) We applied different Transformers to DG ReID. Models are trained on Market and tested on MSMT. Results show Vision transformers (blue bars) are better than CNNs (orange bars)
even with fewer parameters. (b) Visualization of attention maps of
“class token” on source domain (MSMT) and target domain (Market). We use ViT [4] as the backbone and fuse the attention results
of the shallow layers. However, the attention to discriminative information is still limited on target domain.

Thus, many DG methods are proposed to learn generic
features. These methods explore the generalization of CNN
based on disentanglement [10, 19] or meta-learning [3, 18].
Recently, Transformer has gained increasing attention in
computer vision. It is a neural network based on attention mechanisms [26]. Vision Transformer usually yields
better generalization ability than common CNN networks
under distribution shift[32, 17]. However, existing pure
transformer-based ReID models are only used in supervised
and pre-trained ReID [16, 8]. The generalization of Transformer is still unknown in DG ReID.
To investigate the performance of Transformer in DG

11280

