This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Representation Learning for Histopathologic Images with Cluster
Constraints
Weiyi Wu1

Chongyang Gao2
1

Joseph DiPalma1

Dartmouth College

2

Soroush Vosoughi1

Saeed Hassanpour1

Northwestern University

{weiyi.wu.gr,joseph.r.dipalma.gr,soroush.vosoughi,saeed.hassanpour}@dartmouth.edu
chongyanggao2026@u.northwestern.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in whole-slide image (WSI) scanners
and computational capabilities have significantly propelled
the application of artificial intelligence in histopathology
slide analysis. While these strides are promising, current supervised learning approaches for WSI analysis come
with the challenge of exhaustively labeling high-resolution
slides—a process that is both labor-intensive and timeconsuming. In contrast, self-supervised learning (SSL)
pretraining strategies are emerging as a viable alternative, given that they don’t rely on explicit data annotations.
These SSL strategies are quickly bridging the performance
disparity with their supervised counterparts. In this context, we introduce an SSL framework. This framework aims
for transferable representation learning and semantically
meaningful clustering by synergizing invariance loss and
clustering loss in WSI analysis. Notably, our approach outperforms common SSL methods in downstream classification and clustering tasks, as evidenced by tests on the Camelyon16 and a pancreatic cancer dataset. The code and additional details are accessible at https://github.com/
wwyi1828/CluSiam.

1. Introduction
Histopathology slide analysis remains the gold standard for cancer diagnosis and prognosis. In recent years,
researchers have seen the burgeoning adoption of digital
histopathology slides in pathology laboratories, thanks to
the availability of digital pathology scanners and advancements in computer vision, revolutionizing computational
pathology [24]. While adoption of digital slides has accelerated, progress has been hindered by the exceptionally
high resolution of whole slide images (WSIs), often exceeding 40, 000 × 40, 000 pixels, which makes directly applying

standard computer vision models to WSIs not feasible. Furthermore, downsampling WSIs to a more manageable magnification level results in a substantial loss of fine-grained
visual information.

View 1
View 2
Centroid
Pull Together
Push Away

Figure 1: The framework of CluSiam. View 1 and View
2 are distinct augmentations of the same images, pooled
together for clustering. The invariance loss (solid line)
aligns representations of the two views, while the cluster
loss (dashed line) pushes cluster centroids apart.
To address the challenges, WSIs are commonly subdivided into more manageable patches through slidingwindow techniques. These patches are then labeled using
annotations, forming training data for a patch-level classifier. Features extracted by the trained patch-level classifiers
are aggregated to infer slide-level label [21, 42, 43, 40, 33].
However, this annotation-reliant approach has a significant drawback. It’s heavily dependent on precise annotations, which are expensive to obtain. Annotating WSIs is
a painstaking and error-prone task that requires pixel-bypixel scrutiny from highly skilled pathologists. The elusive

21404

