This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TripLe: Revisiting Pretrained Model Reuse and Progressive Learning for
Efficient Vision Transformer Scaling and Searching
Cheng Fu†,‡ , Hanxian Huang† , Zixuan Jiang‡ , Yun Ni‡ , Lifeng Nai‡ , Gang Wu‡ ,
Liqun Cheng‡ , Yanqi Zhou‡ , Sheng Li‡ , Andrew Li‡ , Jishen Zhao‡
UC San Diego† , Google ‡
{cfu,hah008}@ucsd.edu,
{zixuanjiang, yunn, lnai, wgang, liquncheng,
yanqiz, lsheng, andrewyli, jishenzhao}@google.com

Abstract
One promising way to accelerate transformer training
is to reuse small pretrained models to initialize the transformer, as their existing representation power facilitates
faster model convergence. Previous works designed expansion operators to scale up pretrained models to the target
model before training. Yet, model functionality is difficult
to preserve when scaling a transformer in all dimensions at
once. Moreover, maintaining the pretrained optimizer states
for weights is critical for model scaling, whereas the new
weights added during expansion lack these states in pretrained models. To address these issues, we propose TripLe,
which partially scales a model before training, while growing the rest of the new parameters during training by copying both the warmed-up weights with the optimizer states
from existing weights. As such, the new parameters introduced during training will obtain their training states. Furthermore, through serializing the scaling of model width
and depth, the functionality of each expansion can be preserved. We evaluate TripLe in both single-trial model scaling and multi-trial neural architecture search (NAS). Due to
the fast training convergence of TripLe, the proxy accuracy
from TripLe better reveals the model quality compared to
from-scratch training in multi-trial NAS. Experiments show
that TripLe outperforms from-scratch training and knowledge distillation (KD) in both training time and task performance. TripLe can also be combined with KD to achieve
an even higher task accuracy. For NAS, the model obtained
from TripLe outperforms DeiT-B in task accuracy with 69%
reduction in parameter size and FLOPs.

1. Introduction
Vision transformer (ViT) models are promising to
achieve the state-of-the-art performance on various com-

puter vision tasks [14, 20, 44, 45]. While the performance
frontier keeps pushing forward, the training costs also scale
with the growth of parameters. For example, Dehghani et
al. [11] scaled a ViT to 22 billion parameters. Furthermore,
recent research [33] shows that transformers require much
more training steps and larger datasets to better generalize
compared to convolutional neural networks (CNNs), imposing even more scaling costs of ViTs.
Among various transformer training acceleration and
cost reduction techniques [23, 7, 51, 54, 41, 17], one
promising method is to reuse small pretrained models to
initialize a large model before training. By scaling a small
pretrained model with various expansion operators and using it to initialize the large model, the implicit knowledge
facilitates faster model convergence. Previous studies such
as bert2BERT [4] focused on preserving the functionality of
the small pretrained transformer, when growing transformer
width (i.e., hidden dimensions). A recent work learn-togrow [49] learns linear mappings to scale the pretrained
model by minimizing the task loss during model expansion.
However, we identify a set of critical limitations in
the existing approaches through a comprehensive investigation (Sec 2.3). (L1) Maintaining the functionality during model scaling is not the only key factor to achieving a
high speedup and final task accuracy. We identify that the
other critical factor is retaining the optimizer states of the
weights, because that preserves the direction of model updates when the functionality is preserved. Previous methods [49, 4] do not include these optimizer states during
model scaling. (L2) Training discrepancies exist between
the pretrained weights and the new weights because the new
weights introduced during scaling do not have optimizer
states built up before training. (L3) The functionality of a
pretrained model is hardly preserved by simply expanding
a small pretrained model in multiple dimensions all at once.
To address these limitations, we propose a new method,

17153

