This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Token-Label Alignment for Vision Transformers
Han Xiao1,2, * Wenzhao Zheng1,2, * Zheng Zhu3 Jie Zhou1,2 Jiwen Lu1,2,†
1
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
2
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
PhiGent Robotics
{h-xiao20,zhengwz18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; zhengzhu@ieee.org;
{jzhou,lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
Data mixing strategies (e.g., CutMix) have shown the
ability to greatly improve the performance of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs). They mix two images as inputs for
training and assign them with a mixed label with the same
ratio. While they are shown effective for vision transformers (ViTs), we identify a token fluctuation phenomenon that
has suppressed the potential of data mixing strategies. We
empirically observe that the contributions of input tokens
fluctuate as forward propagating, which might induce a different mixing ratio in the output tokens. The training target
computed by the original data mixing strategy can thus be
inaccurate, resulting in less effective training. To address
this, we propose a token-label alignment (TL-Align) method
to trace the correspondence between transformed tokens
and the original tokens to maintain a label for each token. We reuse the computed attention at each layer for efficient token-label alignment, introducing only negligible additional training costs. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our method improves the performance of ViTs on image
classification, semantic segmentation, objective detection,
and transfer learning tasks. Code is available at: https:
//github.com/Euphoria16/TL-Align.

1. Introduction
The recent developments of vision transformers (ViTs)
have revolutionized the computer vision field and set new
state-of-the-arts in various tasks, such as image classification [16, 43, 31, 10], object detection [5, 56, 12, 13], and
semantic segmentation [28, 39, 54, 9]. The successful structure of alternative spatial mixing and channel mixing in
ViTs also motivates the arising of high-performance MLPlike deep architectures [40, 41, 42] and promotes the evolution of better CNNs [15, 32, 17]. In addition to architec* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

ture designs, an improved training strategy can also greatly
boost the performance of a trained deep model [23, 44, 8, 7].
The training of modern deep architecture almost all
adopts data mixing strategies for data augmentation [48, 45,
24, 47, 52, 53], which have been proven to consistently improve the generalization performance. They randomly mix
two images and their labels with the same mixing ratio to
produce mixed data. As the most commonly used data mixing strategy, CutMix [52] performs a copy-and-paste operation on the spatial domain to produce spatially mixed images. While data mixing strategies have been widely studied
for CNNs [48, 45, 24], few works have explored their compatibilities with ViTs [7]. We find that self-attention in ViTs
causes a fluctuation of the original spatial structure. Unlike
the translation equivalence that ensures a global label consistency for CNNs, self-attention in ViTs undermines this
global consistency and causes a misalignment between the
token and label. This misalignment induces a different mixing ratio in the output tokens. The training targets computed
by the original data mixing strategies can then be inaccurate, resulting in less effective training.
To address this, we propose a token-label alignment (TLAlign) method for ViTs to obtain a more accurate target for
training. We present an overview of our method in Figure 1.
We first assign a label to each input token in the mixed image according to the source of the token. We then trace
the correspondence between the input tokens and the transformed tokens and align the labels accordingly. We assume
that only the spatial self-attention and residual connection
operation alter the presence of input tokens since channel
MLP and layer normalization process each token independently. We reuse the computed attentions to linearly mix the
labels of input tokens to obtain those of transformed tokens.
The token-label alignment is performed iteratively to obtain
a label for each output token. For class-token-based classification (e.g., ViT [16] and DeiT [43]), we directly use the
aligned label for the output class token as the training target.
For global-pooling-based classification (e.g., Swin [31]),
we similarly average the labels of output tokens as the train-

5495

