This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unpaired Multi-domain Attribute Translation of 3D Facial Shapes with a Square
and Symmetric Geometric Map
Zhenfeng Fan1,2 , Zhiheng Zhang1,2 , Shuang Yang1,2 , Chongyang Zhong1,2 , Min Cao3 , and Shihong
∗
Xia1,2
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Soochow University

{fanzhenfeng,zhangzhiheng20g,yangshuang21b,zhongchongyang,xsh}@ict.ac.cn; mcao@suda.edu.cn

Abstract
While impressive progress has recently been made in
image-oriented facial attribute translation, shape-oriented
3D facial attribute translation remains an unsolved issue.
This is primarily limited by the lack of 3D generative models and ineffective usage of 3D facial data. We propose
a learning framework for 3D facial attribute translation
to relieve these limitations. Firstly, we customize a novel
geometric map for 3D shape representation and embed
it in an end-to-end generative adversarial network. The
geometric map represents 3D shapes symmetrically on a
square image grid, while preserving the neighboring relationship of 3D vertices in a local least-square sense. This
enables effective learning for the latent representation of
data with different attributes. Secondly, we employ a unified and unpaired learning framework for multi-domain attribute translation. It not only makes effective usage of
data correlation from multiple domains, but also mitigates
the constraint for hardly accessible paired data. Finally,
we propose a hierarchical architecture for the discriminator to guarantee robust results against both global and local artifacts. We conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the advantage of the proposed framework over the
state-of-the-art in generating high-fidelity facial shapes.
Given an input 3D facial shape, the proposed framework
is able to synthesize novel shapes of different attributes,
which covers some downstream applications, such as expression transfer, gender translation, and aging. Code at
https://github.com/NaughtyZZ/3D facial shape attribute tr
anslation ssgmap.

∗ The corresponding author

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Translation of 3D shape attributes to multiple domains
that correspond to expressions, genders, and ages.

The advancement of generative adversarial networks
(GANs) has recently activated a lot of studies on facerelated tasks, such as face synthesis [34, 7], facial image super-resolution [38, 32], and facial attribute translation [13, 1]. The rationale of these studies is to use an auxiliary discriminator network to regularize the output face with
the learned distribution of facial data towards a specific category. The task of facial attribute translation is referred to as
changing the particular aspect of a facial image, e.g. changing the expression [19] or the age [61] of a face, resulting
in desired appearances. This task has many downstream applications in the media and film industry.
In the past, most methods in the field of facial attribute
translation dealt with 2D facial images [11, 51, 55]. This
is partly because 2D facial images are easily accessible
and partly because deep learning based methods commonly
work on image data with a regular grid. Nowadays, re-

20828

