This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Cross-Modal Affinity for Referring Video Object Segmentation
Targeting Limited Samples

1

Guanghui Li1 *, Mingqi Gao2,3 *, Heng Liu1†, Xiantong Zhen4 , Feng Zheng2†
Anhui University of Technology, 2 Southern University of Science and Technology,
3
University of Warwick, 4 United Imaging
guanghui.li1998@gmail.com, mingqi.gao@outlook.com, hengliusky@aliyun.com,
zhenxt@gmail.com, f.zheng@ieee.org

Abstract
Training set

Referring video object segmentation (RVOS), as a supervised learning task, relies on sufficient annotated data
for a given scene. However, in more realistic scenarios,
only minimal annotations are available for a new scene,
which poses significant challenges to existing RVOS methods. With this in mind, we propose a simple yet effective
model with a newly designed cross-modal affinity (CMA)
module based on a Transformer architecture. The CMA
module builds multimodal affinity with a few samples, thus
quickly learning new semantic information, and enabling
the model to adapt to different scenarios. Since the proposed method targets limited samples for new scenes, we
generalize the problem as - few-shot referring video object
segmentation (FS-RVOS). To foster research in this direction, we build up a new FS-RVOS benchmark based on currently available datasets. The benchmark covers a wide
range and includes multiple situations, which can maximally simulate real-world scenarios. Extensive experiments
show that our model adapts well to different scenarios with
only a few samples, reaching state-of-the-art performance
on the benchmark. On Mini-Ref-YouTube-VOS, our model
achieves an average performance of 53.1 J and 54.8 F,
which are 10% better than the baselines. Furthermore, we
show impressive results of 77.7 J and 74.8 F on Mini-RefSAIL-VOS, which are significantly better than the baselines.
Code is publicly available at https://github.com/
hengliusky/Few_shot_RVOS.

1. Introduction
Referring video object segmentation (RVOS) aims to
segment target objects described in natural language in
* Equal contribution. This work was done when G. Li visited to Feng
Zheng Lab in Southern University of Science and Technology.
† Corresponding author.

Testing set

(a) Data distribution in RVOS

(b) Data distribution in Few-shot RVOS

Support set

Query set

Text: “A dog standing in water”

Text: “A dog walking along the shore”

(c) Few-shot RVOS

Figure 1: Comparison of Few-shot RVOS and RVOS and
the setting of Few-shot RVOS. (a) The training and testing
sets overlap in the RVOS. (b) Disjoint training and testing
sets in the Few-shot RVOS. Different shapes represent different classes. (c) Few-shot RVOS segments the referred
object of the same class as the support set in the video.

videos. In real-world scenarios, it has a wide range of applications, such as video editing [9] and human-computer
interaction, so RVOS has attracted much attention from the
research community. Unlike traditional semi-supervised
video object segmentation [10], RVOS is more challenging because it not only lacks the ground-truth mask of the
first frame of the video but also needs to interact with multimodal information of vision and language.
The great success of various tasks based on deep learning benefits from sufficient labeled data. Detailed annotated
masks and language descriptions in real-world RVOS tasks
are relatively scarce. The researchers have to annotate each
frame in the video in detail and provide a referring expression for the segmentation object. Therefore, obtaining highquality labeled data requires a high cost. With the popularity of movies, YouTube videos, TikTok streaming videos,

2684

