This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semi-supervised Speech-driven 3D Facial Animation via Cross-modal Encoding
Peiji Yang* Huawei Wei* Yicheng Zhong* Zhisheng Wang
Tencent, Shenzhen, China
{peijiyang, huaweiwei, ajaxzhong, plorywang}@tencent.com

Abstract
Existing Speech-driven 3D facial animation methods
typically follow the supervised paradigm, involving regression from speech to 3D facial animation. This paradigm
faces two major challenges: the high cost of supervision
acquisition, and the ambiguity in mapping between speech
and lip movements. To address these challenges, this study
proposes a novel cross-modal semi-supervised framework,
comprising a Speech-to-Image Transcoder and a Face-toGeometry Regressor. The former jointly learns a common representation space from speech and image domains,
enabling the transformation of speech into semanticallyconsistent facial images. The latter is responsible for reconstructing 3D facial meshes from the transformed images. Both modules require minimal effort to acquire the
necessary training data, thereby obviating the dependence
on costly supervised data. Furthermore, the joint learning scheme enables the fusion of intricate visual features
into speech encoding, thereby facilitating the transformation of subtle speech variations into nuanced lip movements,
ultimately enhancing the fidelity of 3D face reconstructions. Consequently, the ambiguity of the direct mapping
of speech-to-animation is significantly reduced, leading to
coherent and high-fidelity generation of lip motion. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach produces
competitive results compared to supervised methods.

1. Introduction
Speech-driven 3D facial animation aims to automatically
animate vivid facial expressions of realistic 3D avatars from
the speech signal. It has become increasingly popular in
many fields, such as games, virtual reality, film production,
and online communication, as it enables the generation of
lifelike facial expressions with minimal effort.
Recently proposed approaches, including VOCA[7],
MeshTalk[28], and FaceFormer[10], have shown promising results in recovering 3D facial meshes from speech

signals through the utilization of regressive networks or
transformer-based autoregressive models. However, these
methods, which fall under the supervised paradigm, encounter two primary challenges. Firstly, obtaining paired
supervision of speech and high-fidelity 3D facial animation
requires the utilization of a professional and expensive facial motion capture system, leading to considerable costs.
Secondly, the mapping of low-dimensional speech signals
to high-dimensional 3D facial meshes with significant variability may result in ambiguity issues, leading to suboptimal
outcomes.
This study for the first time proposes a novel crossmodal semi-supervised framework to address the above issues, which consists of a Speech-to-Image Transcoder and
a Face-to-Geometry Regressor. The former is designed
to transform speech into semantically-consistent facial images, while the latter is responsible for reconstructing 3D
facial meshes from the transformed images. The design of
the Speech-to-Image Transcoder is inspired by the recent
success of unsupervised image-to-image translation [26],
which allows for transformation between different input image domains. Our transcoder extends this mechanism to facilitate cross-modal conversion between speech and image
domains. To achieve this capability, we learn a common
representation space using data from three domains: paired
speech and real facial images, as well as synthetic facial images. We train the translation between the real and synthetic
image domains in an unsupervised manner, and simultaneously leverage the paired relationship between real images
and speech to project speech features into the image representation space. Through this joint training, we construct
a common space where the representations of speech and
images are tied together. With the learned common representation, we can convert speech into synthetic facial images using our domain-dependent image decoder. Furthermore, we leverage the synthetic facial data, which is paired
with rendered facial images and 3D face meshes, to train
the Face-to-Geometry Regressor. This allows us to infer
the corresponding 3D face meshes from the synthetic faces
generated from speech.
Our pipeline is capable of effortlessly acquiring the nec-

* These authors contributed equally to this work.

21032

