This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PATMAT: Person Aware Tuning of Mask-Aware Transformer for Face inpainting
Saman Motamed1,2 , Jianjin Xu1 , Chen Henry Wu1 , Christian Häne3 , Jean-Charles Bazin3 ,
Fernando De la Torre1
[1] Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA
[2] INSAIT, Sofia University, Bulgaria
[3] Independent Researcher

Figure 1: An illustration of PATMAT’s identity preserving inpainting. By using reference images of Taylor Swift and Dwayne
Johnson, PATMAT enables Mask-Aware Transformer to preserve the identity of the person. We also show results of recent
methods such as MyStyle [25], trained with the same number of reference images as PATMAT and RePaint[22] that is not
fine-tuned with any reference images.

Abstract
Generative models such as StyleGAN2 and Stable Diffusion have achieved state-of-the-art performance in computer vision tasks such as image synthesis, inpainting, and
de-noising. However, current generative models for face
inpainting often fail to preserve fine facial details and the
identity of the person, despite creating aesthetically convincing image structures and textures. In this work, we propose
Person Aware Tuning (PAT) of Mask-Aware Transformer
(MAT) for face inpainting, which addresses this issue. Our
proposed method, PATMAT 1 , effectively preserves identity
by incorporating reference images of a subject and finetuning a MAT architecture trained on faces. By using ∼ 40
reference images, PATMAT creates anchor points in MAT’s
style module, and tunes the model using the fixed anchors to
1 All experiments and data processing activities were conducted at

Carnegie Mellon University.

adapt the model to a new face identity. Moreover, PATMAT’s
use of multiple images per anchor during training allows
the model to use fewer reference images than competing
methods. We demonstrate that PATMAT outperforms stateof-the-art models in terms of image quality, the preservation
of person-specific details, and the identity of the subject. Our
results suggest that PATMAT can be a promising approach
for improving the quality of personalized face inpainting 2 .

1. Introduction
The objective of image inpainting is to generate plausible content to complete missing regions within an image.
Preserving contextual integrity of the inpainted image is a
crucial factor, where the reconstructed regions must conform
2 The code will be available at https://github.com/
humansensinglab/PATMAT.
For any questions, please reach
out to sam(dot)motamed(at)insait(dot)ai.

22778

