This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ordinal Label Distribution Learning
Changsong Wen*
Xin Zhang*
Xingxu Yao
Jufeng Yang†
VCIP & TMCC & DISSec, College of Computer Science, Nankai University
downdric@163.com, zhangxin.nk@mail.nankai.edu.cn, yxx hbgd@163.com, yangjufeng@nankai.edu.cn

1. Introduction
In the common machine learning paradigms, single-label
learning [27] predicts one speciﬁc label for an instance.
Multi-label learning [58] predicts multiple labels which can
handle some ambiguous cases where an instance is related
to more than one class. However, it treats each label equally
and only assigns the same degree to the related classes.
To tackle this problem, Geng [19] proposes label distribution learning (LDL). This new paradigm models the different relative importance between labels for describing an
instance. Due to the characteristics of LDL [19], it has
23481

(a) Image
Metric

(gt,pd-1) (gt,pd-2)

KL

0.1379

0.1379

Canberra

1.7293

1.7293

Cosine

0.2638

0.2638

‫ܯ‬஼஺஽

0.3670

0.0217

‫ܯ‬ொி஽

0.1275

0.1125

0.0768

0.0434

‫ܯ‬஼௃ௌ

(c) Metrics

label-by-label

Label distribution learning (LDL) is a recent hot topic,
in which ambiguity is modeled via description degrees of
the labels. However, in common LDL tasks, e.g., age estimation, labels are in an intrinsic order. The conventional
LDL paradigm adopts a per-label manner for optimization,
neglecting the internal sequential patterns of labels. Therefore, we propose a new paradigm, termed ordinal label distribution learning (OLDL). We model the sequential patterns of labels from aspects of spatial, semantic, and temporal order relationships. The spatial order depicts the relative position between arbitrary labels. We build cross-label
transformation between distributions, which is determined
by the spatial margin in labels. Labels naturally yield different semantics, so the semantic order is represented by constructing semantic correlations between arbitrary labels.
The temporal order describes that the presence of labels is
determined by their order, i.e. ﬁve after four. The value of a
particular label contains information about previous labels,
and we adopt cumulative distribution to construct this relationship. Based on these characteristics of ordinal labels,
we propose the learning objectives and evaluation metrics
for OLDL, namely CAD, QFD, and CJS. Comprehensive
experiments conducted on four tasks demonstrate the superiority of OLDL against other existing LDL methods in both
traditional and newly proposed metrics. Our project page
can be found at https://downdric23.github.io/.

per-label

Abstract

(b) Examples for order-sensitive distributions

Figure 1. An example of image aesthetics rating using scores from
1 to 5. There exist obvious order relations in the label space. (a)
shows an example of the image. In (b), compared with prediction1 (pd-1), prediction-2 (pd-2) obviously ﬁts better to the ground
truth label distribution. However, they both have equal performance on the widely-used distances metrics (KL, Canberra, and
Cosine) as shown in (c). Our order-sensitive metrics including
MCAD , MQF D , and MCJS can reﬂect the difference between
the two predictions.

been widely used to solve various real-world ambiguous
tasks [57, 66, 74, 34], including age estimation [17, 28],
image aesthetics analysis [62], etc. Speciﬁcally, LDL algorithms assign a number dyx less than or equal to 1 to the
potential
 y label y for describing an instance x. Note that
y dx = 1 is held in order to satisfy the condition that
label space is complete.
Generally, LDL tries to learn accurate results at each
label. However, in some common LDL tasks, such as
age estimation [47] and beauty rating [65], labels are in
order. The natural order of labels presents a sequential
pattern and is different from other LDL tasks like facial

