This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Camera-Driven Representation Learning for
Unsupervised Domain Adaptive Person Re-identification
Geon Lee1 Sanghoon Lee1 Dohyung Kim1 Younghoon Shin2 Yongsang Yoon 2 Bumsub Ham1 *
1

Yonsei University 2 Robotics Lab, Hyundai Motor Company
https://cvlab.yonsei.ac.kr/projects/CaCL

Abstract
: Source
: Cam 0
: Cam 1
: Cam 2
: Cam 3

(a)
Cam 1
Cam 1, Cam 0

Stage 1

Cluster 0
Cam0

Cam1 Cam2

Cam2

Cam1

Cam2

Cam3

Cam3

Cam3

Stage 2
Cluster 1

Cam 1, Cam 0, Cam 3 Stage 3
Cam 1, Cam 0
Cam 3, Cam 2

(b)

Stage 4

Cluster 2

Cluster-wise weights

We present a novel unsupervised domain adaption
method for person re-identification (reID) that generalizes a
model trained on a labeled source domain to an unlabeled
target domain. We introduce a camera-driven curriculum
learning (CaCL) framework that leverages camera labels
of person images to transfer knowledge from source to target domains progressively. To this end, we divide target domain dataset into multiple subsets based on the camera labels, and initially train our model with a single subset (i.e.,
images captured by a single camera). We then gradually
exploit more subsets for training, according to a curriculum sequence obtained with a camera-driven scheduling
rule. The scheduler considers maximum mean discrepancies (MMD) between each subset and the source domain
dataset, such that the subset closer to the source domain is
exploited earlier within the curriculum. For each curriculum sequence, we generate pseudo labels of person images
in a target domain to train a reID model in a supervised
way. We have observed that the pseudo labels are highly
biased toward cameras, suggesting that person images obtained from the same camera are likely to have the same
pseudo labels, even for different IDs. To address the camera
bias problem, we also introduce a camera-diversity (CD)
loss encouraging person images of the same pseudo label,
but captured across various cameras, to involve more for
discriminative feature learning, providing person representations robust to inter-camera variations. Experimental results on standard benchmarks, including real-to-real and
synthetic-to-real scenarios, demonstrate the effectiveness of
our framework.

(c)

Figure 1: We visualize in (a) a t-SNE plot for features
extracted from person images in Market1501 [55] and
MSMT17 [45], using a reID model trained on MSMT17,
where MSMT17 and Market1501 are source and target domains, respectively. The samples from different cameras
in the target domain are distinguished by different colors.
The model trained on a single domain offers features that
are highly biased towards camera labels of person images
for other domains. We propose to establish a camera-driven
curriculum, as shown in (b), and initially train our model
using images captured by a single camera, then gradually
exploit more images captured using multiple cameras. To
further alleviate the camera bias issue, we compute clusterwise weights, as in (c), to encourage clusters containing images obtained from various cameras to involve more during
the adaptation process.

1. Introduction
The objective of person re-identification (reID) is to retrieve person images of the same ID as a query person across
* Corresponding author

non-overlapping cameras [48, 56]. Current reID approaches
mainly adopt a supervised learning paradigm by exploiting person ID labels, and focus on learning discriminative
person representations in a single domain. However, reID

11453

