This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PG-RCNN: Semantic Surface Point Generation for 3D Object Detection

Inyong Koo* Inyoung Lee* Se-Ho Kim

Hee-Seon Kim

Woo-jin Jeon

Changick Kim

KAIST
Daejeon, South Korea

{iykoo010, inzero24, ksh1040, hskim98, woojin.jeon337, changick}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
One of the main challenges in LiDAR-based 3D object detection is that the sensors often fail to capture the
complete spatial information about the objects due to long
distance and occlusion. Two-stage detectors with point
cloud completion approaches tackle this problem by adding
more points to the regions of interest (RoIs) with a pretrained network. However, these methods generate dense
point clouds of objects for all region proposals, assuming that objects always exist in the RoIs. This leads to
the indiscriminate point generation for incorrect proposals as well. Motivated by this, we propose Point Generation R-CNN (PG-RCNN), a novel end-to-end detector
that generates semantic surface points of foreground objects for accurate detection. Our method uses a jointly
trained RoI point generation module to process the contextual information of RoIs and estimate the complete shape
and displacement of foreground objects. For every generated point, PG-RCNN assigns a semantic feature that
indicates the estimated foreground probability. Extensive
experiments show that the point clouds generated by our
method provide geometrically and semantically rich information for reﬁning false positive and misaligned proposals. PG-RCNN achieves competitive performance on the
KITTI benchmark, with signiﬁcantly fewer parameters than
state-of-the-art models. The code is available at https:
//github.com/quotation2520/PG-RCNN .

1. Introduction
3D object detection using LiDAR point clouds is a fundamental perception task in autonomous driving that has received signiﬁcant attention in recent years. LiDAR sensors
are frequently used in many 3D applications, such as odometry and mapping [41, 26, 17], object tracking [27, 30, 29],
* Denote equal contribution

18142

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. The intermediate outputs of PG-RCNN: (a) ﬁrst stage
output with initial bounding box proposals in red, and (b) second stage outputs with generated points over 0.6 foreground score
in yellow and ﬁnal detection outputs in green bounding boxes.
Ground truth bounding boxes are shown in blue.

and detection [34, 19, 4], due to their ability to provide accurate distance information in various conditions.
LiDAR-based 3D object detectors use either a pointbased [15, 16, 22, 14] or a voxel-based [43, 34, 13] network to generate bounding boxes for foreground objects.
The two-stage framework with a proposal reﬁnement stage
is often adopted in many detectors to enhance the detection
accuracy [20, 35]. While researchers have explored different methods [19, 4] to extract effective reﬁnement features
for the regions of interest (RoIs), some of the most recent
works with voxel-based backbones [18, 8] revisit the point
information within the RoIs at the reﬁnement stage, considering the precise coordinates and density of internal points.
Nevertheless, the inherent sparsity of LiDAR point
clouds poses a challenge in 3D object detection, particularly for distant and occluded objects. These objects have
fewer collected points, making them difﬁcult to detect and
degrading the overall performance of detectors [12, 32]. To
address this problem, point cloud completion methods have
been explored to assist proposal reﬁnement by adding more
points to the RoIs. The methods in [12, 42] enhance the
resolution of point clouds by utilizing a point cloud completion network pre-trained from an external dataset [1], but

