This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Semi-supervised Gaussian Mixture Models
for Generalized Category Discovery
†

Bingchen Zhao†
University of Edinburgh

bingchen.zhao@ed.ac.uk

Xin Wen‡
Kai Han‡ *
‡
The University of Hong Kong

wenxin@eee.hku.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of generalized category discovery (GCD), i.e., given a set of images where
part of them are labelled and the rest are not, the task is
to automatically cluster the images in the unlabelled data,
leveraging the information from the labelled data, while the
unlabelled data contain images from the labelled classes and
also new ones. GCD is similar to semi-supervised learning
(SSL) but is more realistic and challenging, as SSL assumes
all the unlabelled images are from the same classes as the
labelled ones. We also do not assume the class number in the
unlabelled data is known a-priori, making the GCD problem
even harder. To tackle the problem of GCD without knowing the class number, we propose an EM-like framework
that alternates between representation learning and class
number estimation. We propose a semi-supervised variant
of the Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) with a stochastic
splitting and merging mechanism to dynamically determine
the prototypes by examining the cluster compactness and
separability. With these prototypes, we leverage prototypical contrastive learning for representation learning on the
partially labelled data subject to the constraints imposed
by the labelled data. Our framework alternates between
these two steps until convergence. The cluster assignment
for an unlabelled instance can then be retrieved by identifying its nearest prototype. We comprehensively evaluate our
framework on both generic image classification datasets and
challenging fine-grained object recognition datasets, achieving state-of-the-art performance. Our code is available at
https://github.com/DTennant/GPC.

1. Introduction
The success of deep learning is driven by the availability
of large-scale data with human annotations. Given enough
annotated data, deep learning models are able to surpass
human-level performance on many important computer vi* Corresponding author.

Image embedding

kaihanx@hku.hk

E-step

128D
PCA

768D

ViT

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------M-step

+
+

+

-

+ +
+

Image patches

Figure 1: Overview of our proposed EM-like framework.
The input images are fed into a ViT-B model to obtain a 768dimensional feature vector, then the feature vector will be
projected to a lower dimensional space using the projection
calculated from PCA. We perform class number estimation
and representation learning in this projected space. In the
E-step, we use a semi-supervised GMM that can split separable clusters and merge cluttered clusters to estimate the
class number and prototypes, which will be used in the Mstep of representation learning with prototypical contrastive
learning.

sion tasks such as image classification [21]. But the cost
of collecting a large annotated dataset is not always affordable, and it is also not possible to annotate all new classes
emerging from the real world. Thus, designing models that
can learn to deal with large-scale unlabelled data in the open
world is of great value and importance. Semi-supervised
learning (SSL) [38] is proposed as a solution to learn a
model on both labelled data and unlabelled data, with many
works achieving promising performance [1, 46, 44]. However, SSL assumes that labelled instances are provided for
all object classes in the unlabelled data. The novel category
discovery (NCD) task is introduced [17, 16] to automatically discover novel classes by transferring the knowledge
learned from the labelled instances of known classes, assuming the unlabelled data only contain instances from new
classes. Generalized category discovery (GCD) [48] further relaxes the assumption in NCD, and tackles a more

16623

