This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Saliency Regularization for Self-Training with Partial Annotations
Shouwen Wang1 Qian Wan2 Xiang Xiang1 * Zhigang Zeng1
1
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology;
Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control, Ministry of Education
2
Wuhan Research Institute of Posts and Telecommunications
1

{shouwen hust, xex, zgzeng}@hust.edu.cn

2

w252086746@gmail.com

Abstract
Partially annotated images are easy to obtain in multilabel classification. However, unknown labels in partially
annotated images exacerbate the positive-negative imbalance inherent in multi-label classification, which affects
supervised learning of known labels. Most current methods require sufficient image annotations, and do not focus
on the imbalance of the labels in the supervised training
phase. In this paper, we propose saliency regularization
(SR) for a novel self-training framework. In particular, we
model saliency on the class-specific maps, and strengthen
the saliency of object regions corresponding to the present
labels. Besides, we introduce consistency regularization to
mine unlabeled information to complement unknown labels
with the help of SR. It is verified to alleviate the negative
dominance caused by the imbalance, and achieve state-ofthe-art performance on Pascal VOC 2007, MS-COCO, VG200, and OpenImages V3.

1. Introduction
The multi-label classification task is a practical vision
task that has received much attention. It is widely used in
applications such as image retrieval and recommendation
systems. In recent years, significant progress has been made
in multi-label classification with the development of deep
neural networks [20, 30, 15, 11]. These efforts benefit from
network structure construction [35, 7, 8] and optimization
function design [38, 28, 14]. Meanwhile, the excellent performance of a model is inseparable from a large-scale and
high-quality dataset. However, as the number of samples
and semantic concepts increases significantly, annotating all
possible labels for each image is very difficult. Thus, annotating a large-scale multi-label benchmark with full labels
is very laborious and time-consuming, which poses challenges for multi-label classification. Collecting a partially
* Corresponding author (email to xex@hust.edu.cn).

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Probability distribution of prediction on the MS-COCO
validation set from ResNet101 trained by BCE with (a) 10%, and
(b) 50% known labels on its training set. The y-axis represents
the number of all class ground-truths in each probability interval.
The positive-negative ratio of samples is same in the training sets
with different known proportions. It is obviously observed that the
number of misclassified positive labels in the interval [0, 0.5] is
significantly higher when 10% known labels.

annotated multi-label dataset is an alternative and feasible
strategy to solve the problem. For a partially annotated image, a small subset of its labels is annotated by positive and
negative labels, and the rest labels are unknown. Partial
labeling saves time and labor costs considerably. This paper focuses on how to learn deep neural network models on
multi-label datasets with partial labels.
To simplify the classification problem of partial labeling, unknown labels are ignored or treated as negative labels [32, 17]. However, the mode of ignoring unknown labels leads to higher entropy of unlabeled data and weakens
the generalization of the trained model. Treating unknown
labels as negative may reduce the entropy of unlabeled data,
which also introduces label noise into model training. The
self-training (ST) framework is proposed to deal with the
problems of generalization and label noise. Known labels
are utilized for training a model first, then the trained model
is used to generate pseudo-labels for unknown labels, and
at last, the model is trained by all labels again. The works
[12, 16, 6] exploit known labels to supervise training and
mine label correlations or instance similarities to comple-

1611

