This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Learn: How to Continuously Teach Humans and Machines
Parantak Singh1, 2 , You Li2,3 , Ankur Sikarwar1, 2 , Weixian Lei4 , Difei Gao4 ,
Morgan B. Talbot5, 6 , Ying Sun2 , Mike Zheng Shou4 , Gabriel Kreiman5 , Mengmi Zhang1, 2
1

Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore 2 CFAR and I2R, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore,
3
5

University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA, 4 Show Lab, National University of Singapore, Singapore,

Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, USA, 6 Harvard-MIT Health Sciences and Technology, MIT,
Address correspondence to mengmi@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract

Human teacher teaches human students
Full knowledge
about math

Curriculum design is a fundamental component of
education. For example, when we learn mathematics
at school, we build upon our knowledge of addition to
learn multiplication. These and other concepts must
be mastered before our first algebra lesson, which also
reinforces our addition and multiplication skills. Designing
a curriculum for teaching either a human or a machine
shares the underlying goal of maximizing knowledge
transfer from earlier to later tasks, while also minimizing
forgetting of learned tasks. Prior research on curriculum
design for image classification focuses on the ordering
of training examples during a single offline task. Here,
we investigate the effect of the order in which multiple
distinct tasks are learned in a sequence. We focus on
the online class-incremental continual learning setting,
where algorithms or humans must learn image classes
one at a time during a single pass through a dataset.
We find that curriculum consistently influences learning
outcomes for humans and for multiple continual machine
learning algorithms across several benchmark datasets.
We introduce a novel-object recognition dataset for human
curriculum learning experiments and observe that curricula
that are effective for humans are highly correlated with
those that are effective for machines. As an initial
step towards automated curriculum design for online
class-incremental learning, we propose a novel algorithm,
dubbed Curriculum Designer (CD), that designs and ranks
curricula based on inter-class feature similarities. We find
significant overlap between curricula that are empirically
highly effective and those that are highly ranked by our
CD. Our study establishes a framework for further research
on teaching humans and machines to learn continuously
using optimized curricula. Our code and data are available
through this link.

teacher

Add

Student 1

Multiply

Algebra

Student 2

AI teacher teaches AI students
Full knowledge
about object
recognition

teacher

Curriculum: which
class should I teach
students first?
Student 1

Student 2

Figure 1: Curricula in classroom and machine learning
settings.
In human education, a natural curriculum
designed by a knowledgeable math teacher prescribes
teaching, in order, addition, multiplication, and algebra.
Student 1 and Student 2 learn these concepts in a continuous
fashion. Similarly, in an image classification task, what is
the optimal curriculum for an AI teacher to continuously
teach AI students to recognize images?

1. Introduction
When learning mathematics, students continuously
advance through a curriculum that guides them to first learn
addition, then multiplication, and later algebra such that
each new concept both builds upon and reinforces existing
knowledge (Fig 1). Studies on curriculum development
in education show that careful design of curricula for
human students can enable an incremental learning process,
facilitating positive knowledge transfer to new tasks and
minimizing forgetting of learned tasks [55]. Drawing on
this inspiration, our goal is to develop a knowledgeable
artificially intelligent (AI) teacher (a “curriculum designer”)
that produces optimized curricula that enhance learning
outcomes of both human students and machine learning
algorithms (“AI students”).
A growing body of literature in the field of “curriculum

11708

