This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Label-Noise Learning with Intrinsically Long-Tailed Data
Yang Lu1,2 * Yiliang Zhang1,2
1

Bo Han3

Yiu-ming Cheung3

Hanzi Wang1,2

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
2

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China

3

Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China

luyang@xmu.edu.cn ylzhangcs@hotmail.com {bhanml, ymc}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk hanzi.wang@xmu.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Under the support of a large amount of high-quality labeled data, deep neural networks have achieved great success in various fields [27, 40, 7]. However, it is expensive and difficult to obtain a large amount of high-quality
labeled data in many practical applications. Instead, the
commonly used large-scale training data is usually obtained
from the Internet or crowdsourcing platforms like Amazon
Mechanical Turk, which is unreliable and may be mislabeled [52, 43]. The models trained on this kind of unreliable
data, called noisy-labeled data, often produce poor generalization performance because deep neural networks tend to
overfit noisy samples due to their large model capacity. In
* Yang Lu is the corresponding author: luyang@xmu.edu.cn

0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Class index

120
Clean
Noisy
100
Tail class noisy
80
Tail class clean
60
40
20
0 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
Loss

(a) Class distribution

(b) Loss distribution

4000
3000

Intrinsic
Observed (clean)
Observed (noise)

2000
1000

Number of samples

Label noise is one of the key factors that lead to the poor
generalization of deep learning models. Existing labelnoise learning methods usually assume that the groundtruth classes of the training data are balanced. However, the real-world data is often imbalanced, leading to
the inconsistency between observed and intrinsic class distribution with label noises. In this case, it is hard to
distinguish clean samples from noisy samples on the intrinsic tail classes with the unknown intrinsic class distribution. In this paper, we propose a learning framework for label-noise learning with intrinsically long-tailed
data. Specifically, we propose two-stage bi-dimensional
sample selection (TABASCO) to better separate clean samples from noisy samples, especially for the tail classes.
TABASCO consists of two new separation metrics that complement each other to compensate for the limitation of using a single metric in sample separation. Extensive experiments on benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method. Our code is available at https://github.
com/Wakings/TABASCO.

5000
Number of samples

Abstract

Figure 1: (a) An example of observed class distribution with
noisy labels with long-tailed intrinsic class distribution. (b)
The training loss of each sample under noisy-labeled and
long-tailed data.
the literature, there are some works to obtain a robust model
trained on noisy-labeled data [11, 44]. Among them, the
most straightforward and effective way is to differentiate
between clean and noisy samples based on their differences
in specific metrics, such as training loss [12, 29, 23].
These label-noise learning methods generally assume
that the intrinsic class distribution of the training data is
balanced, where each class has almost the same number
of samples in terms of their unknown ground-truth labels.
However, the data in real-world applications are often imbalanced, e.g., the LVIS dataset [9] and the iNaturalist
dataset [17]. The class imbalance usually exhibits in the
form of a long-tail distribution, where a small portion of
classes possess a large number of samples, and the other
classes possess a small number of samples only [38, 18]. In
this case, the model training tends to the head classes and
ignores the tail classes [60, 62]. When both noisy labels and
long-tail distribution exist, training a robust model is even
more challenging. There are two key challenges in this scenario. (1) Distribution inconsistency: The observed and
intrinsic distributions are likely inconsistent due to noise labels, making the model more difficult to discover and focus
on the intrinsic tail classes. As illustrated in Fig. 1(a), the intrinsic class distribution of the dataset is long-tailed, while
the existence of noisy labels makes the distribution more

1369

