This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DFA3D: 3D Deformable Attention For 2D-to-3D Feature Lifting
Hongyang Li1,3 *†
Hao Zhang2,3 *†
Zhaoyang Zeng3
Shilong Liu4,3
Feng Li2,3
Tianhe Ren3
Lei Zhang1,3‡
1
South China University of Technology.
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
3
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA).
4
Dept. of CST., BNRist Center, Institute for AI, Tsinghua University.
Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new operator, called 3D
DeFormable Attention (DFA3D), for 2D-to-3D feature lifting, which transforms multi-view 2D image features into
a unified 3D space for 3D object detection. Existing feature lifting approaches, such as Lift-Splat-based and 2D
attention-based, either use estimated depth to get pseudo
LiDAR features and then splat them to a 3D space, which is
a one-pass operation without feature refinement, or ignore
depth and lift features by 2D attention mechanisms, which
achieve finer semantics while suffering from a depth ambiguity problem. In contrast, our DFA3D-based method first
leverages the estimated depth to expand each view’s 2D feature map to 3D and then utilizes DFA3D to aggregate features from the expanded 3D feature maps. With the help
of DFA3D, the depth ambiguity problem can be effectively
alleviated from the root, and the lifted features can be progressively refined layer by layer, thanks to the Transformerlike architecture. In addition, we propose a mathematically equivalent implementation of DFA3D which can significantly improve its memory efficiency and computational
speed. We integrate DFA3D into several methods that use
2D attention-based feature lifting with only a few modifications in code and evaluate on the nuScenes dataset. The experiment results show a consistent improvement of +1.41%
mAP on average, and up to +15.1% mAP improvement
when high-quality depth information is available, demonstrating the superiority, applicability, and huge potential of
DFA3D. The code is available at https://github.com/IDEAResearch/3D-deformable-attention.git.

* This work was done during the internship at IDEA.
† Equal contribution.
‡ Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
3D object detection is a fundamental task in many realworld applications such as robotics and autonomous driving. Although LiDAR-based methods [37, 40, 23, 33] have
achieved impressive results with the help of accurate 3D
perception from LiDAR, multi-view camera-based methods have recently received extensive attention because of
their low cost for deployment and distinctive capability
of long-range and color perception. Classical multi-view
camera-based 3D object detection approaches mostly follow monocular frameworks which first perform 2D/3D object detection in each individual view and then conduct
cross-view post-processing to obtain the final result. While
remarkable progress has been made [30, 31, 24, 26, 1], such
a framework cannot fully utilize cross-view information and
usually leads to low performance.
To eliminate the ineffective cross-view post-processing,
several end-to-end approaches [25, 13, 10, 14, 32, 20, 21]
have been developed. These approaches normally contain
three important modules: a backbone for 2D image feature
extraction, a feature lifting module for transforming multiview 2D image features into a unified 3D space (e.g. BEV
space in an ego coordinate system) to obtain lifted features,
and a detection head for performing object detection by taking as input the lifted features. Among these modules, the
feature lifting module serves as an important component to
bridge the 2D backbone and the 3D detection head, whose
quality will greatly affect the final detection performance.
To perform feature lifting, recent methods usually predefine a set of 3D anchors in the ego coordinate system sparsely or uniformly, with randomly initialized content features. After that, they lift 2D image features into
the 3D anchors to obtain the lifted features. Some methods [13, 10, 9, 34, 12] utilize a straightforward lift and
splat mechanism [25] by first lifting 2D image features into
pseudo LiDAR features in an ego coordinate system using
estimated depth and then assigning the pseudo LiDAR fea-

6684

