This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Locating Noise is Halfway Denoising for Semi-Supervised Segmentation
Yan Fang1,2 ∗ , Feng Zhu3 , Bowen Cheng4 † , Luoqi Liu5 , Yao Zhao1,2 , Yunchao Wei1,2
1

2

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology
3
University of Technology Sydney 4 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
5
MT Lab, Meitu Inc

Abstract
We investigate semi-supervised semantic segmentation
with self-training, where a teacher model generates pseudo
masks to exploit the benefits of a large amount of unlabeled
images. We notice that the noisy label from the generated
pseudo masks is the major obstacle to achieving good performance. Previous works all treat the noise in pixel level
and ignore the contextual information of the noise. This
work shows that locating the patch-wise noisy region is a
better way to deal with noise. To be specific, our method,
named Uncertainty-aware Patch CutMix (UPC), first estimates the uncertainty of per-pixel prediction for pseudo
masks of unlabeled images. Then UPC splits the uncertainty map into patches and calculates patch-wise uncertainty. UPC selects top-k most uncertain patches to generate the uncertain regions. Finally, uncertain regions are
replaced with reliable ones from labeled images. We conduct extensive experiments using standard semi-supervised
settings on Pascal VOC and Cityscapes. Experiment results
show that UPC can significantly boost the performance of
the state-of-the-art methods. In addition, we further demonstrate that our UPC is robust to out-of-distribution unlabeled images, e.g., MSCOCO.

1. Introduction
Past decades have witnessed significant progress in semantic segmentation thanks to the rapid growth of deep
learning [20, 6, 9, 8, 30] and large-scale datasets [29, 10, 13]
with accurate pixel-level annotations. However, annotating a massive number of training images is expensive and
time-consuming, which limits the ability to scale to various segmentation tasks or scenarios. To reduce the anno* Work done during internships at MT Lab, Meitu Inc.
† Work done while at University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign.

Corresponding author.

Figure 1. (a) Illustrations of the difference between the Pixel Erasing method and our UPC. The Pixel Erasing method directly removes highly uncertain pixels in pseudo masks. (b) Comparison
with other popular data augmentation methods, based on ST++.

tation cost, semi-supervised semantic segmentation algorithms [33, 31, 15] emerged by exploiting a small number
of labeled data and a large amount of unlabeled data.
State-of-the-art semi-supervised semantic segmentation
can be categorized into two groups: consistency regularization and entropy minimization. Particularly, consistency
regularization-based approaches [15, 33, 7] enforce similar
predictions of the same image under different transformations, and a representative work is the Mean-Teacher [38].
However, consistency regularization usually has complex
training pipelines to achieve good performance, e.g., contrastive learning [27] or class-balanced strategies [21, 3, 14].
In contrast, entropy minimization [17] often follows a selftraining [14] pipeline by retraining the model with pseudo
masks on unlabeled images, which leads to a simpler

16612

