This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D-VisTA: Pre-trained Transformer for 3D Vision and Text Alignment
Siyuan Huang2
Qing Li2
Ziyu Zhu1,2 * Xiaojian Ma2 Yixin Chen2 Zhidong Deng1
1
Tsinghua University 2 National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI, China
3d-vista.github.io

Abstract
3D vision-language grounding (3D-VL) is an emerging
field that aims to connect the 3D physical world with natural
language, which is crucial for achieving embodied intelligence. Current 3D-VL models rely heavily on sophisticated
modules, auxiliary losses, and optimization tricks, which
calls for a simple and unified model. In this paper, we propose 3D-VisTA, a pre-trained Transformer for 3D Vision
and Text Alignment that can be easily adapted to various
downstream tasks. 3D-VisTA simply utilizes self-attention
layers for both single-modal modeling and multi-modal fusion without any sophisticated task-specific design. To further enhance its performance on 3D-VL tasks, we construct
ScanScribe, the first large-scale 3D scene-text pairs dataset
for 3D-VL pre-training. ScanScribe contains 2,995 RGBD scans for 1,185 unique indoor scenes originating from
ScanNet and 3R-Scan datasets, along with paired 278K
scene descriptions generated from existing 3D-VL tasks, templates, and GPT-3. 3D-VisTA is pre-trained on ScanScribe
via masked language/object modeling and scene-text matching. It achieves state-of-the-art results on various 3D-VL
tasks, ranging from visual grounding and dense captioning
to question answering and situated reasoning. Moreover,
3D-VisTA demonstrates superior data efficiency, obtaining
strong performance even with limited annotations during
downstream task fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
Aligning the 3D physical world with natural language is a
crucial step towards embodied artificial intelligence [18, 26,
37], where intelligent agents can understand and further execute human instructions in the real world [5, 29]. Recently,
3D vision-language (3D-VL) tasks have attracted growing
interest [19], including 3D visual grounding [8, 1], dense
captioning [11], grammar learning [23], question answering [3, 56], and situated reasoning [36].
However, most of the models developed for 3D-VL only
* Work done as an intern at BIGAI.

Corresponding author.

Diverse prompts, scene graphs, 3D scans, and objects.
Scene graph

Prompt

Chair

Where is the chair?
Where is the table?
Summarize this
scene.

Next

On

3D scan

Object

Table
On

Floor

GPT-3

Ask
GPT

Template

Human

Ask
human

ScanScribe dataset for 3D-VL pre-training
(Large-scale scene-text pairs)

3D-VisTA: Pre-trained Transformer
(Masked Language / Object Modeling, Scene-Text Matching)
3D Visual
Grounding
(e.g., ScanRefer)

3D Question
Answering
(e.g., ScanQA)

3D Situated
Reasoning
(e.g., SQA3D)

3D Dense
Captioning
(e.g., Scan2Cap)

Figure 1: Overall framework of our 3D-VisTA pipeline. We collect diverse prompts, scene graphs, 3D scans, and objects to construct ScanScribe dataset. Through self-supervised pre-training,
3D-VisTA supports various downstream tasks including 3D visual
grounding, dense captioning, question answering, and situated reasoning.

focus on one or two of these 3D-VL tasks and employ taskspecific designs [7, 3, 36, 35, 10]. For instance, 3D-SPS [35]
and BUTD-DETR [27] progressively discover the target object by attending VL features and detecting objects in each
layer. 3DVG [55], MVT [24], and ViL3DRel [10] improve
3D visual grounding by explicitly infusing spatial relation
information into the model design. 3DJCG [7] jointly learns
3D dense captioning and visual grounding via a shared 3D
object proposal module [16] with two separate task-specific
heads [7]. Additionally, training these models often requires
manually specified auxiliary losses (e.g., 3D object detection/classification and text classification [35, 24, 7, 3, 36]) or
optimization tricks (e.g., knowledge distillation [4, 53] ). The
lack of a simple and unified approach creates a significant
gap in developing a general-purpose 3D-VL model.
To fill such gap, we introduce 3D-VisTA, a Transformerbased model for 3D Vision and Text Alignment that can be
easily adapted to various downstream tasks. Unlike previous models that design sophisticated task-specific modules,

2911

