This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Landscape Learning for Neural Network Inversion
Ruoshi Liu1

Chengzhi Mao1 Purva Tendulkar1 Hao Wang2
1
Columbia University 2 Rutgers University

Carl Vondrick1

Abstract
Many machine learning methods operate by inverting a neural network at inference time, which has become a popular
technique for solving inverse problems in computer vision,
robotics, and graphics. However, these methods often involve
gradient descent through a highly non-convex loss landscape,
causing the optimization process to be unstable and slow. We
introduce a method that learns a loss landscape where gradient descent is efficient, bringing massive improvement and
acceleration to the inversion process. We demonstrate this
advantage on a number of methods for both generative and
discriminative tasks, including GAN inversion, adversarial
defense, and 3D human pose reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Many inference problems in machine learning are formulated as inverting a forward model F (x) by optimizing an
objective over the input space x. This approach, which we
term optimization-based inference (OBI), has traditionally
been used to solve a range of inverse problems in vision,
graphics, robotics, recommendation systems, and security
[28, 38, 22, 10, 62, 17]. Recently, neural networks have
emerged as the paramterization of choice for forward models [43, 53, 1, 49, 76, 68, 13, 78], which can be pretrained
on large collections of data, and inverted at testing time in
order to solve inference queries.
Optimization-based inference (OBI) has many advantages
over feed-forward or encoder-based inference (EBI). Without encoder, OBI provides flexibility to adapt to new tasks,
allowing one to define new constraints into the objective during inference. When observations are partially missing, OBI
can adapt without additional training. Moreover, OBI naturally supports generating multiple and diverse hypotheses
when there is uncertainty. Finally, OBI has intrinsic advantages for robustness, both adapting to new data distributions
as well as defending against adversarial examples.
However, the key bottleneck for OBI in practice is the
computational efficiency and the speed of inference. Feedforward models are fast because they only require a single
forward pass of a neural network, but OBI requires many

Original Loss Landscape

Learned Loss Landscape

Figure 1: Loss Landscapes Comparison. The loss landscape of
optimization-based inference (OBI) is often highly non-convex.
We propose to learn a smoother loss landscape through a mapping
network to accelerate the optimization. Plotted from real data.

(often hundreds) steps of optimization in order to obtain
strong results for one example. Forward models in OBI are
often trained with generative or discriminative tasks, but they
are not trained for the purpose of performing gradient descent
in the input space. Fig. 9 visualizes the loss landscape for
uncurated examples. The loss landscape is not guaranteed
to be an efficient path from the initialization to the solution,
causing the instability and inefficiency.
In this paper, we propose a framework to accelerate and
stabilize the inversion of forward neural networks. Instead of
optimizing over the original input space, we learn a new input space such that gradient descent converges quickly. Our
approach uses an alternating algorithm to learn the mapping
between these spaces. The first step collects optimization
trajectories in the new space until convergence. The second
step updates the mapping parameters to reduce the distance
between the convergence point and each point along the trajectory. By repeating these steps, our approach will learn
a mapping between the spaces that allows gradient descent
over the input to converge in significantly fewer steps.
Empirical experiments and visualizations on both generative and discriminative models show that our method can
largely improve the convergence speed for optimization. We
validate our approach on a diverse set of vision tasks, including GAN inversion [1], adversarial defense [45], and 3D
human pose reconstruction [53]. Our experiments show that
our method converges an order of magnitude faster without
loss in absolute performance after convergence. As our ap-

2239

