This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Not All Steps are Created Equal:
Selective Diffusion Distillation for Image Manipulation
Luozhou Wang1, 4 *
1
3

Shu Liu2

Shuai Yang1, 4 *

Ying-cong Chen1, 3, 4†

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou).

2

SmartMore.

4

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. HKUST (Guangzhou) - SmartMore Joint Lab.

Abstract
Conditional diffusion models have demonstrated impressive performance in image manipulation tasks. The general pipeline involves adding noise to the image and then
denoising it. However, this method faces a trade-off problem: adding too much noise affects the fidelity of the image
while adding too little affects its editability. This largely
limits their practical applicability. In this paper, we propose a novel framework, Selective Diffusion Distillation
(SDD), that ensures both the fidelity and editability of images. Instead of directly editing images with a diffusion
model, we train a feedforward image manipulation network
under the guidance of the diffusion model. Besides, we propose an effective indicator to select the semantic-related
timestep to obtain the correct semantic guidance from the diffusion model. This approach successfully avoids the dilemma
caused by the diffusion process. Our extensive experiments
demonstrate the advantages of our framework. Code is released at https://github.com/AndysonYs/Selective-DiffusionDistillation.

1. Introduction
In recent years, diffusion model [10, 14, 28, 34, 36, 38, 40–
43] has attracted great attention in both academic and industrial communities. It models the Markov transition from
a Gaussian distribution to a data distribution to generate
high-quality images sequentially. The elegant formulation
achieves state-of-the-art performance in various image generation benchmarks. Meanwhile, text-to-image diffusion models [28, 34, 36, 38] also demonstrate their impressive capacity
in controllable image synthesis, enabling a wide range of
practical applications. Among them, one of the most interesting applications is image manipulation.
A typical text-guidance manipulation pipeline is to invert
the input image to a noisy latent and then denoise this latent
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Fidelity

Editability

“Sad”

“white hair”

Figure 1. Editability and fidelity trade-off of diffusion-based
image manipulation. The leftmost is the input image. For each
manipulation, we add increasing noise levels from left to right and
then denoise the image. Different semantics require different levels
of noise to manipulate.

with a given text prompt. The inversion process can be the
simple noise adding [25] or the DDIM inversion [41, 44].
There is an editability-fidelity tradeoff in such pipelines, as
shown in Fig. 1. Adding a lot of noise to the original image
gives the diffusion model more freedom to manipulate the
image, but it also makes it harder to retain original semantics
when denoising back, and vice versa.
More importantly, this trade-off can lead to unsuccessful
manipulations, such as “white hair” in Fig. 1. This is because
the diffusion model processes different semantics at different
stages [6]. If our manipulation corresponds to the semantics
in the early stages, we have to add more noise, hence losing
much information from the original image. To overcome the
failure caused by the trade-off, existing methods attempt to
incorporate more guidance information, such as using masks
to limit the manipulation region [1, 2, 24]. This is useful for
local image manipulation, but for some global structures,
such as changing the pose of a human face, it still fails to
solve the problem.
In this work, we take a different viewpoint to leverage
a diffusion model for image manipulation. Unlike existing
methods that directly manipulate images progressively with
diffusion models, we train an efficient image manipulator

7472

