This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hyperbolic Chamfer Distance for Point Cloud Completion
Fangzhou Lin1,2 Yun Yue1 Songlin Hou1,3 Xuechu Yu1 Yajun Xu4
Kazunori D Yamada2 Ziming Zhang1 *
1
Worcester Polytechnic Institute, USA 2 Tohoku University, Japan
3
Dell Technologies, USA 4 Hokkaido University, Japan
{flin2, yyue, xyu4, shou, zzhang15}@wpi.edu, yamada@tohoku.ac.jp,

Abstract
Chamfer distance (CD) is a standard metric to measure
the shape dissimilarity between point clouds in point cloud
completion, as well as a loss function for (deep) learning.
However, it is well known that CD is vulnerable to outliers, leading to the drift towards suboptimal models. In
contrast to the literature where most works address such
issues in Euclidean space, we propose an extremely simple yet powerful metric for point cloud completion, namely
Hyperbolic Chamfer Distance (HyperCD), that computes
CD in hyperbolic space. In backpropagation, HyperCD
consistently assigns higher weights to the matched point
pairs with smaller Euclidean distances. In this way, good
point matches are likely to be preserved while bad matches
can be updated gradually, leading to better completion results. We demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on the
benchmark datasets, i.e. PCN, ShapeNet-55, and ShapeNet34, and show from visualization that HyperCD can significantly improve the surface smoothness. Code is available
at: https://github.com/Zhang-VISLab.

1. Introduction
Point clouds, one of the most important data representations that can be easily acquired, play a key role in modern
robotics and automation applications [54, 33, 44]. However,
raw data of point clouds captured by existing 3D sensors is
usually incomplete and sparse due to occlusion, limited sensor resolution and light reflection [68, 23, 31, 24, 75], which
can negatively impact the performance of downstream tasks
that require high-quality representation, such as point cloud
segmentation and detection. In this paper, we address this
issue by inferring the complete shape of an object or scene
from incomplete raw point clouds. This task is referred to
as point cloud completion [2].
* corresponding author

𝑥!"
𝑥!

𝑥!"

𝑥#
𝑥#"

𝑥#
𝑥#"

𝑥$

(a) Euclidean

𝑥$

𝑥!

(b) Hyperbolic

Figure 1. Illustration of point matching in the (a) Euclidean space
and (b) hyperbolic space. With the position-aware embeddings in
hyperbolic space, the mismatched point pairs in Euclidean space
may be corrected, leading to better completion performance.

Point cloud completion is usually non-trivial due to the
unordered and unstructured characteristics of point clouds
(especially obtained from real-world environments). Recently, many (deep) learning-based approaches have been
introduced to point cloud completion ranging from supervised learning, self-supervised learning to unsupervised
learning [70, 55, 35, 6, 11, 43]. Amongst them, supervised
learning with a general encoder-decoder structure serves as
the dominant paradigm architectural choice for many researchers and achieves state-of-the-art on nearly all mainstream benchmarks. Their works largely focus on the design of different structures in the encoder and decoder for
more informative feature extractions and better point cloud
generation [69, 62, 75, 54, 12], in Euclidean space.
Unequal Point Importance in Point Clouds. Humans often perceive the visual quality of point clouds in a nonhomogeneous way by putting a higher emphasis on the
points with certain geometric structures such as planes,
edges, corners, etc. For example, point clouds with smooth
surfaces and sharp edges tend to be more visually appealing
than their counterparts [64, 26]. Surprisingly, this simple
yet nontrivial fact in point clouds, however, is hardly explored in the literature of point cloud completion. For in-

14595

