This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FLIP: Cross-domain Face Anti-spoofing with Language Guidance
Koushik Srivatsan Muzammal Naseer Karthik Nandakumar
Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI)
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
{koushik.srivatsan, muzammal.naseer, karthik.nandakumar}@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
Face anti-spoofing (FAS) or presentation attack detection
is an essential component of face recognition systems deployed in security-critical applications. Existing FAS methods have poor generalizability to unseen spoof types, camera sensors, and environmental conditions. Recently, vision transformer (ViT) models have been shown to be effective for the FAS task due to their ability to capture longrange dependencies among image patches. However, adaptive modules or auxiliary loss functions are often required
to adapt pre-trained ViT weights learned on large-scale
datasets such as ImageNet. In this work, we first show that
initializing ViTs with multimodal (e.g., CLIP) pre-trained
weights improves generalizability for the FAS task, which
is in line with the zero-shot transfer capabilities of visionlanguage pre-trained (VLP) models. We then propose a
novel approach for robust cross-domain FAS by grounding
visual representations with the help of natural language.
Specifically, we show that aligning the image representation
with an ensemble of class descriptions (based on natural
language semantics) improves FAS generalizability in lowdata regimes. Finally, we propose a multimodal contrastive
learning strategy to boost feature generalization further and
bridge the gap between source and target domains. Extensive experiments on three standard protocols demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms the stateof-the-art methods, achieving better zero-shot transfer performance than five-shot transfer of “adaptive ViTs”. Code:
https://github.com/koushiksrivats/FLIP

1. Introduction
From personal devices to airport boarding gates, face
recognition systems have become a ubiquitous tool for recognizing people. This may be attributed to recent advances
in face recognition technology based on deep learning, as
well as its simplicity and non-contact nature. However,
these systems are vulnerable to face presentation attacks,
where an attacker tries to spoof the identity of a bonafide

Figure 1. Area Under ROC Curve (AUC %) and Half Total Error
Rate (HTER %) comparison between our proposed method and
state-of-the-art (SOTA). Our method achieves the highest AUC (↑)
performance with the lowest HTER (↓) for cross-domain face antispoofing on MCIO datasets, surpassing all the SOTA methods.

individual with the help of presentation attack instruments
(PAI) such as printed photos, replayed videos, or 3D synthetics masks [52]. Therefore, face anti-spoofing (FAS) or
face presentation attack detection (FPAD) is essential to secure face recognition systems against presentation attacks.
Prior works [59, 30, 51, 47, 54, 53, 42] have shown that
impressive FAS accuracy can be achieved in intra-domain
scenarios, where the training and test distributions are similar. However, existing FAS methods fail to generalize well
to the unseen target domains due to two main reasons: (a)
variations due to camera sensors, presentation attack instruments, illumination changes, and image resolution cause a
large domain gap between the source and target distributions that is inherently hard to bridge; and (b) commonly
used FAS benchmark datasets have limited training data,
causing the model to overfit to the source domain(s). Consequently, achieving robust cross-domain FAS performance
has remained an elusive challenge thus far.
The problem of cross-domain FAS has been formulated
in different ways in the literature. Unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) methods [40, 12, 15, 21, 45, 44, 43, 19,
67, 56] make use of the unlabeled target domain data and
labeled source domain data to learn a generalized decision boundary. Few-shot learning methods [29, 32, 31, 16]

19685

