This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BlindHarmony: “Blind” Harmonization for MR Images via Flow model
Hwihun Jeong
Heejoon Byun
Dong Un Kang
Jongho Lee†
Department of ECE, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea
{hwihuni, ryanb01, qkrtnskfk23, jonghoyi}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In MRI, images of the same contrast (e.g., T1 ) from the
same subject can exhibit noticeable differences when acquired using different hardware, sequences, or scan parameters. These differences in images create a domain gap
that needs to be bridged by a step called image harmonization, to process the images successfully using conventional or deep learning-based image analysis (e.g., segmentation). Several methods, including deep learning-based
approaches, have been proposed to achieve image harmonization. However, they often require datasets from multiple
domains for deep learning training and may still be unsuccessful when applied to images from unseen domains. To
address this limitation, we propose a novel concept called
‘Blind Harmonization’, which utilizes only target domain
data for training but still has the capability to harmonize
images from unseen domains. For the implementation of
blind harmonization, we developed BlindHarmony using an
unconditional flow model trained on target domain data.
The harmonized image is optimized to have a correlation
with the input source domain image while ensuring that
the latent vector of the flow model is close to the center
of the Gaussian distribution. BlindHarmony was evaluated on both simulated and real datasets and compared
to conventional methods. BlindHarmony demonstrated noticeable performance on both datasets, highlighting its potential for future use in clinical settings. The source code
is available at: https://github.com/SNU-LIST/
BlindHarmony

1. Introduction
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a widely-used
medical imaging modality. With the advent of deep
learning-based computer vision techniques, there have been
numerous applications of deep learning in MRI, such as disease classification [5, 36, 23], tumor segmentation [3, 46],
and solving inverse problems [18, 44]. Despite the notable
†Corresponding author.

performance of deep learning in MRI, its widespread use
has been hindered by the inherent domain gap present in
MRI data [6, 8]. Variations occur in MRI images across
different vendors, scanners, sites, and scan parameters even
when the images are acquired from the same subject. This
domain gap presents a generalization problem when applying the data to a neural network that has been trained on a
different dataset.
To overcome the challenges of generalization in deep
learning applied to MRI data, several harmonization methods have been developed to match the source domain image to the characteristics of the target domain. These approaches include non-deep learning-based methods [37, 31,
38, 29, 34, 15] and deep learning-based methods [9, 30,
26, 10, 13, 17], which have demonstrated performance improvements. However, there are limitations that need to be
addressed. Firstly, many of these methods require multiple datasets from different domains. For instance, DeepHarmony [9] which is a supervised end-to-end framework
requires “traveling subjects” who undergo multiple MRI
scans with different scanners to obtain images from both
the source and target domains. Utilizing CycleGAN-based
style transfer can mitigate the need for traveling subjects
[30, 26], but it still necessitates large datasets with multiple domains. Secondly, the harmonization network trained
for mapping between specific source and target domains is
challenging to be applied in unseen domains, limiting the
generalizability of methods. Efforts have been made to employ disentanglement approaches or domain adaptation to
achieve harmonization in unseen domains, but it requires a
multi-contrast or multi-site paired dataset [10, 48]. To overcome these challenges, we propose the concept of “Blind
Harmonization”, where the harmonization network can be
constructed only with the target domain data during training and applicable to diverse source domains that are unseen
during training.
In recent years, a class of invertible generative models
called normalizing flow [11, 21, 12] has been introduced
and has shown exceptional performance in a wide range of
computer vision tasks [27, 2, 33]. Normalizing flow has the
unique ability not only to generate novel images that resem-

21129

