This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Fields for Structured Lighting
Aarrushi Shandilya Benjamin Attal Christian Richardt 1 James Tompkin † Matthew O’Toole
Carnegie Mellon University 1 Meta Reality Labs Research † Brown University
Abstract
We present an image formation model and optimization
procedure that combines the advantages of neural radiance fields and structured light imaging. Existing depthsupervised neural models rely on depth sensors to accurately
capture the scene’s geometry. However, the depth maps recovered by these sensors can be prone to error, or even fail
outright. Instead of depending on the fidelity of processed
depth maps from a structured light system, a more principled approach is to explicitly model the raw structured light
images themselves. Our proposed approach enables the estimation of high-fidelity depth maps, including for objects with
complex material properties (e.g., partially-transparent surfaces). Besides computing depth, the raw structured light images also confer other useful radiometric cues, which enable
predicting surface normals and decomposing scene appearance in terms of a direct, indirect, and ambient component.
We evaluate our framework quantitatively and qualitatively
on a range of real and synthetic scenes, and decompose
scenes into their constituent components for novel views.

1. Introduction
3D scene reconstruction lies at the center of fields like photogrammetry, robotics, and digital preservation. However,
reconstructing scenes from 2D image supervision alone is
under-constrained and classical approaches struggle in textureless regions [25], where finding correspondences between images is hard. Recent neural rendering techniques
like NeRF [18] and other variants [29] are good at novel-view
synthesis, but they, too, struggle to reconstruct geometry in
scenes with low-texture regions or from few input views.
Many depth cameras alleviate these issues by introducing
their own lighting into the scene [9, 24]. For example, active
stereo systems (e.g., Intel RealSense [14]) use a projector to
illuminate the scene with an (often unknown) light pattern,
which adds texture to help solve the stereo correspondence
problem. Coded structured light systems use known light
patterns to solve correspondences using as few as one camera
viewpoint. Such active depth-sensing devices are found in
many smartphones and tablets [1, 14, 39], and unlock new

(a) Structured light image

(b) Ambient image

(c) Direct component

(d) Indirect component

(e) Disparity map

(f) Normal map

Figure 1. Scene decomposition of a real scene from a novel viewpoint. Our proposed framework uses the raw measurements from
a single infrared camera on an Intel RealSense to generate a volumetric representation of the scene. The images (a–f) synthesized
from a novel camera viewpoint show the different representations
of shape and appearance recovered using our proposed framework.

VR and AR applications. However, these sensors can also
fail to reliably estimate depth, especially in cases where
light misbehaves [10, 22], e.g., due to light traveling many
different paths before reaching a particular camera pixel.
We propose a volumetric image formation model and corresponding optimization procedure designed to synthesize
structured light images under a known projection pattern.
Given a set of raw structured light and ambient-only images
captured from different viewpoints, our proposed framework
reconstructs scenes through a neural volume rendering procedure [18], recovering a representation of a scene’s shape
and appearance from only a few input views. Beyond recovering the geometry of challenging scenes (e.g., scenes
containing translucent objects), our image formation model
takes advantage of additional radiometric cues present in
the raw structured light images, to solve for normals and

3512

