This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond One-to-One: Rethinking the Referring Image Segmentation
Yutao Hu1 ,* Qixiong Wang2 ,* Wenqi Shao2 , Enze Xie3 ,
Zhenguo Li3 , Jungong Han4 , Ping Luo1,2†
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 4 The University of Sheffield

Abstract
Referring image segmentation aims to segment the target object referred by a natural language expression. However, previous methods rely on the strong assumption that
one sentence must describe one target in the image, which
is often not the case in real-world applications. As a result, such methods fail when the expressions refer to either
no objects or multiple objects. In this paper, we address
this issue from two perspectives. First, we propose a Dual
Multi-Modal Interaction (DMMI) Network, which contains
two decoder branches and enables information flow in two
directions. In the text-to-image decoder, text embedding is
utilized to query the visual feature and localize the corresponding target. Meanwhile, the image-to-text decoder is
implemented to reconstruct the erased entity-phrase conditioned on the visual feature. In this way, visual features
are encouraged to contain the critical semantic information about target entity, which supports the accurate segmentation in the text-to-image decoder in turn. Secondly,
we collect a new challenging but realistic dataset called
Ref-ZOM, which includes image-text pairs under different
settings. Extensive experiments demonstrate our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on different datasets,
and the Ref-ZOM-trained model performs well on various
types of text inputs. Codes and datasets are available at
https://github.com/toggle1995/RIS-DMMI.

1. Introduction
Referring image segmentation aims to segment the target object described by a given natural language expression. Compared to the traditional semantic segmentation
task [32, 41, 3], referring image segmentation is no longer
restricted by the predefined classes and could segment specific individuals selectively according to the description of
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Persons in front
of the car

(a)

one-to-one

one-to-many

Ground-truth

VLT [7]

one-to-zero

one-to-many
Three persons
playing baseball

one-to-zero
A cat lying on
the ground

(b)

LAVT [48]

Figure 1: (a) Taking the autonomous driving as an example,
text expression may refer to varying number of targets, depending on the specific real-world scenario. (b) When the
sentences refer to multiple or no targets, existing methods
cannot realize accurate segmentation.
text, which has large potential value for various applications
such as human-robot interaction [43] and image editing [2].
Despite the recent progress, there are still several important
challenges that need to be addressed in order to make this
technology more applicable in real-world scenarios.
In referring image segmentation, most previous methods only concentrate on the one-to-one setting, where each
sentence only indicates one target in the image. However,
as shown in Fig. 1(a), one-to-many and one-to-zero settings, where the sentence indicates many or no targets in
the image, respectively, are also common and critical in the
real-world applications. Unfortunately, previous methods
tend to struggle when confronting one-to-many and one-tozero samples. As illustrated in Fig. 1(b), the recent SOTA
method, LAVT [48], only localizes one person in the image
when given the description “Three persons playing baseball”. As for one-to-zero input, previous methods still segment one target even if it is completely irrelevant to the
given text. Therefore, it is imperative to enable the model
to adapt to various types of text inputs.

4067

