This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Universal LiDAR-Based 3D Object Detection
by Multi-Domain Knowledge Transfer
Guile Wu, Tongtong Cao, Bingbing Liu*, Xingxin Chen, and Yuan Ren
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{guile.wu, caotongtong, liu.bingbing, xingxin.chen1, yuan.ren3}@huawei.com

Abstract
Contemporary LiDAR-based 3D object detection methods mostly focus on single-domain learning or crossdomain adaptive learning. However, for autonomous driving systems, optimizing a specific LiDAR-based 3D object
detector for each domain is costly and lacks of scalability in real-world deployment. It is desirable to train a universal LiDAR-based 3D object detector from multiple domains. In this work, we propose the first attempt to explore
multi-domain learning and generalization for LiDAR-based
3D object detection. We show that jointly optimizing a 3D
object detector from multiple domains achieves better generalization capability compared to the conventional singledomain learning model. To explore informative knowledge
across domains towards a universal 3D object detector, we
propose a multi-domain knowledge transfer framework with
universal feature transformation. This approach leverages
spatial-wise and channel-wise knowledge across domains
to learn universal feature representations, so it facilitates
to optimize a universal 3D object detector for deployment
at different domains. Extensive experiments on four benchmark datasets (Waymo, KITTI, NuScenes and ONCE) show
the superiority of our approach over the state-of-the-art approaches for multi-domain learning and generalization in
LiDAR-based 3D object detection.

1. Introduction
LiDAR-based 3D object detection aims to localize and
recognize objects of interests from LiDAR point clouds. It
has been used in a wide range of applications, such as autonomous driving and robotics. Although incredible success has been achieved in the past few years, most LiDARbased 3D object detection methods focus on optimizing a
specific model for a single domain [38, 42, 21, 34, 7, 23,
11], which usually shows poor generalization to other domains. To address this problem, some researchers resort to
* Bingbing Liu is the corresponding author.

Training domain

Testing domain
3D object detector-n
3D
Detection
2D
Domain-n
Domain-n
backbone-n backbone-n
head-n
(a) 3D object detection by single-domain learning.
Testing domain
Training domain
Domain-1

…

Domain-n

3D
backbone

Domain-1

3D object detector
2D
Detection
backbone
head

…

Domain-n

(b) 3D object detection by multi-domain learning.
100

(%)

ONCE

KITTI

Waymo

NuScenes

Joint

Waymo

NuScenes

Avg

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
ONCE

KITTI

(c) Single-domain learning vs. multi-domain learning.

Figure 1. Comparisons of LiDAR-based 3D object detection by
single-domain learning and multi-domain learning. (a) Conventional methods mainly train a specific model for each domain.
(b) We propose to jointly optimize a universal model for all domains. (c) Comparison between oracle models and a joint-training
model. Results are evaluated using CenterPoint [38] with KITTI
metric [2] of APBEV and IoU0.7 of the car category.

cross-domain adaptation [31, 16, 37, 36] to transfer knowledge from a source domain to a target domain, which improves generalization of a target model. However, domain
adaptive 3D object detection methods usually ignore the importance of preserving generalization to the source domain,
resulting in poor performance on the source domain.
For automated driving systems, optimizing a specific
LiDAR-based 3D object detection model for each domain
(e.g., locations, LiDAR sensors, etc.) is costly and lacks
of scalability for real-world deployment. More importantly,
optimizing each domain independently cannot make full use
of knowledge of each domain to facilitate learning a universal detector. We summarize some domain gap infor-

8669

