This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D-aware Blending with Generative NeRFs
Hyunsu Kim 1

Gayoung Lee 1
1

Yunjey Choi 1

NAVER AI Lab

2

SNU AIIS
(a) Original

3

Jun-Yan Zhu3

CMU
(b) Reference

(c) 2D method

(d) Ours

Misaligned

Roughly aligned

Abstract
Image blending aims to combine multiple images seamlessly. It remains challenging for existing 2D-based methods,
especially when input images are misaligned due to differences in 3D camera poses and object shapes. To tackle these
issues, we propose a 3D-aware blending method using generative Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF), including two key
components: 3D-aware alignment and 3D-aware blending.
For 3D-aware alignment, we first estimate the camera pose
of the reference image with respect to generative NeRFs and
then perform pose alignment for objects. To further leverage 3D information of the generative NeRF, we propose
3D-aware blending that utilizes volume density and blends
on the NeRF’s latent space, rather than raw pixel space.
Collectively, our method outperforms existing 2D baselines,
as validated by extensive quantitative and qualitative evaluations with FFHQ and AFHQ-Cat.

Jin-Hwa Kim 1,2

1. Introduction
Image blending aims at combining elements from multiple images naturally, enabling a wide range of applications in content creation, and virtual and augmented realities [95, 96]. However, blending images seamlessly requires
delicate adjustment of color, texture, and shape, often requiring users’ expertise and tedious manual processes. To
reduce human efforts, researchers have proposed various automatic image blending algorithms, including classic methods [62, 49, 7, 76] and deep neural networks [93, 79, 54].
Despite significant progress, blending two unaligned images remains a challenge. Current 2D-based methods often
assume that object shapes and camera poses have been accurately aligned. As shown in Figure 1c, even slight misalignment can produce unnatural results, as it is obvious to human
eyes that foreground and background objects were captured
using different cameras. Several methods [34, 52, 12, 66, 86]
warp an image via 2D affine transformation. However, these
approaches do not account for 3D geometric differences,
such as out-of-plane rotation and 3D shape differences. 3D
alignment is much more difficult for users and algorithms,
as it requires inferring the 3D structure from a single view.

Figure 1: Image blending is challenging for unaligned original
and reference images. Existing 2D-based methods [42] struggle to
synthesize realistic results due to the 3D object pose differences
between foreground and background. In contrast, we propose a
3D-aware blending method that aligns and composes unaligned
images without manual effort.

Additionally, even though previous methods get aligned images, they blend images in 2D space. Blending images using
only 2D signals, such as pixel values (RGB) or 2D feature
maps, doesn’t account for the 3D structure of objects.
To address the above issues, we propose a 3D-aware
image blending method based on generative Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRFs) [9, 33, 10, 59, 67, 91]. Generative NeRFs
learn to synthesize images in 3D using only collections of
single-view images. Our method projects the input images
to the latent space of generative NeRFs and performs 3Daware alignment by novel view synthesis. We then perform
blending on NeRFs’ latent space. Concretely, we formulate
an optimization problem in which a latent code is optimized
to synthesize an image and volume density of the foreground

22906

