This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cumulative Spatial Knowledge Distillation for Vision Transformers
Borui Zhao1
1

Renjie Song1

Jiajun Liang1

MEGVII Technology

zhaoborui.gm@gmail.com, song.renjie@foxmail.com, liangjiajun@megvii.com

Abstract
Distilling knowledge from convolutional neural networks (CNNs) is a double-edged sword for vision transformers (ViTs). It boosts the performance since the imagefriendly local-inductive bias of CNN helps ViT learn faster
and better, but leading to two problems: (1) Network designs of CNN and ViT are completely different, which leads
to different semantic levels of intermediate features, making spatial-wise knowledge transfer methods (e.g., feature
mimicking) inefficient. (2) Distilling knowledge from CNN
limits the network convergence in the later training period
since ViT’s capability of integrating global information is
suppressed by CNN’s local-inductive-bias supervision.
To this end, we present Cumulative Spatial Knowledge
Distillation (CSKD). CSKD distills spatial-wise knowledge
to all patch tokens of ViT from the corresponding spatial responses of CNN, without introducing intermediate features.
Furthermore, CSKD exploits a Cumulative Knowledge Fusion (CKF) module, which introduces the global response
of CNN and increasingly emphasizes its importance during the training. Applying CKF leverages CNN’s local inductive bias in the early training period and gives full play
to ViT’s global capability in the later one. Extensive experiments and analysis on ImageNet-1k and downstream
datasets demonstrate the superiority of our CSKD. Code:
https://github.com/Zzzzz1/CSKD

1. Introduction
Recently, Vision Transformers (ViT) attract lots of attention in the computer vision community. Due to the powerful
network capacity brought by the self-attention module, ViT
achieves great performance on many vision tasks (e.g., image recognition[7, 22] and object detection[20, 3]). Knowledge distillation (KD) is a widely-used technique, which
improves the performance of a lightweight model (the student) by transferring knowledge from a heavy one (the
teacher). DeiT[34] first applies this technique to ViT, which
proposes to distill knowledge from the convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) for better training efficiency. The net-

work design of CNN is image-friendly since the convolution operation is translation invariant, i.e., CNN has a local
inductive bias which benefits the vision tasks. Thus, applying DeiT could help ViT converge faster and better for
vision tasks. However, distilling knowledge from CNN is a
double-edged sword. It introduces two problems, which are
explained as follows.
Firstly, the network designs of CNN and ViT are different in three aspects: (1) The ways to extend the receptive
field, (2) the ways to stack blocks, and (3) the types of normalization layers. It makes intermediate features hard to
align in terms of semantics. Thus, feature-based distillation
methods could be inefficient due to the misalignment. The
inefficiency is worthy of attention because the features can
provide spatial-wise supervision with abundant knowledge.
Secondly, CNN’s local inductive bias could hinder the
full power of long-range dependencies and positional encoding of ViTs at convergence, although it helps ViT converge faster in the earlier stage (which is also observed in
[4]). This phenomenon can be explained as follows: ViT’s
network capability is stronger than CNN’s due to its powerful self-attention module. It could predict some hard training samples correctly that CNN can not handle. However,
distilling knowledge from CNN’s predictions provides negative supervision, leading ViT to predict wrong labels. With
the progress of training, this problem is going to get worse.
Previous works make efforts to solve the problems
above. (1) To alleviate the first one, DearKD[4] presents
the MHCA module which modifies ViT’s network architecture to align the intermediate features better. Despite the
improved performance, extra module design is needed and
ViT’s capability of modeling the global relation is weakened. (2) As for the second one, DearKD [4] presents a twostage learning strategy, and the distillation loss is disabled
in the second stage to bypass the problem. In CviT[27],
multiple networks with various inductive biases are used
as teachers to provide more abundant knowledge, so that
ViT’s capability could be less suppressed. Both works boost
the distillation performance. However, the former degrades
into a baseline training scheme in the later period because
it doesn’t apply knowledge distillation, and the latter makes

6146

