This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FerKD: Surgical Label Adaptation for Efficient Distillation
Zhiqiang Shen
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI
Zhiqiang.Shen@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
We present FerKD, a novel efficient knowledge distillation framework that incorporates partial soft-hard label
adaptation coupled with a region-calibration mechanism.
Our approach stems from the observation and intuition
that standard data augmentations, such as RandomResizedCrop, tend to transform inputs into diverse conditions: easy
positives, hard positives, or hard negatives. In traditional
distillation frameworks, these transformed samples are utilized equally through their predictive probabilities derived
from pretrained teacher models. However, merely relying
on prediction values from a pretrained teacher, a common
practice in prior studies, neglects the reliability of these soft
label predictions. To address this, we propose a new scheme
that calibrates the less-confident regions to be the context
using softened hard groundtruth labels. Our approach involves the processes of hard regions mining + calibration.
We demonstrate empirically that this method can dramatically improve the convergence speed and final accuracy.
Additionally, we find that a consistent mixing strategy can
stabilize the distributions of soft supervision, taking advantage of the soft labels. As a result, we introduce a stabilized SelfMix augmentation that weakens the variation of
the mixed images and corresponding soft labels through
mixing similar regions within the same image. FerKD is
an intuitive and well-designed learning system that eliminates several heuristics and hyperparameters in former
FKD solution [37]. More importantly, it achieves remarkable improvement on ImageNet-1K and downstream tasks.
For instance, FerKD achieves 81.2% on ImageNet-1K with
ResNet-50, outperforming FKD and FunMatch by remarkable margins. Leveraging better pre-trained weights and
larger architectures, our finetuned ViT-G14 even achieves
89.9%. Our code is available at https://github.
com/szq0214/FKD/tree/main/FerKD.

1. Introduction
Knowledge Distillation (KD) [13] has achieved impressive results in various visual domains, including image clas-

! > #. %

Input

Center points of
RandomResizedCrop

! < #. '(

Figure 1: Illustration of motivation for FerKD. The left
figure depicts the original input, and the middle figure
shows the center points of bounding boxes generated using
RandomResizedCrop. The radius of each circle corresponds to the area of the bounding box. It can be observed
that the center points of the bounding boxes are concentrated in the center of the image, and their area increases as
they approach the center. The right figure displays several
top and bottom confident bounding boxes and their corresponding predictive probabilities from a pre-trained teacher
or teachers ensemble. The proposed hard region calibration
strategy is established based on these predictions.
sification [52, 36, 5, 37], object detection [6, 46, 11, 8, 53]
and semantic segmentation [22, 15, 16]. However, KD
methods are often computationally expensive and inefficient due to the additional computational burden imposed
by the teacher models. The primary advantage of KD that
motivates its usage is its ability to generate precise soft labels that convey more informative details about the input
examples. It differs from other label softening techniques,
such as label smoothing [43], Mixup [58], and CutMix [56],
mainly in two aspects: (1) KD generates soft labels dynamically in each iteration, which is more informative than fixed
smoothing patterns used in label smoothing; (2) Mixup and
CutMix techniques essentially combine hard labels with coefficients, while KD produces soft labels that are highly correlated with the input sample. This allows KD’s soft labels
to become more accurate when different data augmentations, such as RandomResizedCrop, flipping and rotation,
color jittering, etc., are applied. In general, mixing-based
label softening methods cannot monitor such changes in input content, but KD can address them effortlessly.

1666

