This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spatially-Adaptive Feature Modulation for Efficient Image Super-Resolution
Long Sun, Jiangxin Dong, Jinhui Tang, and Jinshan Pan*
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology

Abstract

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) aims to restore a
high-resolution (HR) image from its low-resolution (LR)
counterpart by recovering lost details. This longstanding
and challenging task has recently attracted much attention
due to the rapid development of streaming media or highdefinition devices. As these scenarios are usually resourceconstrained, it is of great interest to develop an efficient and
effective SR method to estimate HR images for better visual
display on these platforms or products.
Deep learning-based SR methods have achieved significant performance improvements with the great evolution of
hardware technologies, as we can use large amounts of data
to train much larger or deeper neural networks for image
SR [32, 53, 31, 5]. For example, RCAN [53] is a representative CNN-based image SR network with 15.59M parameters and reaching a depth of over 400 layers. One of
the most significant drawbacks of these large models is that
they require high computational costs, which makes them
* Corresponding author

38.00

SMSR

(Ours)

IMDN

ShuffleMixer

EDSR-baseline

37.95

PSNR (dB)

Although deep learning-based solutions have achieved
impressive reconstruction performance in image superresolution (SR), these models are generally large, with complex architectures, making them incompatible with lowpower devices with many computational and memory constraints. To overcome these challenges, we propose a
spatially-adaptive feature modulation (SAFM) mechanism
for efficient SR design. In detail, the SAFM layer uses independent computations to learn multi-scale feature representations and aggregates these features for dynamic spatial
modulation. As the SAFM prioritizes exploiting non-local
feature dependencies, we further introduce a convolutional
channel mixer (CCM) to encode local contextual information and mix channels simultaneously. Extensive experimental results show that the proposed method is 3× smaller
than state-of-the-art efficient SR methods, e.g., IMDN, and
yields comparable performance with much less memory usage. Our source codes and pre-trained models are available
at: https://github.com/sunny2109/SAFMN .

PSNR vs. FLOPs vs. Params
SAFMN

37.90

ECBSR-M16C64

37.85

37.80
CARN
37.75
50

100

150

200

FLOPs (G)

250

300

Figure 1. Model complexity and performance comparison between our proposed SAFMN model and other lightweight methods
on Set5 [4] for ×2 SR. Circle sizes indicate the number of parameters. The proposed method achieves a better trade-off between
model complexity and reconstruction performance.

challenging to deploy. Moreover, recent visual transformers (ViTs) [12, 31, 5] outperform convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in low-level vision tasks, and their results
demonstrate that exploring non-local feature interactions is
essential for high-quality reconstruction. But existing selfattention mechanisms are computationally expensive and
unfriendly to efficient SR design. This, therefore, motivates us to develop a lightweight yet effective model for
real-world applications of image super-resolution by integrating the principles of convolution and self-attention.
To reduce the heavy computational burden, various methods, including efficient module design [11, 41,
1, 20, 26, 33, 44, 45, 54, 30], knowledge distillation [16], neural architecture search [7], and structural
re-parameterization [52], are trying to improve the efficiency of SR algorithms. Among these efficient SR models, one direction is to reduce model parameters or complexity (FLOPs). Lightweight strategies like recursive manner [23, 46], parameter sharing [1], and spare convolutions [1, 45, 30] are adopted. Although these approaches
certainly reduce the model size, they usually compensate
for the performance drop caused by shared recursive modules or sparse convolutions by increasing the depth or width

13190

