This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DIME-FM : DIstilling Multimodal and Efficient Foundation Models
Ximeng Sun1†

Pengchuan Zhang2

Peizhao Zhang2 Hardik Shah2
1
Boston University, 2 Meta AI

Kate Saenko1,2

Xide Xia2

Abstract
Large Vision-Language Foundation Models (VLFM),
such as CLIP, ALIGN and Florence, are trained on largescale datasets of image-caption pairs and achieve superior
transferability and robustness on downstream tasks, but they
are difficult to use in many practical applications due to their
large size, high latency and fixed architectures. Unfortunately, recent work shows training a small custom VLFM
for resource-limited applications is currently very difficult
using public and smaller-scale data. In this paper, we introduce a new distillation mechanism (DIME-FM) that allows
us to transfer the knowledge contained in large VLFMs to
smaller, customized foundation models using a relatively
small amount of inexpensive, unpaired images and sentences.
We transfer the knowledge from the pre-trained CLIP-ViTL/14 model to a ViT-B/32 model, with only 40M public images and 28.4M unpaired public sentences. The resulting
model “Distill-ViT-B/32” rivals the CLIP-ViT-B/32 model
pre-trained on its private WiT dataset (400M image-text
pairs): Distill-ViT-B/32 achieves similar results in terms
of zero-shot and linear-probing performance on both ImageNet and the ELEVATER (20 image classification tasks)
benchmarks. It also displays comparable robustness when
evaluated on five datasets with natural distribution shifts
from ImageNet. Please refer to our project page for code
and more details.

1. Introduction
In contrast to neural networks learnt to solve a single
target vision task (i.e. task-specific models) [26, 48, 70, 13,
68, 45], CLIP [55] and other Vision-Language “Foundation
Models” (VLFMs) [41, 84] achieve superior accuracy on
diverse novel downstream tasks and improved robustness to
natural domain shifts during inference. At the same time,
small and customizable VLFMs are in high demand for many
applications that have limited computational resources (AV,
AR/VR and other edge devices). Unfortunately, only a few
labs in the world can afford the large-scale vision-language
datasets (e.g. WiT [55] with 400M image-text pairs) and
† Work done when interning at Meta AI.

400M+
Paired Image-Text

Student
Foundation Model

Unpaired Public Data

Pre-Train
Images
(40M)

Teacher
CLIP-ViT-L/14

ViT-B/32
(4.4 GFLOPs/Img)

Distillation

Sentences
(28.4M)

(81.1 GFLOPs/Img)

Or
Swin-Tiny
(4.5 GFLOPs/Img)

For ViT-B/32 (4.4 GLOPs/Img) models:

CLIP Distilled

CLIP Distilled
ZS
LP

60.1% 61.5%
78.2% 79.2%
Transferability

ZS

48.6%

transfer

50.4%

Robustness

Numerous Unknown
Downstream Tasks

Figure 1: Conceptual Figure of our Vision-Language Knowledge Distillation DIME-FM. We distill the knowledge from a large
VLFM “CLIP-ViT-L/14’ pretrained on 400M private image-text
paired dataset. We only use public unpaired image and text corpora as inputs. Our Distill-ViT-B/32 rivals CLIP-ViT-B/32 in both
transferability and robustness. ZS: Zero-Shot, LP: Linear Probing.

the immense computing resources required to train VLFMs.
Efforts to re-create VLFMs on public data [82, 64, 15])
either fall short on accuracy or require even more expensive
training on huge datasets of images paired with captions (e.g.
over 5B pairs [61]).
Instead of pretraining, model distillation used to offer
a convenient way to obtain a smaller custom model. Recent work distills CLIP specifically for one or a few target
tasks (i.e. task-specific distillation). For example, some
works [78, 79, 87, 54] distill the CLIP’s image feature maps
for better visual feature representations. BeamCLIP [36]
distills CLIP logits for a single target image classification
task, e.g. ImageNet-1K [16]. More recently, CLIP-TD [76]
distills CLIP to solve three specific vision-language tasks.
Even though these task-specific distillation works achieve
good performance for the specialized downstream task, they
are not scalable to solve new downstream tasks by zero-shot
transferring. There is no approach for distilling VLFMs to
another foundation model which preserves transferability
to novel tasks and robustness to domain shifts. Due to the unaffordable large-scale pretraining and the lack of foundationmodel distillation mechanism, practitioners must rely on
the few labs to release smaller VLFMs, and cannot easily
customize their size or architecture.

15521

