This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Temporal-Coded Spiking Neural Networks with Dynamic Firing Threshold:
Learning with Event-Driven Backpropagation
Wenjie Wei1 , Malu Zhang1 *, Hong Qu1 , Ammar Belatreche2 , Jian Zhang3 , and Hong Chen3
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
2
Northumbria University, 3 Tsinghua University

{maluzhang,hongqu}@uestc.edu.cn,ammar.belatreche@northumbria.ac.uk,hongchen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) offer a highly promising computing paradigm due to their biological plausibility, exceptional spatiotemporal information processing capability and low power consumption. As a temporal encoding scheme for SNNs, Time-To-First-Spike (TTFS) encodes information using the timing of a single spike, which
allows spiking neurons to transmit information through
sparse spike trains and results in lower power consumption and higher computational efficiency compared to traditional rate-based encoding counterparts. However, despite
the advantages of the TTFS encoding scheme, the effective
and efficient training of TTFS-based deep SNNs remains a
significant and open research problem. In this work, we
first examine the factors underlying the limitations of applying existing TTFS-based learning algorithms to deep SNNs.
Specifically, we investigate issues related to over-sparsity
of spikes and the complexity of finding the ‘causal set’. We
then propose a simple yet efficient dynamic firing threshold
(DFT) mechanism for spiking neurons to address these issues. Building upon the proposed DFT mechanism, we further introduce a novel direct training algorithm for TTFSbased deep SNNs, called DTA-TTFS. This method utilizes
event-driven processing and spike timing to enable efficient
learning of deep SNNs. The proposed training method was
validated on the image classification task and experimental results clearly demonstrate that our proposed method
achieves state-of-the-art accuracy in comparison to existing
TTFS-based learning algorithms, while maintaining high
levels of sparsity and energy efficiency on neuromorphic inference accelerator.

* Corresponding author

1. Introduction
Deep learning approaches have demonstrated remarkable performance in various intelligent applications [18,
27, 24, 23] and innovative simulations [62, 61]. However, these achievements come at a significant cost of energy consumption, severely limiting the deployment of artificial neural networks (ANNs) on resource-limited platforms [43, 9, 3, 50]. Brain-inspired spiking neural networks
(SNNs) have emerged as a promising and energy-efficient
alternative to ANNs [22, 31, 57]. SNNs have garnered attention for their distinctive features of sparse-asynchronous
spikes and event-driven computing, which have played a
pivotal role in driving the development of neuromorphic
computing platforms such as ANP-I [54], TrueNorth [1],
Loihi [8], and Tianjic [39].
Despite the inherent energy efficiency of SNNs, their
extensive application to real-world practical scenarios has
been limited by the absence of efficient and scalable training algorithms [52, 35, 30, 14, 20]. Traditional training
techniques for ANNs, such as error backpropagation (BP)
and standard GPU-accelerated training packages, cannot be
leveraged directly by SNNs due to the complex temporal
dynamics and the non-differentiability of spiking neurons’
activity [33, 6, 56]. To address these challenges, various solutions have been proposed, broadly categorized into three
distinct groups.
The first category of solutions proposed to address the
lack of scalable training algorithms for SNNs is ANN-toSNN conversion method [40, 41, 49, 45]. These methods
involve training an ANN first and then converting it to its
SNN counterpart. The resulting SNN may achieve comparable performance to pre-trained ANNs through manual
and careful setting of the SNN parameters such as the firing
threshold [28] and the chosen spiking neuron model [44].
However, such conversion often results in precision loss due
to approximation and requires longer time steps for lossless

10552

