This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LFS-GAN: Lifelong Few-Shot Image Generation
Juwon Seo1 *
1

Ji-Su Kang2∗

Gyeong-Moon Park1†

Kyung Hee University, Yongin, Republic of Korea
2
KLleon Tech., Seoul, Republic of Korea

{jwseo001, gmpark}@khu.ac.kr jisu.kang@klleon.io

Abstract
We address a challenging lifelong few-shot image generation task for the first time. In this situation, a generative model learns a sequence of tasks using only a few
samples per task. Consequently, the learned model encounters both catastrophic forgetting and overfitting problems
at a time. Existing studies on lifelong GANs have proposed modulation-based methods to prevent catastrophic
forgetting. However, they require considerable additional
parameters and cannot generate high-fidelity and diverse
images from limited data. On the other hand, the existing
few-shot GANs suffer from severe catastrophic forgetting
when learning multiple tasks. To alleviate these issues, we
propose a framework called Lifelong Few-Shot GAN (LFSGAN) that can generate high-quality and diverse images
in lifelong few-shot image generation task. Our proposed
framework learns each task using an efficient task-specific
modulator - Learnable Factorized Tensor (LeFT). LeFT is
rank-constrained and has a rich representation ability due
to its unique reconstruction technique. Furthermore, we
propose a novel mode seeking loss to improve the diversity
of our model in low-data circumstances. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed LFS-GAN can generate high-fidelity and diverse images without any forgetting
and mode collapse in various domains, achieving state-ofthe-art in lifelong few-shot image generation task. Surprisingly, we find that our LFS-GAN even outperforms the existing few-shot GANs in the few-shot image generation task.
The code is available at Github.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable success in recent
years, particularly in a single task learning on a large dataset
such as ImageNet [9] or FFHQ [24]. However, obtaining a
large amount of refined data for real-world applications is
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

prohibitively expensive, and there are many domains where
only limited data can be collected, such as the artistic domain. Additionally, when faced with long sequences of
tasks over time, it is inevitable to train a new model for each
target task.
In this context, many studies have recently highlighted
the importance of lifelong few-shot learning. Lifelong fewshot learning combines two challenging settings: lifelong
learning and few-shot learning. It seeks to overcome catastrophic forgetting [32, 12, 26] when learning a sequence of
tasks over time, while learning from limited data without
any overfitting problem. By integrating the concepts of lifelong and few-shot learning, lifelong few-shot learning holds
great potential for real-world applications where data is limited or costly to obtain, and where learning a new model for
each task is not practical.
Previous studies on lifelong few-shot learning have primarily focused on discriminative tasks [1, 31, 21, 38, 37,
39]. However, lifelong few-shot learning on generative
tasks is unexplored before. Lifelong few-shot image generation task involves training a model to generate realistic and diverse images from handful training images, while
continually learning new tasks and preserving the ability to
generate images from the previous domains (see Figure 1).
There are two key challenges in this setting. First, since the
model learns tasks sequentially, it easily forgets the ability
to generate samples of the previous tasks. Second, since
the model learns from a biased and sparse distribution, it
suffers from the mode collapse problem [2], i.e., it is prone
to re-generate the same training samples or produce similar
images regardless of the noises provided. Addressing these
challenges is critical to enable the successful application of
lifelong few-shot image generation in the real-world, where
data is limited or costly to obtain.
To alleviate catastrophic forgetting, recent studies in the
field of lifelong image generation have proposed a weight
modulator inspired by the affine transformation [20], which
enables generative models to learn task-specific informa-

11356

