This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

General Image-to-Image Translation with
One-Shot Image Guidance
Bin Cheng*, Zuhao Liu*, Yunbo Peng, Yue Lin
NetEase Games AI Lab
{chengbin04, liuzuhao, gzpengyunbo, gzlinyue}@corp.netease.com

Figure 1: The image-to-image translation exhibition of the proposed visual concept translator (VCT). For each image group,
the upper-left part is the source image, the lower-left part is the reference image, and the right part is the model output (target
image).

Abstract
Large-scale text-to-image models pre-trained on massive text-image pairs show excellent performance in image
synthesis recently. However, image can provide more intuitive visual concepts than plain text. People may ask: how
can we integrate the desired visual concept into an existing
image, such as our portrait? Current methods are inadequate in meeting this demand as they lack the ability to
preserve content or translate visual concepts effectively. Inspired by this, we propose a novel framework named visual
concept translator (VCT) with the ability to preserve content in the source image and translate the visual concepts
guided by a single reference image. The proposed VCT
contains a content-concept inversion (CCI) process to ex* The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

tract contents and concepts, and a content-concept fusion
(CCF) process to gather the extracted information to obtain the target image. Given only one reference image, the
proposed VCT can complete a wide range of general imageto-image translation tasks with excellent results. Extensive
experiments are conducted to prove the superiority and effectiveness of the proposed methods. Codes are available at
https://github.com/CrystalNeuro/visual-concept-translator.

1. Introduction
Image-to-image translation (I2I) task aims to learn a
conditional generation function that translates images from
source to target domain with source content preserved and
target concept transferred[34, 46]. General I2I can complete a wide range of applications without dedicated model

22736

