This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

X-Mesh: Towards Fast and Accurate Text-driven 3D Stylization
via Dynamic Textual Guidance
Yiwei Ma1‡
Haowei Wang1
1

Xiaoqing Zhang1‡ Xiaoshuai Sun1 * Jiayi Ji1
Guannan Jiang2 Weilin Zhuang2 Rongrong Ji1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China.
2
Contemporary Amperex Technology Co., Limited (CATL), Fujian, China

Abstract
Text-driven 3D stylization is a complex and crucial task
in the fields of computer vision (CV) and computer graphics (CG), aimed at transforming a bare mesh to fit a target text. Prior methods adopt text-independent multilayer
perceptrons (MLPs) to predict the attributes of the target
mesh with the supervision of CLIP loss. However, such
text-independent architecture lacks textual guidance during
predicting attributes, thus leading to unsatisfactory stylization and slow convergence. To address these limitations,
we present X-Mesh, an innovative text-driven 3D stylization framework that incorporates a novel Text-guided Dynamic Attention Module (TDAM). The TDAM dynamically
integrates the guidance of the target text by utilizing textrelevant spatial and channel-wise attentions during vertex
feature extraction, resulting in more accurate attribute prediction and faster convergence speed. Furthermore, existing works lack standard benchmarks and automated metrics for evaluation, often relying on subjective and nonreproducible user studies to assess the quality of stylized
3D assets. To overcome this limitation, we introduce a
new standard text-mesh benchmark, namely MIT-30, and
two automated metrics, which will enable future research
to achieve fair and objective comparisons. Our extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate
that X-Mesh outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods. Our codes and results are available at our project
webpage: https://xmu-xiaoma666.github.io/
Projects/X-Mesh/

1. Introduction
In recent years, 3D asset creation through stylization,
i.e., transforming bare meshes to match text prompts [39, 6,
* Corresponding author; ‡ Equal contributions.

Steve Jobs in a red sweater,
blue jeans, brown leather
shoes and colorful gloves .

slow convergence

CLIP
Loss

Neural Style
Network

sometimes
unsatisfactory

Bare Mesh

Stylized Mesh

(a) Previous framework
Steve Jobs in a red sweater,
blue jeans, brown leather
shoes and colorful gloves .

CLIP
Loss

fast convergence

Textual
Guidance
X-Mesh

Bare Mesh

(b) The proposed X-Mesh

stable & accurate
stylization
Stylized Mesh

Figure 1. (a) A typical text-driven 3D stylization framework. (b)
Our proposed X-Mesh framework. X-Mesh achieves better stylization and faster convergence.

68], images [66, 80], and 3D shapes [77], has received significant attention in the fields of computer vision and graphics [14, 15, 21]. The resulting stylized 3D assets are applied
to a range of practical applications, such as gaming, virtual
reality, and film. Among the stylization techniques available, text-driven 3D stylization is particularly user-friendly,
as text prompts are more readily available than images or
3D shapes. However, creating stylized 3D assets through
text input presents a significant challenge due to the significant gap between visual and linguistic information.
The emergence of Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) [47] has made it possible to achieve textdriven 3D stylization. Recently, Text2Mesh [39] and
TANGO [6] have made significant contributions in this field
by predicting the attributes of each vertex on the mesh with
the supervision of CLIP loss. Specifically, Text2Mesh pre-

2749

