This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Privacy Preservation in Federated Learning
via Learning Rate Perturbation
Guangnian Wan1 Haitao Du2 Xuejing Yuan1 Jun Yang1 Meiling Chen2 Jie Xu1 *
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 2 China Mobile Research Institute

1

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is a privacy-enhanced distributed machine learning framework, in which multiple
clients collaboratively train a global model by exchanging their model updates without sharing local private data.
However, the adversary can use gradient inversion attacks
to reveal the clients’ privacy from the shared model updates.
Previous attacks assume the adversary can infer the local
learning rate of each client, while we observe that: (1) using the uniformly distributed random local learning rates
does not incur much accuracy loss of the global model,
and (2) personalizing local learning rates can mitigate the
drift issue which is caused by non-IID (identically and independently distributed) data. Moreover, we theoretically
derive a convergence guarantee to FedAvg with uniformly
perturbed local learning rates. Therefore, by perturbing the
learning rate of each client with random noise, we propose
a learning rate perturbation (LRP) defense against gradient inversion attacks. Specifically, for classification tasks,
we adapt LPR to ada-LPR by personalizing the expectation
of each local learning rate. The experiments show that our
defenses can well enhance privacy preservation against existing gradient inversion attacks, and LRP outperforms 5
baseline defenses against a state-of-the-art gradient inversion attack. In addition, our defenses only incur minor accuracy reductions (less than 0.5%) of the global model. So
they are effective in real applications.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) [16, 19, 20, 33] is popularly used
to meet the needs of learning from distributed data and protecting the privacy of data owners. Instead of transferring
the local data, each FL client trains a model on its local
data and exchanges its model update under the coordination of a central parameter server. FL leaves the training
data distributed among its clients, which makes it align well
with data privacy regulations, e.g., General Data Protection
* Corresponding author: Jie Xu (cheer1107@bupt.edu.cn).

Regulation (GDPR) [36]. Thus, FL is suitable for developing privacy-sensitive machine learning applications such
as medical services [3, 5], financial fraud detection [37],
and various applications of the future sixth-generation (6G)
wireless communication network [24, 31, 38].
Recent works have shown that clients’ private training
data may be leaked through this update-sharing scheme by
gradient inversion attacks [9, 10, 14, 28, 32, 43]. Several defensive strategies have been proposed to strengthen the privacy properties of the FL system, such as differential privacy [1], secure multi-party computation [2, 39], gradient
compression [29], and data representation perturbation [35].
Nonetheless, it has been demonstrated that these defenses
are insufficient to provide privacy guarantees against gradient inversion attacks [28] or incur significant computational
overheads [35]. Since privacy protection is the major motivation of FL, it is urgent to develop effective defenses to
tackle the data leakage issue.
Assumptions of previous gradient inversion attacks.
Most gradient inversion attacks assume the adversary is a
FL server that is interested in unveiling the private training
data of the clients from the model updates uploaded by the
clients [14, 28, 32, 35], while the server must follow the FL
protocol honestly and cannot modify the model architecture. Moreover, the attackers always explicitly or implicitly assume they can get the gradients of each client while
the client only shares its model updates. In other words,
the attackers assume they know the learning rate (LR) of
each client such that they can generate the training gradients
from the uploaded model updates. This assumption is realistic with existing FL algorithms since the learning rates of
clients follow a unified regularity developed by the server,
while the necessity of avoiding the heterogeneity of local
learning rates has not been thoroughly investigated.
A natural question is: Can clients utilize local learning
rates to protect their data? To investigate this, we form a
FL system composed of two clients with non-IID data from
the MNIST dataset and adjust the clients’ learning rates to
train the models. Compared with allocating a unified learning rate by the server, we find randomizing the local learning rates only causes small fluctuations (about 0.2%) in

4772

