This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TIJO: Trigger Inversion with Joint Optimization for Defending Multimodal
Backdoored Models
Indranil Sur1 * Karan Sikka1 Matthew Walmer2 Kaushik Koneripalli1
Anirban Roy1 Xiao Lin1 Ajay Divakaran1 Susmit Jha1
1

SRI International

2

University of Maryland

Abstract
We present a Multimodal Backdoor Defense technique
TIJO (Trigger Inversion using Joint Optimization). Recent
work [48] has demonstrated successful backdoor attacks
on multimodal models for the Visual Question Answering
task. Their dual-key backdoor trigger is split across two
modalities (image and text), such that the backdoor is activated if and only if the trigger is present in both modalities. We propose TIJO that defends against dual-key attacks
through a joint optimization that reverse-engineers the trigger in both the image and text modalities. This joint optimization is challenging in multimodal models due to the
disconnected nature of the visual pipeline which consists of
an offline feature extractor, whose output is then fused with
the text using a fusion module. The key insight enabling the
joint optimization in TIJO is that the trigger inversion needs
to be carried out in the object detection box feature space
as opposed to the pixel space. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on the TrojVQA benchmark, where
TIJO improves upon the state-of-the-art unimodal methods
from an AUC of 0.6 to 0.92 on multimodal dual-key backdoors. Furthermore, our method also improves upon the
unimodal baselines on unimodal backdoors. We present ablation studies and qualitative results to provide insights into
our algorithm such as the critical importance of overlaying
the inverted feature triggers on all visual features during
trigger inversion. The prototype implementation of TIJO is
available at https://github.com/SRI-CSL/TIJO.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial attacks [47, 1, 16, 24]. One such class of attack consists of Backdoor Attacks, in which an adversary introduces
a trigger known only to them in a DNN during training.
Such a backdoored DNN will behave normally with typi* Corresponding author: indranil.sur@sri.com

Defense against Dual-Key Multimodal Backdoor Aack
Cute
Teddy

Cute
Teddy

Cute
Teddy
@ What is it?

Unimodal
Backdoor Defenses
Don't Work

What is it?

What is it?

Killer
Robot

@ What is it?

Dual-Key Backdoor Attack

Multimodal Trigger Inversion with Joint Optimization

TIJO
Clean Samples

Generate Candidate
Multimodal Triggers
Detect if
Backdoored

Figure 1. (Top) A dual-key backdoor attack for multimodal models [48], which is designed to activate if and only if the trigger is
present in both the modalities. Such backdoors cannot be detected
by unimodal defenses. (Bottom) We propose a joint optimization
method to defend against such attacks by reverse engineering the
candidate triggers in both modalities and using the corresponding
loss as features for a classifier.

cal in-distribution inputs but perform poorly (e.g. produce
targeted misclassifications) on inputs stamped with a predefined trigger designed by the adversary [50, 21, 30].
Recent work [48, 7] has introduced backdoors in multimodal domains such as Visual Question Answering (VQA)
and Fake News Detection [7, 48]. In prior work [48], we
have introduced a Dual-Key Backdoor Attack (shown in
Figure 1), where the trigger is inserted in both the image
and text modalities in such a manner that the backdoor is activated only when both modalities contain the trigger. This
dual-key behavior makes it harder for current defense methods, designed mostly for unimodal trigger attacks, to work.
There has been significant work developing defenses
against backdoor attacks in the visual domain, in particular for the image classification task [45, 49, 6, 23]. Recent
works have also explored defense in natural language pro-

165

