This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-Shot Point Cloud Segmentation by Semantic-Visual Aware Synthesis
Yuwei Yang1

Munawar Hayat2
1
Sichuan University

yuwei@stu.scu.edu.cn

Zhao Jin1 Hongyuan Zhu3 Yinjie Lei1,
2
Monash University 3 A*STAR

munawar.hayat@monash.edu

hongyuanzhu.cn@gmail.com

Seen "chair"

Intra-class
Richness

jinzhao@stu.scu.edu.cn

yinjie@scu.edu.cn

Seen Classes:
chair/table/floor/picture

"chair"

*unseen classes in red

Seen features
Synthetic unseen features

"table"
"picture"
"book
Consistent
"sofa" shelf"

Inter-class
Seperation

Various Visual
Representations:

Semantic
Embedding of
Seen "chair"

(a) Semantic-Visual Correspondence
{"floor", "chair",
"table", "picture"}
Unseen:{"bookshelf", "sofa"}

"chair"

"floor"

Semantic Space

(b) Semantic-Visual Alignment

Visual Space

(c) Semantic-Visual Consistency

Seen:

Auxiliary Semantics

(a) Mask Correspondence
(b) Heterogeneous
Learning (MCL)
Prototype Alignment (HPA)

+

Sec. 3.2
Seen:

floor

Sec. 3.3
chair

table

picture Unseen:

(c) Relational Transfer
Consistency (RTC)

Sec. 3.4
bookshelf

Zero-shot Semantic-Visual Aware Synthesis 3D
Point Cloud Segmentation Network

Input 3D Point Cloud

sofa

Segmentation Results

Figure 1. Our zero-shot synthesis approach for point cloud segmentation tackles multiple semantic-visual transfer issues, by enhancing
correspondence (Sec. 3.2), alignment (Sec. 3.3) and consistency (Sec. 3.4) between the auxiliary-semantic and 3D-visual spaces.

Abstract
This paper proposes a feature synthesis approach
for zero-shot semantic segmentation of 3D point clouds,
enabling generalization to previously unseen categories.
Given only the class-level semantic information for unseen
objects, we strive to enhance the correspondence, alignment
and consistency between the visual and semantic spaces,
to synthesise diverse, generic and transferable visual features. We develop a masked learning strategy to promote
diversity within the same class visual features and enhance
the separation between different classes. We further cast
the visual features into a prototypical space to model their
distribution for alignment with the corresponding semantic space. Finally, we develop a consistency regularizer to
preserve the semantic-visual relationships between the realseen features and synthetic-unseen features. Our approach
Corresponding Author: Yinjie Lei (yinjie@scu.edu.cn)

shows considerable semantic segmentation gains on ScanNet, S3DIS and SemanticKITTI benchmarks. Our code is
available at: https://github.com/leolyj/3DPC-GZSL

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation of 3D point clouds is mostly
dominated by fully-supervised methods [37, 39, 49, 45, 21,
57] that require point-wise labelled data for training. While
these methods perform well on previously seen objects, they
lack scalability to novel and unseen classes for which no
samples are available during training. Zero-Shot Learning
(ZSL) provides a promising paradigm in such cases since it
enables rapid generalization to unseen classes.
While ZSL from RGB images is well explored [15, 1, 17,
56, 19, 48, 24, 53, 7, 16, 41, 47, 6, 52, 18, 9, 20, 27, 58], ZSL
for segmentation of point clouds is less investigated, due to
unique challenges posed by 3D data (e.g. the lack of large-

11586

