This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Adaptive Neighborhoods for Graph Neural Networks
Avishkar Saha1 , Oscar Mendez1 , Chris Russell2 , Richard Bowden1
1
Centre for Vision Speech and Signal Processing, University of Surrey, Guildford, UK
2
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
{a.saha, o.mendez, r.bowden}@surrey.ac.uk, christopher.m.russell@gmail.com

Abstract
Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) enable end-to-end
learning on graph structured data. However, many works
assume a given graph structure. When the input graph is
noisy or unavailable, one approach is to construct or learn a
latent graph structure. These methods typically fix the choice
of node degree for the entire graph, which is suboptimal.
Instead, we propose a novel end-to-end differentiable graph
generator which builds graph topologies where each node
selects both its neighborhood and its size. Our module can
be readily integrated into existing pipelines involving graph
convolution operations, replacing the predetermined or existing adjacency matrix with one that is learned, and optimized,
as part of the general objective. As such it is applicable to
any GCN. We integrate our module into trajectory prediction,
point cloud classification and node classification pipelines
resulting in improved accuracy over other structure-learning
methods across a wide range of datasets and GCN backbones.
We will release the code.

1. Introduction
The success of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [6, 1, 24],
has led to a surge in graph-based representation learning.
GNNs provide an efficient framework to learn from graphstructured data, making them widely applicable where data
can be represented as a relation or interaction system. They
have been effectively applied in a wide range of tasks [25],
[33] including particle physics [4] and protein science [10].
In a GNN, each node iteratively updates its state by interacting with its neighbors, typically through message passing.
However, a fundamental limitation of such architectures is
the assumption that the underlying graph is provided. While
node or edge features may be updated during message passing, the graph topology remains fixed, and its choice may be
suboptimal for various reasons. For instance, when classifying nodes on a citation network, an edge connecting nodes of
different classes can diminish classification accuracy. These
edges can degrade performance by propagating irrelevant

information across the graph. When no graph is explicitly
provided, such domain knowledge can be exploited to learn
structures optimized for the task at hand [8, 3, 9, 7]. However,
in tasks where knowledge of the optimal graph structure is
unknown, one common practice is to generate a k-nearest
neighbor (k-NN) graph. In such cases, k is a hyperparameter
and tuned to find the model with the best performance. For
many applications, fixing k is overly restrictive as the optimal choice of k may vary for each node in the graph. While
there has been an emergence of approaches which learn the
graph structure for use in downstream GNNs [43, 13, 15],
all of them treat the node degree k as a fixed hyperparameter.
We propose a general differentiable graph-generator
(DGG) module for learning graph topology with or without an initial edge structure. Rather than learning graphs
with fixed node degrees k, our module generates local topologies with an adaptive neighborhood size. This module can be
placed within any graph convolutional network, and jointly
optimized with the rest of the network’s parameters, learning
topologies which favor the downstream task without hyperparameter selection or indeed any additional training signal.
The primary contributions of this paper are as follows:
1. We propose a novel, differentiable graph-generator
(DGG) module which jointly optimizes both the neighborhood size, and the edges that should belong to each
neighborhood. Note a key limitation of existing approaches [43, 15, 13, 8, 3, 7, 37] is their inability to
learn neighborhood sizes.
2. Our DGG module is directly integrable into any pipeline
involving graph convolutions, where either the given
adjacency matrix is noisy, or unavailable and must be
determined heuristically. In both cases, our DGG generates the adjacency matrix as part of the GNN training
and can be trained end-to-end to optimize performance
on the downstream task. Should a good graph structure be known, the generated adjacency matrix can be
learned to remain close to it while optimizing performance.
3. To demonstrate the power of the approach, we integrate
our DGG into a range of SOTA pipelines — without

22541

