This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Object Navigation with dynamically learned neural implicit representations
Pierre Marza 1

Laetitia Matignon2
1

INSA Lyon

2

Olivier Simonin1

UCBL

3

Christian Wolf3

Naver Labs Europe

{pierre.marza, olivier.simonin}@insa-lyon.fr
laetitia.matignon@univ-lyon1.fr, christian.wolf@naverlabs.com

Project Page: https://pierremarza.github.io/projects/dynamic_implicit_representations/

Abstract
Understanding and mapping a new environment are core
abilities of any autonomously navigating agent. While classical robotics usually estimates maps in a stand-alone manner
with SLAM variants, which maintain a topological or metric representation, end-to-end learning of navigation keeps
some form of memory in a neural network. Networks are
typically imbued with inductive biases, which can range
from vectorial representations to birds-eye metric tensors or
topological structures. In this work, we propose to structure
neural networks with two neural implicit representations,
which are learned dynamically during each episode and
map the content of the scene: (i) the Semantic Finder predicts the position of a previously seen queried object; (ii) the
Occupancy and Exploration Implicit Representation encapsulates information about explored area and obstacles, and
is queried with a novel global read mechanism which directly
maps from function space to a usable embedding space. Both
representations are leveraged by an agent trained with Reinforcement Learning (RL) and learned online during each
episode. We evaluate the agent on Multi-Object Navigation
and show the high impact of using neural implicit representations as a memory source.

1. Introduction
Autonomous navigation in complex unknown 3D environments from visual observations requires building a suitable representation of the environment, in particular when
the targeted navigation task requires high-level reasoning.
Whereas classical robotics builds these representations explicitly through reconstructions, possibly supported through
machine learning, end-to-end training learns them automatically either from reward, by imitation learning or through
self-supervised objectives.
While spatial representations can emerge even in unstructured agents, as shown in the form of grid-cells in artificial
[16, 3] and biological agents [25], spatial inductive biases

fs

g

(x, s)
1

x

fo

fo

s

θo

θo
3

x

θs

r

2

e

Dec

4

Figure 1. We propose two implicit representations as inductive
biases for autonomous agents — both are learned online during
each episode. ➁ a semantic representation fs predicts positions
x from goals g given as semantic codes. We show Ground Truth
object positions (rectangles) and predictions (round; radius shows
uncertainty, unit-less, as an illustration). Blue and pink objects have
been observed, but not the yellow target. ➂ A structural representation fo predicts occupancy and exploration s from positions x;
we provide a global read which directly maps from function space
fo (represented by trainable weights θo ) to a context embedding
e used by the agent. ➃ shows the reconstruction produced by a
decoder Dec during training. Orange=navigable, Green=Obstacles,
Blue=Unexplored. ➀ a ground-truth map is shown for reference,
simulating a fully explored scene.

can support learning actionable spatial representations and
decrease sample complexity. Popular inductive biases are
metric maps [44, 5, 26], topological maps [6, 12] and recently, self-attention, adapting transformers [55] to sequential decision making and navigation [20, 18, 13, 47]. The
chosen representation should support robust estimation of
navigable space even in difficult conditions, mapping fea-

11004

