This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Action Description Prompts for Skeleton-based Action Recognition
Wangmeng Xiang1,2
Chao Li2
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

Yuxuan Zhou2,3
Biao Wang2
Lei Zhang1 *
2
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 3 Mannheim University

{wangmeng.xwm,lllcho.lc,wb.wangbiao}@alibaba-inc.com, yuxuazho@mail.uni-mannheim.de
cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Skeleton-based action recognition has recently received
considerable attention. Current approaches to skeletonbased action recognition are typically formulated as onehot classification tasks and do not fully exploit the semantic relations between actions. For example, “make victory
sign” and “thumb up” are two actions of hand gestures,
whose major difference lies in the movement of hands. This
information is agnostic from the categorical one-hot encoding of action classes but could be unveiled from the action description. Therefore, utilizing action description in
training could potentially benefit representation learning.
In this work, we propose a Generative Action-description
Prompts (GAP) approach for skeleton-based action recognition. More specifically, we employ a pre-trained largescale language model as the knowledge engine to automatically generate text descriptions for body parts movements of
actions, and propose a multi-modal training scheme by utilizing the text encoder to generate feature vectors for different body parts and supervise the skeleton encoder for action
representation learning. Experiments show that our proposed GAP method achieves noticeable improvements over
various baseline models without extra computation cost at
inference. GAP achieves new state-of-the-arts on popular skeleton-based action recognition benchmarks, including NTU RGB+D, NTU RGB+D 120 and NW-UCLA. The
source code is available at https://github.com/
MartinXM/GAP.

1. Introduction
Action recognition has been an active research topic due
to its wide range of applications in human-computer interaction, sports and health analysis, entertainment, etc. In recent years, with the emergence of depth sensors, such as
Kinect [44] and RealSense [14], human body joints can be
easily acquired. The action recognition approach utilizing
* Corresponding author

body joints, i.e., the so-called skeleton-based action recognition, has drawn a lot of attentions due to its computation
efficiency and robustness to lighting conditions, viewpoint
variations and background noise.
Most of the previous methods in skeleton-based action
recognition focus on modeling the relation of human joints,
following a unimodal training scheme with a sequence of
skeleton coordinates as inputs [41, 15, 27, 9, 28, 4, 25, 40,
30, 36, 35, 22]. Inspired by the recent success of multimodal training with image and language [23, 1], we investigate an interesting question: whether action language
description could unveil the action relations and benefit
skeleton-based action recognition? Regrettably, due to the
absence of a large-scale dataset consisting of skeleton-text
pairs, constructing such a dataset would require significant
time and financial resources. Consequently, the training
scheme outlined in [23, 11, 39] cannot be directly applied to
skeleton-based action recognition. As a result, the development of novel multi-modal training paradigms is necessary
to address this issue.
We propose to leverage the generative category-level human action description in the form of language prompts.
The language definition of an action contains rich prior
knowledge. For example, different actions focus on the
movement of different body parts: “make victory sign” and
“thumb up” describe the gesture of hands; “arm circles” and
“tennis bat swing” describe the movement of arms; “nod
head” and “shake head” are the motions of head; “jump up”
and “side kick” rely on movements of foot and leg. Some
actions describe the interaction of multiple body parts, e.g.,
“put on a hat” and “put on a shoe” involve actions of hand
and head, hand and foot, respectively. These prior knowledge about actions could provide fine-grained guidance for
representation learning. In addition, to resolve the laborious work to collect human action prompts, we resort to pretrained large language model (LLM), e.g. GPT-3 [1] for
efficient automatic prompts generation.
In specific, we develop a new training paradigm, which
employs generative action prompts for skeleton-based action recognition. We take advantages of the GPT-3 [1] as
10276

