This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Harnessing the Spatial-Temporal Attention of Diffusion Models for High-Fidelity
Text-to-Image Synthesis
Qiucheng Wu1⇤ , Yujian Liu1⇤ , Handong Zhao2 , Trung Bui2 , Zhe Lin2 , Yang Zhang3 , Shiyu Chang1
1
UC Santa Barbara, 2 Adobe Research, 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
{qiucheng, yujianliu}@ucsb.edu

Missing Objects
StableDiffusion

Ours

Mismatched Attributes
StableDiffusion

Ours

Mislocated Objects
StableDiffusion

Ours

An airport employee giving
directions to an airplane.

A bedroom has green carpeting
and a bed.

The brown teddy bear is placed
high above the toilet.

A zebra brazing on green grass
next to a pile of rocks.
(a)

A red car is to the left of a
black mailbox.
(b)

The teddy bear is right of the
suitcase.
(c)

Figure 1. Example generation by stable-diffusion-v1-4 and our method. Stable diffusion model makes three types of errors that include
missing objects, mismatched attributes, and mislocated objects. Errors are highlighted in red.

Abstract
Diffusion-based models have achieved state-of-the-art
performance on text-to-image synthesis tasks. However, one
critical limitation of these models is the low fidelity of generated images with respect to the text description, such as
missing objects, mismatched attributes, and mislocated objects. One key reason for such inconsistencies is the inaccurate cross-attention to text in both the spatial dimension,
which controls at what pixel region an object should appear,
and the temporal dimension, which controls how different
levels of details are added through the denoising steps. In
this paper, we propose a new text-to-image algorithm that
adds explicit control over spatial-temporal cross-attention
in diffusion models. We first utilize a layout predictor to
predict the pixel regions for objects mentioned in the text.
We then impose spatial attention control by combining the
attention over the entire text description and that over the

local description of the particular object in the corresponding pixel region of that object. The temporal attention control is further added by allowing the combination weights to
change at each denoising step, and the combination weights
are optimized to ensure high fidelity between the image and
the text. Experiments show that our method generates images with higher fidelity compared to diffusion-model-based
baselines without fine-tuning the diffusion model. Our code
is publicly available. 1

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [14, 19, 46, 47, 48] have recently revolutionized the field of image synthesis. Compared with
previous generative models such as generative adversar⇤ Equal contribution.

1 https://github.com/UCSB-NLP-Chang/
Diffusion-SpaceTime-Attn

7766

