This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fast Inference and Update of Probabilistic Density Estimation
on Trajectory Prediction
Takahiro Maeda
Norimichi Ukita
Toyota Technological Institute, Japan
{sd21601, ukita}@toyota-ti.ac.jp

Abstract

1. Introduction
Human trajectory prediction is a challenging problem
because human movements are not deterministic, unlike
the billiard balls on a pool table. Starting from deterministic approaches [26, 49], to tackle its indeterministic nature, many stochastic approaches are proposed, such as
Gaussian distribution-based [1,42,66], generative adversarial networks (GANs)-based [9, 10, 25, 57], variational autoencoder (VAE)-based [58, 71, 73], diffusion-based [24],
and normalizing flow-based [59] methods. These methods

Density
at

FlowChain (Ours)

Accurate
Density
23904.1 [ms]

33.7 [ms]

Repeat
Predictions

37.0 [ms]
Update
by reusing

Density
at

Safety-critical applications such as autonomous vehicles and social robots require fast computation and accurate probability density estimation on trajectory prediction. To address both requirements, this paper presents
a new normalizing flow-based trajectory prediction model
named FlowChain. FlowChain is a stack of conditional
continuously-indexed flows (CIFs) that are expressive and
allow analytical probability density computation. This analytical computation is faster than the generative models
that need additional approximations such as kernel density estimation. Moreover, FlowChain is more accurate
than the Gaussian mixture-based models due to fewer assumptions on the estimated density. FlowChain also allows a rapid update of estimated probability densities. This
update is achieved by adopting the newest observed position and reusing the flow transformations and its log-detjacobians that represent the motion trend. This update is
completed in less than one millisecond because this reuse
greatly omits the computational cost. Experimental results showed our FlowChain achieved state-of-the-art trajectory prediction accuracy compared to previous methods. Furthermore, our FlowChain demonstrated superiority in the accuracy and speed of density estimation. Our
code is available at https://github.com/meaten/
FlowChain-ICCV2023.

Diffusion-based VAE-based

Fast
Prediction
Update
in an Instant

23904.1 [ms]

33.7 [ms]

0.6 [ms]

Figure 1. Effects of our FlowChain. Our FlowChain can rapidly
estimate accurate density than VAE-based methods as shown in
green. Furthermore, we propose an update of estimated density
that only requires an instant of time, as shown in blue.

can be applied to human-interactive systems, including autonomous vehicles [8,11,38,55,69] and social robots [4,39].
In these safety-critical applications, autonomous systems must infer the existence probability density distribution (“density” for brevity) of other moving objects such as
pedestrians around on all prediction steps for risk assessment (i.e., collision avoidance). However, most of the indeterministic approaches mentioned above merely generate
possible future trajectories and cannot estimate the density
alone. We need to further apply kernel density estimation
(KDE) to these future trajectories for density estimation.
Thus, trajectory prediction with density estimation usually takes a larger computational cost than only generating possible trajectories. This computational cost accumulates upon every single prediction update along with highlyfrequent observations. This is unacceptable to autonomous
systems that work in rapidly changing environments.
To address both computational cost and density estimation, we propose a new normalizing flow-based model
named FlowChain (Fig. 1). This speed and accuracy are because normalizing flows need no additional approximation
such as Gaussian mixture modeling or KDE with limited
samples. FlowChain can estimate a density on each prediction time step thanks to our stacked normalizing flow archi-

9795

