This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Unified Framework for Robustness on Diverse Sampling Errors
Myeongho Jeon
Myungjoo Kang
Joonseok Lee
Seoul National University
{andyjeon, mkang, joonseok}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent studies have substantiated that machine learning
algorithms including convolutional neural networks often
suffer from unreliable generalizations when there is a significant gap between the source and target data distributions. To mitigate this issue, a predetermined distribution
shift has been addressed independently (e.g., single domain
generalization, de-biasing). However, a distribution mismatch cannot be clearly estimated because the target distribution is unknown at training. Therefore, a conservative
approach robust on unexpected diverse distributions is more
desirable in practice. Our work starts from a motivation to
allow adaptive inference once we know the target, since it
is accessible only at testing. Instead of assuming and fixing
the target distribution at training, our proposed approach
allows adjusting the feature space the model refers to at every prediction, i.e., instance-wise adaptive inference. The
extensive evaluation demonstrates our method is effective
for generalization on diverse distributions.

1. Introduction
A fundamental assumption of machine learning is that
the training dataset represents the true distribution and the
test set also follows the same true distribution. For instance,
a face recognition model is trained on a dataset of thousands
or millions of face images, assuming that this dataset represents a set of all possible faces of human beings under
all conditions like illumination or angle. In this sense, any
dataset is nothing but a collection of samples from the real
world, and it may not perfectly represent the true distribution, even if it is huge. No dataset is free from this sampling
error; rather it is just a matter of degree. Obviously, a model
trained on a particular set of samples is affected by the distribution. In some fortunate cases, we may have similar distribution over training samples and over inference set, while
distribution shift between source and target data caused by
extreme sampling error could give rise to unreliable generalization of the model.
Although we are not able to know the true distribution
in most cases, there are many practical situations where we

Figure 1. Our motivation. At training, we do not know to which
distribution the model would be deployed. Thus, generalization
for a predetermined distribution mismatch (e.g., SDG or UBL) is
often unfavorable. The image at the bottom illustrates our scenario, where an arbitrary distribution could be the target.

need to build a model based only on a limited set of training
samples and apply it to another target data, which may neither necessarily follow the training distribution, nor the true
distribution. For instance, a gender classifier trained only on
images of the young may not perform well for the old. For
this practical need, previous research has been dedicated
to tackling this issue of domain shift. Particularly, several
works suggest that the performance of the model trained
on the source domain could often be degraded on the outof-distribution (OOD) target domains. This is called single
domain generalization (SDG) [25, 22, 32, 7, 20, 30, 26, 5],
mainly tackling an unknown domain shift between the training and test sets.
On the other hand, unbiased learning (UBL) is another related research area, aiming at removing bias that
potentially a machine learning model may rely on. As
an example, a gender classifier may consider ‘age’ as an
important factor if trained on (young, female) and (old,
male) samples and hence frequently fail to correctly predict (old, female) and (young, male) test samples. Biased attributes could make the model biased and several
recent works propose various approaches to mitigate this
issue [3, 21, 19, 11, 19, 13, 23].
However, the type of distribution shift can be defined
only when we know both the source and target distributions.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, we do not know at training on which
11464

