This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Mesh Recovery from Partial Point Cloud Sequence
Hojun Jang1
1
2

Minkwan Kim1

Jinseok Bae1

Young Min Kim1,2

Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University

Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence and INMC, Seoul National University
{j12040208, mkjjang3598, capoo95, youngmin.kim}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
The exact 3D dynamics of the human body provides crucial evidence to analyze the consequences of the physical
interaction between the body and the environment, which
can eventually assist everyday activities in a wide range of
applications. However, optimizing for 3D configurations
from image observation requires a significant amount of
computation, whereas real-world 3D measurements often
suffer from noisy observation or complex occlusion. We resolve the challenge by learning a latent distribution representing strong temporal priors. We use a conditional
variational autoencoder (CVAE) architecture with a transformer to train the motion priors with a large-scale motion
dataset. Then our feature follower effectively aligns the feature spaces of noisy, partial observation with the necessary
input for pre-trained motion priors, and quickly recovers a
complete mesh sequence of motion. We demonstrate that
the transformer-based autoencoder can collect necessary
spatio-temporal correlations robust to various adversaries,
such as missing temporal frames, or noisy observation under severe occlusion. Our framework is general and can be
applied to recover the full 3D dynamics of other subjects
with parametric representations.

1. Introduction
Understanding human motion is important for many
real-world applications to assist humans. It has been a consistent interest of research, and has witnessed remarkable
progress. Many previous works attempted to detect human
poses by locating predefined joints from 2D images and fitting template meshes. 3D information has to be inferred as
post-processing with either multi-view observations or by
incorporating prior knowledge about the size of the body
or objects. A large volume of works also find 3D poses
from 3D data of marker-based motion captures, or gyroscopes, which require additional hardware attached to the
body parts. On the other hand, point clouds are easy to

Figure 1. Overview of our approach. Our model firstly learns to
recover mesh sequence from the complete point cloud sequence.
Using this kinematics prior, we train our model in various other
scenarios and recover the mesh sequence. Our model can also be
trained on other input modality to generate its mesh sequence.

obtain using a commodity depth camera or a LiDAR sensor
observing the scene. By directly measuring the 3D locations
of the parts, we can easily reason about body positions relative to surroundings and have advantages in inferring the
consequences of human-object interaction or human-human
interaction.
We propose a pipeline to obtain full 3D dynamic mesh
from noisy, partial point cloud sequences. Real-world observations of motion are highly complex and suffer from occlusion by other objects or noises. Nonetheless, humans can
easily infer the motion context of other humans. Not only
does the physical connectivity of the skeleton structure define the range of possible motions for human body parts,
but the motion semantics result in a rich correlation between temporal frames. To this end, we observe a sequence
of point cloud measurements, instead of individual frames,
and utilize strong kinematics information obtained from a
large-scale motion data. Note that the overall pipeline is not
bounded to human mesh, but can also be extended to other

15074

