This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DeFormer: Integrating Transformers with Deformable Models for 3D Shape
Abstraction from a Single Image
Di Liu1 , Xiang Yu2 , Meng Ye1 , Qilong Zhangli1 , Zhuowei Li1 , Zhixing Zhang1 , Dimitris N. Metaxas1
1
Rutgers University 2 Amazon Prime Video

Abstract
Accurate 3D shape abstraction from a single 2D image
is a long-standing problem in computer vision and graphics. By leveraging a set of primitives to represent the target shape, recent methods have achieved promising results.
However, these methods either use a relatively large number
of primitives or lack geometric flexibility due to the limited
expressibility of the primitives. In this paper, we propose a
novel bi-channel Transformer architecture, integrated with
parameterized deformable models, termed DeFormer, to simultaneously estimate the global and local deformations
of primitives. In this way, DeFormer can abstract complex object shapes while using a small number of primitives which offer a broader geometry coverage and finer details. Then, we introduce a force-driven dynamic fitting and
a cycle-consistent re-projection loss to optimize the primitive parameters. Extensive experiments on ShapeNet across
various settings show that DeFormer achieves better reconstruction accuracy over the state-of-the-art, and visualizes
with consistent semantic correspondences for improved interpretability.

1. Introduction
Accurate 3D shape abstraction with semantically meaningful parts is an active research field in computer vision for
decades. It can be applied to many downstream tasks, such
as shape reconstruction [47, 9, 53, 58, 68, 49, 50, 56, 43],
object segmentation [31, 51, 37, 21, 73, 39, 41, 27, 38,
7, 71, 20, 42, 40, 16, 28, 45, 19], shape editing [69, 24]
and re-targeting [15, 23, 70]. Due to the large success of
deep neural networks (DNNs), a series of learning-based
works [56, 54, 64, 55, 14] propose to decompose an object shape into primitives and use the deformed primitives
to represent the target shape. The primitive-based methods
usually interpret a shape as a union of simple parts (e.g.,
cuboids, spheres, or superquadrics), offering interpretable
abstraction of a shape target.
To achieve high accuracy of shape reconstruction, existing methods require joint optimization of a number of prim-

(a) Input (b) Target (c) Suq (d) CvxNets (4) NP (d) DeFormer

Figure 1: DeFormer uses a small number of primitives to
abstract a 3D shape from a 2D image with better accuracy
and part correspondence. Taking “lamp” and “chair” as examples, we compare to Suq [56], CvxNets [14], and Neural
Parts (NP) [55] with ∼20, 25, and 5 primitives, respectively,
while ours applies 2 primitives for lamps (1 for shade and 1
for body) and 6 primitives for chairs (4 for legs, 1 for seat
and 1 for back).
itives, which sometimes do not accurately correspond to the
object parts and therefore limit the interpretability of the reconstructions [56, 14, 55] (see Fig. 1). To this end, using
a small number of primitives to abstract complex shapes
becomes a trend in recent research [55]. However, the
dilemma lies in that using fewer primitives usually results
in sub-optimal reconstruction accuracy due to their reduced
representation power, while using more primitives lowers
the interpretability and requires higher computational costs.
Physics-based deformable models (DMs) [48, 62] are
well known for their strong abstraction ability in shape
representation, and have been successfully applied to various complex shape modeling applications. DMs leverage
a physical modeling framework to predict global and local
deformations of primitives, in which force-driven dynamic

14236

