This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Spiral Layers
for Efficient 3D Representation Learning on Meshes
Francesca Babiloni1,2 , Matteo Maggioni1 , Thomas Tanay1 , Jiankang Deng1,2 ,
Ales Leonardis1 , Stefanos Zafeiriou2
1
Huawei, Noah’s Ark Lab 2 Imperial College London
{f.babiloni22, j.deng16, s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk
{matteo.maggioni, thomas.tanay, ales.leonardis}@huawei.com

Abstract
The success of deep learning models on structured data
has generated significant interest in extending their application to non-Euclidean domains. In this work, we introduce a
novel intrinsic operator suitable for representation learning
on 3D meshes. Our operator is specifically tailored to adapt
its behavior to the irregular structure of the underlying
graph and effectively utilize its long-range dependencies,
while at the same time ensuring computational efficiency
and ease of optimization. In particular, inspired by the
framework of Spiral Convolution, which extracts and transforms the vertices in the 3D mesh following a local spiral
ordering, we propose a general operator that dynamically
adjusts the length of the spiral trajectory and the parameters of the transformation for each processed vertex and
mesh. Then, we use polyadic decomposition to factorize its
dense weight tensor into a sequence of lighter linear layers
that separately process features and vertices information,
hence significantly reducing the computational complexity
without introducing any stringent inductive biases. Notably, we leverage dynamic gating to achieve spatial adaptivity and induce global reasoning with constant time complexity benefitting from an efficient dynamic pooling mechanism based on Summed-Area-tables. Used as a drop-in
replacement on existing architectures for shape correspondence our operator significantly improves the performanceefficiency trade-off, and in 3D shape generation with morphable models achieves state-of-the-art performance with a
three-fold reduction in the number of parameters required.
Project page: https://github.com/Fb2221/DFC

1. Introduction
Convolutional layers have emerged as the de facto standard methodology to effectively capture local similarity on
a grid, hence leading to a notable paradigm shift in fields
that analyze regular Euclidean data, such as object detec-

Figure 1: Visual comparison of SpiralConvolution (left) and
our operator (right). Our proposed operator adapts to the underlying structure of the mesh, learning vertex-adaptive and meshadaptive spiral sequences of variable lengths, ranging from 7 to
70. In contrast, the base SpiralConvolution operator works on
a fixed receptive field of length 9. The weight tensors of both
operators are shown in the image using Einstein notation and a
schematic representation. Our proposed operator approximates its
dense weight tensor through CP decomposition for efficient implementation. The subscripts indicate respectively: k a fixed sequence length, m a variable sequence length, c, d input and output
channels, n and i the number of vertices and meshes considered.

tion, image classification, speech recognition, and machine
translation. Recently, advances in geometric deep learning have sparked interest towards processing non-Euclidean
data, however, applying classic neural networks to such
kind of data (i.e., 3D mesh or point cloud) still presents significant challenges.
Early deep-learning methods address this issue in an extrinsic manner, applying convolutions directly in the 3D Euclidean space [58, 46], but suffer from high computational
complexity and a lack of smoothness in the data represen-

14620

