This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MolGrapher: Graph-based Visual Recognition of Chemical Structures
Lucas Morin1, 2 Martin Danelljan2 Maria Isabel Agea1 Ahmed Nassar1
Valery Weber1 Ingmar Meijer1 Peter Staar1 Fisher Yu2
1
IBM Research 2 ETH Zurich
{lum, ahn, vwe, inm, taa}@zurich.ibm.com

martin.danelljan@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
The automatic analysis of chemical literature has immense potential to accelerate the discovery of new materials
and drugs. Much of the critical information in patent documents and scientiﬁc articles is contained in ﬁgures, depicting the molecule structures. However, automatically parsing the exact chemical structure is a formidable challenge,
due to the amount of detailed information, the diversity of
drawing styles, and the need for training data. In this work,
we introduce MolGrapher to recognize chemical structures
visually. First, a deep keypoint detector detects the atoms.
Second, we treat all candidate atoms and bonds as nodes
and put them in a graph. This construct allows a natural
graph representation of the molecule. Last, we classify atom
and bond nodes in the graph with a Graph Neural Network.
To address the lack of real training data, we propose a synthetic data generation pipeline producing diverse and realistic results. In addition, we introduce a large-scale benchmark of annotated real molecule images, USPTO-30K, to
spur research on this critical topic. Extensive experiments
on ﬁve datasets show that our approach signiﬁcantly outperforms classical and learning-based methods in most settings. Code, models, and datasets are available 1 .

1. Introduction
The creation of an open-source database offering a uniﬁed view of our current knowledge of all studied molecules,
would greatly accelerate research and development in numerous ﬁelds, ranging from the pharmaceutical industry
to semiconductor manufacturing. Currently, information
about a molecule’s properties is distributed across various databases, research articles, and chemical patents, each
measuring different subsets of properties. In such documents, molecules are most often described using images,
by drawing their molecular structures. Automatic parsing of
molecules from document images, known as Optical Chem1 https://github.com/DS4SD/MolGrapher

i@yf.io

+]EkZI[j

!]YIEkYIQZ<OI

!]YIEkY<ghjgkEjkgI

!]Yg<dPIg

Figure 1. MolGrapher extracts the chemical structure, including
all atoms and bonds, from a molecule image in a document. Our
approach constructs a supergraph of the molecule (bottom right),
containing all detected atom and bond candidates. These nodes
are then classiﬁed by a Graph Neural Network in order to retrieve
the chemical structure.

ical Structure Recognition (OCSR), is thus a critical task in
the quest towards establishing a large-scale digital molecule
database.
OCSR, however, poses multiple key challenges, which
limit the accuracy of current solutions. First, a molecule can
be drawn with a variety of styles and conventions. Even the
projection of the molecular structure from 3-D onto a 2-D
drawing is not unique, leading to the development of various projection algorithms with diverse results. Secondly,
OCSR requires the extraction of detailed information from
the image. Molecules often contain even hundreds of atoms
and bonds, which all need to be correctly classiﬁed and
linked. Thirdly, molecules have a virtually endless diversity stemming from the combinatorical explosion of possibilities, presenting particular challenges to data-driven deep
learning methods. Lastly, available real training datasets
are extremely limited, further complicating the application
of deep learning.

19552

