This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Modality-Agnostic Representations via Meta-learning for Brain
Tumor Segmentation
Aishik Konwer1 ,

Xiaoling Hu1 , Joseph Bae2 , Xuan Xu1 , Chao Chen2 , Prateek Prasanna2
Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University
2
Department of Biomedical Informatics, Stony Brook University
1

{akonwer,xiaolhu,xuaxu}@cs.stonybrook.edu
{joseph.bae,chao.chen.1,prateek.prasanna}@stonybrook.edu

Abstract
In medical vision, different imaging modalities provide
complementary information. However, in practice, not all
modalities may be available during inference or even training. Previous approaches, e.g., knowledge distillation or
image synthesis, often assume the availability of full modalities for all subjects during training; this is unrealistic and
impractical due to the variability in data collection across
sites. We propose a novel approach to learn enhanced
modality-agnostic representations by employing a metalearning strategy in training, even when only limited full
modality samples are available. Meta-learning enhances
partial modality representations to full modality representations by meta-training on partial modality data and metatesting on limited full modality samples. Additionally, we
co-supervise this feature enrichment by introducing an auxiliary adversarial learning branch. More specifically, a
missing modality detector is used as a discriminator to
mimic the full modality setting. Our segmentation framework significantly outperforms state-of-the-art brain tumor
segmentation techniques in missing modality scenarios.

1. Introduction
Multiple medical imaging modalities/protocols are required to provide complementary diagnostic cues to clinicians. For instance, multiple Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) sequences (henceforth referred to as modalities),
namely native T1, post-contrast T1 (T1c), T2-weighted
(T2), and Fluid Attenuated Inversion Recovery (FLAIR) are
used together to understand the underlying spatial complexity of brain tumors and their surroundings [3, 5]. Deep
learning approaches [21, 36, 10, 58, 51, 49] have found
great success in multimodal brain tumor segmentation and
treatment response assessment. These conventional brain
tumor segmentation methods perform well only when all

Figure 1: Comparison of the paradigms generally adopted
by existing missing modality approaches (left) vs. ours
(right) for brain tumor segmentation. N and n refer to the
number of subjects (patients) with partial and full modalities, respectively. Previous methods either utilize full
modality data Df for all subjects or simulate partial modality data Dm from Df . On the contrary, our approach works
in a limited full modality setting, i.e., |Df | ≤ |Dm |.
four acquisition modalities are available as input (i.e., in
the full modality setting). However, in clinical practice, often only a subset of modalities are available due to issues
including image degradation, motion artifacts [18], erroneous acquisition settings, and brief scan times. Hence it is
crucial to develop robust modality-agnostic methods which
can achieve state-of-the-art performance in missing modality settings, i.e., when different modalities are unavailable
during inference or even training.
Recently, a plethora of works has been proposed to address missing modality scenarios for brain tumor segmentation. Two major categories include: 1) Knowledge distillation: These methods [43, 23, 52, 50, 2] learn privileged
information from a teacher network trained on full modality data, i.e., data with all modalities available. 2) Image
synthesis: Several works [42, 54, 59, 25, 55] train generative models to synthesize images of the missing modalities. The synthesized “full modality” images are used for
segmentation. One major issue is that both categories of
methods require full modality data for all subjects in the
training set (see Fig. 1a), either to train the teacher or the

21415

