This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient neural supersampling on a novel gaming dataset
Antoine Mercier Ruan Erasmus Yashesh Savani Manik Dhingra Fatih Porikli Guillaume Berger
Qualcomm AI Research*
{amercier, rerasmus, ysavani, manidhin, fporikli, guilberg}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
Real-time rendering for video games has become increasingly challenging due to the need for higher resolutions, framerates and photorealism. Supersampling has
emerged as an effective solution to address this challenge.
Our work introduces a novel neural algorithm for supersampling rendered content that is 4× more efficient than
existing methods while maintaining the same level of accuracy. Additionally, we introduce a new dataset which provides auxiliary modalities such as motion vectors and depth
generated using graphics rendering features like viewport
jittering and mipmap biasing at different resolutions. We
believe that this dataset fills a gap in the current dataset
landscape and can serve as a valuable resource to help
measure progress in the field and advance the state-of-theart in super-resolution techniques for gaming content.

Figure 1. Example images produced by our solution using neural
networks of different sizes. These models produce 1080p outputs
in respectively 1.08 ms, 1.53 ms, and 3.52 ms on an RTX 3090,
which is 4× to 12× faster than previous work by Xiao et al. [59].

1. Introduction
Real-time rendering has become increasingly difficult
for video games due to the demand for higher resolutions,
framerates and photorealism. One solution that has recently
emerged to address this challenge consists in rendering at
lower resolution and then use an upscaling technique to
achieve the desired resolution. However, developing efficient upscaling solutions that balance speed and accuracy
remains a challenge. Recently, several commercial solutions have been developed for gaming super-resolution, including those that are based on deep learning (DL) such as
Nvidia’s DLSS [36] or Intel’s XeSS [11], as well as solutions that do not rely on machine learning, such as AMD’s
FSR [18, 19]. Despite the availability of these commercial
solutions, there has been relatively little published research
on the application of DL-based super-resolution for gaming.
We believe that one of the reasons why DL-based superresolution for gaming has received little attention compared
to super-resolution of natural content is that there is currently no standard, publicly available dataset for develop-

Figure 2. Example of data modalities available in the QRISP
dataset. First row, from left to right: Native 270p, Negative 2
mipmap biased 270p, Negative 1.58 mipmap biased 360p, Negative 1 mipmap biased 540p. Second row, from left to right: 540p
depth, 540p motion vectors, Native 1080p, Enhanced 1080p

ing gaming-specific super-resolution solutions. Researchers
and developers who want to study or improve upon existing methods must create their own datasets, which can be a
time-consuming and resource-intensive process.
Our work makes the following contributions:
• we release a dataset specifically designed for the research and development of gaming super-resolution algorithms. We show that models trained on this dataset

* Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies,
Inc. and/or its subsidiaries.

1296

