This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-vocabulary Panoptic Segmentation with Embedding Modulation
Xi Chen1 Shuang Li2 Ser-Nam Lim3 Antonio Torralba2 Hengshuang Zhao1,2 *
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 3 Meta AI

Abstract

wall.
black box.

wall-other-merged.
card index.

Open-vocabulary image segmentation is attracting increasing attention due to its critical applications in the real
world. Traditional closed-vocabulary segmentation methods are not able to characterize novel objects, whereas several recent open-vocabulary attempts obtain unsatisfactory
results, i.e., notable performance reduction on the closedvocabulary and massive demand for extra data. To this
end, we propose OPSNet, an omnipotent and data-efficient
framework for Open-vocabulary Panoptic Segmentation.
Specifically, the exquisitely designed Embedding Modulation module, together with several meticulous components,
enables adequate embedding enhancement and information exchange between the segmentation model and the
visual-linguistic well-aligned CLIP encoder, resulting in
superior segmentation performance under both open- and
closed-vocabulary settings with much fewer need of additional data. Extensive experimental evaluations are conducted across multiple datasets (e.g., COCO, ADE20K,
Cityscapes, and PascalContext) under various circumstances, where the proposed OPSNet achieves state-of-theart results, which demonstrates the effectiveness and generality of the proposed approach. The project page is
https://opsnet-page.github.io.

1. Introduction
The real world is diverse and contains numerous distinct
objects. In practical scenarios, we inevitably encounter various objects with different shapes, colors, and categories.
Although some of them are unfamiliar or rarely seen, to
better understand the world, we still need to figure out the
region and shape of each object and what it is. The ability to
perceive and segment both known and unknown objects is
natural and essential for many real-world applications like
autonomous driving, robot sensing, and navigation, humanobject interaction, augmented reality, healthcare, etc.
Lots of works have explored image segmentation and
achieved great success [51, 17, 50, 8]. However, they are
typically designed and developed on specific datasets (e.g.,
* Corresponding author

paper.

paper-merged.

dongle.
cup.

cup.

laptop.
table-merged.

chair.

table.

page printer

laptop

mouse button. floor.

sheep
grass-merged.

(a) Original Image

(b) Mask2Former Prediction

armchair.

wallaby, brush kangaroo
grass, grassland.

(c) Our Prediction

Figure 1. Visual comparisons of classical closed-vocabulary segmentation and our open-vocabulary segmentation. Models are
trained on the COCO panoptic dataset. Categories like ‘printer’,
‘card index’, ‘dongle’, and ‘kangaroo’ are not presented in the
COCO concept set. Closed-vocabulary segmentation algorithms
like Mask2Former [8] are not able to detect and segment new objects (top middle) or fail to recognize object categories (bottom
middle). In contrast, our approach is able to segment and recognize novel objects (top right, bottom right) for the open vocabulary.

COCO [28], ADE20K [53]) with predefined categories in
a closed vocabulary, which assume the data distribution
and category space remain unchanged during algorithm development and deployment procedures, resulting in noticeable and unsatisfactory failures when handling new environments in the complex real world, as shown in Fig. 1 (b).
To address this problem, open-vocabulary perception is
densely explored for semantic segmentation and object detection. Some methods [15, 55, 16, 25, 49] use the visuallinguistic well-aligned CLIP [41] text encoder to extract the
language embeddings of category names to represent each
category, and train the classification head to match these
language embeddings. However, training the text-image
alignment from scratch often requires a large amount of
data and a heavy training burden. Other works [13, 47] use
both of the pre-trained CLIP image/text encoders to transfer
the open-vocabulary ability from CLIP. However, as CLIP
is not a cure-all for all domains and categories, although
they are data-efficient, they struggle to balance the generalization ability and the performance in the training domain.
[47, 12] demonstrate suboptimal cross-dataset results, [13]
shows unsatifactory performance on the training domain.
Besides, their methods for leveraging CLIP visual features
are inefficient. Specifically, they need to pass each proposal

1141

