This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ViewRefer: Grasp the Multi-view Knowledge for 3D Visual Grounding
Zoey Guo1,2*
Dong Wang1B
1

Yiwen Tang1*

Zhigang Wang1

Bin Zhao1, 3B
2

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3

Ray Zhang1,2*
Xuelong Li1, 3

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Northwestern Polytechnical University

{tangyiwen, wangdong, zhaobin}@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract

…

…

𝐅𝐮𝐬𝐢𝐨𝐧
𝐓𝐫𝐚𝐧𝐬𝐟𝐨𝐫𝐦𝐞𝐫

Guide

𝐕𝐢𝐞𝐰-𝐠𝐮𝐢𝐝𝐞𝐝
𝐏𝐫𝐞𝐝𝐢𝐜𝐭𝐢𝐨𝐧𝐬

* Equal Contribution.
B Corresponding authors

Enrich

…

The aim of visual grounding is to ascertain the precise
location of an object from an image or a 3D scene according to given query texts. The field of 2D visual grounding [24, 44, 28] has undergone significant advances recently.
Meanwhile, the developments in embodied agent [36, 9],
vision-language navigation [62, 40], and autonomous driv-

Back to chairs, the left one.

…

1. Introduction

Facing chairs, the right one.

LLM

Understanding 3D scenes from multi-view inputs has
been proven to alleviate the view discrepancy issue in 3D
visual grounding. However, existing methods normally neglect the view cues embedded in the text modality and fail
to weigh the relative importance of different views. In
this paper, we propose ViewRefer, a multi-view framework
for 3D visual grounding exploring how to grasp the view
knowledge from both text and 3D modalities. For the text
branch, ViewRefer leverages the diverse linguistic knowledge of large-scale language models, e.g., GPT, to expand
a single grounding text to multiple geometry-consistent descriptions. Meanwhile, in the 3D modality, a transformer
fusion module with inter-view attention is introduced to
boost the interaction of objects across views. On top of
that, we further present a set of learnable multi-view prototypes, which memorize scene-agnostic knowledge for different views, and enhance the framework from two perspectives: a view-guided attention module for more robust text
features, and a view-guided scoring strategy during the final prediction. With our designed paradigm, ViewRefer
achieves superior performance on three benchmarks and
surpasses the second-best by +2.8%, +1.5%, and +1.35%
on Sr3D, Nr3D, and ScanRefer.

𝐌𝐮𝐥𝐭𝐢-𝐯𝐢𝐞𝐰
𝐏𝐫𝐨𝐭𝐨𝐭𝐲𝐩𝐞𝐬

𝐌𝐮𝐥𝐭𝐢-𝐯𝐢𝐞𝐰 𝐓𝐞𝐱𝐭 𝐈𝐧𝐩𝐮𝐭

𝐌𝐮𝐥𝐭𝐢-𝐯𝐢𝐞𝐰 𝟑𝐃 𝐒𝐜𝐞𝐧𝐞𝐬

Figure 1: The Paradigm of ViewRefer. With our proposed LLMexpanded texts and multi-view prototypes, ViewRefer adopts a fusion transformer to effectively grasp view knowledge from multimodal data, which achieves superior 3D grounding performance.

ing [14] have also stimulated increasing attention on 3D visual grounding [1, 6].
Inspired by the strategies in 2D counterparts, most 3D visual grounding methods adopt a two-stage pipeline, which
first detect all object proposals in the scene and then ground
the target ones. Unlike 2D images with fixed object
positions, the large-scale 3D scenes consist of irregulardistributed point clouds with intricate spatial information,
which is view-invariant and causes more challenges. As discussed in previous works [35, 22], one urging issue is view
discrepancy, caused by the uncertain perspective between
the intelligent agent (model) and the commander (grounding text giver). Given relative positions between objects,
the text descriptions are supposed to change according to
different viewpoints, e.g., when turning the view from “facing” into “back to”, the “right” chair should be rectified as a

15372

