This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CSDA: Learning Category-Scale Joint Feature for Domain Adaptive
Object Detection
Changlong Gao1*, Chengxu Liu1,2* , Yujie Dun1 , Xueming Qian1,2
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Shaanxi Yulan Jiuzhou Intelligent Optoelectronic Technology Co., Ltd
{gaochanglong,chengxuliu}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {dunyj,qianxm}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain Adaptive Object Detection (DAOD) aims to improve the detection performance of target domains by minimizing the feature distribution between the source and target domain. Recent approaches usually align such distributions in terms of categories through adversarial learning and some progress has been made. However, when objects are non-uniformly distributed at different scales, such
category-level alignment causes imbalanced object feature
learning, refer as the inconsistency of category alignment at
different scales. For better category-level feature alignment,
we propose a novel DAOD framework of joint category and
scale information, dubbed CSDA, such a design enables effective object learning for different scales. Specifically, our
framework is implemented by two closely-related modules:
1) SGFF (Scale-Guided Feature Fusion) fuses the category representations of different domains to learn categoryspecific features, where the features are aligned by discriminators at three scales. 2) SAFE (Scale-Auxiliary Feature
Enhancement) encodes scale coordinates into a group of
tokens and enhances the representation of category-specific
features at different scales by self-attention. Based on the
anchor-based Faster-RCNN and anchor-free FCOS detectors, experiments show that our method achieves state-ofthe-art results on three DAOD benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Benefiting from the training of large numbers of highquality labeled data, object detection algorithms have been
significantly advanced in recent years [15, 20, 24, 25, 33].
However, when dealing with new scenarios with unlabeled
data, the detector suffers from severe performance degradation. To tackle this problem, the domain adaptive object detection is proposed, where the trained detector is transferred
from a scenario with labeled data (i.e., source domain) to a
* Equal contribution.

Category-level Alignment
Source
Target

Category 1

Pull
Domain
Feature
Boundary Push Enhancement

Category 2

Category n

Small Medium Large
Set
Set
Set

SGFF

SAFF

CSDA (Ours)

Figure 1. Illustration of the difference between our method and the
category-level alignment methods. It is worth noting that we only
depict one category in the figure for brevity. Our method learns
category-level features jointly with scales for more effective feature alignment. SGFF: scale-guided feature fusion module. SAFE:
scale-auxiliary feature enhancement module.

new scenario without labeled data (i.e., target domain).
The large difference in data distribution between the
source and target domain is an essential factor affecting
the performance. To improve the generalization ability of
detectors, most existing methods align feature distribution
from three aspects: 1) DAF [3] uses adversarial learning [8]
to align the feature distribution of pixel- and instancelevel with the help of the gradient reverse layer (GRL). 2)
EPM [11] and CFFA [43] weaken the negative impact from
the background and focus on the cross-domain alignment of
the foreground. 3) KTNet [32], GPA [37], DBGL [1], and
SIGMA [17] achieve adaptation at category-level by aligning cross-domain class-conditional distributions and make
significant progress. However, these works above ignore the
impact of object scale in transferring and aligning categorylevel features, as shown in Fig. 1, which prevents them from
satisfactory results.
In our view, there are still two challenges existing in current category-level DAOD works. The first challenge is
the large variance in category features at different scales,
which negatively affects the category-level feature alignment. Commonly, category features of small objects lack
texture details or even category-specific features with dis-

11421

