This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Template Transformer for Mitochondria Segmentation
in Electron Microscopy Images
Rui Sun1
Meng Meng 1
Yuwen Pan1∗
Naisong Luo1 *
1,2†
1,2
Tianzhu Zhang
Zhiwei Xiong
Yongdong Zhang1,3
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
3
State Key Laboratory of Communication Content Cognition, People’s Daily Online
{panyw, lns6, issunrui, meng18}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

{tzzhang, zwxiong, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn

Incomplete activation

Abstract
skip connection

Mitochondria, as tiny structures within the cell, are of
significant importance in studying cell functions for biological and clinical analysis. And exploring how to automatically segment mitochondria in electron microscopy (EM)
images has attracted increasing attention. However, most
of existing methods struggle to adapt to different scales
and appearances of the input due to the inherent limitations of the traditional CNN architecture. To mitigate these
limitations, we propose a novel adaptive template transformer (ATFormer) for mitochondria segmentation. The
proposed ATFormer model enjoys several merits. First, the
designed structural template learning module can acquire
appearance-adaptive templates of background, foreground
and contour to sense the characteristics of different shapes
of mitochondria. And we further adopt an optimal transport
algorithm to enlarge the discrepancy among diverse templates to activate corresponding regions fully. Second, we
introduce a hierarchical attention learning mechanism to
absorb multi-level information for templates to be adaptive
scale-aware classifiers for dense prediction. Extensive experimental results on three challenging benchmarks including MitoEM, Lucchi and NucMM-Z datasets demonstrate
that our ATFormer performs favorably against state-of-theart mitochondria segmentation methods.

Classifier

Decoder

Encoder

Segmentation

Image Block

Missing

(a) Previous methods
skip connection

Image Block

Adaptive
Templates

Classify

Decoder

Encoder

Segmentation

Hierarchical Attention
Learning Mechanism

Background

Foreground

Contour

(b) Our method

Figure 1. Comparison of the previous methods and our method. (a)
Most existing methods use the traditional CNN architecture to extract features, with a simple and weight-fixed classifier at the end
of the network for per-voxel classification, resulting in incomplete
or missing activation. (b) We propose a set of learnable vectors as
adaptive templates of background, foreground and contour, which
interact with multi-scale features to aggregate structure-aware information. Then, these templates are used as appearance-adaptive
scale-aware classifiers to generate more accurate activation for mitochondria of different scales.

1. Introduction
Studying the morphology of mitochondria is vital for
understanding cell physiology, and changes in their shape
are tightly linked to neurodegeneration, lifespan and cell
death [6, 4, 19, 36]. As representative membrane-bound organelles, mitochondria provide power for cells as the main
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author.

place to perform aerobic respiration [49, 36, 5, 52], however, their micrometer size makes it challenging to conduct
observational analysis. Electron microscopy (EM), as one
of the practical tools for investigating the morphology of
structures at the sub-cubic millimeter scale [38, 41], enables neuroscientists to obtain images with higher resolution. Due to its large data size and numerous cluttered
irrelevant organelles, manual labeling is extremely time-

21474

