This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting Foreground and Background Separation in Weakly-supervised
Temporal Action Localization: A Clustering-based Approach
Qinying Liu1

Zilei Wang*1 Shenghai Rong 1 Junjie Li 1 Yixin Zhang1,2
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
1

{lydyc, rongsh, hnljj@}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhyx12, zlwang}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Weakly-supervised temporal action localization aims
to localize action instances in videos with only videolevel action labels. Existing methods mainly embrace
a localization-by-classification pipeline that optimizes the
snippet-level prediction with a video classification loss.
However, this formulation suffers from the discrepancy between classification and detection, resulting in inaccurate
separation of foreground and background (F&B) snippets.
To alleviate this problem, we propose to explore the underlying structure among the snippets by resorting to unsupervised snippet clustering, rather than heavily relying
on the video classification loss. Specifically, we propose a
novel clustering-based F&B separation algorithm. It comprises two core components: a snippet clustering component that groups the snippets into multiple latent clusters
and a cluster classification component that further classifies the cluster as foreground or background. As there are
no ground-truth labels to train these two components, we
introduce a unified self-labeling mechanism based on optimal transport to produce high-quality pseudo-labels that
match several plausible prior distributions. This ensures
that the cluster assignments of the snippets can be accurately associated with their F&B labels, thereby boosting
the F&B separation. We evaluate our method on three
benchmarks: THUMOS14, ActivityNet v1.2 and v1.3. Our
method achieves promising performance on all three benchmarks while being significantly more lightweight than previous methods. Code is available at https://github.
com/Qinying-Liu/CASE

1. Introduction
Temporal action localization (TAL) [43] is a task to localize the temporal boundaries of action instances and recognize their categories in videos. In recent years, numerous
* Corresponding author

works put effort into the fully supervised manner and gain
great achievements. Albeit successful, these methods require extensive manual frame-level annotations, which are
expensive and time-consuming. Without the requirement of
frame-level annotations, weakly-supervised TAL (WTAL)
has received increasing attention, as it allows us to detect
the action instances with only video-level action labels.
There has been a wide spectrum of WTAL methods developed in the literature [48, 58, 37, 29]. With only videolevel labels, mainstream methods employ a localization-byclassification pipeline, which formulates WTAL as a video
action classification problem to learn a temporal class activation sequence (T-CAS). For this pipeline, foreground
(i.e., action) and background separation remains an open
question since video-level labels do not provide any cue
for background class. There are two types of existing approaches to solve it. The first type [48, 58] is based on
the multiple instance learning (MIL), which uses the T-CAS
to select the most confident snippets for each action class.
The second type [37, 29] introduces an attention mechanism
to learn class-agnostic foreground weights that indicate the
probabilities of the snippets belonging to foreground. Despite recent progress, these methods typically rely on the
video classification loss to guide the learning of the T-CAS
or the attention weights. There is an inherent downside: the
loss is easily minimized by the salient snippets [33] and fails
to explore the distribution of the whole snippets, resulting in
erroneous T-CAS or attention weights. This issue is rooted
in the supervision gap between the classification and detection tasks. Recent studies [39, 31] are devoted to producing
snippet-level pseudo-labels to bridge the gap. However, the
pseudo-labels are still derived from the unreliable T-CAS or
attention weights.
Deep clustering [6], which automatically partitions the
samples into different groups, has been proven to be capable of revealing the intrinsic distribution of the samples in
many label-scarce tasks [1, 4, 10, 27]. A natural issue arises:
is it possible to adopt the clustering to capture the distribution of snippets? Since clustering can be conducted in a

10433

