This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Trajectory-Word Alignments for Video-Language Tasks
Xu Yang1 Zhangzikang Li1,2
Chenliang Li2 Ming Yan2

Haiyang Xu2 * Hanwang Zhang3 Qinghao Ye2
Yu Zhang1 * Fei Huang2 Songfang Huang2

1

School of Computer Science & Engineering, Key Lab of New Generation Artiﬁcial Intelligence Technology
& Its Interdisciplinary Applications (Ministry of Education), Southeast University
2
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 3 School of Computer Science & Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
{xuyang palm, zhang yu}@seu.edu.cn, lizhangzikang@gmail.com, {shuofeng.xhy, yeqinghao.yqh,
lcl193798, ym119608, f.huang, songfang.hsf}@alibaba-inc.com, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
In a video, an object usually appears as the trajectory,
i.e., it spans over a few spatial but longer temporal patches,
that contains abundant spatiotemporal contexts. However,
modern Video-Language BERTs (VDL-BERTs) neglect this
trajectory characteristic that they usually follow imagelanguage BERTs (IL-BERTs) to deploy the patch-to-word
(P2W) attention that may over-exploit trivial spatial contexts and neglect signiﬁcant temporal contexts. To amend
this, we propose a novel TW-BERT to learn TrajectoryWord alignment by a newly designed trajectory-to-word
(T2W) attention for solving video-language tasks. Moreover, previous VDL-BERTs usually uniformly sample a few
frames into the model while different trajectories have diverse graininess, i.e., some trajectories span longer frames
and some span shorter, and using a few frames will lose
certain useful temporal contexts. However, simply sampling more frames will also make pre-training infeasible
due to the largely increased training burdens. To alleviate
the problem, during the ﬁne-tuning stage, we insert a novel
Hierarchical Frame-Selector (HFS) module into the video
encoder. HFS gradually selects the suitable frames conditioned on the text context for the later cross-modal encoder
to learn better trajectory-word alignments. By the proposed
T2W attention and HFS, our TW-BERT achieves SOTA performances on text-to-video retrieval tasks, and comparable
performances on video question-answering tasks with some
VDL-BERTs trained on much more data. The code will be
available in the supplementary material.

(a) RoI based IL-BERT

(b) Patch based IL-BERT

(c) Patch based VDL-BERT

(d) TW-BERT Pretraining

(e) TW-BERT Fine-Tuning

A boy is playing basketball.
Figure 1. The comparisons of ﬁve different ways to build objectword alignments. In (b), by patch-to-word (P2W) attention, implicit object-word alignment can be built, e.g., the “ball region” is
aligned with basketball. While in (c), P2W attention may concentrate the attention of an object on only one frame, e.g., basketball
only attends over on the “ball region” of the ﬁrst frame. (d) When
pre-training TW-BERT, the trajectory of an object is constructed,
e.g., the “ball trajectory” through 4 frames built. Note that we only
use 4 frames during pre-training, we show 8 frames for comparing with (e) and the transparent ones denote that they are not input
into the model. (e) When ﬁne-tuning TW-BERT, we use HFS to
select 4 frames from 8 and we can see that the selected frames are
different from the uniformly sampled ones in (d).

1. Introduction

begin to build vision-language BERTs[3, 61, 10] for learning robust cross-modal associations. Compared with the
images, videos provide more details for building robust associations, e.g., the spatiotemporal contexts in videos can

By witnessing the boom of BERT-like models in single
domains, e.g., vision or language[52, 44, 21], researchers
* Corresponding authors.

1
2504

