This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RPEFlow: Multimodal Fusion of RGB-PointCloud-Event
for Joint Optical Flow and Scene Flow Estimation
Zhexiong Wan1 Yuxin Mao1 Jing Zhang2 Yuchao Dai1†
Northwestern Polytechnical University & Shaanxi Key Laboratory of
Information Acquisition and Processing 2 Australian National University
1

Abstract
Recently, the RGB images and point clouds fusion methods have been proposed to jointly estimate 2D optical flow
and 3D scene flow. However, as both conventional RGB
cameras and LiDAR sensors adopt a frame-based data
acquisition mechanism, their performance is limited by
the fixed low sampling rates, especially in highly-dynamic
scenes. By contrast, the event camera can asynchronously
capture the intensity changes with a very high temporal resolution, providing complementary dynamic information of
the observed scenes. In this paper, we incorporate RGB
images, Point clouds and Events for joint optical flow and
scene flow estimation with our proposed multi-stage multimodal fusion model, RPEFlow. First, we present an attention fusion module with a cross-attention mechanism
to implicitly explore the internal cross-modal correlation
for 2D and 3D branches, respectively. Second, we introduce a mutual information regularization term to explicitly model the complementary information of three modalities for effective multimodal feature learning. We also
contribute a new synthetic dataset to advocate further research. Experiments on both synthetic and real datasets
show that our model outperforms the existing state-of-theart by a wide margin. Code and dataset is available at
https://npucvr.github.io/RPEFlow.

1. Introduction
Optical flow estimation, i.e., estimating the dense 2D
motion between consecutive image frames, has been extensively studied and significantly advanced with the development of deep neural networks [1–3]. Scene flow estimation,
on the other hand, aims to estimate the 3D motion field
with various input configurations, ranging from monocular images [4, 5], stereo images [6, 7], two frames of point
clouds [8, 9], images combined with depth maps [10, 11]
† Corresponding author (daiyuchao@gmail.com).

or point clouds [12, 13]. Both are fundamental to downstream applications such as autonomous driving [14, 15],
object tracking [16, 17], scene reconstruction [18, 19], etc.
Due to the strong correlation between 2D and 3D motion, i.e., 2D motion can be regarded as the projection of 3D
motion on the image plane, recent works [10, 12, 13] make
efforts to jointly estimate optical flow and scene flow by
combining RGB images and point clouds (or depth maps).
Their success indicates that joint 2D and 3D motion estimation within a framework can obtain more accurate results than separate tasks. However, as both conventional
RGB cameras and LiDAR (or depth) sensors adopt a fixed
frame-by-frame data acquisition mechanism, these methods
show unsatisfactory performance when dealing with complex motion scenes (see Fig. 3), which motivates us to alleviate this problem by introducing the event camera.
Event camera, as a bio-inspired imaging sensor, can
asynchronously capture the brightness change with very
high temporal resolution (in the order of µs) and output an
event signal quickly [20]. As each pixel adapts its sampling
rate according to the captured changes, the amount of output events usually depends on the complexity of motion (the
faster the motion, the more triggered events), thus providing
abundant motion information of the observed scene. Based
on this, some works use event data alone to estimate optical flow [21, 22], but they show limitations in estimating
reliable motion at regions with no events [23]. As compensation for this, image and event data are fused together to estimate dense optical flow [24, 25]. As far as we know, there
is no method to incorporate event data within a multimodal
learning framework for both 2D and 3D motion estimation.
In this paper, we propose to fuse RGB images, point
clouds and events for joint optical flow and scene flow estimation. We find the ability of the event camera to asynchronously capture the brightness changes caused by motion makes it complementary to image cameras and LiDAR
sensors, especially for complex dynamics and high-contrast
brightness changes. We believe that combining these three
modalities together for 2D and 3D motion estimation meets
the practical needs, which has been further confirmed by

10030

