This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Directly-Trained Spiking Neural Networks for Object Detection
Qiaoyi Su1 , Yuhong Chou2,7 , Yifan Hu3 , Jianing Li4 , Shijie Mei5,7 , Ziyang Zhang6 , Guoqi Li1,7 *
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
College of Artificial Intelligence, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
Department of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua University
4
School of Computer Science, Peking University
5
School of Vehicle and Mobility, Tsinghua University
6
Advanced Computing and Storage Lab, Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd.
7
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences

suqiaoyi2020@ia.ac.cn, huyf19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, lijianing@pku.edu.cn, guoqi.li@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are brain-inspired
energy-efficient models that encode information in spatiotemporal dynamics. Recently, deep SNNs trained directly
have shown great success in achieving high performance
on classification tasks with very few time steps. However,
how to design a directly-trained SNN for the regression
task of object detection still remains a challenging problem. To address this problem, we propose EMS-YOLO,
a novel directly-trained SNN framework for object detection, which is the first trial to train a deep SNN with surrogate gradients for object detection rather than ANN-SNN
conversion strategies. Specifically, we design a full-spike
residual block, EMS-ResNet, which can effectively extend
the depth of the directly-trained SNN with low power consumption. Furthermore, we theoretically analyze and prove
the EMS-ResNet could avoid gradient vanishing or exploding. The results demonstrate that our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art ANN-SNN conversion methods (at
least 500 time steps) in extremely fewer time steps (only 4
time steps). It is shown that our model could achieve comparable performance to the ANN with the same architecture while consuming 5.83× less energy on the frame-based
COCO Dataset and the event-based Gen1 Dataset. Our
code is available in https://github.com/BICLab/
EMS-YOLO.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a key and challenging problem in
computer vision. It aims to recognize multiple overlapped
* Corresponding author

objects and locate them with precise bounding boxes. This
task has many applications in various fields, such as autonomous driving [3], security surveillance [47], and medical imaging [29]. Most existing frameworks (e.g., YOLO
series [38], RCNN series [13]) for object detection use artificial neural networks (ANNs), which have high performance but also high computational complexity and energy
consumption. Spiking neural networks (SNNs), known as
the third generation of neural networks [32, 40], potentially
serves as a more efficient and biologically inspired way
to perform object detection. Specifically, SNNs utilize binary signals (spikes) instead of continuous signals for neuron communication, which reduces data transfer and storage overhead. Furthermore, the SNNs exhibit asynchronous
computation and event-driven communication, which could
avoid unnecessary computation and synchronization overhead. When deployed on neuromorphic hardware [33, 36],
SNNs show great energy efficiency.
However, most SNNs for object detection are converted
from ANNs, which have some limitations. For example,
Spiking-Yolo [23, 22] needs at least 3500 time steps to
match the performance of the original ANN. Spike Calibration [26] can reduce the time steps to hundreds, but it still
depends on the performance of the original ANN model.
Moreover, most methods for converted SNNs are only applicable for static images, and not suitable for sparse event
datas, because their dynamics are designed to approximate
the expected activation of the ANN and fail to capture the
spatiotemporal information of DVS data [10]. A promising
approach is to train SNNs directly with surrogate gradient,
which can achieve high performance with few time steps
and process both static images and event data efficiently.

6555

