This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Make-It-3D: High-Fidelity 3D Creation from A Single Image with Diffusion Prior
Junshu Tang1† Tengfei Wang2† Bo Zhang3‡ Ting Zhang3
Ran Yi1 Lizhuang Ma1‡ Dong Chen3
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 HKUST 3 Microsoft Research
https://make-it-3d.github.io/

Reference

Normal

Novel Views

Reference

Normal

Novel Views

Figure 1: Make-It-3D can create high-fidelity 3D content from only a single image. We show the normal map and novel-view
renderings of created 3D content, showcasing fine geometry and faithful textures with stunning quality at novel views.

Abstract
In this work, we investigate the problem of creating
high-fidelity 3D content from only a single image. This
is inherently challenging: it essentially involves estimating the underlying 3D geometry while simultaneously hallucinating unseen textures. To address this challenge, we
leverage prior knowledge from a well-trained 2D diffusion
model to act as 3D-aware supervision for 3D creation. Our
approach, Make-It-3D, employs a two-stage optimization
pipeline: the first stage optimizes a neural radiance field by
incorporating constraints from the reference image at the
frontal view and diffusion prior at novel views; the second
stage transforms the coarse model into textured point clouds
and further elevates the realism with diffusion prior while
leveraging the high-quality textures from the reference image. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
outperforms prior works by a large margin, resulting in
faithful reconstructions and impressive visual quality. Our
method presents the first attempt to achieve high-quality 3D
creation from a single image for general objects and enables various applications such as text-to-3D creation and
texture editing.
† Work is done during the internship at Microsoft Research.
‡ Corresponding authors.

1. Introduction
Given a single image as in Figure 1, how would the object portrayed in the image look like from a different perspective? Humans possess an innate ability to effortlessly
imagine 3D geometry and hallucinate the appearance of
novel views with a glance at the picture based on their prior
knowledge about the world. In this work, we aim to achieve
a similar goal: creating high-fidelity 3D content from a real
or artificially generated single image. This will open up new
avenues for artistic expression and creativity, such as bringing 3D effects to the fantasy images given by the cuttingedge 2D generative models like Stable Diffusion [38]. By
offering a more accessible and automated way to create visually stunning 3D content, we hope to engage a broader
audience with the world of 3D modeling with ease.
The creation of 3D objects from a single image presents
a significant challenge due to the limited information that
can be inferred from a single viewpoint. One categories of
works aim to produce 3D photo effect [28, 41, 11, 47] in the
manner of image-based rendering or single-view 3D reconstruction with neural rendering [54, 56, 37]. However, these
methods often struggle with reconstructing fine geometry
and fall short of rendering in large views. Another line of
research [26, 51, 59, 55] projects the input image into the latent space of the pretrained 3D-aware generative networks.
1
22819

