This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LexLIP: Lexicon-Bottlenecked Language-Image Pre-Training for
Large-Scale Image-Text Sparse Retrieval
Ziyang Luo1 *, Pu Zhao2 , Can Xu2 , Xiubo Geng2 , Tao Shen2 , Chongyang Tao2 ,
Jing Ma1†, Qingwei Lin2 , Daxin Jiang2†
1

Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
Microsoft Corporation
cszyluo@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, majing@hkbu.edu.hk
{pu.zhao,caxu,xigeng,shentao,chongyang.tao,qlin,djiang}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Image-text retrieval (ITR) aims to retrieve images or texts
that match a query originating from the other modality. The
conventional dense retrieval paradigm relies on encoding
images and texts into dense representations with dual-stream
encoders. However, this approach is limited by slow retrieval
speeds in large-scale scenarios. To address this issue, we
propose a novel sparse retrieval paradigm for ITR that exploits sparse representations in the vocabulary space for
images and texts. This paradigm enables us to leverage bagof-words models and efficient inverted indexes, significantly
reducing retrieval latency. A critical gap emerges from representing continuous image data in a sparse vocabulary
space. To bridge this gap, we introduce a novel pre-training
framework, Lexicon-Bottlenecked Language-Image PreTraining (LexLIP), that learns importance-aware lexicon
representations. By using lexicon-bottlenecked modules between the dual-stream encoders and weakened text decoders,
we are able to construct continuous bag-of-words bottlenecks and learn lexicon-importance distributions. Upon pretraining with same-scale data, our LexLIP achieves stateof-the-art performance on two ITR benchmarks, MSCOCO
and Flickr30k. Furthermore, in large-scale retrieval scenarios, LexLIP outperforms CLIP with 5.8× faster retrieval
speed and 19.1× less index storage memory. Beyond this,
LexLIP surpasses CLIP across 8 out of 10 zero-shot image
classification tasks.

1. Introduction
Image-text retrieval (ITR) is a critical problem that involves retrieving relevant images and texts based on textual
and visual queries. Its practical applications span multi* Work done during the internship at Microsoft.
† Corresponding author

Exact
Match

Cosine
Similarity

Dense Vectors

Vision
Encoder

Language
Encoder

Three workers
are on the roof.

(a) Dense Retrieval Paradigm.

man: 5
sky: 6
roof: 4
dog: 0
...

Vision
Encoder

Sparse
Vectors

man: 3
sky: 0
roof: 5
work: 4
...

Language
Encoder

Three workers
are on the roof.

(b) Sparse Retrieval Paradigm.

Figure 1: Comparing the traditional dense retrieval paradigm
and our brand-new sparse retrieval paradigm.

ple domains, including e-commerce product search [27]
and social media image search [19]. Due to the lack of
publicly available large-scale benchmarks, the evaluation
of existing ITR models [20, 32, 39, 44] is commonly conducted on small-scale datasets such as MSCOCO [29] and
Flickr30k [38], which contain a limited number of samples in
their test sets. Thus, the significance of retrieval speed is frequently disregarded. However, real-world scenarios, such as
Google Image Search, may involve a massive number of candidate samples, easily exceeding 1M. Hence, retrieval speed
is a crucial concern. The current dense retrieval paradigm,
in which each image and text is represented as a dense vector (as shown in Figure 1a), can become computationally
expensive, resulting in slow retrieval speed. The large-scale
exact k-nearest neighbor (KNN) dense retrieval involves calculating the similarity between the query and all candidate
samples, resulting in a linear increase in retrieval time as
the number of samples increases [5]. This limitation poses
a challenge for the dense retrieval paradigm in real-world
applications and underscores the need for more efficient and

11206

