This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Homeomorphism Alignment for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Lihua Zhou1 , Mao Ye1, *, Xiatian Zhu3 , Siying Xiao1 , Xu-Qian Fan2 , Ferrante Neri3
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Jinan University
3
University of Surrey
lihua.zhou@std.uestc.edu.cn, cvlab.uestc@gmail.com, xiatian.zhu@surrey.ac.uk
2018270101016@std.uestc.edu.cn, txqfan@jnu.edu.cn, f.neri@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
Existing unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods rely on aligning the features from the source and target domains explicitly or implicitly in a common space (i.e.,
the domain invariant space). Explicit distribution matching
ignores the discriminability of learned features, while the
implicit counterpart such as self-supervised learning suffers from pseudo-label noises. With distribution alignment,
it is challenging to acquire a common space which maintains fully the discriminative structure of both domains.
In this work, we propose a novel HomeomorphisM Alignment (HMA) approach characterized by aligning the source
and target data in two separate spaces. Specifically, an
invertible neural network based homeomorphism is constructed. Distribution matching is then used as a sewing
up tool for connecting this homeomorphism mapping between the source and target feature spaces. Theoretically,
we show that this mapping can preserve the data topological structure (e.g., the cluster/group structure). This property allows for more discriminative model adaptation by
leveraging both the original and transformed features of
source data in a supervised manner, and those of target domain in an unsupervised manner (e.g., prediction consistency). Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
can achieve the state-of-the-art results. Code is released at
https://github.com/buerzlh/HMA.

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods rely mostly on a large quantity of
manually labeled data [13, 37, 21, 55] which however could
be prohibitively expensive or impossible to collect in many
scenarios. One effective strategy is to exploit pre-existing
labeled data (i.e., the source domain) for a target domain
without need for manual labeling. Due to the domain shift
* corresponding author.

challenge [35], a model pretrained on a source domain often
suffers from drastic performance degradation when directly
applied on a target domain. This gives rise to the research
attention of Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA).
Existing UDA methods can be roughly divided into
two categories. One is based on distribution alignment
[31, 18, 10, 32] which minimizes domain discrepancy by
aligning the distributions between two domains. They usually align two different distributions to a single distribution. However, this strategy could distort the original structural information, potentially hurting the final model generalization [5, 11, 44]. The other category is based on selfsupervised learning [9, 26, 43] which also learns a single
common feature space using pseudo labels or other selfsupervision information. Given inevitable noise with selfsupervision, it is difficult to obtain a common feature space
with discriminative structure well kept. As shown in Fig.
1(a), adapting a model in a common space cannot guarantee better classification performance.
A natural solution for the above problem is to learn a
latent distribution transformation function without destroying the original distribution of both domains. There are a
few works in this line. For example, CyCADA [14] uses
ordinary bijection implemented by two different networks
to transform the images of the source domain to the target
domain and vice versa. However, its learned two networks
are not strictly inverse mappings, making the transformed
images not necessarily semantically consistent through the
transformation. That is, an image cannot be reconstructed
after going through the two learned mappings. In addition,
CyCADA learns two networks which is expensive.
To address the above limitations, we leverage a stricter
bijection, namely Homeomorphism mapping, a concept
borrowed from the topology field [34]. If a bijection satisfies the definition of homeomorphism (i.e., one-to-one correspondence and continuous), theoretically we prove that
the data topological structure can be well preserved in the
projected space (i.e., the samples in the same cluster are still

18699

