This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TeD-SPAD: Temporal Distinctiveness for Self-supervised Privacy-preservation
for video Anomaly Detection
Joseph Fioresi, Ishan Rajendrakumar Dave, Mubarak Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida, Orlando, USA
{joseph.fioresi, ishanrajendrakumar.dave}@ucf.edu, shah@crcv.ucf.edu
Project Page:

https://joefioresi718.github.io/TeD-SPAD_webpage/

Abstract

Privacy Leakage
Anomaly: Shoplifting
62.30%

Video anomaly detection (VAD) without human monitoring is a complex computer vision task that can have a positive impact on society if implemented successfully. While
recent advances have made significant progress in solving
this task, most existing approaches overlook a critical realworld concern: privacy. With the increasing popularity of
artificial intelligence technologies, it becomes crucial to implement proper AI ethics into their development. Privacy
leakage in VAD allows models to pick up and amplify unnecessary biases related to people’s personal information,
which may lead to undesirable decision making. In this paper, we propose TeD-SPAD, a privacy-aware video anomaly
detection framework that destroys visual private information in a self-supervised manner. In particular, we propose the use of a temporally-distinct triplet loss to promote
temporally discriminative features, which complements current weakly-supervised VAD methods. Using TeD-SPAD,
we achieve a positive trade-off between privacy protection
and utility anomaly detection performance on three popular weakly supervised VAD datasets: UCF-Crime, XDViolence, and ShanghaiTech. Our proposed anonymization
model reduces private attribute prediction by 32.25% while
only reducing frame-level ROC AUC on the UCF-Crime
anomaly detection dataset by 3.69%.

1. Introduction
Machine learning-driven technologies are increasingly
being adopted by society. The progress in cloud computing has enabled the deployment of even computationally intensive technologies in the public space. One such application is video anomaly detection (VAD) in autonomous video
analytics. VAD is a video understanding task that aims to
identify the temporal location of anomalous events occurring in long continuous videos without human supervision.
An anomaly can be defined as any unusual event, such as a
traffic accident, an elderly person falling, or a fire. Proper

52.71%

Private Attributes:
Hair: Brown
Gender: Male
Clothes: Jacket
ApproxAge: 30
Tattoos: None
FacialHair: None
Raw Frame

42.21%

Anonymized Frame

Raw Data

SPAct

Ours

Figure 1: Single frame from video Shoplifting052 x264.mp4 of
UCF-Crime [43] showing the types of private attributes (shown in
red on the left image) leaked in visual data. In the right image we
show the anonymized frame where these attributes are barely visible. The graph demonstrates the ability of our self-supervised
framework to mitigate privacy leakage compared to prior work
SPAct [13]. At a similar anomaly detection utility performance,
our method prevents 32% of the visual private leakage compared
to raw data.

application of this technology can result in faster response
times to anomalies, without the need for human resources
to monitor camera feeds.
However, public adoption of such AI technologies brings
justifiable concern about safety and their decision-making
capabilities. Many of these concerns center around privacy
violations and accuracy. VAD is an application where visual
privacy leakage and data bias are exceedingly important issues. Sending videos to remote computers or cloud services
to process results in unnecessary privacy leakage for people
who are not directly involved in anomalous events. Additionally, an application employing a standard RGB video
will incorporate any bias found in its training set, leading
to potentially unfair decisions. An illustration of privacy
leakage is shown in Fig. 1.
Recently, there have been interesting attempts to prevent
13598

