This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Anatomical Invariance Modeling and Semantic Alignment for Self-supervised
Learning in 3D Medical Image Analysis
Yankai Jiang1,3* , Mingze Sun1,4* , Heng Guo1,2 , Xiaoyu Bai1 , Ke Yan1,2 , Le Lu1 and Minfeng Xu1,2B
1

DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
2
Hupan Lab
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
4
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, China
B
eric.xmf@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has recently achieved
promising performance for 3D medical image analysis
tasks. Most current methods follow existing SSL paradigm
originally designed for photographic or natural images,
which cannot explicitly and thoroughly exploit the intrinsic similar anatomical structures across varying medical
images. This may in fact degrade the quality of learned
deep representations by maximizing the similarity among
features containing spatial misalignment information and
different anatomical semantics. In this work, we propose
a new self-supervised learning framework, namely Alice,
that explicitly fulfills Anatomical invariance modeling and
semantic alignment via elaborately combining discriminative and generative objectives. Alice introduces a new contrastive learning strategy which encourages the similarity between views that are diversely mined but with consistent high-level semantics, in order to learn invariant
anatomical features. Moreover, we design a conditional
anatomical feature alignment module to complement corrupted embeddings with globally matched semantics and
inter-patch topology information, conditioned by the distribution of local image content, which permits to create
better contrastive pairs. Our extensive quantitative experiments on three 3D medical image analysis tasks demonstrate and validate the performance superiority of Alice,
surpassing the previous best SSL counterpart methods and
showing promising ability for united representation learning. Codes are available at https://github.com/alibabadamo-academy/alice.

* Equal contribution. This work was done when Yankai Jiang and
Mingze Sun were interns at DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group.

1. Introduction
Since the advent of deep learning, the lack of highquality annotated data has long been a thorny challenge in
medical image analysis, especially for 3D tasks. Recent research efforts based on self-supervised learning (SSL) shed
light on acquiring strong visual representations in an unsupervised manner [7, 8, 16, 21, 26, 42].
Nowadays, contrastive learning (CL) [3, 11, 35, 50] and
masked image modeling (MIM) [2, 20, 48], together with
Vision Transformers (ViTs) [15, 29], have revolutionized
the field of SSL in computer vision and medical imaging,
which achieve the state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance for
a variety of tasks [3, 20, 40, 47, 56]. There is also a growing
trend to combine CL and MIM in a self-distillation way to
design more powerful SSL frameworks [23, 40, 41, 56]. Despite popularity and success, these methods still follow the
self-supervised paradigm designed for specific computer vision scenarios, e.g., ImageNet (ILSVRC-2012) [36], which
can be less suitable or irrational when applied to medical
images. Now we analyze the drawbacks and irrationalities
of existing hybrid SSL approaches, which combine CL with
MIM, from the following aspects:
(i) Neglecting the intrinsic similar anatomical structure
across varying medical image volumes. Commonly-used
computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR)
images render human anatomies with intrinsic structures.
As shown in Fig. 1a, the definition of positive and negative pairs in existing siamese SSL frameworks [3, 23, 40,
41, 56] ignore the semantically consistent anatomical features across different volumes and force an incorrect constraint of instance invariance. Intuitively, utilizing the intrinsic anatomical structure across different image volumes
to model the class-specific invariance can help the learned
representations more robust to the size, shape, and texture

15859

