This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ChartReader: A Unified Framework for Chart Derendering and Comprehension
without Heuristic Rules

1

Zhi-Qi Cheng1 Qi Dai2 * Alexander G. Hauptmann1
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Microsoft Research
zhiqic@cs.cmu.edu, qid@microsoft.com, alex@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Charts are a powerful tool for visually conveying complex data, but their comprehension poses a challenge due
to the diverse chart types and intricate components. Existing chart comprehension methods suffer from either
heuristic rules or an over-reliance on OCR systems, resulting in suboptimal performance. To address these issues, we present ChartReader, a unified framework that
seamlessly integrates chart derendering and comprehension
tasks. Our approach includes a transformer-based chart
component detection module and an extended pre-trained
vision-language model for chart-to-X tasks. By learning the
rules of charts automatically from annotated datasets, our
approach eliminates the need for manual rule-making, reducing effort and enhancing accuracy. We also introduce
a data variable replacement technique and extend the input and position embeddings of the pre-trained model for
cross-task training. We evaluate ChartReader on Chart-toTable, ChartQA, and Chart-to-Text tasks, demonstrating its
superiority over existing methods. Our proposed framework
can significantly reduce the manual effort involved in chart
analysis, providing a step towards a universal chart understanding model. Moreover, our approach offers opportunities for plug-and-play integration with mainstream LLMs
such as T5 and TaPas, extending their capability to chart
comprehension tasks.1

1. Introduction
The adage, “a picture is worth a thousand words,” underscores the immense value of charts found on various websites and articles, which often depict knowledge that cannot be conveyed through words alone. Chart derendering,
which refers to the conversion of charts into tables (i.e.,
Chart-to-Table [11, 41, 42]), is widely viewed as essential
in facilitating a range of downstream tasks, such as chart
* Corresponding author
1 Code is at https://github.com/zhiqic/ChartReader

(A) ChartQA Task
Q1: Which football club generates the most
revenue from broadcasting? A1: Real Madrid.
Q2: Which football club earns the highest revenue
from commercial activities? A2: Bayern Munich.

(B) Chart-to-Text Task
The football club with the highest revenue from
broadcasting is Real Madrid, while Bayern Munich
holds the top position for revenue from
commercial sources.

(C) Chart-to-Table Task
Category

Highest Revenue Club

Broadcasting

Real Madrid

Commercial

Bayern Munich

Figure 1. Illustration of chart derendering and comprehension
tasks. The Chart-to-Table task aims to transform a chart into a
machine-readable table, while ChartQA and Chart-to-Text tasks
involve answering questions and summarizing the content of the
chart, respectively. [Best viewed in color].

question-answering (ChartQA [27, 45, 66]) and chart summarization (Chart-to-Text [7, 15, 48]). As shown in Figure 1, the Chart-to-Table task aims to recognize the chart as
a machine-readable table, while ChartQA and Chart-to-Text
tasks involve answering pre-set questions and summarizing
the content of the chart, respectively. The interdependence
and mutual value of these research tasks have also been emphasized in earlier studies [22, 58, 61], underscoring their
critical role in chart comprehension research.
Despite the critical role of chart comprehension, existing
research has failed to address the three sub-tasks separately,
let alone propose a universal solution. As depicted in Figure 2, charts come in various types, each designed to convey domain-specific knowledge, and can exhibit intricate
components, texture variations, and speckled backgrounds.
Confronted with such complex charts, existing chart comprehension methods face two main problems.
Firstly, existing chart derendering approaches [4, 11, 18,
41, 42] (i.e., Chart-to-Table) resort to heuristic rules that
demand extensive domain knowledge and effort to formulate. For example, ChartOCR [42], a pioneering method,
requires chart classification to identify categories first and
then detects different components using various pre-defined
heuristic rules. To avoid complicated rule-making, some
methods even try only one set of limited chart types, such as

22202

