This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Homography Mixture for Single Image Rolling Shutter Correction
Weilong Yan1
Robby T. Tan2
Bing Zeng1
Shuaicheng Liu1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China1
National University of Singapore2

*

1092443660ywl@gmail.com, robby.tan@nus.edu.sg, {eezeng, liushuaicheng}@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
We present a deep homography mixture motion model
for single image rolling shutter correction. Rolling shutter
(RS) effects are often caused by row-wise exposure delay
in the widely adopted CMOS sensor. Previous methods often require more than one frame for the correction, leading
to data quality requirements. Few approaches address the
more challenging task of single image RS correction, which
often adopt designs like trajectory estimation or long rectangular kernels, to learn the camera motion parameters of
an RS image, to restore the global shutter (GS) image. In
this work, we adopt a more straightforward method to learn
deep homography mixture motion between an RS image and
its corresponding GS image, without large solution space
or strict restrictions on image features. We show that dividing an image into blocks with a Gaussian weight of block
scanlines fits well for the RS setting. Moreover, instead of
directly learning the motion mapping, we learn coefficients
that assemble several motion bases to produce the correction motion, where these bases are learned from the consecutive frames of natural videos beforehand. Experiments
show that our method outperforms existing single RS methods statistically and visually, in both synthesized and real
RS images. Our code and dataset are available at https:
//github.com/DavidYan2001/Deep_HM .

1. Introduction
Rolling shutter (RS) refers to the effects caused by different row exposures that has been widely adopted in CMOS
sensors. Such a row-wise exposure often introduces artifacts, such as blending of straight lines and skewing of image contents, which are not only visually unpleasant but
also harmful for downstream tasks [9, 26, 1, 25]
Existing RS rectification methods can be categorized
into: multi-frame [3, 13, 2, 15, 31] and single-frame [22,
21, 20, 38, 10]. Correcting RS from a single image is more
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Rectification result on real examples. Column 1: real RS
images. Column 2: results by [37]. Column 3: our results.

challenging but important under data-starved situations.
Most existing single RS methods are non-learning methods
(e.g., [22, 20, 12, 19]), only few works are learning-based
ones (e.g., [21, 10]). Non-learning methods rely on prior
assumptions for the correction, such as “straight lines remain straight”. However, they often fail when such salient
priors are not available in an image. In contrast, many deep
learning methods have been proposed but they are based on
multi-frame approaches. Only few methods target on single
RS correction, which is inherently an ill-posed problem.
Existing deep-learning single RS methods learn the rowwise camera motion between RS and global shutter (GS)
pairs (e.g., [21]). However, row-wise motion introduces a
large solution space that increases the learning difficulty. To
facilitate the learning, [38] requires an additional depth as
the input, where the depth can be estimated by an off-theshelf method. Unfortunately, the quality of the correction is
affected by the quality of the estimated depth, and estimating depth from a single image is still an open problem.
In this paper, we present a novel method that learns a
deep homography mixture (HM) motion model for single
RS correction. HM [6] is originally proposed to align adjacent frames for the task of joint video RS removal and stabilization. An HM divides a frame into several equally spaced
19868

