This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Surface Extraction from Neural Unsigned Distance Fields
Congyi Zhang1,2∗

Guying Lin1∗

Scott Schaefer3
1

John Keyser3

We propose a method, named DualMesh-UDF, to extract
a surface from unsigned distance functions (UDFs), encoded by neural networks, or neural UDFs. Neural UDFs
are becoming increasingly popular for surface representation because of their versatility in presenting surfaces
with arbitrary topologies, as opposed to the signed distance function that is limited to representing a closed surface. However, the applications of neural UDFs are hindered by the notorious difficulty in extracting the target surfaces they represent. Recent methods for surface extraction
from a neural UDF suffer from significant geometric errors
or topological artifacts due to two main difficulties: (1) A
UDF does not exhibit sign changes; and (2) A neural UDF
typically has substantial approximation errors.
DualMesh-UDF addresses these two difficulties. Specifically, given a neural UDF encoding a target surface S̄ to
be recovered, we first estimate the tangent planes of S̄ at
a set of sample points close to S̄. Next, we organize these
sample points into local clusters, and for each local cluster, solve a linear least squares problem to determine a final
surface point. These surface points are then connected to
create the output mesh surface, which approximates the target surface. The robust estimation of the tangent planes of
the target surface and the subsequent minimization problem
constitute our core strategy, which contributes to the favorable performance of DualMesh-UDF over other competing
methods. To efficiently implement this strategy, we employ
an adaptive Octree. Within this framework, we estimate the
location of a surface point in each of the octree cells identified as containing part of the target surface. Extensive experiments show that our method outperforms existing methods in terms of surface reconstruction quality while maintaining comparable computational efficiency.

* Equal contribution

Xin Li3

Taku Komura1

Wenping Wang3†

2
The University of Hong Kong
TransGP
3
Texas A&M University

Abstract

† Corresponding author

Lei Yang1,2

1. Introduction
Implicit surfaces are widely used for surface representation in computer vision and computer graphics. An implicit
surface is usually defined as a level set of a function, such as
the zero-level set of a signed distance function (SDF). Extracting a mesh representation of an implicit surface from
its defining equation is therefore a critical task for surface
visualization and processing. Recent advances in machine
learning have given rise to a new kind of implicit surface,
called a neural implicit surface. A neural implicit surface
is a level-set of a function encoded by an MLP (multilayer
perceptron) and has the advantage of compactness and inherent smoothness thanks to its MLP representation. SDFs
or occupancy fields are widely used in these implicit representations [17, 15, 16, 4, 18, 20, 6, 1, 8, 14, 19].
However, neural implicit surfaces based on the SDF or
occupancy fields require inside/outside labeling and thus
can only represent orientable and closed surfaces. Hence,
as an extension, unsigned distance functions (UDFs) have
been used to represent surfaces of arbitrary topologies, including open surfaces with boundaries or non-orientable
surfaces (e.g. the Möbius strip). Despite its versatility,
applications of a UDF-based surface representation are
severely hindered by the difficulty in extracting the target
surface it represents, as shown in [5] and [7].
Problem formulation: Suppose that a surface S̄, called
the target surface, is defined as the zero-level set of its unsigned distance function (UDF) F̄ (p). Then suppose that
this UDF F̄ (p) is approximated by a neural network with
the resulting network-encoded UDF being referred to as the
neural UDF, denoted by F (p). Given a neural UDF F (p),
the surface extraction problem is to robustly extract a surface S from F (p) such that S well approximates the target
surface S̄.
Challenges: The difficulty in surface extraction from a
neural UDF arises from two aspects: (1) A UDF does not
have zero-crossings (or sign changes) across the surface it
represents. As a result, traditional mesh extraction methods

22531

