This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Model Calibration in Dense Classification with Adaptive Label Perturbation
Jiawei Liu Changkun Ye Shan Wang Ruikai Cui Jing Zhang Kaihao Zhang Nick Barnes
The Australian National University

Abstract
For safety-related applications, it is crucial to produce trustworthy deep neural networks whose prediction
is associated with confidence that can represent the likelihood of correctness for subsequent decision-making. Existing dense binary classification models are prone to being over-confident. To improve model calibration, we propose Adaptive Stochastic Label Perturbation (ASLP) which
learns a unique label perturbation level for each training
image. ASLP employs our proposed Self-Calibrating Binary Cross Entropy (SC-BCE) loss, which unifies label perturbation processes including stochastic approaches (like
DisturbLabel), and label smoothing, to correct calibration while maintaining classification rates. ASLP follows
Maximum Entropy Inference of classic statistical mechanics to maximise prediction entropy with respect to missing
information. It performs this while: (1) preserving classification accuracy on known data as a conservative solution, or (2) specifically improves model calibration degree by minimising the gap between the prediction accuracy and expected confidence of the target training label.
Extensive results demonstrate that ASLP can significantly
improve calibration degrees of dense binary classification models on both in-distribution and out-of-distribution
data. The code is available on https://github.com/
Carlisle-Liu/ASLP.

1. Introduction
Binary segmentation aims to differentiate foreground areas from the background in images. Its tasks include Salient
Object Detection [86], Camouflaged Object Detection [13],
Smoke Detection [79], etc. Performance in these tasks has
been significantly advanced using the strong representation
powers of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). However, with
complex structures and a tremendous number of parameters, DNNs are prone to over-fitting to training data and
producing over-confident predictions in the real world [18].
Such issues can render the model predictions unreliable in
decision making or utilisation in downstream tasks.
Recently, a growing body of literature has been pro-

Model Output

Epoch: k

Our
SC-BCE
Loss

Groundtruth Label

Initial Prediction

Evolving
Epoch: k + n

Perturbed Label

Prediction

Final Prediction
with Our ASLP

Entropy

Figure 1: Applying Adaptive Label Perturbation during
training can effectively moderate predictions at incorrect
areas, highlighting them with high entropy values (red).
Zt (x, y) is a sample-wise Bernoulli variable, parameterized
by α, at the tth iteration. After k iterations, update α using
Eq. (5) to adjust the likelihood (or level) of label perturbation to increase entropy for incorrect predictions and so
correct model calibration. The Perturbed Label (shown inverted) replaces the Groundtruth Label with probability α.
posed to address model mis-calibration problems in DNNs.
They can be roughly categorised as: (1) post-hoc operations, such as temperature scaling [18], Platt scaling [54],
etc., (2) training objective approaches [27], like MMCE
[30], soft calibration objective [27], focal loss [45, 17], and
(3) data/label augmentation techniques, e.g. label smoothing [46] and mixup [85]. We propose an Adaptive Label
Perturbation which learns a unique label perturbation level
for each training image. As illustrated in Fig. 1, training with Adaptive Stochastic Label Perturbation, a form
of ALP, can effectively moderate incorrect predictions and
highlight them with high entropy values.
Adaptive Label Perturbation employs our proposed SelfCalibrating Binary Cross Entropy (SC-BCE) loss, which
unifies label perturbation processes including stochastic approaches (like DisturbLabel [75]), and label smoothing [60]
to correct calibration while maintaining classification accuracy. SC-BCE loss is equivalent to a factored combination
of (i) a BCE loss w.r.t. groundtruth label, and (ii) a BCE
loss w.r.t. a uniform binary categorical distribution. The
former enhances dense binary classification performance
and the latter improves the model calibration degree. Our
method can be connected to Maximum Entropy Inference
[23] of classic statistical mechanics, to maximise prediction

1173

