This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Video Quality Assessment on User Generated Contents
from Aesthetic and Technical Perspectives
Haoning Wu*1
Erli Zhang*1
Liang Liao*1
Chaofeng Chen1
1
1
2
Jingwen Hou
Annan Wang
Wenxiu Sun
Qiong Yan2
Weisi Lin1
1
2
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
Sensetime Research and Tetras AI
Which video has better quality?

Abstract
The rapid increase in user-generated content (UGC)
videos calls for the development of effective video quality assessment (VQA) algorithms. However, the objective
of the UGC-VQA problem is still ambiguous and can be
viewed from two perspectives: the technical perspective,
measuring the perception of distortions; and the aesthetic
perspective, which relates to preference and recommendation on contents. To understand how these two perspectives
affect overall subjective opinions in UGC-VQA, we conduct a large-scale subjective study to collect human quality
opinions on the overall quality of videos as well as perceptions from aesthetic and technical perspectives. The collected Disentangled Video Quality Database (DIVIDE-3k)
conﬁrms that human quality opinions on UGC videos are
universally and inevitably affected by both aesthetic and
technical perspectives. In light of this, we propose the
Disentangled Objective Video Quality Evaluator (DOVER)
to learn the quality of UGC videos based on the two perspectives. The DOVER proves state-of-the-art performance
in UGC-VQA under very high efﬁciency. With perspective
opinions in DIVIDE-3k, we further propose DOVER++, the
ﬁrst approach to provide reliable clear-cut quality evaluations from a single aesthetic or technical perspective. Code
at https://github.com/VQAssessment/DOVER.

1. Introduction
Understanding and predicting human quality of experience (QoE) on diverse in-the-wild videos has been a longexisting and unsolved problem. Recent Video Quality Assessment (VQA) studies have gathered enormous human
quality opinions [1–5] on in-the-wild user-generated contents (UGC) and attempted to use machine algorithms [6–8]
to learn and predict these opinions, known as the UGCVQA problem [9]. However, due to the diversity of contents in UGC videos and the lack of reference videos during
subjective studies, these human-quality opinions are still
ambiguous and may relate to different perspectives.
* The authors contribute equally to this paper.

(a) (b)

2.44

2.56

Overall Score
in DIVIDE-3k

(better than 24% videos)

2.99✓

Technical
Perspective

(worse than 92% videos)

1.86

Aesthetic
Perspective

(better than 56% videos)

(better than 23% videos)
(better than 60% videos)
(worse than 98% videos)

1.92
3.07✓

Figure 1. Which video has better quality: a clear video with meaningless
contents (a) or a blurry video with meaningful contents (b)? Viewing from
different perspectives (aesthetic/technical) may produce different judgments, motivating us to collect DIVIDE-3k, which is the ﬁrst UGC-VQA
dataset with opinions from multiple perspectives. More multi-perspective
quality comparisons in our dataset are shown in supplementary Sec. A.

Conventionally, VQA studies [9–13] are concerned with
the technical perspective, aiming at measuring distortions
in videos (e.g., blurs, artifacts) and their impact on quality,
so as to compare and guide technical systems such as cameras [14, 15], restoration algorithms [16–18] and compression standards [19]. Under this perspective, the video with
clear textures in Fig. 1(a) should have notably better quality
than the blurry video in Fig. 1(b). On the other hand, several recent studies [2, 6, 7, 20, 21] notice that preferences on
non-technical semantic factors (e.g., contents, composition)
also affect human quality assessment on UGC videos. Human experience on these factors is usually regarded as the
aesthetic perspective [22–27] of quality evaluation, which
considers the video in Fig. 1(b) as better quality due to
its more meaningful contents and is preferred for content
recommendation systems on platforms such as YouTube or
TikTok. However, how aesthetic preference plays the impact on ﬁnal human quality opinions of UGC videos is still
debatable [1, 2] and requires further validation.
To investigate the impact of aesthetic and technical perspectives on human quality perception of UGC videos, we
conduct the ﬁrst comprehensive subjective study to collect
opinions from both perspectives, as well as overall opinions
on a large number of videos. We also conduct subjective
1
20144

