This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Understanding the Generalization of Deepfake Detectors from a
Game-Theoretical View
Kelu Yao1 , Jin Wang1 , Boyu Diao2 , Chao Li1 *
1

2

Zhejiang Laboratory, Hangzhou 311100, China
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China

yaokelu@zhejianglab.com, wjbillbieber@gmail.com, diaoboyu2012@ict.ac.cn, lichao@zhejianglab.com

Abstract
This paper aims to explain the generalization of deepfake detectors from the novel perspective of multi-order interactions among visual concepts. Specifically, we propose
three hypotheses: 1. Deepfake detectors encode multiorder interactions among visual concepts, in which the
low-order interactions usually have substantially negative
contributions to deepfake detection. 2. Deepfake detectors with better generalization abilities tend to encode loworder interactions with fewer negative contributions. 3.
Generalized deepfake detectors usually weaken the negative contributions of low-order interactions by suppressing
their strength. Accordingly, we design several mathematical metrics to evaluate the effect of low-order interaction
for deepfake detectors. Extensive comparative experiments
are conducted, which verify the soundness of our hypotheses. Based on the analyses, we further propose a generic
method, which directly reduces the toxic effects of low-order
interactions to improve the generalization of deepfake detectors to some extent.

1. Introduction
Deepfake detection has attracted increasing attention in
recent years [39, 32, 13, 22, 41]. However, the generalization of deepfake detectors is still a considerable challenge
in this field. Specifically, deepfake detectors with outstanding performance on learned datasets usually do not generalize well to unseen datasets. Previous studies on improving the generalization mainly focused on two perspectives.
Some studies [39, 29, 10, 9] proposed methods to synthesize
new face forgeries to mimic deepfakes, in order to enrich
the diversity of artifact features in images. Some studies
[36, 58, 4, 57, 20] empirically designed specific modules to
concentrate on more generalized forgery traces. However,
these works usually reflected human’s understanding of the
* Corresponding author.

A little information Much information
Decompose
interactions
Low‐order
interactions

Deepfake
detectors with
strong
H1. It is difficult to detect
generalization
genuine images with
fragmentary patches

H2. encode Low‐order
interactions with fewer
negative contributions

High‐order
interactions
than

H3. Suppress the low‐order
interactions strength to weaken
the negative contributions

Deepfake
detectors with
poor
do
generalization

Figure 1. An intuitive understanding of our motivation. Given
a manipulated image, the realism of the image usually can not be
identified faithfully when preserving a little information. In correspondence, as the amount of information on the image increases,
the realism of the image can be concluded more confidently. In
this paper, we decompose such effects of the different amounts of
information on the image from a novel view of multi-order interactions among visual concepts. To this end, three hypotheses are
proposed and verified, showing that deepfake detectors often fail
to learn reliable and generalized artifact representations from limited information.

generalized artifact features, which failed to diagnose and
explore the generalization mechanism of the learned representations inside deepfake detectors.
Different from previous studies, we aim to explain the
generalization of deepfake detectors by diagnosing the
learned representations from a novel game-theoretical view.
Specifically, we aim to explore the relationship between the
generalization of deepfake detectors and the multi-order interactions [54] among the learned visual concepts on forgeries.
In this paper, visual concepts represent meaningful image regions, e.g., object parts like eyes, noses, or mouths of
genuine/fake human faces. Originally proposed by Zhang
et al. [54], the multi-order interaction among different visual concepts can be understood as follows. Deepfake detectors usually do not indicate forgeries based on each visual concept individually. Instead, different visual concepts
may cooperate with each other to form a decisive interaction
pattern to distinguish fake images, such as the inconsistency

2031

