This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shape Anchor Guided Holistic Indoor Scene Understanding
Mingyue Dong1 , Linxi Huan1 , Hanjiang Xiong1 , Shuhan Shen2 , Xianwei Zheng1 *
1
The State Key Lab. LIESMARS, Wuhan University
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{dmy25148, whu hlx, xionghanjiang, zhengxw}@whu.edu.cn
shshen@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
This paper proposes a shape anchor guided learning
strategy (AncLearn) for robust holistic indoor scene understanding. We observe that the search space constructed
by current methods for proposal feature grouping and instance point sampling often introduces massive noise to instance detection and mesh reconstruction. Accordingly, we
develop AncLearn to generate anchors that dynamically fit
instance surfaces to (i) unmix noise and target-related features for offering reliable proposals at the detection stage,
and (ii) reduce outliers in object point sampling for directly
providing well-structured geometry priors without segmentation during reconstruction. We embed AncLearn into a
reconstruction-from-detection learning system (AncRec) to
generate high-quality semantic scene models in a purely
instance-oriented manner. Experiments conducted on the
challenging ScanNetv2 dataset demonstrate that our shape
anchor-based method consistently achieves state-of-the-art
performance in terms of 3D object detection, layout estimation, and shape reconstruction. The code will be available
at https://github.com/Geo-Tell/AncRec.

1. Introduction
Holistic indoor scene understanding from partial observations (e.g., single-view images or 3D scans) is a comprehensive task that provides 3D semantic scene models for
indoor applications. Early works studied this task with a
reconstruction-from-detection framework that recovers the
geometries of room structures and objects from the corresponding detection in a separate way. Later, end-toend learning methods were proposed to simultaneously perform layout estimation, object detection, and shape prediction in one forward pass for semantic scene reconstruction
[27, 37, 23]. With the recent success of point-based 3D
detection and instance reconstruction, surging interest has
been witnessed in detecting and modeling objects directly
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparison between different feature grouping strategies. (a) the original scene model. (b)-(e) The different feature
grouping operations all suffer from the issue of confusing nontarget noise with useful features. (f) The proposed shape anchor
guided grouper directly generates anchors at the instance surface
to merge instance-related features, which largely alleviates noise
interference.

from sparse point clouds [28, 33].
Benefiting from the use of rich geometry information,
current scan-based deep methods have improved the performance of semantic scene reconstruction. However, they
still left two issues that bottleneck high-quality semantic reconstruction: (1) the noisy instance feature learning at the
detection phase, and (2) the difficulty in retrieving instances
from sparse point clouds for reconstruction.
At the detection phase, it is required to group features for
instance representation learning. The ball query [30, 31]
and 3D convolution[39, 20] are two basic operations for
point feature grouping, but they often mix massive noise
with informative features due to the fixed grouping range,

21916

