This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scratching Visual Transformer’s Back with Uniform Attention

Byeongho Heo2
1

Nam Hyeon-Woo1 *
Kim Yu-Ji1
Dongyoon Han2
Seong Joon Oh3

Tae-Hyun Oh1∗

POSTECH, 2 NAVER AI Lab, 3 Tübingen University

Abstract
The favorable performance of Vision Transformers
(ViTs) is often attributed to the multi-head self-attention
(MSA), which enables global interactions at each layer of
a ViT model. Previous works acknowledge the property of
long-range dependency for the effectiveness in MSA. In this
work, we study the role of MSA in terms of the different axis,
density. Our preliminary analyses suggest that the spatial
interactions of learned attention maps are close to dense
interactions rather than sparse ones. This is a curious phenomenon because dense attention maps are harder for the
model to learn due to softmax. We interpret this opposite behavior against softmax as a strong preference for
the ViT models to include dense interaction. We thus manually insert the dense uniform attention to each layer of the
ViT models to supply the much-needed dense interactions.
We call this method Context Broadcasting, CB. Our study
demonstrates the inclusion of CB takes the role of dense attention and thereby reduces the degree of density in the original attention maps by complying softmax in MSA. We also
show that, with negligible costs of CB (1 line in your model
code and no additional parameters), both the capacity and
generalizability of the ViT models are increased.

1. Introduction
After the success of Transformers [58] in language domains, Dosovitskiy et al. [12] have extended to Vision
Transformers (ViTs) that operate almost identically to the
Transformers but for computer vision tasks. Recent studies [12, 56] have shown that ViTs achieve superior performance on image classification tasks. Further, the universal nature of ViTs’ input has demonstrated its potential to
multi-modal input extensions [2, 14, 26, 31].
The favorable performance is often attributed to the
multi-head self-attention (MSA) in ViTs [12, 56, 59, 7, 50,
* This work was done during N. Hyeon-Woo’s intern at NAVER AI Lab.
Tae-Hyun Oh is in Department of Electrical Engineering and Grad. School
of Artificial Intelligence, POSTECH, and joint affiliated with Institute for
Convergence Research and Education in Advanced Technology, Yonsei
University, Korea.

Problem

Sparse attention

Dense attention

Easy to learn for SA

Our solution

Hard to learn for SA
CB: Context broadcasting
SA: Self-attention

Takes away
CB handles
densest attention

Target attention

SA only needs to learn
sparse attention

for SA

for SA

Figure 1. Motivation of our work. Top: dense attention is hard
to learn with softmax, but self-attention tends to learn it more than
sparse one. Bottom: we infuse dense attention explicitly, named
CB, to split the responsibility of interactions; the burden of interactions of self-attention is reduced. Self-attention is now more likely
to learn sparse interaction that is in favor of softmax.

44], which facilitates long-range dependency1 . Specifically,
MSA is designed for long-range interactions of spatial information in all layers. This is a structurally contrasting feature with a large body of successful predecessors, convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which gradually increase
the range of interactions by stacking many fixed and hardcoded local operations, i.e., convolutional layers. Raghu et
al. [44] and Naseer et al. [39] have shown the effectiveness
of the self-attention in ViTs for the global interactions of
spatial information compared to CNNs.
Unlike previous works [44, 39] that focused on the effectiveness of long-range dependency, we study the role
of density in spatial attention. “Long-range” can be either
“sparse” or “dense”. We examine whether the learned attention of ViTs is dense or sparse. Our preliminary analysis based on the entropy measure suggests that the learned
1 Long-range dependency is described in the literature with various termi-

nologies: non-local, global, large receptive fields, etc.

5807

