This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MEFLUT: Unsupervised 1D Lookup Tables for Multi-exposure Image Fusion
Ting Jiang 1

Chuan Wang 1

Xinpeng Li 1 Ru Li 1 Haoqiang Fan 1 Shuaicheng Liu 2,1 *
1
Megvii Technology
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

In this paper, we introduce a new approach for highquality multi-exposure image fusion (MEF). We show that
the fusion weights of an exposure can be encoded into a 1D
lookup table (LUT), which takes pixel intensity value as input and produces fusion weight as output. We learn one 1D
LUT for each exposure, then all the pixels from different exposures can query 1D LUT of that exposure independently
for high-quality and efficient fusion. Specifically, to learn
these 1D LUTs, we involve attention mechanism in various
dimensions including frame, channel and spatial ones into
the MEF task so as to bring us significant quality improvement over the state-of-the-art (SOTA). In addition, we collect a new MEF dataset consisting of 960 samples, 155 of
which are manually tuned by professionals as ground-truth
for evaluation. Our network is trained by this dataset in an
unsupervised manner. Extensive experiments are conducted
to demonstrate the effectiveness of all the newly proposed
components, and results show that our approach outperforms the SOTA in our and another representative dataset
SICE, both qualitatively and quantitatively. Moreover, our
1D LUT approach takes less than 4ms to run a 4K image on
a PC GPU. Given its high quality, efficiency and robustness,
our method has been shipped into millions of Android mobiles across multiple brands world-wide. Code is available
at: https://github.com/Hedlen/MEFLUT.

1. Introduction
Dynamic ranges of natural scenes are much wider than
those captured by commercial imaging products, causing
they are hard to be captured by most digital photography
sensors. As a result, high dynamic range (HDR) [1, 2] imaging techniques have attracted considerable interest due to
their capability to overcome such limitations. Among HDR
solutions, multi-exposure image fusion (MEF) [3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15] provides a cost-effective one,
with which plausible images with vivid detail can be generated. MEF has attracted wide attention and there have been
many methods [16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24] available
* Corresponding author

EV=-2.0 EV=-1.0 EV=0 EV=+1.0

Abstract

(a) Inputs

(d) Mertens09

(b) Our Result

(e) GGIF

(c) Patches

(f) DeepFuse (g) MEFNet

(h) IFCNN (i) TransMEF
(j) Ours
(k) GT
Figure 1. (a) Inputs. (b) Our result. (c) Input patches. We show
the results by various methods in patches. Our result hallucinates
more accurate details over the saturated areas.

to fuse images with faithful detail and color reproduction.
However, these MEF methods use hand-crafted features or
transformations so that they usually suffer from robustness
if being applied to modified conditions.
Inspired by the successes of the deep neural networks
(DNNs) in many computer vision areas [25, 26, 27, 28],
recently some deep learning-based approaches [5, 7] have
been proposed to improve MEF. DeepFuse [5] uses DNNs
for the first time to directly regress the Y channel of an YUV
image as the target. As the core weight maps’ learning is
ignored, its quality is limited despite of its acceptable efficiency due to the limited model size. To improve the quality,
MEFNet [7] alternatively learns the weight maps for blending the input sequence. However, its speed is downgraded
as the network becomes complex, hence it just works on
low resolution input as a workaround to maintain the efficiency. Unfortunately, these methods do not take real-world
deployment into consideration, their speed and quality cannot be well balanced, causing the difficulty of their wide

10542

