This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Open-Vocabulary Video Instance Segmentation
Haochen Wang*
University of Amsterdam

Cilin Yan*
Beihang University

Shuai Wang
University of Amsterdam

h.wang3@uva.nl

clyan@buaa.edu.cn

s.wang3@uva.nl

Xiaolong Jiang, Xu Tang, Yao Hu
Xiaohongshu Inc.

Weidi Xie†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Efstratios Gavves
University of Amsterdam

laige@xiaohongshu.com

weidi@robots.ox.ac.uk

egavves@uva.nl

Abstract
Video Instance Segmentation (VIS) aims at segmenting and categorizing objects in videos from a closed set
of training categories, lacking the generalization ability
to handle novel categories in real-world videos. To address this limitation, we make the following three contributions. First, we introduce the novel task of OpenVocabulary Video Instance Segmentation, which aims to simultaneously segment, track, and classify objects in videos
from open-set categories, including novel categories unseen
during training. Second, to benchmark Open-Vocabulary
VIS, we collect a Large-Vocabulary Video Instance Segmentation dataset (LV-VIS), that contains well-annotated objects from 1,196 diverse categories, significantly surpassing the category size of existing datasets by more than
one order of magnitude. Third, we propose an efficient
Memory-Induced Transformer architecture, OV2Seg, to first
achieve Open-Vocabulary VIS in an end-to-end manner
with near real-time inference speed. Extensive experiments on LV-VIS and four existing VIS datasets demonstrate
the strong zero-shot generalization ability of OV2Seg on
novel categories. The dataset and code are released here
https://github.com/haochenheheda/LVVIS.

1. Introduction
Despite impressive efforts, Video Instance Segmentation (VIS) [39, 9, 36] is fundamentally constrained to segment and classify objects from a closed set of training categories, thus limiting the capacity to generalize to novel concepts, see Fig. 1 (a). In real-world scenarios, this closedvocabulary paradigm lacks practical value, as the model
usually encounters objects from novel categories unseen in
the training stage. In contrast, recent works Open-World
Tracking (OWTB)[27], UVO [35], and BURST [1] aim
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

(a) Traditional Video Instance Segmentation

(b) Open-World Tracking

(c) Open-Vocabulary Video Instance Segmentation

Figure 1. (a) Traditional VIS fails to tackle objects from novel
categories (unseen during training, e.g. walrus in the figure); (b)
Open-World Tracking aims to segment and track all objects in a
class-agnostic manner, while lacking the ability for object categorization in videos; (c) Open-Vocabulary VIS aims to simultaneously segment, track, and classify objects for both training categories, e.g., person, and novel categories, e.g., walrus in the figure.
Different colors in the figures indicate different object instances.

to segment and track all visible objects, see Fig. 1 (b).
However, those works still have no capacity to classify
the objects from open-set categories, which is significant
for video-level tasks, such as video captioning and action
recognition. To enhance the practicality of VIS, and make
VIS more suited to downstream video-level tasks, we propose Open-Vocabulary Video Instance Segmentation to simultaneously classify, track, and segment arbitrary objects
from an open set of categories, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (c).
To properly benchmark the Open-Vocabulary VIS, a
video dataset with large and diverse object categories is

4057

