This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bayesian Prompt Learning for Image-Language Model Generalization
Mohammad Mahdi Derakhshani1 ,* Enrique Sanchez4 , Adrian Bulat4
Victor Guilherme Turrisi da Costa2 *, Cees G. M. Snoek1†, Georgios Tzimiropoulos3,4†, Brais Martinez4†
1
University of Amsterdam 2 University of Trento 3 Queen Mary University of London
4
Samsung AI Cambrdige

Abstract
Foundational image-language models have generated
considerable interest due to their efficient adaptation to
downstream tasks by prompt learning. Prompt learning
treats part of the language model input as trainable while
freezing the rest, and optimizes an Empirical Risk Minimization objective. However, Empirical Risk Minimization
is known to suffer from distributional shifts which hurt generalizability to prompts unseen during training. By leveraging the regularization ability of Bayesian methods, we
frame prompt learning from the Bayesian perspective and
formulate it as a variational inference problem. Our approach regularizes the prompt space, reduces overfitting to
the seen prompts and improves the prompt generalization on
unseen prompts. Our framework is implemented by modeling the input prompt space in a probabilistic manner, as an
a priori distribution which makes our proposal compatible
with prompt learning approaches that are unconditional or
conditional on the image. We demonstrate empirically on
15 benchmarks that Bayesian prompt learning provides an
appropriate coverage of the prompt space, prevents learning spurious features, and exploits transferable invariant
features. This results in better generalization of unseen
prompts, even across different datasets and domains.
Code available at: https://github.com/saic-fi/BayesianPrompt-Learning

1. Introduction
In the continuous quest for better pre-training strategies,
models based on image and language supervision have set
impressive milestones, with CLIP [38], ALIGN [22] and
Flamingo [1] being leading examples. Contrastively trained
image-language models consist of image and text encoders
that align semantically-related concepts in a joint embedding space. Such models offer impressive zero-shot image
classification by using the text encoder to generate classifier weights from arbitrarily newly defined category classes
* Most work done during an internship at Samsung AI Cambridge.
† Equal advising

Figure 1: We present a Bayesian perspective on prompt
learning by formulating it as a variational inference problem
(right column). Our framework models the prompt space as
an a priori distribution which makes our proposal compatible with common prompt learning approaches that are unconditional (top) or conditional on the image (bottom).
without relying on any visual data. In particular, the class
name is used within a handcrafted prompt template and then
tokenized and encoded into the shared embedding space
to generate new classifier weights. Rather than manually
defining prompts, both Lester et al. [28] and Zhou et al.
[55] demonstrated prompts can instead be optimized in a
data-driven manner through backpropagation. However, as
prompt learning typically has access to only a few training
examples per prompt, overfitting to the seen prompts in lieu
of the unseen prompts is common [55]. In this paper, we
strive to mitigate the overfitting behavior of prompt learning so as to improve generalization for unseen prompts.
Others before us have considered the generalization
problem in prompt learning as well, e.g., [55, 54], be it they
all seek to optimize a so-called Empirical Risk Minimiza-

15237

