This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Query Refinement Transformer for 3D Instance Segmentation
Jiahao Lu1 , Jiacheng Deng1 , Chuxin Wang1 , Jianfeng He1 , Tianzhu Zhang1,2,†
1

University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Deep Space Exploration Lab

{lujiahao, dengjc, wcx0602, hejf}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tzzhang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
3D instance segmentation aims to predict a set of object instances in a scene and represent them as binary foreground masks with corresponding semantic labels. However, object instances are diverse in shape and category,
and point clouds are usually sparse, unordered, and irregular, which leads to a query sampling dilemma. Besides,
noise background queries interfere with proper scene perception and accurate instance segmentation. To address
the above issues, we propose the Query Refinement Transformer termed QueryFormer. The key to our approach is to
exploit a query initialization module to optimize the initialization process for the query distribution with a high coverage and low repetition rate. Additionally, we design an
affiliated transformer decoder that suppresses the interference of noise background queries and helps the foreground
queries focus on instance discriminative parts to predict final segmentation results. Extensive experiments on ScanNetV2 and S3DIS datasets show that our QueryFormer can
surpass state-of-the-art 3D instance segmentation methods.

1. Introduction
3D instance segmentation is a fundamental task for 3D
scene understanding, which aims to predict the semantic labels and the binary foreground masks for every object in the
scene simultaneously. With the popularity of AR/VR [31],
3D indoor scanning [21], and autonomous driving [46], 3D
instance segmentation has become a key technology facilitating scene understanding. However, the complex layout
of the scene and the variety of object categories pose severe challenges to 3D instance segmentation in segmenting
similar objects and accurate point cloud masking.
To overcome the above challenges, a series of 3D instance segmentation methods [11, 24, 4, 23, 39, 36] have
been proposed. Generally, these methods can be divided into three categories: proposal-based [45, 11, 24],
grouping-based [17, 4, 23, 39], and query-based [36].
Proposal-based methods [45, 11, 24] extract 3D bound∗ Corresponding Author

A

Mask3D

Ours

Mask3D

Ours

GT

Mask3D

Ours

Mask3D

Ours

GT

B

C

w/o denoising module

w denoising module

w/o denoising module

w denoising module

GT

Figure 1. The visualization of query distribution and segmentation results. A. The query initialization module samples a
query on each of the two chairs to distinguish the two instances
precisely. B. Repeated queries incorrectly split the complete board
into two pieces. C. The denoising module removes many noise
background queries and optimizes the final segmentation results.

ing boxes and utilize a mask learning branch to predict
the object mask inside each box. Grouping-based methods [17, 4, 23, 39] rely on a bottom-up pipeline that generates predictions for each point (e.g., semantic categories
and geometric offsets) and then groups the points into
instances. However, proposal-based and grouping-based
methods strongly rely on high-quality proposals and require
manual selection of geometric properties and tuning of hyperparameters. These drawbacks and limitations prompt
query-based methods to be proposed and receive extensive
attention from researchers. Query-based methods are regarded as a class of transformer query-based methods [2, 5]
in which each object instance is represented as an instance
query. Query-based methods require a large number of
queries spread throughout the scene to cover a large part
of foreground objects in the scene so that there are one or
even more queries on each covered object instance. Then
a transformer decoder learns the instance queries by iteratively focusing on multi-level point cloud features. Eventually, the instance queries aggregate point cloud features to
produce all instance masks in parallel.
Based on the discussion of the above approaches, querybased methods show great promise for 3D instance segmentation tasks by offering superior performance while not re-

18516

