This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OnlineRefer: A Simple Online Baseline for Referring Video Object Segmentation
Dongming Wu1‡ , Tiancai Wang2 , Yuang Zhang3 , Xiangyu Zhang2,4 , Jianbing Shen5†
1
Beijing Institute of Technology, 2 MEGVII Technology, 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
4
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, 5 SKL-IOTSC, CIS, University of Macau
wudongming97@gmail.com, wangtiancai@megvii.com, shenjiangbingcg@gmail.com

Abstract
Referring video object segmentation (RVOS) aims at segmenting an object in a video following human instruction.
Current state-of-the-art methods fall into an offline pattern,
in which each clip independently interacts with text embedding for cross-modal understanding. They usually present
that the offline pattern is necessary for RVOS, yet model
limited temporal association within each clip. In this work,
we break up the previous offline belief and propose a simple
yet effective online model using explicit query propagation,
named OnlineRefer. Specifically, our approach leverages
target cues that gather semantic information and position
prior to improve the accuracy and ease of referring predictions for the current frame. Furthermore, we generalize
our online model into a semi-online framework to be compatible with video-based backbones. To show the effectiveness of our method, we evaluate it on four benchmarks, i.e.,
Refer-Youtube-VOS, Refer-DAVIS17 , A2D-Sentences, and
JHMDB-Sentences. Without bells and whistles, our OnlineRefer with a Swin-L backbone achieves 63.5 J&F and
64.8 J&F on Refer-Youtube-VOS and Refer-DAVIS17 , outperforming all other offline methods. Our code is available
at https://github.com/wudongming97/OnlineRefer.

A panda with its hand on
the back of another

Model

Model

Model

(a) Mask-propagation method
A panda with its hand on
the back of another

Model

(b) Offline method
A panda with its hand on
the back of another

Query

Model
Query

Model
Query

Model

1. Introduction
Given a natural language expression, the purpose of referring video object segmentation (RVOS) is to segment the
described object in a streaming video. The emerging task
has attracted great attention in the computer vision community as it provides potential benefits for many applications,
e.g., video editing and human-computer interaction. Its core
challenge is associating all frames with constructing an efficient video representation, further promoting cross-modal
understanding of two modalities, i.e., video and language.
†Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen. This work was supported in
part by the FDCT grants 0154/2022/A3 and SKL-IOTSC(UM)-2021-2023,
the MYRG-CRG2022-00013-IOTSC-ICI grant and the SRG2022-00023IOTSC grant. ‡The work is done during the internship at MEGVII.

(c) Query-propagation method

Figure 1: Conceptual comparison on current methods:
(a) the mask-propagation method [12, 28], (b) the offline
method [10, 1, 35], and (c) our query-propagation method.
Pioneer methods [12, 28] integrate mask propagation into
the referring image segmentation in an online manner, as
shown in Fig. 1 (a). However, the complexity and performance of their model remain far from satisfactory.
Recently, the state-of-the-art performance on RVOS has
been dominated by offline methods [31, 10, 1, 4, 13, 35, 46].
They typically follow a clip-level paradigm, dividing the entire video into multiple non-overlapped clips and generating
referring object masks for each clip, as illustrated in Fig. 1

2761

