This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Democratising 2D Sketch to 3D Shape Retrieval Through Pivoting
Pinaki Nath Chowdhury1,2

Ayan Kumar Bhunia1 Aneeshan Sain1,2 Subhadeep Koley1,2
Tao Xiang1,2 Yi-Zhe Song1,2
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.
2
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.

{p.chowdhury, a.bhunia, a.sain, s.koley, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract

3D shape

Sketch
No paired

=

❌
Hard to collect

Free of cost
easy to collect
2D Projections

Sketches are highly expressive [37]. This particular
sketch strait has been explored to a large extend for image
retrieval, especially under the fine-grained setting. The 3D
literature followed a similar trend, starting with categorylevel retrieval of 3D shapes using sketches [45], but only
very recently moved onto the fine-grained instance-level

Sketch-photo pairs

1. Introduction

❌

supervision

Using paired photos

This paper studies the problem of 2D sketch to 3D shape
retrieval, but with a focus on democratising the process. We
would like this democratisation to happen on two fronts:
(i) to remove the need for large-scale specifically sourced
2D sketch and 3D shape datasets, and (ii) to remove restrictions on how well the user needs to sketch and from
what viewpoints. The end result is a system that is trainable using existing datasets, and once trained allows users
to sketch regardless of drawing skills and without restriction on view angle. We achieve all this via a clever use
of pivoting, along with novel designs that injects 3D understanding of 2D sketches into the system. We perform
pivoting using two existing datasets, each from a distant
research domain to the other: 2D sketch and photo pairs
from the sketch-based image retrieval field (SBIR), and 3D
shapes from ShapeNet. It follows that the actual feature
pivoting happens on photos from the former and 2D projections from the latter. Doing this already achieves most
of our democratisation challenge – the level of 2D sketch
abstraction embedded in SBIR dataset offers demoralization on drawing quality, and the whole thing works without
a specifically sourced 2D sketch and 3D model pair. To
further achieve democratisation on sketching viewpoint, we
“lift” 2D sketches to 3D space using Blind Perspective-nPoints (BPnP) that injects 3D-aware information into the
sketch encoder. Results show ours achieves competitive performance compared with fully-supervised baselines, while
meeting all set democratisation goals.

Pivoting

Figure 1. Collecting 2D sketches for 3D shapes is difficult since
the viewpoints often needs to be pre-defined that arguably makes
sketch collection for 3D shapes an ill-posed problem to start with
– there is no one good view that caters for everyone. We remove
the need for large-scale 2D sketch and 3D shape datasets through
a clever use of pivoting across two separate domains (i) paired 2D
freehand sketches from well-studied FG-SBIR literature [91], and
(ii) the 3D shape domain, where we have ample data at our dispoal
(e.g., ShapeNet [11]). Our pivoting happens on paired 2D photos
from FG-SBIR and 2D projections from 3D shapes.

setup [58]. The very reason behind such a time lag lies
with that of data collection – just as how collection of 2D
sketches for images was difficult [70, 18, 66, 43], sketches
for 3D models had been proven to be even harder to collect
[47, 58]. In particular, since one is collecting a 2D sketch
for a 3D model, viewpoints often need to be pre-defined
[95], which arguably makes sketch collection for 3D shapes
an ill-posed problem to start with – there is no one good
view that caters for everyone.
There is however a strong voice in the 3D community
stating the opposite – that different to images, sketches can
be freely rendered for 3D models, other than collected by
hand. This is because 3D models are well-defined and without cluttered background unlike natural photos, so welltailored non-photorealistic rendering (NPR) algorithms [26]
should suffice to produce pseudo-sketches good enough for

23275

