This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StageInteractor: Query-based Object Detector with Cross-stage Interaction
Yao Teng1 Haisong Liu1 Sheng Guo3 Limin Wang1,2,
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Shanghai AI Lab, China 3 MYbank, Ant Group, China

Abstract
Previous object detectors make predictions based on
dense grid points or numerous preset anchors. Most of
these detectors are trained with one-to-many label assignment strategies. On the contrary, recent query-based object detectors are based a sparse set of learnable queries
refined by a series of decoder layers. The one-to-one label assignment is independently applied on each layer for
deep supervision during training. Despite the great success
of query-based object detection, however, this vanilla oneto-one label assignment strategy requires the detectors to
have strong fine-grained discrimination and modeling capacity. In this paper, we propose a new query-based object
detector with cross-stage interaction, coined as StageInteractor. During the forward pass, we come up with an efficient way to improve this modeling ability by reusing dynamic operators with lightweight adapters. As for the label
assignment, a cross-stage label assigner is designed to improve the one-to-one label assignment. With this assigner,
the training target class labels are gathered across stages
and then reallocated to proper predictions at each decoder
layer. On MS COCO benchmark, our model improves the
baseline counterpart by 2.2 AP, and achieves a 44.8 AP
with ResNet-50 as backbone, 100 queries and 12 training
epochs. With longer training time and 300 queries, StageInteractor achieves 51.3 AP and 52.7 AP with ResNeXt-101DCN and Swin-S, respectively. The code and models are
made available at https://github.com/MCG-NJU/
StageInteractor.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental task in computer
vision and acts as a cornerstone for many downstream
tasks [48, 9]. It aims to localize and categorize all object instances in an image. Over the past few decades,
dense spatial prior has been widely applied in various detectors. These detectors make predictions based on either
: Corresponding author (lmwang@nju.edu.cn).

Figure 1: Convergence curves of our model and other
query-based object detectors [4, 68, 46, 15] with ResNet50 [21] on MS COCO [31] minival set.
a large quantity of pre-defined anchors covering the whole
image [18, 41, 3, 33, 30, 40] or dense grid points in the feature map of this image [26, 13, 65, 49, 39, 57]. To deliver
supervision signals to these detectors, most works employ
the one-to-many label assignment strategy [62, 66, 25, 17,
16, 59] (i.e., the classification label and localization target of
one ground-truth object could be assigned to multiple object
predictions). Although this paradigm is widely used in object detection, it suffers from redundant and near-duplicate
predictions due to such label assignment [45], and thus relies heavily on specific post-processing algorithms for duplicate removal [2, 23, 22].
Recently, DETR [4] and its variants [68, 46, 15, 7, 32, 14,
37, 8] open a new area of object detection. These querybased object detectors get rid of the dense prior and view
object detection as a set prediction problem. Specifically,
they use a sparse set of queries (i.e., learnable embeddings)
to progressively capture the characteristics and location of
objects with the help of a series of decoder layers. In each
layer, image features are sampled and fused into the input queries via attention-like operation [51, 68] or dynamic
mixing [46, 15]. Then, the transformed queries are decoded
into object predictions and also serve as the inputs of next
layer. As for the training of this paradigm, a kind of one-to-

6577

