This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text-Driven Generative Domain Adaptation with Spectral Consistency
Regularization
Zhenhuan Liu1,2
Liang Li1 *
Jiayu Xiao1,2
Zheng-Jun Zha3
Qingming Huang1,2,4
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Science and Technology of China
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{zhenhuan.liu, jiayu.xiao}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, liang.li@ict.ac.cn,
zhazj@ustc.edu.cn, qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Combined with the generative prior of pre-trained models and the ﬂexibility of text, text-driven generative domain
adaptation can generate images from a wide range of target domains. However, current methods still suffer from
overﬁtting and the mode collapse problem. In this paper,
we analyze the mode collapse from the geometric point of
view and reveal its relationship to the Hessian matrix of
generator. To alleviate it, we propose the spectral consistency regularization to preserve the diversity of source domain without restricting the semantic adaptation to target
domain. We also design granularity adaptive regularization to ﬂexibly control the balance between diversity and
stylization for target model. We conduct experiments for
broad target domains compared with state-of-the-art methods and extensive ablation studies. The experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method to preserve the diversity of source domain and generate high ﬁdelity target images. Source code has been released in https:
//github.com/Victarry/Adaptation-SCR.

1. Introduction
Generative image modeling has developed signiﬁcantly
in recent years and is able to generate diverse highresolution images even indistinguishable from real images.
However, training such models requires intense computation resources and large datasets, which restricts the application scope of generative models. For some scenarios, collecting large datasets is impossible like paintings by speciﬁc
artists. Beneﬁting from Vision-Language models learning
from large image-text pairs, text can be leveraged as a de* Corresponding Author

scription of abstract visual semantics to guide generative
domain adaptation instead of a collection of image samples
in target domain. As an expressive representation, text has
shown great success in semantic image generation and manipulation recently [23, 20]. Based on the generative prior
of pre-trained models and ﬂexible text description of target
domain, text-driven generative domain adaptation can generate more various images and have promising applications.
To reduce the requirement of training samples, traditional methods propose to train generative models in the
target domain with only limited samples by adapting pretrained models in the large-scale source domain which contains high-level semantic knowledge as a generative prior.
These few-shot adaptation methods either ﬁnetune only a
part of parameters within networks to preserve most source
domain knowledge [15] or impose strong regularization on
the generated images [30, 36]. However, these methods still
require additional training samples of target domain and adversarial training process. As the number of samples drops,
the image ﬁdelity and diversity also hurt severely. Different
from these methods, text-driven generative domain adaptation requires no image samples but texts to describe the
target domain. Pioneer work [5] proposed to encourage the
visual change between samples from target and source generators to align with semantic direction described by text in
the CLIP [19] embedding space, which achieves generative
adaptation for miscellaneous domains in short training time.
The main challenge of text-driven GAN adaptation is the
mode collapse problem due to the entanglement of intradomain semantics and inter-domain style in text representation. Besides the speciﬁed target style described by text,
there also exists an unknown pattern for the semantics of
images. This leads to a decrease of variations in generated
images when the style effect is optimized to approach target
domain. As shown in Figure 2, while the number of itera-

7019

