This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Label Shift Adapter for Test-Time Adaptation under Covariate and Label Shifts
Sunghyun Park1,2 Seunghan Yang1 Jaegul Choo2 Sungrack Yun1
1
Qualcomm AI Research* 2 KAIST
1 {sunpar,

seunghan, sungrack}@qti.qualcomm.com

2 {psh01087,

jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Test-time adaptation (TTA) aims to adapt a pre-trained
model to the target domain in a batch-by-batch manner during inference. While label distributions often exhibit imbalances in real-world scenarios, most previous TTA approaches typically assume that both source and target domain datasets have balanced label distribution. Due to the
fact that certain classes appear more frequently in certain
domains (e.g., buildings in cities, trees in forests), it is natural that the label distribution shifts as the domain changes.
However, we discover that the majority of existing TTA
methods fail to address the coexistence of covariate and label shifts. To tackle this challenge, we propose a novel label
shift adapter that can be incorporated into existing TTA approaches to deal with label shifts during the TTA process
effectively. Specifically, we estimate the label distribution
of the target domain to feed it into the label shift adapter.
Subsequently, the label shift adapter produces optimal parameters for target label distribution. By predicting only
the parameters for a part of the pre-trained source model,
our approach is computationally efficient and can be easily applied, regardless of the model architectures. Through
extensive experiments, we demonstrate that integrating our
strategy with TTA approaches leads to substantial performance improvements under the joint presence of label and
covariate shifts.

1. Introduction
Despite the recent remarkable improvement of deep neural networks in various applications, the models still suffer
from distribution shifts between source distribution and target distribution. One type of distribution shift, known as
covariate shift, occurs when the target distribution pt (x)
differs from the source distribution ps (x). In autonomous
driving, for instance, models may degrade significantly during testing due to ambient factors such as weather and location. To design the models robust to covariate shifts, un* Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies,

Inc.

Figure 1. We consider the test-time adaptation scenario, when covariate and label shifts occur simultaneously. After deploying
the pre-trained model, the model is adapted to the target domain.
However, existing methods often suffer from the coexistence of
covariate and label shifts. Employing our method enables online
adaptation under shifted target label distributions.

supervised domain adaptation literature [9, 10, 23, 19] has
explored the transfer of knowledge learned from labeled
source data to unlabeled target data.
To be more practical in real-world scenarios, test-time
adaptation (TTA) algorithms [46] have emerged to enhance
practicality in real-world scenarios by adapting deep neural networks to the target domain during inference. Specifically, TTA approaches optimize the model parameters
batch-by-batch using unlabeled test data, avoiding additional labeling costs. Previous TTA studies have mitigated
the performance degradation caused by covariate shift by
enhancing normalization statistics [41, 11, 24], optimizing
model parameters with entropy minimization [46, 35], or
utilizing pseudo labels [20].
Although the natural data encountered in practice often
exhibits long-tailed label distribution, most previous TTA
methods assume that the model is trained on class-balanced
data. This assumption overlooks another type of distribution shift, known as label shift, in which label distribution varies between source ps (y) and target pt (y). Label
shift has been studied extensively in the long-tailed recognition literature [18, 6, 8, 15]. Considering only one type

16421

