This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Frame-to-Frame Camera Rotation Estimation in Crowded Scenes
Fabien Delattre 1
David Dirnfeld 1
Phat Nguyen 1
Stephen Scarano 1
Michael J. Jones 2
Pedro Miraldo 2
Erik Learned-Miller 1
1

University of Massachusetts Amherst

2

Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL)

Abstract
We present an approach to estimating camera rotation
in crowded, real-world scenes from handheld monocular
video. While camera rotation estimation is a well-studied
problem, no previous methods exhibit both high accuracy
and acceptable speed in this setting. Because the setting
is not addressed well by other datasets, we provide a new
dataset and benchmark, with high-accuracy, rigorously verified ground truth, on 17 video sequences. Methods developed for wide baseline stereo (e.g., 5-point methods)
perform poorly on monocular video. On the other hand,
methods used in autonomous driving (e.g., SLAM) leverage specific sensor setups, specific motion models, or local optimization strategies (lagging batch processing) and
do not generalize well to handheld video. Finally, for dynamic scenes, commonly used robustification techniques
like RANSAC require large numbers of iterations, and become prohibitively slow. We introduce a novel generalization of the Hough transform on SO(3) to efficiently and robustly find the camera rotation most compatible with optical flow. Among comparably fast methods, ours reduces
error by almost 50% over the next best, and is more accurate than any method, irrespective of speed. This represents a strong new performance point for crowded scenes,
an important setting for computer vision. The code and the
dataset are available at https://fabiendelattre.com/robustrotation-estimation.

1

Introduction

The estimation of camera motion through a scene is
a fundamental problem in computer vision that is highly
related to a number of vision tasks such as motion segmentation [5], video stabilization [44], 3D reconstruction [9], visual odometry [56], Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping (SLAM) [53], Structure-from-Motion
(SfM) [65], human-computer interaction [54], autonomous
navigation [69], and many more. Hence, developing a
method that can accurately predict the camera’s movement

Figure 1. Left. A frame from our BUSS dataset of crowded
scenes. The red vectors show optical flows compatible with the
winning rotation estimate R∗ , indicating the rotation of the camera. Gray vectors show optical flows not explained purely by R∗ .
Right. The three axes show the space of rotations in 3D. Each
line shows the one-dimensional set of rotations that are compatible with a single optical flow vector. The red lines (corresponding to the red flow vectors in the top figure) intersect in a single
small bin, indicating that their optical flows are compatible with
the same rotation. The gray lines, which are affected by other
motion effects, are scattered in an unstructured manner, and correspond to the gray optical flows above. Our algorithm finds the set
of lines with greatest coherence in SO(3), revealing the rotation
R∗ of the camera.

through a scene is critical in solving these problems.
As the camera moves through the scene, the motion
field depends not only on the camera’s motion but also on
the scene’s geometry and objects’ motion in the environment. Given a sufficiently crowded location with many
moving objects (e.g., pedestrians and vehicles), estimating
the camera motion requires the difficult task of distinguishing between static and moving objects. This paper proposes a novel, robust method of estimating camera rotation
in crowded scenes such as the one shown in Fig. 1.
It is important to clarify the difference between frame-

9752

