This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Domain-Specificity Inducing Transformers for Source-Free Domain Adaptation
Sunandini Sanyal* Ashish Ramayee Asokan* Suvaansh Bhambri* Akshay Kulkarni
Jogendra Nath Kundu R Venkatesh Babu
Vision and AI Lab, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru
A. Domain-Speciﬁcity Inducing SFDA

Abstract
Conventional Domain Adaptation (DA) methods aim to
learn domain-invariant feature representations to improve
the target adaptation performance. However, we motivate that domain-specificity is equally important since indomain trained models hold crucial domain-specific properties that are beneficial for adaptation. Hence, we propose
to build a framework that supports disentanglement and
learning of domain-specific factors and task-specific factors
in a unified model. Motivated by the success of vision transformers in several multi-modal vision problems, we find that
queries could be leveraged to extract the domain-specific
factors. Hence, we propose a novel Domain-Specificity inducing Transformer (DSiT) framework 1 for disentangling
and learning both domain-specific and task-specific factors.
To achieve disentanglement, we propose to construct novel
Domain-Representative Inputs (DRI) with domain-specific
information to train a domain classifier with a novel domain
token. We are the first to utilize vision transformers for domain adaptation in a privacy-oriented source-free setting,
and our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on
single-source, multi-source, and multi-target benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models often fail to generalize to
unseen domains due to the discrepancy between training
(source) and test (target) data distributions (i.e. domain
shift). This results in poor deployment performance and
is also critical for applications like autonomous driving [9]
or medical imaging [12]. Unsupervised domain adaptation (DA) techniques seek to address this challenging scenario by transferring task-specific knowledge from a labeled
source domain to an unlabeled target domain. However, DA
works [15] require concurrent access to source and target
data. Such a constraint is highly impractical since data tends
to be proprietary and cannot be easily shared. Hence, we focus on Source-Free DA [31] that operates under a practical
* Equal Contribution
1 Project Page: http://val.cds.iisc.ac.in/DSiT-SFDA/

Target
Domain-Repr.
Input (DRI)

Domain
Classiﬁer
Task
Classiﬁer

Task-Label
Destructive
Transform

Unlabeled
Target Data

Task-speciﬁc factors
Domain-speciﬁc factors

B. w/o Domain-Speciﬁcity C. with Domain-Speciﬁcity
(Ours)
(Baseline)

Src-Class-1

Src-Class-2

Tgt-Class-1

Tgt-Class-2

Figure 1. A. We induce domain-specificity by disentangling
domain- and task-specific factors within the model. A task-labeldestructive transform produces novel Domain-Representative Inputs (DRI) to learn domain-specific factors via domain classification. B. Conventional DA methods preserve domain-invariance,
resulting in only task-oriented clusters in the feature space. C.
Our proposed disentanglement ensures that different domains are
well-clustered.

setting of sharing only the source model between a vendor
and a client, without any data-sharing.
Conventional Domain Adaptation works [15] aim to
learn task-discriminative features that are domain-invariant,
i.e. indistinguishable w.r.t. domain shift. Intuitively, if the
feature distributions of the source and target domain are
similar, then a low error on the source domain translates
to the target, shown theoretically by [3]. But domaininvariance does not always result in optimal target performance because a specific domain might be far away from
the support of a domain-invariant model [14]. Further, supervised in-domain trained models (where train and test
datasets come from the same domain) usually perform better as they hold useful domain-specific properties. Thus,
we motivate the concept of domain-specificity to improve
the target adaptation performance.
In source-free DA, while adapting a model to a new

18928

