This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Symmetry-Aware Geometry Correspondences for 6D Object
Pose Estimation
Heng Zhao1,4 Shenxing Wei2 Dahu Shi1,3 * Wenming Tan1 *
Zheyang Li1 Ye Ren1 Xing Wei2 Yi Yang3 Shiliang Pu1
1
Hikvision Research Institute 2 Xi’an Jiaotong University 3 Zhejiang University
4
Key Laboratory of Peace-building Big Data of Zhejiang Province
{zhaoheng13,shidahu,tanwenming,lizheyang,renye,pushiliang}@hikvision.com

Current 6D pose estimation methods focus on handling
objects that are previously trained, which limits their applications in real dynamic world. To this end, we propose a geometry correspondence-based framework, termed
GCPose, to estimate 6D pose of arbitrary unseen objects
without any re-training. Specifically, the proposed method
draws the idea from point cloud registration and resorts
to object-agnostic geometry features to establish the 3D3D correspondences between the object-scene point cloud
and object-model point cloud. Then the 6D pose parameters are solved by a least-squares fitting algorithm. Taking the symmetry properties of objects into consideration,
we design a symmetry-aware matching loss to facilitate
the learning of dense point-wise geometry features and improve the performance considerably. Moreover, we introduce an online training data generation with special data
augmentation and normalization to empower the network
to learn diverse geometry prior. With training on synthetic objects from ShapeNet, our method outperforms previous approaches for unseen object pose estimation by a
large margin on T-LESS, LINEMOD, Occluded-LINEMOD,
and TUD-L datasets. Code is available at https://
github.com/hikvision-research/GCPose.

1. Introduction
The 6D pose of an object represents a geometry transformation between the object coordinate system and camera coordinate system, which consists of 3D rotation and
3D translation. Estimating object pose plays an important
role in many real-world applications, such as robotic grasping [8] and augmented reality [38].
* Corresponding author.

Cat. 1

Cat. 2

Templates

Abstract

Target Image

wsx1064432511@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, weixing@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, yangyics@zju.edu.cn

Cat. N

(a) Category-Level
Train

(b) Template-Based
Test

ShapeNet

T-LESS
Random
Poses

GCPose
Geometry Correspondences

(c) Correspondence-Based

Figure 1: Comparison of different open-set pose estimation frameworks. Unlike previous methods that rely on
category-specific network training (a) or struggle to estimate precise poses (b), our GCPose can perform well on
arbitrary unseen objects (c).

Driven by the recent developments in deep learning, various methods have been proposed to explore the instancelevel 6D pose estimation problem. Some existing works
[43, 15] employ CNNs to detect a set of keypoints predefined on the 3D object model. Then the 6D pose can be
solved by Perspective-n-Points (PnP) [31] or least-squares
fitting algorithm. Since the detected keypoints serve as
sparse correspondences, these methods often struggle when
objects have view-point changes, occlusions, or lack of texture. Another alternative is to predict pixel-wise 3D coordinates for building dense 2D-3D correspondence maps
[42, 59, 51, 36, 22]. They allow for significantly better
treatment of occlusions and lead to more precise poses. Al-

14045

