This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Using a Waffle Iron for Automotive Point Cloud Semantic Segmentation
Gilles Puy1
1

valeo.ai, Paris, France

2

Alexandre Boulch1

Renaud Marlet1,2

LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-Vallée, France

Abstract
Semantic segmentation of point clouds in autonomous
driving datasets requires techniques that can process large
numbers of points efficiently. Sparse 3D convolutions have
become the de-facto tools to construct deep neural networks
for this task: they exploit point cloud sparsity to reduce
the memory and computational loads and are at the core
of today’s best methods. In this paper, we propose an alternative method that reaches the level of state-of-the-art
methods without requiring sparse convolutions. We actually show that such level of performance is achievable by
relying on tools a priori unfit for large scale and highperforming 3D perception. In particular, we propose a
novel 3D backbone, WaffleIron, made almost exclusively
of MLPs and dense 2D convolutions and present how to
train it to reach high performance on SemanticKITTI and
nuScenes. We believe that WaffleIron is a compelling alternative to backbones using sparse 3D convolutions, especially in frameworks and on hardware where those convolutions are not readily available. The code is available at
https://github.com/valeoai/WaffleIron.

1. Introduction
Lidar sensors deliver rich information about the 3D environment surrounding autonomous vehicles. Semantic segmentation of point clouds delivered by these lidars permits
to autonomous vehicles to make sense of this 3D information in order to take proper and safe decisions. When studying the leaderboard of SemanticKITTI [2], we rapidly notice that all the top methods leverage sparse 3D convolutions. For example, the recent work 2DPASS [43] relies on
an adapted version of SPVCNN [34] which, once trained
with the help of images of the scene captured synchronously
with the lidar, is currently the state-of-the-art method. As
another example, Cylinder3D [51], later improved in [12],
use sparse 3D convolutions on cylindrical voxels (particularly adapted to rotating lidars) with asymmetrical kernels
suited to capture the geometry of the main objects in driving scenes.
Despite the undeniable success and efficiency of sparse

convolutions, we seek here for 3D backbones which are free
of them. Indeed, sparse convolutions remain available in
a limited number of deep learning frameworks and hardware (essentially PyTorch and NVIDIA GPUs). One reason might be because they are challenging to implement efficiently [33]. Another reason may be because they are not
as widely used as, e.g., dense 2D convolutions, and are thus
not the first to be implemented in a new framework. Therefore, we would like to construct a 3D backbone (i) built
with tools more broadly available than sparse convolutions,
but which (ii) can reach the level of performance of the top
methods on automotive datasets, while (iii) remaining easy
to implement and to use. This would offer a compelling
alternative to sparse 3D backbone, especially when sparse
convolutions are not available.
We actually construct a novel 3D backbone built almost
exclusively with standard MLPs and dense 2D convolutions, both readily available in all deep learning frameworks
thanks to their wide use in the whole field of computer vision. Our backbone architecture, WaffleIron, is illustrated
in Fig. 1, and is inspired by the recent MLP-Mixer [36]. It
takes as input a point cloud with a token associated to each
point. All these point tokens are then updated by a sequence
of layers, each containing a token-mixing step (made of
dense 2D convolutions) and a channel-mixing step (made
of a MLP shared across points).
In addition, we explain how to train WaffleIron to make
it reach the performance of the current best methods on automotive semantic segmentation benchmarks. The performance we obtain shows that standard MLPs and dense 2D
convolutions, despite being a priori unfit for 3D segmentation, are sufficient to construct a 3D backbone reaching the
state of the art.
Finally, WaffleIron is at least as easy to implement and
to tune as any other backbone. The implementation consists
in repeated applications of basic layers directly on the point
tokens (an example of complete implementation is available
in the supplementary material). The performance increases
with the network width and depth, until an eventual saturation. The main hyperparameter to tune is the resolution of
the 2D grid used for discretization before 2D convolution,
but for which we observe stable results over a wide range

3379

