This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantic-Aware Implicit Template Learning via Part Deformation Consistency
Sihyeon Kim
Juyeon Ko

Minseok Joo
Jaewon Lee
Juhan Cha
Hyunwoo J. Kim*

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University
{sh bs15, wlgkcjf87, 2j1ejyu, juyon98, hanchaa, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Learning implicit templates as neural fields has recently
shown impressive performance in unsupervised shape correspondence. Despite the success, we observe current approaches, which solely rely on geometric information, often
learn suboptimal deformation across generic object shapes,
which have high structural variability. In this paper, we
highlight the importance of part deformation consistency
and propose a semantic-aware implicit template learning
framework to enable semantically plausible deformation.
By leveraging semantic prior from a self-supervised feature extractor, we suggest local conditioning with novel
semantic-aware deformation code and deformation consistency regularizations regarding part deformation, global
deformation, and global scaling. Our extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method
over baselines in various tasks: keypoint transfer, part label transfer, and texture transfer. More interestingly, our
framework shows a larger performance gain under more
challenging settings. We also provide qualitative analyses
to validate the effectiveness of semantic-aware deformation.
The code is available at https://github.com/mlvlab/PDC.

1. Introduction
Template learning is essential for shape analysis since
the template, which is a compact representation of arbitrary
shapes, provides a good prior for shape fitting so that we can
establish dense correspondence and transfer key attributes
such as texture or keypoints between shapes. Traditionally,
handcrafted templates such as meshes, part elements with
primitive shapes (e.g., sphere, cylinder, cone), or parametric
models have been widely used for human/animal body [3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9], human face [10, 11], human hand [12, 13,
14], and generic objects [15, 16, 17]. Defining templates for
less complex shapes with consistent topologies and similar
structures is relatively straightforward. However, for shapes
like generic object shapes with high structural variability or
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Importance of part deformation consistency. Given
input shapes with high structural variability, only considering lowlevel geometry during template learning [1, 2] can lead to suboptimal deformation (e.g., cannot distinguish between seat and arm
where two parts are geometrically close while semantically distant: low seat-low arm, high seat-high arm). Ours succeeds in
transferring shape attributes by encouraging part deformation consistency with semantic information.

non-rigid shapes with large-scale deformations, manually
defining suitable templates becomes challenging.
To address this challenge, recent works [1, 2, 18, 19]
have focused on learning implicit templates based on neural fields [20]. Neural fields, which are known for strong
representation power, efficiency, and flexibility, have been
successful in multiple 3D vision tasks, e.g., shape/scene reconstruction [21, 22, 23, 24], neural rendering [25, 26, 27],
and human digitization [28, 29, 30]. Likewise, neural
fields-based template learning have shown superior perfor-

593

