This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HollowNeRF: Pruning Hashgrid-Based NeRFs
with Trainable Collision Mitigation
Xiufeng Xie, Riccardo Gherardi, Zhihong Pan, Stephen Huang
Oppo Mobile Telecommunications Corp.
2479 E Bayshore Rd, Palo Alto, CA, 94303, USA
xxie28@gmail.com

Abstract
Neural radiance fields (NeRF) have garnered significant attention, with recent works such as Instant-NGP accelerating NeRF training and evaluation through a combination of
hashgrid-based positional encoding and neural networks.
However, effectively leveraging the spatial sparsity of 3D
scenes remains a challenge. To cull away unnecessary regions of the feature grid, existing solutions rely on prior
knowledge of object shape or periodically estimate object
shape during training by repeated model evaluations, which
are costly and wasteful. To address this issue, we propose
HollowNeRF, a novel compression solution for hashgridbased NeRF which automatically sparsifies the feature grid
during the training phase. Instead of directly compressing
dense features, HollowNeRF trains a coarse 3D saliency
mask that guides efficient feature pruning, and employs an
alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) pruner
to sparsify the 3D saliency mask during training. By exploiting the sparsity in the 3D scene to redistribute hash
collisions, HollowNeRF improves rendering quality while
using a fraction of the parameters of comparable state-ofthe-art solutions, leading to a better cost-accuracy tradeoff. Our method delivers comparable rendering quality to
Instant-NGP, while utilizing just 31% of the parameters. In
addition, our solution can achieve a PSNR accuracy gain of
up to 1dB using only 56% of the parameters.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF [1, 15]) have gained
widespread recognition across academia and industry due to
their remarkable capability to generate photorealistic novel
views of 3D scenes from a collection of 2D images. Inspired by the volumetric representation, NeRF models the
scene as a continuous 5D plenoptic function, enabling the
creation of high-fidelity renderings with accurate lighting
and shading effects. This technique has found versatile ap-

Figure 1: Cross-section views of rendered 3D scenes. The
left column shows the hollow interior of HollowNeRF’s
rendering, while the middle column shows the solid interior of Instant-NGP’s rendering. The right column displays
HollowNeRF’s rendering without slicing.

plications in fields such as computer graphics, virtual and
augmented reality, as well as robotics.
Training and evaluating NeRF models can be computationally expensive, and many recent works [20, 16, 4, 22,
18, 23] have focused on improving the efficiency of NeRF.
Instant-NGP [16] is an established solution with state-ofthe-art training speed. It employs a lightweight hashgrid for
input encoding and a small multi-layer perceptron (MLP)
to disambiguate hash collisions. However, the lightweight
hashgrid unavoidably causes severe collisions at fine resolutions. These collisions are evenly scattered across the occupied voxels, resulting in a suboptimal accuracy. Another
line of research focuses on accelerating NeRF rendering by
only sampling near the surface of interest, but has to rely on
prior knowledge of surface geometries (either from conventional algorithms such as shape-from-silhouette [13] or an
MLP predicting the depth distribution along each camera
ray [18]). However, a coarse surface estimation degrades

3480

