This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HTML: Hybrid Temporal-scale Multimodal Learning Framework for
Referring Video Object Segmentation
Mingfei Han1,4 , Yali Wang†2,6 , Zhihui Li3 , Lina Yao4 , Xiaojun Chang1,5 , Yu Qiao6,2
ReLER, AAII, UTS 2 Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and
Virtual Reality Technology, SIAT-SenseTime Joint Lab, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Shandong Artificial Intelligence, Qilu University of Technology
4
Data61, CSIRO 5 Department of Computer Vision, Mohamed bin Zayed University
of Artificial Intelligence 6 Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China
https://mingfei.info/HTML/
1

1. Introduction
Referring Video Object Segmentation (RVOS) has witnessed the growing interest, due to its wide applications
in visual editing, virtual reality, human-robotic interaction
and so on. Different from the traditional vision-only VOS,
RVOS aims to segment the object instance from an input
video, according to an open-world description about the re† Corresponding author.

✘

Our HTML

a tennis ball

✓

Baseline

(a) Simple description

✘
A sheep top second right moves down and
comes out of the circle on right side
Our HTML

Referring Video Object Segmentation (RVOS) is to segment
the object instance from a given video, according to the textual description of this object. However, in the open world,
the object descriptions are often diversified in contents and
flexible in lengths. This leads to the key difficulty in RVOS,
i.e., various descriptions of different objects are corresponding to different temporal scales in the video, which is
ignored by most existing approaches with single stride of
frame sampling. To tackle this problem, we propose a concise Hybrid Temporal-scale Multimodal Learning (HTML)
framework, which can effectively align lingual and visual
features to discover core object semantics in the video,
by learning multimodal interaction hierarchically from
different temporal scales. More specifically, we introduce a
novel inter-scale multimodal perception module, where the
language queries dynamically interact with visual features
across temporal scales. It can effectively reduce complex
object confusion by passing video context among different
scales. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on the
widely used benchmarks, including Ref-Youtube-VOS,
Ref-DAVIS17, A2D-Sentences and JHMDB-Sentences,
where our HTML achieves state-of-the-art performance on
all these datasets.

Baseline

Abstract

✓
(b) Complex description

Figure 1: Referring descriptions in different lengths.
(a) The description is simple containing only the category
name. (b) The description is complicated with movement
and position of the object. Single-scale baseline (e.g., four
frames in (a) and two frames in (b)) fails to segment the
referred object, while our hybrid-scale HTML succeeds.
More discussion can be found in introduction.
ferred object. In this case, the model has to learn both visual
and textual contents comprehensively, in order to discover
the underlying object by multimodal interaction.

13414

