This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Long-Range Grouping Transformer for Multi-View 3D Reconstruction
Liying Yang∗ Zhenwei Zhu∗ Xuxin Lin Jian Nong Yanyan Liang†
Macau University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Nowadays, transformer networks have demonstrated superior performance in many computer vision tasks. In
a multi-view 3D reconstruction algorithm following this
paradigm, self-attention processing has to deal with intricate image tokens including massive information when facing heavy amounts of view input. The curse of information content leads to the extreme difficulty of model learning. To alleviate this problem, recent methods compress
the token number representing each view or discard the attention operations between the tokens from different views.
Obviously, they give a negative impact on performance.
Therefore, we propose long-range grouping attention (LGA)
based on the divide-and-conquer principle. Tokens from all
views are grouped for separate attention operations. The
tokens in each group are sampled from all views and can
provide macro representation for the resided view. The
richness of feature learning is guaranteed by the diversity
among different groups. An effective and efficient encoder
can be established which connects inter-view features using LGA and extract intra-view features using the standard
self-attention layer. Moreover, a novel progressive upsampling decoder is also designed for voxel generation with relatively high resolution. Hinging on the above, we construct
a powerful transformer-based network, called LRGT. Experimental results on ShapeNet verify our method achieves
SOTA accuracy in multi-view reconstruction.
Code
is available at https://github.com/LiyingCV/
Long-Range-Grouping-Transformer.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction, the problem to recover the shape of
an object according to its several view images, is an essential research topic involving the field of computer vision and computer graphics. One of the main challenges
is how to extract the features from multiple images for generating the corresponding object with 3D representation. At
present, deep learning reconstructors have provided three
* Equal contribution. Email: {lyyang69, garyzhu1996}@gmail.com
† Corresponding author. Email: yyliang@must.edu.mo

kinds of solutions, including RNN-based methods [1, 2],
CNN-based methods [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10] and transformerbased methods [11, 12, 13, 14]. In this work, we focus on
the transformer network and aim to improve the accuracy
and robustness of multi-view 3D reconstruction with voxel
representation.
Vision transformer (ViT) [15] promotes the approach to
extract features from an image employing transformer architecture. An image is split into fixed-size patches and
then using attention operators learn the association between
them to explore an appropriate representation. If following this paradigm to establish a multi-view 3D reconstruction algorithm, an intuitive approach like [16] is to build
attention layers to connect full-range tokens from all views,
shown in Figure 1a. However, it is extremely difficult for
the model to face heavy amounts of view input, as attention
operators have to predict the potential importance weights
of intricate tokens from views. The curse of information
content increases the complexity of model encoding. It
is necessary to provide relatively large-scale data to support adequate training, but the commonly used datasets for
multi-view reconstruction are far from satisfying such requirements.
The previous works design three types of strategies to
avoid this problem. 1) Separated-stage strategy [13] individually extract the feature from each view and then fusion
them. It is simplified in structure but weak in mining the
inter-view relationships. 2) Blended-stage strategy [11, 12]
compress the number of tokens to represent each view and
make the attention layers to learn the association between
all tokens from different views. They enhance the interview correlation but lose a certain representation capability
for each view. 3) Alternated-stage strategy [14] employs decoupling to alternate the feature extraction from intra-view
and inter-view tokens. They discard the attention operations between the tokens from different views but insert
other modules to achieve similar purposes, which brings
extra computation. The efficiency is significantly dragged
down, especially for a large number of image inputs.
Considering these shortcomings, we hold that grouping
tokens in attention operations is a more reasonable solution. The role of full-range attention can be equivalent to

18257

