This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Heterogeneous Federated Learning under Data Corruption
Xiuwen Fang, Mang Ye,* Xiyuan Yang
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering,
School of Computer Science, Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
https://github.com/FangXiuwen/AugHFL

Abstract
Model heterogeneous federated learning is a realistic
and challenging problem. However, due to the limitations
of data collection, storage, and transmission conditions, as
well as the existence of free-rider participants, the clients
may suffer from data corruption. This paper starts the first
attempt to investigate the problem of data corruption in the
model heterogeneous federated learning framework. We design a novel method named Augmented Heterogeneous Federated Learning (AugHFL), which consists of two stages: 1)
In the local update stage, a corruption-robust data augmentation strategy is adopted to minimize the adverse effects of
local corruption while enabling the models to learn rich local knowledge. 2) In the collaborative update stage, we design a robust re-weighted communication approach, which
implements communication between heterogeneous models
while mitigating corrupted knowledge transfer from others.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method in coping with various corruption patterns in the
model heterogeneous federated learning setting.

1. Introduction
Modern society contains a large number of edge devices,
such as smartphones, mobile networks, IoT devices, etc.,
which can be regarded as local clients with limited private
data. The direct collection of private data from clients seriously compromises their privacy and security. Federated
learning [48, 37, 7] is a distributed machine learning framework with secure encryption techniques. It is intended to
enable multiple institutions to collaboratively train machine
learning models while following the data-stay-local policy.
In addition to the attention of academia [63, 68, 36, 45, 32,
59, 59, 56], federated learning has also been extensively explored in industrial fields such as healthcare [10, 64, 27, 15],
finance [4], and data security [61], etc. Despite its remark* Corresponding Author: Mang Ye (yemang@whu.edu.cn)

Corrupt

Central Server

Noise, Blur,
Weather,
Digital…
Corrupted Dataset

Client 1

Client 2

Clean Image

Client 3

Heterogeneous
Model

Horse

Horse
Corrupted Image

Horse
Deer

Figure 1. Illustration of heterogeneous federated learning with data
corruption, where the clients may possess different model structures and corrupted private datasets.

able success, the most prevalent federated learning algorithms [16, 51, 49] rely heavily on the assumption that all
clients share an identical local model structure. For example, FedAvg [48], FedProx [35], and Per-FedAvg [13] enable communication between clients by taking the weighted
average of the local model parameters.
In practical application scenarios, clients expect to independently design their own models to meet different tasks
and specifications, which inevitably leads to the challenge
of model heterogeneity [69, 46, 66, 72] in federated learning, as shown in Fig. 1. However, clients are often reluctant to share the details of their local model designs in consideration of privacy protection. Additionally, hardware,
software, and communication capabilities [34] often differ
between clients, which can further exacerbate model heterogeneity. Consequently, designing heterogeneous federated learning strategies to achieve collaborative communi15020

