This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Agile Modeling: From Concept to Classifier in Minutes
Otilia Stretcu⇤ 1 , Edward Vendrow⇤ 1,2 , Kenji Hata⇤ 1 , Krishnamurthy Viswanathan1 ,
Vittorio Ferrari1 , Sasan Tavakkol1 , Wenlei Zhou1 , Aditya Avinash1 , Enming Luo1 ,
Neil Gordon Alldrin1 , MohammadHossein Bateni1 , Gabriel Berger1 , Andrew Bunner1 ,
Chun-Ta Lu1 , Javier Rey1 , Giulia DeSalvo1 , Ranjay Krishna3 , Ariel Fuxman1
1

Google Research, 2 Stanford University, 3 University of Washington
Contact: otiliastr@google.com, afuxman@google.com
Abstract

The application of computer vision methods to nuanced,
subjective concepts is growing. While crowdsourcing has
served the vision community well for most objective tasks
(such as labeling a “zebra”), it now falters on tasks where
there is substantial subjectivity in the concept (such as identifying “gourmet tuna”). However, empowering any user
to develop a classifier for their concept is technically difficult: users are neither machine learning experts nor have
the patience to label thousands of examples. In reaction,
we introduce the problem of Agile Modeling: the process
of turning any subjective visual concept into a computer vision model through real-time user-in-the-loop interactions.
We instantiate an Agile Modeling prototype for image classification and show through a user study (N=14) that users
can create classifiers with minimal effort in under 30 minutes. We compare this user driven process with the traditional crowdsourcing paradigm and find that the crowd’s
notion often differs from that of the user’s, especially as the
concepts become more subjective. Finally, we scale our experiments with simulations of users training classifiers for
ImageNet21k categories to further demonstrate the efficacy
of the approach.

1. Introduction
Whose voices, and therefore, whose labels should an image classifier learn from? In computer vision today, the answer to this question is often left implicit in the data collection process. Concepts are defined by researchers before
curating a dataset [13]. Decisions for which images constitute positive versus negative instances are conducted by
majority vote of crowd workers annotating this pre-defined
set of categories [32, 57]. An algorithm then trains on this
aggregated ground truth, learning to predict labels that rep⇤ Equal contribution.

Sandwiches are
NOT gourmet.

This sandwich
looks elegant.

Figure 1: Visual concepts can be nuanced and subjective, differing from how a majoritarian crowd might label
a concept. For example, a graduate student may think that
well-prepared tuna sandwiches are considered gourmet
tuna, but sushi chef might disagree.
resent the crowd’s majoritarian consensus.
As computer vision matures, its application to nuanced,
subjective use cases is burgeoning. While crowdsourcing
has served the vision community well on many objective
tasks (e.g., identifying ImageNet [13] concepts like “zebra”,
“tiger”), it now falters on tasks where there is substantial
subjectivity [21]. Everyday people want to scale their own
decision-making on concepts others may find difficult to
emulate—for example, in Figure 1, a sushi chef might covet
a classifier to source gourmet tuna for inspiration. Majority
vote by crowd workers may not converge to the same definition of what makes a tuna dish gourmet.
This paper highlights the need for user-centric approaches to developing real-world classifiers for these subjective concepts. To define this problem space, we recognize the following challenges. First, concepts are subjective, requiring users to be embedded in the data curation
process. Second, users are usually not machine learning experts; we need interactive systems that elicit the subjective
decision boundary from the user. Third, users don’t have
the patience nor resources to sift through the thousands of
training instances that is typical for most image classification datasets [13, 35, 29]—for example, ImageNet anno-

22323

