This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Surface Anomaly Detection with Diffusion Probabilistic Model
Xinyi Zhang1, * Naiqi Li1, *,† Jiawei Li2
1

Tao Dai3,† Yong Jiang1

Shu-Tao Xia1,4

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Huawei Manufacturing 3 Shenzhen University
4
Research Center of Artificial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory

xinyi-zh21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, linaiqi@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, li-jw15@tsinghua.org.cn,
daitao.edu@gmail.com, jiangy@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised surface anomaly detection aims at discovering and localizing anomalous patterns using only
anomaly-free training samples. Reconstruction-based models are among the most popular and successful methods,
which rely on the assumption that anomaly regions are more
difficult to reconstruct. However, there are three major challenges to the practical application of this approach: 1) the
reconstruction quality needs to be further improved since it
has a great impact on the final result, especially for images
with structural changes; 2) it is observed that for many neural networks, the anomalies can also be well reconstructed,
which severely violates the underlying assumption; 3) since
reconstruction is an ill-conditioned problem, a test instance
may correspond to multiple normal patterns, but most current reconstruction-based methods have ignored this critical fact. In this paper, we propose DiffAD, a method for
unsupervised anomaly detection based on the latent diffusion model, inspired by its ability to generate high-quality
and diverse images. We further propose noisy condition
embedding and interpolated channels to address the aforementioned challenges in the general reconstruction-based
pipeline. Extensive experiments show that our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on the challenging
MVTec dataset, especially in localization accuracy.

1. Introduction
With the great success of deep neural networks in various
computer vision tasks, their application in surface anomaly
detection, which aims to detect anomalous patterns that deviate from normal samples, has also received unprecedented
attention. However, unlike traditional supervised computer
* Equal contribution
† Tao Dai and Naiqi Li are the corresponding authors.

Ia & GT
Ir & Mo
DRAEM
Ir & Mo
Ours

Figure 1. The reconstructed samples Ir of traditional autoencoderbased methods often fail into direct copies of the anomalous inputs
Ia (medium), especially for samples with structural deformations
(top). With our DiffAD, the generated samples are semantically
anomaly-free while keeping consistent in other non-anomalous regions (bottom), yielding pleasing detection and localization results
Mo , closely matching the ground truth (GT).

vision tasks such as image recognition, anomalous samples
are quite rare in real-world scenarios. Therefore, unsupervised methods for anomaly detection are of great significance in practice.
Reconstruction-based models are among the most popular and successful methods of unsupervised anomaly detection. Based on the assumption that anomaly regions are
more difficult to reconstruct, they try to detect anomalies by
comparing the input images with their reconstructed counterparts.
To address the absence of anomalous samples, data augmentation techniques are widely used in the reconstructionbased framework. For instance, DRAEM [32] synthesizes
anomalous samples by blending predefined texture images
with normal training instances. Utilizing the synthetic
anomalous samples, an autoencoder-based reconstructive

6782

