This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LNPL-MIL: Learning from Noisy Pseudo Labels for Promoting Multiple
Instance Learning in Whole Slide Image
Zhuchen Shao1 , Yifeng Wang2 , Yang Chen1 , Hao Bian1 , Shaohui Liu3 , Haoqian Wang1∗ , Yongbing Zhang2 *
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen) 3 Harbin Institute of Technology
shaozc0412@gmail.com, ybzhang08@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

Learning from Noisy Labels (LNL)
Instance label

Gigapixel Whole Slide Images (WSIs) aided patient diagnosis and prognosis analysis are promising directions in
computational pathology. However, limited by expensive
and time-consuming annotation costs, WSIs usually only
have weak annotations, including 1) WSI-level Annotations
(WA) and 2) Limited Patch-level Annotations (LPA). Currently, Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) often exploits WA,
while LPA usually assign pseudo-labels for unlabeled data.
Intuitively, pseudo-labels can serve as a practical guide for
MIL, but the unreliable prediction caused by LPA inevitably
introduce noise. Furthermore, WA-supervised MIL training
inevitably suffers from the semantical unalignment between
instances and bag-level labels. To address these problems, we design a framework called Learning from Noisy
Pseudo Labels for promoting Multiple Instance Learning
(LNPL-MIL), which considers both types of weak annotation. Specifically, for the LPA-trained weak classifier, we
design a Super-Patch-based LNPL (SP-LNPL) method to
reduce false positives in the noisy pseudo-labels and then
select more accurate Top-K key instances. In MIL, we propose a Transformer aware of instance Order and Distribution (TOD-MIL) that strengthens instances correlation and
weakens semantical unalignment in the bag. We validate
our LNPL-MIL on Tumor Diagnosis and Survival Prediction, achieving state-of-the-art performance with at least
2.7%/2.9% AUC and 2.6%/2.3% C-Index improvement with
the patches labeled for two scale. Ablation study and visualization analysis further verify the effectiveness.

1. Introduction
In Computational Pathology (CPATH), limited by the
high-resolution, wide-field of view property (about 50,000
× 50,000 pixels) of Whole Slide Images (WSIs) [46] and
the biomedical backgrounds required for data annotations,
* Corresponding authors.

Clean instance
Noisy instance

Multiple Instance Learning (MIL)

Known

Bag-level label

Known

Unknown

Positive instance
Negative instance

Unknown

Correlation information between instances

Distribution information of instances

LNL related problem in WSI

MIL related problem in WSI

Limited Patch-level Annotations (LPA)

WSI-level Annotations (WA)
Not all patches can accurately inherit WA

LPA-trained classifier: weak classifier
Patch-level noise: Noisy pseudo-labels
predicted by weak classifier

WSI-level noise: Semantical unalignment
between patches and WA

Learning from Noisy Pseudo Labels for Promoting Multiple Instance Learning
Multiple
instances

Weak
classifier

Data cleaning of
Noisy Pseudo Labels

Feature
extractor

Instance
aggregation

Bag-level
label

Top-K
+

LNL

+

MIL

Figure 1. Background and Motivation. Top Row. Definition
of LNL and MIL. Second Row. LNL and MIL related problems
in WSI. Bottom Row. LNL assists MIL training with Top-K key
instances selection and more accurate instance pseudo-labels.

WSIs usually only have two types of weak annotation [26] :
1) WSI-level Annotations (WA); 2) Limited Patch-level
Annotations (LPA). Currently, Multiple Instance Learning
(MIL) is often used to address vital WSI-level tasks in
CPATH, e.g., cancer subtype diagnosis, patient prognosis,
therapeutic-response prediction, and biomarker prediction
[8,13,33,34,39]. As shown in Fig. 1, applying weak annotations will inevitably introduce noise. Designing the framework to facilitate WSI-level tasks with both types of weak
annotation is still a challenging problem in CPATH.
Intuitively, LPA can help WA-supervised MIL training
explore the correlation information between instances and
help select Top-K key instances. Unfortunately, the methods for utilizing LPA, such as Fully Supervisd Learning (FSL) [1, 58] and Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL)
method [17, 18, 36], still cannot get satisfactory results.
Specifically, only weak classifiers can be trained with LPA,
and the pseudo-labels usually contain a lot of noise. Besides, when the labeled and unlabeled data come from different centers, differences in tissue preparation and scanners

21495

