This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Progressive Spatio-Temporal Prototype Matching for Text-Video Retrieval
Pandeng Li1 ,* Chen-Wei Xie2 , Liming Zhao2 , Hongtao Xie1†, Jiannan Ge1 ,
Yun Zheng2 , Deli Zhao2 , Yongdong Zhang1
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
{lpd, gejn}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {htxie, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn
{eniac.xcw, lingchen.zlm, zhengyun.zy}@alibaba-inc.com, zhaodeli@gmail.com

Abstract
The performance of text-video retrieval has been significantly improved by vision-language cross-modal learning schemes. The typical solution is to directly align the
global video-level and sentence-level features during learning, which would ignore the intrinsic video-text relations,
i.e., a text description only corresponds to a spatio-temporal
part of videos. Hence, the matching process should consider both fine-grained spatial content and various temporal semantic events. To this end, we propose a text-video
learning framework with progressive spatio-temporal prototype matching. Specifically, the matching process is decomposed into two complementary phases: object-phrase
prototype matching and event-sentence prototype matching.
In the object-phrase prototype matching phase, the spatial prototype generation mechanism predicts key patches
or words, which are aggregated into object or phrase prototypes. Importantly, optimizing the local alignment between
object-phrase prototypes helps the model perceive spatial
details. In the event-sentence prototype matching phase,
we design a temporal prototype generation mechanism to
associate intra-frame objects and interact inter-frame temporal relations. Such progressively generated event prototypes can reveal semantic diversity in videos for dynamic
matching. Validated by comprehensive experiments, our
method consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on four video retrieval benchmark.1

1. Introduction
Understanding multimodal information [13, 37, 40, 76,
6, 79, 41, 12, 53, 54] is an essential way for humans to
perceive the world. As a fundamental task in multimodal
learning [25, 62, 60], Text-Video Retrieval (TVR) [22, 70,
68, 24] has garnered huge interest with the rapid devel* Interns at DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
† Corresponding author
1 Code is available at https://github.com/IMCCretrieval/ProST.

(1) Adaptive event matching w/o object-phrase prototypes
a baby is playing with a cat’s tail
53

: 23.

Ma

y
ilarit
x sim

Video 1 (ground truth)

Max similarity: 24.92

Video 2

Event prototype visualization
(2) Our object-phrase prototype matching
a baby is playing with a cat’s tail

Object prototype visualization
Figure 1. Visualization of event and object prototypes learned by
1) adaptive event matching w/o object-phrase prototypes and 2)
object-phrase prototype matching. Object prototypes can focus on
local patches (e.g., tail) and complement event-level matching.

opment of short video platforms. TVR [45, 21] aims to
search semantically relevant videos based on user-entered
text queries. Unfortunately, the inherent modality gap phenomenon [42, 61, 38, 3, 67] increases the difficulty of associating multimodal data. Towards such a concern, pioneering works [47, 65, 73] usually exploit multiple unimodal
pre-trained models to extract features, and then use metric learning strategies [14] to strengthen the modality alignment in the joint space. However, there are large differences
in the initial distributions of multiple unimodal offline features, which inevitably brings the feature fusion challenge
to affect the retrieval results.
Recently, encouraged by the success of vision-language
pre-training [50, 66, 34, 27, 72, 35, 4], a series of canonical
works [51, 20, 44, 16] are proposed by transferring knowl-

4100

