This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Category-aware Allocation Transformer for Weakly Supervised
Object Localization
Zhiwei Chen1 Jinren Ding1 Liujuan Cao1 * Yunhang Shen2
Shengchuan Zhang1 Guannan Jiang3 Rongrong Ji1
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of
Education of China, Xiamen University, China. 2 Tencent Youtu Lab, China. 3 CATL, China.
zhiweichen.cn@gmail.com, dingjinren@stu.xmu.edu.cn, odysseyshen@tencent.com,
{caoliujuan, zsc 2016, rrji}@xmu.edu.cn, jianggn@catl.com

Abstract
Weakly supervised object localization (WSOL) aims to
localize objects based on only image-level labels as supervision. Recently, transformers have been introduced
into WSOL, yielding impressive results. The self-attention
mechanism and multilayer perceptron structure in transformers preserve long-range feature dependency, facilitating complete localization of the full object extent. However, current transformer-based methods predict bounding
boxes using category-agnostic attention maps, which may
lead to confused and noisy object localization. To address
this issue, we propose a novel Category-aware Allocation
TRansformer (CATR) that learns category-aware representations for specific objects and produces corresponding category-aware attention maps for object localization.
First, we introduce a Category-aware Stimulation Module (CSM) to induce learnable category biases for selfattention maps, providing auxiliary supervision to guide
the learning of more effective transformer representations.
Second, we design an Object Constraint Module (OCM) to
refine the object regions for the category-aware attention
maps in a self-supervised manner. Extensive experiments
on the CUB-200-2011 and ILSVRC datasets demonstrate
that the proposed CATR achieves significant and consistent
performance improvements over competing approaches.

1. Introduction
Weakly supervised learning utilizes minimal supervision
or coarse annotations for training. In particular, weakly
supervised object localization (WSOL) aims to locate objects using only image-level annotations, making it an attractive research area in various applications due to the
* Corresponding author.

(A) CAM-based Mechanism Small-range Feature Dependency
Class Label

CNN

Image

Feature maps

Localization map

(B) Transformer-based Mechanism Long-range Feature Dependency
Class Label

Transformer

Category-

Feature maps aware

Image

Self-attention
Category-agnostic

Attention map

(C) Our Mechanism

Class Label

Transformer

Image

Localization
map

Category-

Feature maps aware
Self-attention
Category-aware

Localization
map

Attention map

Figure 1. The comparison of different mechanisms for generating
localization maps: (A) The CAM-based mechanism [19, 3] uses
feature maps of the class label, which tends to capture the most discriminative regions in the localization map. (B) The transformerbased mechanism [8, 5] combines the category-agnostic attention
map with the category-aware feature map, which brings person
noise to the localization map. (C) Our mechanism investigates
category awareness in self-attention maps to generate a categoryaware attention map, which is then coupled with the categoryaware feature map to produce an accurate localization map. The
predicted bounding boxes are in red. Best viewed in color.

elimination of the need for costly bounding box annotations [4, 35, 8, 14, 1].
To tackle the challenge of WSOL with only image-level
labels, most approaches [36, 32, 19, 3, 21, 9] rely on Class
Activation Maps (CAM) [38] to discover discriminative im-

6643

