This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CPCM: Contextual Point Cloud Modeling for Weakly-supervised
Point Cloud Semantic Segmentation
Lizhao Liu1,2 Zhuangwei Zhuang1,2 Shangxin Huang1 Xunlong Xiao1 Tianhang Xiang1
Cen Chen1 Jingdong Wang3 Mingkui Tan1,2†
1
South China University of Technology 2 Pazhou Lab 3 Baidu Inc.
{selizhaoliu, z.zhuangwei, sevtars, sexxl, sexiangtianhang}@mail.scut.edu.cn,

We study the task of weakly-supervised point cloud semantic segmentation with sparse annotations (e.g., less than
0.1% points are labeled), aiming to reduce the expensive
cost of dense annotations. Unfortunately, with extremely
sparse annotated points, it is very difﬁcult to extract both
contextual and object information for scene understanding such as semantic segmentation. Motivated by masked
modeling (e.g., MAE) in image and video representation
learning, we seek to endow the power of masked modeling to learn contextual information from sparsely-annotated
points. However, directly applying MAE to 3D point clouds
with sparse annotations may fail to work. First, it is nontrivial to effectively mask out the informative visual context from 3D point clouds. Second, how to fully exploit
the sparse annotations for context modeling remains an
open question. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective Contextual Point Cloud Modeling (CPCM) method
that consists of two parts: a region-wise masking (RegionMask) strategy and a contextual masked training (CMT)
method. Speciﬁcally, RegionMask masks the point cloud
continuously in geometric space to construct a meaningful masked prediction task for subsequent context learning.
CMT disentangles the learning of supervised segmentation
and unsupervised masked context prediction for effectively
learning the very limited labeled points and mass unlabeled
points, respectively. Extensive experiments on the widelytested ScanNet V2 and S3DIS benchmarks demonstrate the
superiority of CPCM over the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
With the growing demand for autonomous driving and
robotic navigation, point cloud semantic segmentation becomes an indispensable technique for accurate 3D environ† Corresponding author.

3GYQU[Z
IUTZK^ZZUHKLORRKJ

,GOR OT
LORROTMIUTZK^Z

9[IIKKJ OT
LORROTMIUTZK^Z

/TV[Z

HGYKROTKAC

)6)35[XY

3GYQKJ+\GR

Abstract

9ZGTJGXJ+\GR

{chencen, mingkuitan}@scut.edu.cn, wangjingdong@baidu.com

Figure 1: Effectiveness of the proposed CPCM on context
comprehension ability compared to the consistency-based
baseline [16, 53]. We conduct masked evaluations to inspect the model’s contextual understanding ability. The visual comparison of results from different methods (mask ratio = 40%) and the performance w.r.t. different mask ratios
are shown in the top and bottom panels, respectively.
ment perception [18, 27, 51]. Recent years have witnessed
great progress in fully-supervised learning in point cloud
segmentation [2, 6, 10, 14, 31, 32, 39, 47, 56]. However,
densely-annotating point-wise labels are time-consuming,
labor-intensive as well as economic-inefﬁcient to obtain
since the number of points in point cloud data can easily
reach tens of thousands of magnitude [42, 48]. It goes without saying that diving into point cloud semantic segmentation from sparse labels is crucial to reduce the annotation
cost and expand the application boundary [9, 20, 22].
Very recently, to reduce the reliance on dense labels

18413

