This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PARIS: Part-level Reconstruction and Motion Analysis for Articulated Objects
Jiayi Liu, Ali Mahdavi-Amiri, Manolis Savva
Simon Fraser University
https://3dlg-hcvc.github.io/paris/

Abstract
We address the task of simultaneous part-level reconstruction and motion parameter estimation for articulated
objects. Given two sets of multi-view images of an object
in two static articulation states, we decouple the movable
part from the static part and reconstruct shape and appearance while predicting the motion parameters. To tackle this
problem, we present PARIS: a self-supervised, end-to-end
architecture that learns part-level implicit shape and appearance models and optimizes motion parameters jointly
without any 3D supervision, motion, or semantic annotation. Our experiments show that our method generalizes
better across object categories, and outperforms baselines
and prior work that are given 3D point clouds as input.
Our approach improves reconstruction relative to state-ofthe-art baselines with a Chamfer-L1 distance reduction of
3.94 (45.2%) for objects and 26.79 (84.5%) for parts, and
achieves 5% error rate for motion estimation across 10 object categories.

1. Introduction
Articulated objects consist of interconnected static and
movable parts that exhibit motion. Such objects are ubiquitous in real life (e.g., drawers, ovens, chairs, laptops,
staplers). Thus, perception and understanding of articulated object structure is important in many areas including
robotics [49, 25, 9, 23], animation [39, 7], and industrial design [19]. Articulated object motion analysis enables robots
to manipulate objects more effectively [11]. Acquiring digital replicas of articulated objects [20, 16] also enables simulating object articulation in applications involving robotic
agents and embodied AI [37, 41].
Prior work on articulated object understanding uses supervised learning which requires 3D supervision and articulation annotation [45, 50]. Unfortunately, such supervisory data is expensive and unavailable at scale. Another
line of prior work assumes a known object category and
learns separate models for each category [21, 29, 47, 43].
This makes generalization to arbitrary unseen objects diffi-

Start State (t=0)

End State (t=1)

Output

t

Figure 1. We present PARIS: a method that takes only multi-view
images of an object in two articulation states (top left) and recovers part-level shape and appearance while jointly estimating articulation motion parameters (top right). Our method can generate
unseen states and render the object from arbitrary views (bottom).

cult. Recently, Jiang et al. [20] proposed Ditto: a categoryagnostic approach for motion and part geometry prediction
from a pair of 3D point clouds. However, this approach is
limited in generalization to unseen object categories and it
does not address detailed appearance reconstruction.
We make the observation that perception of articulated
objects involves two subproblems: reconstruction and motion analysis. These subproblems are tightly intertwined
since knowing the complete geometry of an object makes
motion analysis easier, while knowing the motion parameters of an object provides a signal for better reconstruction of the object given observations in different articulation
states. Our insight is that by leveraging the intertwined nature of articulated object perception we can avoid reliance
on explicit 3D data and motion parameter supervision.
In this paper, we propose PARIS: a self-supervised approach for joint reconstruction and motion analysis of articulated objects. By observing an articulated object in two
states (see Figure 1), our method reconstructs the shape and
appearance of the static and movable parts in two implicit
neural fields, while predicting the articulation motion parameters. The separated neural fields are composited using
the estimated motion parameters to set up self-supervisory
losses relying only on the input RGB images.
Thus, our approach is category-agnostic and does not require any 3D data or supervisory signals for part segmenta-

352

