This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LDL: Line Distance Functions for Panoramic Localization
Junho Kim1 , Changwoon Choi1 , Hojun Jang1 , and Young Min Kim1, 2
1
2

Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University

Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence and INMC, Seoul National University

82magnolia@snu.ac.kr, changwoon.choi00@gmail.com, {j12040208, youngmin.kim}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We introduce LDL, a fast and robust algorithm that
localizes a panorama to a 3D map using line segments.
LDL focuses on the sparse structural information of lines
in the scene, which is robust to illumination changes and
can potentially enable efficient computation. While previous line-based localization approaches tend to sacrifice
accuracy or computation time, our method effectively observes the holistic distribution of lines within panoramic
images and 3D maps. Specifically, LDL matches the distribution of lines with 2D and 3D line distance functions,
which are further decomposed along principal directions of
lines to increase the expressiveness. The distance functions
provide coarse pose estimates by comparing the distributional information, where the poses are further optimized
using conventional local feature matching. As our pipeline
solely leverages line geometry and local features, it does not
require costly additional training of line-specific features
or correspondence matching. Nevertheless, our method
demonstrates robust performance on challenging scenarios including object layout changes, illumination shifts, and
large-scale scenes, while exhibiting fast pose search terminating within a matter of milliseconds. We thus expect our
method to serve as a practical solution for line-based localization, and complement the well-established point-based
paradigm. The code for LDL is available through the following link: https://github.com/82magnolia/
panoramic-localization.

1. Introduction
Estimating the location of a mobile device or agent with
respect to a 3D map, widely referred to as visual localization, has vast applications in robotics and AR/VR. Compared to perspective images, which are more widely used
for localization, panorama images provide a 360◦ field of
view that contains ample visual evidence from the holistic
scene context. In this light, there have been recent advances
in visual localization using panoramic images [6, 7, 23, 24]

Figure 1. Overview of our approach. LDL assumes a 3D map
equipped with lines and local features, and similarly preprocesses
the 2D panorama prior to localization. LDL then selects candidate poses by matching 2D, 3D line distance functions through
decomposition along principal directions that effectively represent
the sparse geometry of lines. Finally, the selected poses are refined
via local feature matching [39] and PnP-RANSAC [13, 25].

17882

