This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LinkGAN: Linking GAN Latents to Pixels for Controllable Image Synthesis
Jiapeng Zhu†*1 Ceyuan Yang†2 Yujun Shen†3 Zifan Shi*1 Bo Dai2 Deli Zhao4 Qifeng Chen1
1
HKUST 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 Ant Group 4 Alibaba Group
Latent code

Latent code

Latent code

Latent code

Figure 1. Precise local control achieved by LinkGAN, where we can manipulate the image content within a spatial region (e.g., a single
eye or the right half of the image) or a semantic category (e.g., car) simply by resampling the latent code on some sparse axes. Our
approach works well for 2D image syntheses, like StyleGAN2 [27] (left three columns), and 3D-aware image synthesis, like EG3D [5]
(right two columns). It is noteworthy that, under the 3D-aware case, we can control both the appearance and the underlying geometry.

Abstract
This work presents an easy-to-use regularizer for GAN
training, which helps explicitly link some axes of the latent
space to a set of pixels in the synthesized image. Establishing such a connection facilitates a more convenient
local control of GAN generation, where users can alter the
image content only within a spatial area simply by partially
resampling the latent code. Experimental results confirm
four appealing properties of our regularizer, which we call
LinkGAN. (1) The latent-pixel linkage is applicable to either
a fixed region (i.e., same for all instances) or a particular
semantic category (i.e., varying across instances), like the
sky. (2) Two or multiple regions can be independently linked
to different latent axes, which further supports joint control.
(3) Our regularizer can improve the spatial controllability
of both 2D and 3D-aware GAN models, barely sacrificing
the synthesis performance. (4) The models trained with our
regularizer are compatible with GAN inversion techniques
and maintain editability on real images. Project page can
be found here.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [12] have been
shown to produce photo-realistic and highly diverse images,
facilitating a wide range of real world applications [21,
36, 11, 41, 42]. The generator in a GAN is formulated
to take a randomly sampled latent code as the input and
output an image with a feed forward network. Given a welllearned GAN model, it is generally accepted that a variety
of semantics and visual concepts automatically emerge in
the latent space [57, 43, 14, 22, 64], which naturally support
image manipulation. Some recent work also reveals the
potential of GANs in local editing by steering the latent
code along a plausible trajectory in the latent space [30, 63].
However, most studies on the relationship between the
latent codes and their corresponding images depend on
a posterior discovery, which usually suffers from three
major drawbacks. (1) Instability: The identification of
emerging latent semantics is very sensitive to the samples
used for analysis, such that different samples may lead to

† indicates equal contribution.

* This work was done during an internship at Ant Group.

7656

