This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Generalization in Visual Reinforcement Learning via
Conflict-aware Gradient Agreement Augmentation
Siao Liu
Zhaoyu Chen
Yang Liu
Yuzheng Wang
Dingkang Yang
Zhile Zhao
Ziqing Zhou
Xie Yi
Wei Li∗
Wenqiang Zhang
Zhongxue Gan*
Academy for Engineering & Technology, Fudan University
{saliu20, zhaoyuchen20, yang liu20, ganzhongxue}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning a policy with great generalization to unseen
environments remains challenging but critical in visual reinforcement learning. Despite the success of augmentation combination in the supervised learning generalization,
naively applying it to visual RL algorithms may damage
the training efficiency, suffering from serve performance
degradation. In this paper, we first conduct qualitative
analysis and illuminate the main causes: (i) high-variance
gradient magnitudes and (ii) gradient conflicts existed in
various augmentation methods. To alleviate these issues,
we propose a general policy gradient optimization framework, named Conflict-aware Gradient Agreement Augmentation (CG2A), and better integrate augmentation combination into visual RL algorithms to address the generalization
bias. In particular, CG2A develops a Gradient Agreement
Solver to adaptively balance the varying gradient magnitudes, and introduces a Soft Gradient Surgery strategy to alleviate the gradient conflicts. Extensive experiments demonstrate that CG2A significantly improves the generalization
performance and sample efficiency of visual RL algorithms.

1. Introduction
With the development of deep learning in various
tasks [28, 26, 25, 27, 7, 6, 38, 40, 39, 24], visual Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved impressive success
in various fields such as robotic control [11], autonomous
driving [17], and game-playing [35]. Previous works usually formulate it as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) [33], and the agent receives highdimensional image observations as inputs. As depicted
in [15, 14], visual RL generalization refers to the ability
* Corresponding author

of a pretrained RL agent to perform well in unseen environments. Due to the dynamic nature of the real world, even
minor perturbations in the environment can result in significant semantic shifts in the visual observations, which makes
visual RL generalization challenging.
To improve generalization performance, data augmentation [29] is a widely adopted technique in reinforcement
learning. Numerous studies [22, 13] utilize data augmentation methods to generate synthetic data and diversify the
training environments, yielding considerable performance
improvements. However, recent methods [14, 3, 44] mostly
select a single augmentation technique to improve the generalization capability, resulting in a poor performance in the
environments with observations varying far from the augmented images. For instance, ColorJitter [23] is the preferred choice for addressing color variations, but agents
trained with such augmentation still hard to cope with intricate texture patterns. In other words, the generalization
ability heavily relies on the selection of specific data augmentation technique, which is so-called generalization bias.
Compared to single data augmentation, Augmentation
Combination (AC) [16] integrates multiple data augmentation methods to enhance the diversity of augmentations and
alleviate the generalization bias, which is a more promising
pre-processing solution. Unfortunately, there is a dilemma
in incorporating AC into visual RL. Although data augmentation combination can effectively improve generalization
capability in the supervised visual tasks, RL algorithms are
quite sensitive to excessive variations, resulting in performance degradation and training sample inefficiency. Therefore, it is necessary to rethink why visual RL algorithms
cannot benefit from AC as much as supervised learning.
From the perspective of gradient optimization, we conduct numerous qualitative analysis to illustrate the causes
of performance degradation and training collapse that occur
when employing augmentation combinations during training. There are two primary reasons for this phenomenon: (i)

23436

