This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Generalist Framework for Panoptic Segmentation of Images and Videos
Ting Chen, Lala Li, Saurabh Saxena, Geoffrey Hinton† , David J. Fleet†
Google Deepmind
{iamtingchen,lala,srbs,geoffhinton,davidfleet}@google.com

Abstract
Panoptic segmentation assigns semantic and instance ID
labels to every pixel of an image. As permutations of instance IDs are also valid solutions, the task requires learning of high-dimensional one-to-many mapping. As a result, state-of-the-art approaches use customized architectures and task-speciﬁc loss functions. We formulate panoptic segmentation as a discrete data generation problem,
without relying on inductive bias of the task. A diffusion
model is proposed to model panoptic masks, with a simple
architecture and generic loss function. By simply adding
past predictions as a conditioning signal, our method is capable of modeling video (in a streaming setting) and thereby
learns to track object instances automatically. With extensive experiments, we demonstrate that our simple approach can perform competitively to state-of-the-art specialist methods in similar settings. 1

1. Introduction
Panoptic segmentation [30] is a fundamental vision task
that assigns semantic and instance labels for every pixel of
an image. The semantic labels describe the class of each
pixel (e.g., sky, vertical), and the instance labels provides
a unique ID for each instance in the image (to distinguish
different instances of the same class). The task is a combination of semantic segmentation and instance segmentation,
providing rich semantic information about the scene.
While the class categories of semantic labels are ﬁxed a
priori, the instance IDs assigned to objects in an image can
be permuted without affecting the instances identiﬁed. For
example, swapping instance IDs of two cars would not affect the outcome. Thus, a neural network trained to predict
instance IDs should be able to learn a one-to-many mapping, from a single image to multiple instance ID assignments. The learning of one-to-many mappings is challenging and traditional approaches usually leverage a pipeline
of multiple stages involving object detection, segmentation,
† Equal advising.
1 Code at https://github.com/google-research/pix2seq

Figure 1: We formulate panoptic segmentation as a conditional discrete mask (m) generation problem for images
(left) and videos (right), using a Bit Diffusion generative
model [12].
merging multiple predictions [30, 34, 66, 40, 14]. Recently,
end-to-end methods [58, 17, 70, 16, 35, 68, 69, 33] have
been proposed, based on a differentiable bipartite graph
matching [7]; this effectively converts a one-to-many mapping into a one-to-one mapping based on the identiﬁed
matching. However, such methods still require customized
architectures and sophisticated loss functions with built-in
inductive bias for the panoptic segmentation task.
Eshewing task-speciﬁc architectures and loss functions,
recent generalist vision models, such as Pix2Seq [10, 11],
OFA [60], UViM [31], and Uniﬁed I/O [43], advocate a
generic, task-agnostic framework, generalizing across multiple tasks while being much simpler than previous models.
For instance, Pix2Seq [10, 11] formulates a set of core vision tasks in terms of the generation of semantically meaningful sequences conditioned on an image, and they train a
single autoregressive model based on Transformers [55].
Following the same philosophy, we formulate the panoptic segmentation task as a conditional discrete data generation problem, depicted in Figure 1. We learn a generative
model for panoptic masks, treated as an array of discrete
tokens, conditioned on an input image. One can also apply
the model to video data (in an online/streaming setting), by
simply including predictions from past frames as an additional conditioning signal. In doing so, the model can then
learn to track and segment objects automatically.
Generative modeling for panoptic segmentation is very
challenging as the panoptic masks are discrete/categorical

909

