This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reconciling Object-Level and Global-Level Objectives for Long-Tail Detection
Shaoyu Zhang1,2 , Chen Chen1,2∗ , Silong Peng1,2,3 *
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Beijing Visystem Co. Ltd, Beijing, China
{zhangshaoyu2019, chen.chen, silong.peng}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Large vocabulary object detectors are often faced with
the long-tailed label distributions, seriously degrading their
ability to detect rarely seen categories. On one hand, the
rare objects are prone to be misclassified as frequent categories. On the other hand, due to the limitation on the total number of detections per image, detectors usually rank
all the confidence scores globally and filter out the lowerranking ones. This may result in missed detection during
inference, especially for the rare categories that naturally
come with lower scores. Existing methods mainly focus
on the former problem and design various classification
loss to enhance the object-level classification accuracy, but
largely overlook the global-level ranking task. In this paper,
we propose a novel framework that Reconciles Object-level
and Global-level (ROG) objectives to address both problems. As a multi-task learning framework, ROG simultaneously trains the model with two tasks: classifying each
object proposal individually and ranking all the confidence
scores globally. Specifically, complementary to the objectlevel classification loss for model discrimination, we design
a generalized average precision (GAP) loss to explicitly optimize the global-level score ranking across different objects. For each category, GAP loss generates balanced gradients to rectify the ranking errors. In experiments, we show
that GAP loss is highly versatile to be plugged into various
advanced methods and brings considerable benefits. Code
is at https://github.com/EricZsy/ROG.

1. Introduction
The development of modern convolutional neural networks (CNNs) gives rise to great advances in object detection [14, 36, 29] and instance segmentation [49, 54]. So far,
the state-of-the-art object detectors typically rely heavily on
a huge amount of annotated data [27]. However, with the
* Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. The two major causes degrading detection performance
for rare categories: misclassification (MC) and missed detection
(MD). (a) The common pipeline of an object detector. The boxes
with solid line and dashed line are foregrounds and backgrounds
respectively. The dots denote the predictions for these boxes, followed by their confidence scores. (b) Rare object soccer is misclassified as person in the classification task. (c) Missed detection
for soccer caused by global ranking and filtering.

rapid growth of data scale, the long-tail effect has become a
bottleneck in training object detectors for real-world use. In
large vocabulary image datasets such as LVIS [15], there are
only a few categories containing abundant instances, while
most other rare categories seldom appear. Detectors naturally lean towards the frequent categories and usually fail in
detecting those rarely seen objects.
In Figure 1, we analyze that the undesired phenomenon
is mainly derived from two aspects. First, the significantly
more frequent objects dominate the training process, and
thereby suppress the rare categories by overwhelming discouraging gradients [42]. As a result, the latter is more
likely to be predicted with lower confidence scores and mis-

18982

