This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SparseDet: Improving Sparsely Annotated Object Detection with
Pseudo-positive Mining
Saksham Suri*1

Saketh Rambhatla*1

Rama Chellappa2

Abhinav Shrivastava1

sakshams@cs.umd.edu

rssaketh@umd.edu

rchella4@jhu.edu

abhinav@cs.umd.edu

University of Maryland, College Park1

Abstract

1. Introduction
The performance of object detectors is sensitive to the
quality of labeled data [1–3]. Existing object detection
methods assume that the training data is pristine and a drop
in performance is observed if this assumption fails. Noise
in the data used for training object detectors can arise due to
incorrect class labels or incorrect/missing bounding boxes.
In this work, we deal with the problem of training object
detectors with sparse annotations, i.e., missing region or
bounding boxes. This problem is of utmost importance, as
obtaining crowd-sourced datasets [4, 5] can be expensive
* First two authors contributed equally

Negatives

Fully
Annotated

Positives

Sparsely
Annotated

Training with sparse annotations is known to reduce the
performance of object detectors. Previous methods have
focused on proxies for missing ground truth annotations
in the form of pseudo-labels for unlabeled boxes. We observe that existing methods suffer at higher levels of sparsity in the data due to noisy pseudo-labels. To prevent
this, we propose an end-to-end system that learns to separate the proposals into labeled and unlabeled regions using Pseudo-positive mining. While the labeled regions are
processed as usual, self-supervised learning is used to process the unlabeled regions thereby preventing the negative
effects of noisy pseudo-labels. This novel approach has
multiple advantages such as improved robustness to higher
sparsity when compared to existing methods. We conduct exhaustive experiments on five splits on the PASCALVOC and COCO datasets achieving state-of-the-art performance. We also unify various splits used across literature
for this task and present a standardized benchmark. On
average, we improve by 2.6, 3.9 and 9.6 mAP over previous state-of-the-art methods on three splits of increasing sparsity on COCO. Our project is publicly available at
cs.umd.edu/~sakshams/SparseDet.

Johns Hopkins University2

Figure 1: (Top) Most Object Detection datasets have exhaustive annotations for foreground/positives. During training, the unlabeled regions can be safely considered as background/negatives. Sparsely Annotated Object Detection
datasets (bottom) have missing annotations. This results in
foreground regions (shown in red) being considered as negatives during training, adversely affecting the performance
of the classifier.
and laborious. The alternative is to use computer-assisted
protocols to collect annotations which have been shown to
be noisy and incomplete [6]. This problem of training object detectors with incomplete bounding box annotations is
called Sparsely Annotated Object Detection (SAOD).
To understand why training with sparse annotations
is detrimental to the performance, consider the example
shown in Figure 1 (top). If the annotation were exhaustive,
then the negative samples to the classifier contain true background regions. But with sparse annotations, as shown in
Figure 1 (bottom), a few positive regions will inevitably be
considered as negatives (shown in red), thereby wrongfully
penalizing the classifier leading to lower performance. Existing methods[2, 7–10] prevent this by predicting pseudolabels and removing the foreground regions from the negatives to the classifier. However, at higher levels of sparsity,
the quality of pseudo-labels is greatly affected, resulting in
the same problem noted above.

6770

