This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SwiftFormer: Efficient Additive Attention for Transformer-based
Real-time Mobile Vision Applications
Abdelrahman Shaker1∗ Muhammad Maaz1 Hanoona Rasheed1 Salman Khan1
Ming-Hsuan Yang2,3,4 Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,5
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI 2 University of California, Merced
3
Yonsei University 4 Google Research 5 Linköping University

Abstract
Self-attention has become a defacto choice for capturing global context in various vision applications. However,
its quadratic computational complexity with respect to image resolution limits its use in real-time applications, especially for deployment on resource-constrained mobile devices. Although hybrid approaches have been proposed to
combine the advantages of convolutions and self-attention
for a better speed-accuracy trade-off, the expensive matrix
multiplication operations in self-attention remain a bottleneck. In this work, we introduce a novel efficient additive
attention mechanism that effectively replaces the quadratic
matrix multiplication operations with linear element-wise
multiplications. Our design shows that the key-value interaction can be replaced with a linear layer without sacrificing any accuracy. Unlike previous state-of-the-art methods,
our efficient formulation of self-attention enables its usage
at all stages of the network. Using our proposed efficient
additive attention, we build a series of models called “SwiftFormer” which achieves state-of-the-art performance in
terms of both accuracy and mobile inference speed. Our
small variant achieves 78.5% top-1 ImageNet-1K accuracy
with only 0.8 ms latency on iPhone 14, which is more accurate and 2× faster compared to MobileViT-v2. Our code
and models: https://tinyurl.com/5ft8v46w

1. Introduction
In recent years, transformer models have shown remarkable success in various vision applications such as classification [8, 44, 24, 23, 9], detection [2, 59, 33, 56, 28], and
segmentation [4, 40]. However, deploying these models on
resource-constrained mobile devices for real-time applications remains challenging due to their inherently complex
nature [20, 29]. Specifically, vision transformers (ViTs)
rely on global self-attention, which has a quadratic com-

Figure 1: Latency vs Accuracy Comparison. Compared
to the recent EfficientFormer-L1 [20], our SwiftFormer-L1
achieves an absolute gain of 1.7% in terms of top-1 accuracy with the same latency and without requiring any neural
architecture search.

plexity with respect to the input image resolution, making it impractical for deployment on low-powered mobile
devices [31]. As a result, convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) are still the preferred choice for real-time deployment on mobile devices, primarily because the convolution
operation is computationally efficient [39, 15]. However, a
major limitation of CNNs is their reliance on local connections and stationary weights, which can limit their ability to
adapt to variable input resolutions and capture long-range
dependencies in the data. Therefore, developing more efficient and flexible models that combine the strengths of both
CNNs and transformers is critical, particularly for mobile
devices with limited computational resources.

* Corresponding author: abdelrahman.youssief@mbzuai.ac.ae

To achieve this goal, several hybrid approaches have

17425

