This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MosaiQ: Quantum Generative Adversarial Networks
for Image Generation on NISQ Computers
Daniel Silver
Northeastern University

Tirthak Patel
Rice University

William Cutler
Northeastern University

silver.da@northeastern.edu

tirthak.patel@rice.edu

cutler.wi@northeastern.edu

Aditya Ranjan
Northeastern University

Harshitta Gandhi
Northeastern University

Devesh Tiwari
Northeastern University

ranjan.ad@northeastern.edu

gandhi.ha@northeastern.edu

d.tiwari@northeastern.edu

Abstract
Quantum machine learning and vision have come to the
fore recently, with hardware advances enabling rapid advancement in the capabilities of quantum machines. Recently, quantum image generation has been explored with
many potential advantages over non-quantum techniques;
however, previous techniques have suffered from poor quality and robustness. To address these problems, we introduce
MosaiQ a high-quality quantum image generation GAN
framework that can be executed on today’s Near-term Intermediate Scale Quantum (NISQ) computers.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks, or GANs, are a type
of neural network architecture used in machine learning and
computer vision for generative modeling [8, 22, 2, 9]. A
classical GAN consists of two neural networks, a generator, and a discriminator, that are trained simultaneously in
a competitive process. The generator generates fake data
samples, while the discriminator tries to distinguish them
from real ones found in the training set, hence serving as an
“adversarial entity”. Classical GANs have received significant attention for generating high-quality images, among
other purposes including text generation, data augmentation, and anomaly detection [20, 1, 5].
Naturally, this has spawned interest in the quantum information science community to develop corresponding quantum GANs that run on quantum computers. While recent
efforts toward developing quantum GANs have been instrumental and early results have been encouraging, we discovered that existing approaches have severe scalability bottlenecks and have significant room for improvement. This is
especially true in the context of generating high-quality image generation on real-system quantum computers.

Opportunity Gap for Quantum GANs.
A recent work by Huang et al. [11], referred to as QGPatch in this paper, is the state-of-the-art demonstration of
QuantumGANs on real quantum computers. As our paper also demonstrates, QGPatch can learn different shapes
and produce recognizable images in some cases, but can often yield low-quality images. It suffers from the scalability
challenge because it breaks the image into “patches” and
performs a pixel-by-pixel learning. Second, it is not effective at generating a variety of images within the same class
– this problem is known as “mode collapse” [7]. It is nontrivial to achieve high-quality image generation while also
maintaining variety. Motivated by these limitations, MosaiQ’s design pushes the state of the art by achieving higher
scalability, image quality, and variety.

Contributions of MosaiQ
I. MosaiQ introduces the design and implementation of a
novel quantum generative adversarial network for image
generation on quantum computers. MosaiQ’s approach is a
hybrid classical-quantum generation network where a network of low-circuit-depth variational quantum circuits are
leveraged to learn and train the model. Upon acceptance,
MosaiQ will be available as an open-source contribution.
II. MosaiQ’s design demonstrates how the extraction of
principal components of images enables us to learn and generate higher-quality images, compared to the state-of-theart approach which is limited in its scalability due to pixelby-pixel learning [11]. However, exploiting information in
principal components to its full potential is non-trivial, and
MosaiQ proposes to mitigate those challenges using feature redistribution. Furthermore, MosaiQ introduces a novel
adaptive input noise generation technique to improve both
the quality and variety of generated images – mitigating the
common risk of mode collapse in generative networks.

7030

