This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-supervised Monocular Depth Estimation: Let’s Talk About The Weather
Kieran Saunders
Aston University
Birmingham, UK

George Vogiatzis
Loughborough University
Leicestershire, UK

Luis J. Manso
Aston University
Birmingham, UK

190229315@aston.ac.uk

g.vogiatzis@lboro.ac.uk

l.manso@aston.ac.uk

Abstract
Current, self-supervised depth estimation architectures
rely on clear and sunny weather scenes to train deep neural networks. However, in many locations, this assumption is too strong. For example in the UK (2021), 149
days consisted of rain. For these architectures to be effective in real-world applications, we must create models
that can generalise to all weather conditions, times of the
day and image qualities. Using a combination of computer graphics and generative models, one can augment
existing sunny-weather data in a variety of ways that simulate adverse weather effects. While it is tempting to use
such data augmentations for self-supervised depth, in the
past this was shown to degrade performance instead of improving it. In this paper, we put forward a method that
uses augmentations to remedy this problem. By exploiting
the correspondence between unaugmented and augmented
data we introduce a pseudo-supervised loss for both depth
and pose estimation. This brings back some of the benefits of supervised learning while still not requiring any labels. We also make a series of practical recommendations
which collectively offer a reliable, efficient framework for
weather-related augmentation of self-supervised depth from
monocular video. We present extensive testing to show that
our method, Robust-Depth, achieves SotA performance on
the KITTI dataset while significantly surpassing SotA on
challenging, adverse condition data such as DrivingStereo,
Foggy CityScape and NuScenes-Night. The project website
can be found at https://kieran514.github.io/Robust-DepthProject/.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation has been a pillar of computer vision
for decades and has many applications, such as self-driving,
robotics, and scene reconstruction. While multiple-view geometry is a well-understood computer vision problem, the
advent of deep learning has enabled depth estimation from
a single image. The first such methods used a supervised

Figure 1. Monodepth2 demonstrates impressive performance on
sunny scenes but struggles in different weather scenarios. Our
method is more robust to environmental changes.

approach to estimate depth and required expensive ground
truth data collected using LIDAR and Radar sensors. Recently, self-supervised monocular methods have been introduced, using photometric loss [57] to achieve view synthesis on consecutive images as a form of self-supervision.
These methods have received wide interest because of their
low cost and ability to generalize to multiple scenarios [22].
However, despite its potential, self-supervised Monocular
Depth Estimation (MDE) has been hampered by adverse
weather conditions and nighttime driving [46, 44]. The
KITTI dataset [15], used extensively for MDE, only contains daytime, dry, sunny images rather than varied realistic conditions. Previous attempts have shown that training these methods on different domains, like nighttime data,
lead to worse performance [29]. Figure 1 illustrates Monodepth2 [17], trained on the KITTI dataset, estimating depth
accurately on sunny data but struggles when shifting domains to different weather conditions. Our method RobustDepth, trained with the KITTI dataset and augmentations,
is more robust to such changes.
Unlike in other fields of computer vision [55, 35], dataset
augmentation has led to worse performance for MDE (see
Table 1). One possible explanation is that augmentations
lead to texture shifts, and we know that CNNs are poor at
generalising to texture shifts [3]. It is known [10, 34, 46]
that depth networks become reliant on vertical cues (e.g.,
the output for a pixel being dependent on its vertical po-

8907

