This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Neural Eigenfunctions for Unsupervised Semantic Segmentation
Zhijie Deng
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China

Yucen Luo
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany

zhijied@sjtu.edu.cn

luoyucencen@gmail.com

Abstract
Unsupervised semantic segmentation is a long-standing
challenge in computer vision with great significance. Spectral clustering is a theoretically grounded solution to it
where the spectral embeddings for pixels are computed to
construct distinct clusters. Despite recent progress in enhancing spectral clustering with powerful pre-trained models, current approaches still suffer from inefficiencies in
spectral decomposition and inflexibility in applying them to
the test data. This work addresses these issues by casting
spectral clustering as a parametric approach that employs
neural network-based eigenfunctions to produce spectral
embeddings. The outputs of the neural eigenfunctions are
further restricted to discrete vectors that indicate clustering
assignments directly. As a result, an end-to-end NN-based
paradigm of spectral clustering emerges. In practice, the
neural eigenfunctions are lightweight and take the features
from pre-trained models as inputs, improving training efficiency and unleashing the potential of pre-trained models
for dense prediction. We conduct extensive empirical studies to validate the effectiveness of our approach and observe
significant performance gains over competitive baselines on
Pascal Context, Cityscapes, and ADE20K benchmarks. The
code is available at https://github.com/thudzj/
NeuralEigenfunctionSegmentor.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is essential in understanding the
inherent structure and fine-grained information of images.
However, current approaches often hinge on a vast amount
of manual annotations to train neural networks (NNs) effectively in an end-to-end manner [5, 40]. This is problematic,
as obtaining these annotations can be both time-consuming
and costly, particularly in fields such as autonomous driving
and medical image processing, where annotations are usually collected from domain experts. Thus, finding a way to
perform semantic segmentation without manual annotation
remains a crucial unresolved problem.

Unsupervised semantic segmentation has recently attracted a great deal of attention. A number of methods attempt to tackle it by learning fine-grained image features
using self-supervised objectives and then applying clustering or grouping techniques [46, 41]. They tend to recognize single objects or single semantic categories and struggle with complex images. Other approaches have tried to
use vision-language cross-modal models (e.g., CLIP [35])
to achieve zero-shot semantic segmentation [48, 39], but
they heavily rely on carefully-tuned text prompts and selftraining. Compared to the recent approaches, the classic
spectral clustering [38], which has stood the test of time,
remains an appealing option. In particular, it enjoys solid
foundations in spectral graph theory—it finds the minimum
cut of the connectivity graph over pixels.
However, traditional spectral clustering exhibits limitations in three aspects: (i) it operates on raw image pixels, thus is sensitive to color transformations and unable
to recognize semantic similarities; (ii) it is computationally inefficient due to the involved spectral decomposition;
(iii) unlike NN-based methods, it is nontrivial and costly to
extend to non-training samples because of its transductive
manner. Thus it cannot be performed end-to-end in the test
phase. Recent work reveals that pre-trained models such as
ViTs [14] can mitigate the first limitation, significantly improving the applicability and effectiveness of spectral clustering [30]. Its core contribution is to build the connectivity
graph over image patches based on an affinity matrix computed with the dense features from pre-trained models. Still,
the limitations regarding efficiency and flexibility remain.
The present paper aims to overcome the remaining limitations, rendering spectral clustering a simple yet effective baseline for unsupervised semantic segmentation. To
tackle the inefficiency issue, we propose to cast the involved
spectral decomposition problem as an NN-based optimization one using the recently developed neural eigenfunction
(NeuralEF) technique [12]. Concretely, we first measure the
similarities between image patches using both the features
extracted from pre-trained models and raw pixels. Treating the similarity matrix (or its variants) as the output of a

551

