This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Recursive Video Lane Detection
Dongkwon Jin
Korea University

Dahyun Kim
Korea University

Chang-Su Kim
Korea University

dongkwonjin@mcl.korea.ac.kr

dhkim@mcl.korea.ac.kr

changsukim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
(a)

A novel algorithm to detect road lanes in videos, called
recursive video lane detector (RVLD), is proposed in this
paper, which propagates the state of a current frame recursively to the next frame. RVLD consists of an intra-frame
lane detector (ILD) and a predictive lane detector (PLD).
First, we design ILD to localize lanes in a still frame. Second, we develop PLD to exploit the information of the previous frame for lane detection in a current frame. To this end,
we estimate a motion ﬁeld and warp the previous output to
the current frame. Using the warped information, we reﬁne
the feature map of the current frame to detect lanes more
reliably. Experimental results show that RVLD outperforms
existing detectors on video lane datasets. Our codes are
available at https://github.com/dongkwonjin/RVLD.

(b)
‫ ܫ‬௧ିଷ

‫ ܫ‬௧ିଶ

‫ ܫ‬௧ିଵ

‫ܫ‬௧

(c)

Figure 1. (a) For lane detection, it is required to identify visible
lane pixels, represented by yellow lines in the insets. (b) Due
to occlusions by nearby vehicles or glistening conditions on wet
roads, lanes may be unobvious, which are depicted by orange dotted lines. Besides, lanes may not be marked at crossroads. (c) In
a current frame I t , which is also the rightmost one in (b), some
lane parts are occluded by a vehicle but visible in past frames. By
utilizing visual cues along the temporal axis, depicted by cyan arrows, we can localize the implied lane parts more reliably.

1. Introduction
rather than processing each frame independently. It can detect implied lanes in a current frame more reliably using
past information, as shown in Figure 1(c). But, relatively
few techniques have been proposed for video lane detection. Zou et al. [22] developed a memory network to aggregate the features of past and current frames. Similarly,
in [23–26], they combined the features of a current frame
with those of past frames and then detected lanes from the
mixed features. However, these techniques require several
past frames as input and do not reuse the mixed features in
subsequent frames.
Recently, the ﬁrst video lane dataset called VIL-100 [24]
was constructed, containing 100 videos. However, the number of images is only 10K, and most images are collected
from highway scenes. Also, OpenLane [27], a huge dataset
for 3D lane detection, was proposed. It consists of 200K
images from 1,000 videos and annotates lanes with both 2D
and 3D coordinates. But, it is unsuitable for video lane detection because it provides annotations for visible lane parts
only: First, the same lane is sometimes broken into multiple
parts. Second, some annotations are temporally incoherent
because of invisible parts in certain frames. To overcome

Lane detection is a task to localize lanes in a road scene,
which is crucial for either autonomous or human driving.
For lane detection, it is necessary to exploit visual cues of
lanes, as illustrated in Figure 1(a). Early methods extract
low-level features such as image gradients or colors [1–4].
Recently, deep learning techniques have been developed to
cope with challenging scenes. Some of them are based on
semantic segmentation [5–9], in which each pixel is classiﬁed into either lane category or not. To ensure lane continuity, several techniques have been proposed, including
parametric curve modeling [10–14] and keypoint association [15–17]. However, despite yielding promising results,
they may fail to detect less visible lanes, as in Figure 1(b).
To detect such lanes reliably, anchor-based lane detectors
[18–21] have been proposed. They generate a set of lane anchors, detect lanes through the binary classiﬁcation of each
anchor, and then regress the detected ones. However, all
these methods detect lanes from still images without considering high inter-frame correlation in a video.
In autonomous driving systems, video frames are captured consecutively. Video lane detection aims to detect
lanes in such a video by exploiting inter-frame correlation,
8473

