This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Low-Shot Object Counting Network With Iterative Prototype Adaptation
Nikola Ðukić, Alan Lukežič, Vitjan Zavrtanik, Matej Kristan
Faculty of Computer and Information Science, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia
nikola.m.djukic@gmail.com, {alan.lukezic, vitjan.zavrtanik, matej.kristan}@fri.uni-lj.si

Abstract
We consider low-shot counting of arbitrary semantic categories in the image using only few annotated exemplars
(few-shot) or no exemplars (no-shot). The standard fewshot pipeline follows extraction of appearance queries from
exemplars and matching them with image features to infer
the object counts. Existing methods extract queries by feature pooling which neglects the shape information (e.g., size
and aspect) and leads to a reduced object localization accuracy and count estimates.
We propose a Low-shot Object Counting network with
iterative prototype Adaptation (LOCA). Our main contribution is the new object prototype extraction module, which
iteratively fuses the exemplar shape and appearance information with image features. The module is easily adapted
to zero-shot scenarios, enabling LOCA to cover the entire spectrum of low-shot counting problems. LOCA outperforms all recent state-of-the-art methods on FSC147
benchmark by 20-30% in RMSE on one-shot and fewshot and achieves state-of-the-art on zero-shot scenarios,
while demonstrating better generalization capabilities. The
code and models are available here: https://github.
com/djukicn/loca.

1. Introduction
Object counting considers estimation of the number of
specific objects in the image. Solutions based on object detectors have been extensively explored for categories such
as people [1, 33], cars [20, 12] or animal species [2, 32].
However, these methods require huge annotated training
datasets and are not applicable to counting new, previously unobserved, classes with potentially only few annotations. The latter problem is explored by low-shot counting, which encompasses few-shot and zero-shot counting.
Few-shot counters count all present objects of some class
with only few of them annotated by bounding boxes (exemplars), while zero-shot counters consider counting the most
frequent class without annotations.
Few-shot counters have recently gained momentum with
the emergence of a challenging dataset [24] and follow a

Figure 1. LOCA injects shape and appearance information into
object queries to precisely count objects of various sizes in densely
and sparsely populated scenarios. It also extends to a zeroshot scenario and achieves excellent localization and count errors
across the entire low-shot spectrum.

common pipeline [18, 24, 13, 26, 31]. Image and exemplar features are extracted into object prototypes, which are
matched to the image by correlation. Finally, the obtained
intermediate image representation is regressed into a 2D object density map, whose values sum to the object count estimate. The methods primarily differ in the intermediate image representation construction method, which is based either on Siamese similarity [18, 24], cross-attention [16, 13]
or feature and similarity fusion [26, 31]. While receiving much less attention, zero-shot counters follow a similar
principle, but either identify possible exemplars by majority vote from region proposals [22] or implicitly by attention
modules [11].
All few-shot counters construct object prototypes by
pooling image features extracted from the exemplars into
fixed-sized correlation filters. The prototypes thus fail to
encode the object shape information (i.e., width, height

18872

