This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MGMAE: Motion Guided Masking for Video Masked Autoencoding
Bingkun Huang1,2 Zhiyu Zhao1,2 Guozhen Zhang1 Yu Qiao2 Limin Wang1,2, B
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University 2 Shanghai AI Lab
https://github.com/MCG-NJU/MGMAE
Abstract
Masked autoencoding has shown excellent performance
on self-supervised video representation learning. Temporal
redundancy has led to a high masking ratio and customized
masking strategy in VideoMAE. In this paper, we aim to
further improve the performance of video masked autoencoding by introducing a motion guided masking strategy. Our
key insight is that motion is a general and unique prior in
video, which should be taken into account during masked pretraining. Our motion guided masking explicitly incorporates
motion information to build temporal consistent masking
volume. Based on this masking volume, we can track the
unmasked tokens in time and sample a set of temporal consistent cubes from videos. These temporal aligned unmasked
tokens will further relieve the information leakage issue in
time and encourage the MGMAE to learn more useful structure information. We implement our MGMAE with an online
efficient optical flow estimator and backward masking map
warping strategy. We perform experiments on the datasets of
Something-Something V2 and Kinetics-400, demonstrating
the superior performance of our MGMAE to the original
VideoMAE. In addition, we provide the visualization analysis
to illustrate that our MGMAE can sample temporal consistent cubes in a motion-adaptive manner for more effective
video pre-training.

1. Introduction
Attention-based Transformer [38] has witnessed great
success in computer vision since the introduction of Vision
Transformer (ViT) [12]. It has been applied for a variety of
vision tasks and obtains state-of-the-art performance, such
as image classification [36, 59, 52], object detection [23,
46], semantic segmentation [49], and object tracking [8].
Thanks to this high performance, ViT models have been
also applied to the video domain for action recognition [5,
1] and detection [33, 54]. However, the high capacity of
Transformer often demands pre-training on a large-scale
dataset to reduce the over-fitting risk of subsequent fineB: Corresponding author (lmwang@nju.edu.cn).

(a) original video clip

(b) tube masking

(c) random masking

(d) motion guided masking

Figure 1: Comparison of different masking strategies.
Masked autoencoding [11, 17] has been explored in video
domain for self-supervised pre-training by employing different masking strategies: random masking [14] and tube
masking [35]. We propose to track masking maps under the
guidance of motion information (termed as motion guided
masking). Our resulting MGMAE can build a more challenging and meaningful task for video pre-training.
tuning. Therefore, an effective pretraining strategy of ViT is
particularly important for obtaining excellent performance
in the video domain due to the smaller video dataset.
The early video transformers [1, 5] often rely on the
pre-training of image-based transformer derived from the
large-scale image dataset [10]. This pre-training scheme
makes the learnt video model to be naturally biased by imagebased ViTs. Recently, masked autoencoding (MAE) [35, 14,
41] has been explored for pre-training video transformer
on the video dataset due to its simplicity and promising
result in image domain [17]. However, unlike the image,
video data is equipped with an extra time dimension and
exhibits the unique property of temporal redundancy and
correlation. This property requires some customized designs
on video masked autoencoder compared with image-based
MAE. For example, VideoMAE and MAE-ST both propose
to use an extremely high masking ratio in video masked
autoencoder pre-training to improve its performance. In
addition, VideoMAE devises a tube masking strategy of
dropping tokens at the same position across frames to further
relieve the information leakage in time. This tube masking

13493

