This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Federated Learning Over Images:
Vertical Decompositions and Pre-Trained Backbones Are Difficult to Beat
Erdong Hu1 , Yuxin Tang1 , Anastasios Kyrillidis, Chris Jermaine
Rice University
{eh51, yuxin.tang, anastasios, cmj4}@rice.edu

Abstract

diverse set of classes, and we are concerned that few FL
tasks will involve differentiating dinosaurs from rabbits.

We carefully evaluate a number of algorithms for learning in a federated environment, and test their utility for a
variety of image classification tasks. We consider many
issues that have not been adequately considered before:
whether learning over data sets that do not have diverse sets
of images affects the results; whether to use a pre-trained
feature extraction “backbone”; how to evaluate learner
performance (we argue that classification accuracy is not
enough), among others. Overall, across a wide variety of
settings, we find that vertically decomposing a neural network seems to give the best results, and outperforms more
standard reconciliation-used methods.

For example, imagine that the members of a bird watching club taking pictures with their smartphones; club members label the pictures with the bird species, and FL is used
to build a classifier. Or, a set of companies who are typically competitors—and hence cannot exchange data—want
to work together to classify pictures of industrial drill bits
based on whether they are going to fail. Both of these
deployments involve narrow domains, and the classification problems involve fine-grained differentiation [13, 48]
among members of a narrow category. True, not all applications of FL will be narrow, but they are likely to be far
narrower than classifying whales versus chairs. We argue
that, while evaluating on a broad data set—such as CIFAR100—is useful, it is also necessary to evaluate FL algorithms on a variety of more narrow data sets.

1. Introduction
There has been a recent influx of work aimed at developing and evaluating new algorithms for Federated Learning (FL) [2, 6, 20, 29], particularly for image classification [3, 14, 18, 27, 28, 31, 35, 50, 53]. Most papers are primarily concerned with the development of innovative algorithms, and less concerned with the design of appropriate benchmarks and especially, appropriate baselines to test
against. This paper, in contrast, is concerned with benchmarking: Which existing methods for FL work best, and
under what conditions do they work, or not work? As such,
our primary contribution is a set of carefully-designed experiments, rather than the introduction of a new FL algorithm. Our benchmarks are designed to address the following concerns regarding the design of FL benchmarks and
baselines.
(1) Learning algorithms are typically evaluated on a few diverse data sets, rather than a large variety of more focused
data sets. The most common benchmark for evaluating federated image classification is CIFAR-100 [25]. This dataset
includes whales, chairs, dinosaurs, and so on. This is a very
1 Equal contribution.

(2) Most evaluations focus on final accuracy or the number
of communication rounds required for convergence. FL algorithms are often evaluated by reporting final accuracies
(after convergence), or by plotting test accuracy as a function of the number of epochs, or the number of communication rounds. However, final accuracy, at least in isolation,
is not really a useful metric. After all, the simplest “FL” algorithm is classical, data parallel learning [33, 41, 52]. That
is, run distributed gradient descent; compute gradients locally over mini-batches in a fully synchronous way, then do
an all-reduce. As this is functionally equivalent to centralized learning, it is invariant to data distribution, and is likely
to be the most accurate method in terms of final accuracy.
However, it is inefficient in a federated environment.
Likewise, considering accuracy as a function of communication rounds ignores the computation or communication
cost of each round. Communication and computation costs
can vary across methods, and are typically far more important than the number of rounds. A method that can quickly
achieve high accuracy with a relatively large number of very
inexpensive communication rounds—where a small fraction of the model is communicated at each round—is proba-

19385

