This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instruct-NeRF2NeRF: Editing 3D Scenes with Instructions

Ayaan Haque, Matthew Tancik, Alexei A. Efros, Aleksander Holynski, and Angjoo Kanazawa
UC Berkeley

Edited NeRF

NeRF Scene

“Give him a cowboy hat”

“Give him a mustache”

“Make him bald”

“Turn him into a clown”

“As a bronze bust”

“Turn him into Albert Einstein”

“Turn his face into a skull”

“Turn him into a Modigliani painting”

“Turn him into Batman”

Instruct
NeRF2NeRF

Figure 1: Editing 3D scenes with Instructions. We propose Instruct-NeRF2NeRF, a method for consistent 3D editing of a NeRF scene
using text-based instructions. Our method can accomplish a diverse collection of local and global scene edits.

Abstract
We propose a method for editing NeRF scenes with textinstructions. Given a NeRF of a scene and the collection
of images used to reconstruct it, our method uses an imageconditioned diffusion model (InstructPix2Pix) to iteratively
edit the input images while optimizing the underlying scene,
resulting in an optimized 3D scene that respects the edit instruction. We demonstrate that our proposed method is able
to edit large-scale, real-world scenes, and is able to accomplish more realistic, targeted edits than prior work. Result
videos can be found on the project website: https://instructnerf2nerf.github.io.

1. Introduction
With the emergence of efﬁcient neural 3D reconstruction techniques, capturing a realistic digital representation
of a real-world 3D scene has never been easier. The process is simple: capture a collection of images of a scene

from varying viewpoints, reconstruct their camera parameters, and use the posed images to optimize a Neural Radiance Field [26]. Due to its ease of use, we expect captured 3D content to gradually replace the traditional processes of manually-generated assets. Unfortunately, while
the pipelines for turning a real scene into a 3D representation are relatively mature and accessible, many of the other
necessary tools for the creation of 3D assets (e.g., those
needed for editing 3D scenes) remain underdeveloped.
Traditional processes for editing 3D models involve specialized tools and years of training in order to manually
sculpt, extrude, and re-texture a given object. This process is made even more involved with the advent of neural
representations, which often do not have explicit surfaces.
This further motivates the need for 3D editing approaches
designed for the modern era of 3D representations, particularly approaches that are similarly as accessible as the capture techniques themselves.
To this end, we propose Instruct-NeRF2NeRF, a method
for editing 3D NeRF scenes that requires as input only a

19740

