This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Class Prior-Free Positive-Unlabeled Learning with Taylor Variational Loss for
Hyperspectral Remote Sensing Imagery
Hengwei Zhao

Xinyu Wang*
Jingtao Li
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China

Yanfei Zhong

{whu zhaohw, wangxinyu, JingtaoLi, zhongyanfei}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Positive-unlabeled learning (PU learning) in hyperspectral remote sensing imagery (HSI) is aimed at learning a binary classifier from positive and unlabeled data, which has
broad prospects in various earth vision applications. However, when PU learning meets limited labeled HSI, the unlabeled data may dominate the optimization process, which
makes the neural networks overfit the unlabeled data. In
this paper, a Taylor variational loss is proposed for HSI
PU learning, which reduces the weight of the gradient of
the unlabeled data by Taylor series expansion to enable the
network to find a balance between overfitting and underfitting. In addition, the self-calibrated optimization strategy
is designed to stabilize the training process. Experiments
on 7 benchmark datasets (21 tasks in total) validate the effectiveness of the proposed method. Code is at: https:
//github.com/Hengwei-Zhao96/T-HOneCls.

1. Introduction
Positive-unlabeled learning is aimed at learning a binary
classifier from positive and unlabeled data [21, 17, 3]. Due
to the lack of negative samples, PU learning is a challenging
task, but play an important role in machine learning applications, including product recommendation [16], deceptive
reviews detection [30], and medical diagnosis [39].
PU learning in HSI is a powerful tool for environmental
monitoring [43, 23]. For example, when mapping the invasive species in complex forestry, PU learning only needs
positive labels of invasive species; however, traditional hyperspectral classification [19, 37, 46] requires the various negative classes to be labeled to obtain a discriminate
boundary, which is labor-intensive, even impossible, to investigate the negative objects and annotate them in high
species richness areas [43].
Few releated works have focused on PU learning in HSI.
Compared to other tasks, the training data size in HSI is

much smaller [9], and the deep models are more likely to
be over-fitting and susceptible to unalabeled data. These
characteristics make hyperspectral PU learning a more challenging task.
PU learning methods can be divided into two categories,
according to whether the class prior (πp , i.e., the proportion
of positive data) is assumed to be known. (1) Due to the
limited supervision information from PU data, most studies assume that the class prior is available [43, 23], but in
reality, the class prior is hard to be estimated accurately,
especially for HSIs, due to the severe inter-class similarity and intra-class variation. (2) Class prior-free PU learning is a recent research focus of the machine learning community [3, 17], where variational principle-based PU learning [3] is one of the state-of-the-art in theory. It approximates the positive distribution by optimizing the posterior
probability, i.e., the classifier, and does not require knowing
the class prior. However, the unlabeled data may dominate
the optimization process, which makes it difficult for neural networks to find a balance between the underfitting and
overfitting of positive data, especially when the variational
principle meets limited labeled HSI data (discussed later in
Section 3 in detail).
In this paper, a Taylor series expansion-based variational
framework—T-HOneCls—is proposed to solve the limited
labeled hyperspectral PU learning problem without class
prior. The contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows:
• A novel insight is proposed in terms of the dynamic
change of the loss, which demonstrates that the unlabeled data dominating the training process is the bottleneck of the variational principle-based classifier.
• Taylor variational loss is proposed to tackle the problem of PU learning without a class prior, which reduces
the weight of the gradient of the unlabeled data and simultaneously satisfy the variational principle by Taylor series expansion, to alleviate the problem of unlabeled data dominating the training process.

* Corresponding author.

16827

