This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PADCLIP: Pseudo-labeling with Adaptive Debiasing in CLIP
for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Zhengfeng Lai1 * Noranart Vesdapunt2 * Ning Zhou2 Jun Wu2
Cong Phuoc Huynh2 Xuelu Li2 Kah Kuen Fu2 Chen-Nee Chuah1
1

1

University of California, Davis 2 Amazon
{lzhengfeng, chuah}@ucdavis.edu 2 {solves, ningzho, jwum, conghuyn, xueluli, kahkuen}@amazon.com

Abstract
Traditional Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA)
leverages the labeled source domain to tackle the learning
tasks on the unlabeled target domain. It can be more challenging when a large domain gap exists between the source
and the target domain. A more practical setting is to utilize
a large-scale pre-trained model to fill the domain gap. For
example, CLIP shows promising zero-shot generalizability
to bridge the gap. However, after applying traditional finetuning to specifically adjust CLIP on a target domain, CLIP
suffers from catastrophic forgetting issues where the new
domain knowledge can quickly override CLIP’s pre-trained
knowledge and decreases the accuracy by half. We propose
Catastrophic Forgetting Measurement (CFM) to adjust the
learning rate to avoid excessive training (thus mitigating
the catastrophic forgetting issue). We then utilize CLIP’s
zero-shot prediction to formulate a Pseudo-labeling setting
with Adaptive Debiasing in CLIP (PADCLIP) by adjusting causal inference with our momentum and CFM. Our
PADCLIP allows end-to-end training on source and target
domains without extra overhead. We achieved the best results on four public datasets, with a significant improvement
(+18.5% accuracy) on DomainNet.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) proposes to
reduce data annotation costs by leveraging a labeled source
domain to transfer the knowledge into an unlabeled target
domain [11, 27, 49, 60, 73]. Prior UDA works focus on
bridging the domain gap between source and target domains
[4, 12, 25, 27], or increasing network capacity [49, 60] by
changing a convolutional neural network (e.g., ResNet [14])
to Vision Transformer (ViT) [9]. All of these past methods
are pre-trained on ImageNet [7], but large-scale pre-training
is becoming practical and achieves superior performance in
many fields [41, 64, 65, 67]. In theory, if the pre-trained
* Equal contributions. This work was done at Amazon.

Figure 1: Catastrophic Forgetting. We naively fine-tune
CLIP (ResNet-101) on VisDA-2017 source domain training set, and test it on validation sets of VisDA-2017 target
domain and ImageNet-1K. CLIP forgets pre-trained knowledge (ImageNet accuracy -45%), resulting in -27% VisDA2017 accuracy. Our PADCLIP mitigates catastrophic forgetting issues to achieve +6% VisDA-2017 accuracy.
dataset is large enough, the domain gap between source and
target domains could be bridged by the pre-trained dataset
itself. Hence, we argue that large-scale pre-training is an
important missing part of UDA.
We choose CLIP [41], a vision-language model pretrained on 400 million image-text pairs. Without finetuning, CLIP outperforms SSRT [49], a state-of-the-art
UDA method on DomainNet [38]. This is thanks to the
large-scale training set, which allows CLIP to disentangle
object class from object domain (e.g., “a photo of a dog” vs
“a sketch of a dog”): the language supervision in the form
of a sentence used by CLIP is more descriptive than a single class label. However, on VisDA-2017, CLIP without
fine-tuning underperforms previous work, SDAT [42]. This
is because the synthetic data generated from the real-world
domain do not exist in CLIP’s training set, so we still need
to fine-tune CLIP to adapt it for a specific domain task.
We first adopt the traditional approach to fine-tune CLIP
on VisDA-2017 [39] but found that CLIP suffers from
catastrophic forgetting issues. As shown in Fig.1: before
fine-tuning, CLIP has a strong representation power that

16155

