This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EDAPS: Enhanced Domain-Adaptive Panoptic Segmentation
Suman Saha*
ETH Zurich

Lukas Hoyer∗
ETH Zurich

Anton Obukhov
ETH Zurich

Dengxin Dai
Huawei Zurich
Research Center

ground truth

Abstract
With autonomous industries on the rise, domain adaptation of the visual perception stack is an important research
direction due to the cost savings promise. Much prior art
was dedicated to domain-adaptive semantic segmentation
in the synthetic-to-real context. Despite being a crucial output of the perception stack, panoptic segmentation has been
largely overlooked by the domain adaptation community.
Therefore, we revisit well-performing domain adaptation
strategies from other fields, adapt them to panoptic segmentation, and show that they can effectively enhance panoptic
domain adaptation. Further, we study the panoptic network
design and propose a novel architecture (EDAPS) designed
explicitly for domain-adaptive panoptic segmentation. It
uses a shared, domain-robust transformer encoder to facilitate the joint adaptation of semantic and instance features,
but task-specific decoders tailored for the specific requirements of both domain-adaptive semantic and instance segmentation. As a result, the performance gap seen in challenging panoptic benchmarks is substantially narrowed.
EDAPS significantly improves the state-of-the-art performance for panoptic segmentation UDA by a large margin of
20% on SYNTHIA-to-Cityscapes and even 72% on the more
challenging SYNTHIA-to-Mapillary Vistas. The implementation is available at https://github.com/susaha/edaps.

1. Introduction
Panoptic segmentation [30] of images is a core computer
vision task that jointly solves two related problems – semantic segmentation and instance segmentation. With the
rise of robotics and emerging autonomous driving markets,
efficient visual perception stacks are in high demand. However, large-scale supervised learning of panoptic segmentation [7, 30, 29, 49, 70, 44] is prohibitively expensive as it
requires dense annotations for both semantics and instances,
which require time-consuming manual labeling.
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

Luc Van Gool
ETH Zurich,
KU Leuven

CVRN

PQ=32.1

EDAPS

PQ=41.2

Figure 1: EDAPS is an architecture and a collection of
recipes, designed specifically for Domain-Adaptive Panoptic Segmentation. It demonstrates a significant improvement over the prior art on the challenging synthetic-to-real
benchmarks. As shown above, it is better than CVRN [25]
on SYNTHIA → Cityscapes by 9 mPQ.

A promising alternative to circumvent this issue is to
learn from abundantly available photo-realistic synthetic
images [51, 50] as their ground truth annotations can be automatically generated by the rendering engine. However,
often models trained on synthetic data (source domain) fail
to generalize well on the real data (target domain) due to
differences in data distribution, known as the domain gap.
A common remedy to this problem is to minimize the domain gap using Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA).
This field is actively studied for image classification [38,
14, 39, 54, 48], object detection [4, 53, 71, 6, 33], and semantic segmentation [19, 61, 18, 32, 52, 60, 20, 21, 22].
However, UDA for panoptic segmentation is often overlooked and there are only two works, namely CVRN [25]
and UniDAPS [75], which address this problem from the
synthetic-to-real point of view. Compared to the related
semantic segmentation UDA, these approaches achieve
only subpar performance. Specifically, the relative performance of the best UDA and fully-supervised learning approaches to panoptic segmentation (64% in UniDAPS [75])

19234

