This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Flatness-Aware Minimization for Domain Generalization
Xingxuan Zhang, Renzhe Xu, Han Yu, Yancheng Dong, Pengfei Tian, Peng Cui*
Department of Computer Science, Tsinghua University
xingxuanzhang@hotmail.com, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Current neural networks are expected to generalize to
unseen distributions in real-world applications, which can
break the independent and identically distributional (I.I.D.)
assumption of traditional machine learning algorithms [129,
99]. The distribution shift between training and test data
may largely deteriorate most current approaches in practice.
Hence, instead of generalization within the training distribution, the ability to generalize under distribution shift,
namely domain generalization (DG) [73], has attracted increasing attention [99].
Various methods have been proposed to address the DG
problem recently, many of which have shown promising
performance. As a learning problem mainly in the computer vision field, the DG task relies highly on the chosen
optimizer, yet the effect of the optimizer in DG has hardly
been studied. Most current algorithms, following the wellknown benchmark DomainBed [32], default to optimize
*Corresponding author

Accuracy on PACS

Domain generalization (DG) seeks to learn robust models that generalize well under unknown distribution shifts.
As a critical aspect of DG, optimizer selection has not been
explored in depth. Currently, most DG methods follow the
widely used benchmark, DomainBed, and utilize Adam as
the default optimizer for all datasets. However, we reveal that Adam is not necessarily the optimal choice for
the majority of current DG methods and datasets. Based
on the perspective of loss landscape flatness, we propose
a novel approach, Flatness-Aware Minimization for Domain Generalization (FAD), which can efficiently optimize
both zeroth-order and first-order flatness simultaneously for
DG. We provide theoretical analyses of the FAD’s out-ofdistribution (OOD) generalization error and convergence.
Our experimental results demonstrate the superiority of
FAD on various DG datasets.

88
86
84
82
80
43.00

43.25

43.50

43.75

44.00

44.25

Accuracy on DomainNet

Adam
AdamW
SGD
YOGI
AdaBelief
AdaHessian
SAM
GAM
FAD (Ours)

Figure 1. Test accuracy on PACS and DomainNet of different optimizers. Adam, the default optimizer in popular benchmarks shows
no advantage compared with its counterparts, while the proposed
FAD achieve better OOD generalization performance compared
with current optimizers.

models with Adam [48] without considering other optimizers. However, the in-distribution generalization ability of
popular optimizers has been investigated from the perspective of loss landscape recently [28, 29] and Adam is found
to achieve inferior generalization compared with other optimizers such as SGD [76] due to the sharp minima Adam
selected. Thus, investigating the impact of optimizers in
DG and clarifying whether Adam should be considered as
the default optimizer is of significance.
In this paper, we empirically compare the performance
of current optimizers, including Adam, SGD, AdaBelief
[131], YOGI [117], AdaHessian [116], SAM [28], and
GAM[121]. Through extensive experiments on current DG
benchmarks, we show that Adam can hardly surpass other
optimizers on most DG datasets. The best choice of the
optimizer for different DG methods varies across different
datasets, and choosing the right optimizer can help exceed
the current leaderboards’ limitations.
Recently, the connection between the flatness of the
loss landscape and in-distribution generalization ability has
been widely studied and verified both theoretically[130]
and empirically[25]. Some works [13, 87] show that flatness also leads to superior OOD generalization. However,
none of the previous works consider the optimization in
DG nor provide theoretical assurance of their approach.
15189

