This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Controllable Multi-Task Architectures
Abhishek Aich⋆,† , Samuel Schulter† , Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury⋆ ,
Manmohan Chandraker†,‡ , Yumin Suh†
⋆
University of California, Riverside, † NEC Labs America, ‡ University of California, San Diego

Abstract
We aim to train a multi-task model such that users can
adjust the desired compute budget and relative importance
of task performances after deployment, without retraining.
This enables optimizing performance for dynamically varying user needs, without heavy computational overhead to
train and save models for various scenarios. To this end,
we propose a multi-task model consisting of a shared encoder and task-specific decoders where both encoder and
decoder channel widths are slimmable. Our key idea is to
control the task importance by varying the capacities of
task-specific decoders, while controlling the total computational cost by jointly adjusting the encoder capacity. This
improves overall accuracy by allowing a stronger encoder
for a given budget, increases control over computational
cost, and delivers high-quality slimmed sub-architectures
based on user’s constraints. Our training strategy involves a
novel ‘Configuration-Invariant Knowledge Distillation’ loss
that enforces backbone representations to be invariant under
different runtime width configurations to enhance accuracy.
Further, we present a simple but effective search algorithm
that translates user constraints to runtime width configurations of both the shared encoder and task decoders, for
sampling the sub-architectures. The key rule for the search
algorithm is to provide a larger computational budget to
the higher preferred task decoder, while searching a shared
encoder configuration that enhances the overall MTL performance. Various experiments on three multi-task benchmarks
(PASCALContext, NYUDv2, and CIFAR100-MTL) with diverse backbone architectures demonstrate the advantage of
our approach. For example, our method shows a higher
controllability by ∼ 33.5% in the NYUD-v2 dataset over
prior methods, while incurring much less compute cost.

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) often aims to solve multiple
related tasks together using a single neural network for economy of deployment [1, 2]. Humans can handle multiple tasks
with diverse trade-offs (e.g., due to availability of resources,

Figure 1. Problem Setup. We aim to provide users precise control
on compute allocation as per their MTL performance preference,
with the ability to change these dynamically without re-training. To
accomplish this, we provide a strategy where a MTL SuperNet is
trained only once but allows crafting SubNets that can be sampled
based on the user’s MTL constraints (compute cost and task preference) at test-time. “High” task preference for task i implies the
performance for task i is more important than other tasks.

adaptable reaction time, etc.), however, most existing MTL
architectures are incapable of transforming themselves to
handle multiple user constraints without being retrained for
each scenario. In this paper, we address the problem of designing controllable dynamic convolutional neural networks
(CNN) for MTL that can adjust jointly for two types of user
requirements, task preference and compute budget.
Real-world MTL systems are seeing growing applications ranging from autonomous cars [3] to video cameras
for traffic analysis [4], with respective task performance
preferences. For example, observe Fig. 1. A single MTL
architecture can allow two users to use the same model but
with custom task preferences based on the available compute
cost. The user with higher compute (e.g. self-driving cars)
may expect higher performance on task 1, but the user with
lower compute (e.g. traffic cameras) would prefer higher
performance on task 2 given the budget. It will be extremely
inefficient to create and train MTL architectures for all such
possible variations of user requirements due to expensive design and deployment costs [5–7]. This brings forth the need
for flexible MTL architectures that allow test-time trade-offs
based on relative task importance and resource allocation.
Some prior methods have introduced dynamic MTL networks [8–11] in an effort to incorporate changing user task

5740

