This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoIn: Contrastive Instance Feature Mining for Outdoor 3D Object Detection
with Very Limited Annotations
Qiming Xia1

Jinhao Deng1 Chenglu Wen1 * Hai Wu1 Shaoshuai Shi2 Xin Li3 Cheng Wang1
1
Xiamen University 2 Max-Planck Institute 3 Texas A&M University

Centerpoint

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recently, 3D object detection, which is becoming increasingly important in a variety of vision applications, including autonomous driving, indoor robots, and virtual reality, has received much attention [32, 4, 11, 45, 38, 37, 21,
16, 35, 1]. Popular detectors rely heavily on a large number of high-quality instance-level 3D annotations. However, annotating 3D bounding boxes is time-consuming and
labor-intensive, and, therefore, is prohibitive for large-scale
datasets.
The development of effective 3D object detectors using
only limited annotations has recently received increasing at* Corresponding author

Easy

CoIn (ours)

Mod.

Hard

3D AP(%)

Recently, 3D object detection with sparse annotations
has received great attention. However, current detectors
usually perform poorly under very limited annotations. To
address this problem, we propose a novel Contrastive Instance feature mining method, named CoIn. To better
identify indistinguishable features learned through limited
supervision, we design a Multi-Class contrastive learning module (MCcont) to enhance feature discrimination.
Meanwhile, we propose a feature-level pseudo-label mining
framework consisting of an instance feature mining module
(InF-Mining) and a Labeled-to-Pseudo contrastive learning module (LPcont). These two modules exploit latent instances in feature space to supervise the training of detectors with limited annotations. Extensive experiments with
KITTI dataset, Waymo open dataset, and nuScenes dataset
show that under limited annotations, our method greatly
improves the performance of baseline detectors: CenterPoint, Voxel-RCNN, and CasA. Combining CoIn with an
iterative training strategy, we propose a CoIn++ pipeline,
which requires only 2% annotations in the KITTI dataset
to achieve performance comparable to the fully supervised
methods. The code is available at https://github.
com/xmuqimingxia/CoIn.

90
80
70
60
50
40
30

100% 20% 10% 5% 2%

Annotation rate

100% 20% 10% 5% 2% 100% 20% 10% 5% 2%

Annotation rate

Annotation rate

Figure 1. Comparison of performance with different annotation
rates under the KITTI-3D-Car. Green and orange represent
CenterPoint[39] and our proposed CoIn, respectively.

tention [17, 14, 27, 20, 42]. However, when annotations are
limited, two main challenges hinder the effectiveness of 3D
object detection.
(1) Indistinguishable Features. With limited annotations,
it is often difficult for a model that has insufficient training
supervision to differentiate foreground points from background points. Consequently, extracted features of different objects are often not well clustered (see supplementary
materials). We designate such kinds of features as indistinguishable features. This issue is a critical bottleneck
toward more accurate detection. In 2D vision, contrastive
learning-based methods [10, 8] have proven effective in enhancing discriminability against indistinguishable features.
However, rather than multi-class object classification tasks
in common 3D detection problems, contrastive learning is
studied mainly for binary classification tasks.
(2) Lacking reliable initial pseudo labels. To deal with
limited annotations, recent sparsely-/semi-supervised 3D
detectors usually adopt instance-level pseudo-label mining
methods to mine unlabeled latent instances [14, 29]. These
strategies rely on the assumption that initial detectors already generate relatively reliable detections that are used as
preliminary pseudo-labels. However, often this is not possible if the annotation is very limited. In such a scenario,
initial detectors are often unreliable and in insufficient quantity to produce reasonable pseudo-labels. Fig. 1 shows some
examples where SOTA detectors, such as CenterPoint [39]
hardly provide reliable preliminary pseudo-labels when annotations are very limited (e.g., 2%).

6254

