This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Environment Agnostic Representation for Visual Reinforcement learning
Hyesong Choi1 ,
Hunsang Lee2 ,
1
Ewha W. University

Seongwon Jeong1 ,
Dongbo Min1†
2
Hyundai Motor Company

Abstract
Generalization capability of vision-based deep reinforcement learning (RL) is indispensable to deal with dynamic
environment changes that exist in visual observations. The
high-dimensional space of the visual input, however, imposes
challenges in adapting an agent to unseen environments.
In this work, we propose Environment Agnostic Reinforcement learning (EAR), which is a compact framework for
domain generalization of the visual deep RL. Environmentagnostic features (EAFs) are extracted by leveraging three
novel objectives based on feature factorization, reconstruction, and episode-aware state shifting, so that policy learning
is accomplished only with vital features. EAR is a simple
single-stage method with a low model complexity and a fast
inference time, ensuring a high reproducibility, while attaining state-of-the-art performance in the DeepMind Control
Suite and DrawerWorld benchmarks. Code is available at:
https://github.com/doihye/EAR.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) plays an important
role in various fields such as robotic manipulation, video
games, and autonomous navigation. Among them, RL approaches using visual observations [32, 26, 31, 7, 58, 1, 46]
have achieved appreciable success in that dense and rich information can be obtained easily through the camera. Since
real world changes dynamically at all times, the ability to
generalize an agent against visual variations is indispensable
in this field. However, the high-dimensional observation
space of visual inputs [5, 41] imposes several challenges in
adapting the agent to unseen environments [8, 4].
To learn robust policies invariant to visual changes, domain randomization methods [44, 37, 36, 53, 38] have been
proposed based on the surmise that applying miscellaneous
augmentations during a training phase empowers an agent
* This work was supported by the Mid-Career Researcher Program
(2021R1A2C2011624) and the Basic Research Laboratory Program
(2021R1A4A1032582) from NRF Korea, and the Artificial Intelligence Convergence Innovation Human Resources Development (RS-2022-00155966)
from Institute of Information & communications Technology Planning &
Evaluation (IITP). † Corresponding author: dbmin@ewha.ac.kr

Figure 1. From visual observations with the same agent state under
different environments (o1 : original environment, o2 : random box,
o3 : color jitter), EAR separates environment-agnostic feature and
environment-specific feature to learn vital representation used for
RL policy learner.

to cover any test environments. However, a considerable
amount of effort is required to set the degree of randomization, and more importantly, it is practically impossible to
fully consider all variations of test scenarios.
Instead of increasing the variability in training data, domain adaptation approaches have attempted to adapt the
policy ingenuously to a test domain [39, 20, 19]. However,
these methods often require additional fine-tuning during inference with a reward function that is newly created for each
unseen environment. Alternatively, PAD [12] proposes to
adapt an auxiliary self-supervised task (e.g. inverse dynamics prediction and rotation prediction) to obtain supervisory
during test time without using reward. While this approach
benefits greatly from an online learning, an appropriate auxiliary task should be selected depending on the specific RL
task. More importantly, the additional training stage in the
novel environment causes extra inference time, impairing an
overall computational efficiency.
More recently, as an explicit approach based on domain
generalization, VAI [49] proposes to learn visual foreground
masks from augmented input images to feed only foregroundrelated information to a policy network. Though a high generalization performance was reported in VAI, several shortcomings still limit the use of this method. Since the policy
training process requires two pre-training steps of auxiliary
tasks (e.g. keypoint detection and visual attention prediction), the learning process is complex, requiring substantial
computational costs compared to existing works. Moreover,

263

