This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

QD-BEV : Quantization-aware View-guided Distillation for Multi-view
3D Object Detection
Yifan Zhang1* ,

Zhen Dong2* ,

Huanrui Yang2 ,

Yuan Du1 ,

Ming Lu3 ,

Kurt Keutzer2 ,

Cheng-Ching Tseng3 ,

Li Du1† ,

Shanghang Zhang3†
1
3

Nanjing University, 2 University of California, Berkeley,

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University,

Abstract
Multi-view 3D detection based on BEV (bird-eye-view)
has recently achieved significant improvements. However,
the huge memory consumption of state-of-the-art models
makes it hard to deploy them on vehicles, and the nontrivial latency will affect the real-time perception of streaming applications. Despite the wide application of quantization to lighten models, we show in our paper that directly applying quantization in BEV tasks will 1) make the
training unstable, and 2) lead to intolerable performance
degradation. To solve these issues, our method QD-BEV
enables a novel view-guided distillation (VGD) objective,
which can stabilize the quantization-aware training (QAT)
while enhancing the model performance by leveraging both
image features and BEV features. Our experiments show
that QD-BEV achieves similar or even better accuracy than
previous methods with significant efficiency gains. On the
nuScenes datasets, the 4-bit weight and 6-bit activation
quantized QD-BEV-Tiny model achieves 37.2% NDS with
only 15.8 MB model size, outperforming BevFormer-Tiny
by 1.8% with an 8× model compression. On the Small and
Base variants, QD-BEV models also perform superbly and
achieve 47.9% NDS (28.2 MB) and 50.9% NDS (32.9 MB),
respectively.

1. Introduction
Given its potential in enabling autopilot, multi-view
3D detection based on BEV (bird-eye-view) has become
* Equal contribution :
zhang yifan@smail.nju.edu.cn, zhendong@berkeley.edu
† Corresponding authors :
ldu@nju.edu.cn, shanghang@pku.edu.cn

(a) mAP curve.

(b) NDS curve.

Figure 1: Training curves of QD-BEV (with VGD) versus
progressive QAT on W4A6 quantization of BEVFormerTiny. Note that standard QAT works even worse compared
to progressive QAT and it falls out of the targeted accuracy
range in the figures.

an important research direction for autonomous driving.
Based on input sensors, previous work can be divided into
LiDAR-based methods [18, 47] and camera-only methods
[23, 38, 14, 13, 24, 25]. Compared to the LiDAR-based
methods, camera-only methods have the merits of lower
deployment cost, closer to human eyes, and easier access
to visual information in the driving environment. However,
even if using the camera-only methods, the computational
and memory costs of running state-of-the-art BEV models
are still formidable, making it difficult to deploy them onto
vehicles. For example, BEVFormer-Base has a 540 ms inference latency (corresponds to 1.85 fps) on one NVIDIA
V100 GPU, which is infeasible for real-time applications
that generally require 30 fps. Since a non-trivial latency
will harm the streaming perception, it is particularly crucial
to explore and devise lightweight models for camera-only
3D object detection based on BEV.
Quantization [16, 11, 42, 10] can reduce the bitwidth
used to represent weights and activations in deep neural net-

3825

