This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DETR Does Not Need Multi-Scale or Locality Design
Yutong Lin1†

Yuhui Yuan2†

Zheng Zhang2†

Chen Li1

Nanning Zheng1

Han Hu2†

1

National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
and Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract
This paper presents an improved DETR detector that
maintains a “plain” nature: using a single-scale feature
map and global cross-attention calculations without specific locality constraints, in contrast to previous leading
DETR-based detectors that reintroduce architectural inductive biases of multi-scale and locality into the decoder. We
show that two simple technologies are surprisingly effective
within a plain design to compensate for the lack of multiscale feature maps and locality constraints. The first is
a box-to-pixel relative position bias (BoxRPB) term added
to the cross-attention formulation, which well guides each
query to attend to the corresponding object region while
also providing encoding flexibility. The second is masked
image modeling (MIM)-based backbone pre-training which
helps learn representation with fine-grained localization
ability and proves crucial for remedying dependencies on
the multi-scale feature maps. By incorporating these technologies and recent advancements in training and problem
formation, the improved “plain” DETR showed exceptional
improvements over the original DETR detector. By leveraging the Object365 dataset for pre-training, it achieved 63.9
mAP accuracy using a Swin-L backbone, which is highly
competitive with state-of-the-art detectors which all heavily
rely on multi-scale feature maps and region-based feature
extraction. Code will be available at https:// github.com/
impiga/ Plain-DETR.

1. Introduction
The recent revolutionary advancements in natural language processing highlight the importance of keeping
task-specific heads or decoders as general, simple, and
lightweight as possible, and shifting main efforts towards
building more powerful large-scale foundation models [37,
11, 2]. However, the computer vision community often
† Equal contribution.

{yuhui.yuan, hanhu}@microsoft.com

60

Deformable DETR (local + m.s.)

55
50
45
40

Plain DETR (global + s.s.)
Improved Plain DETR (global + s.s.)

55.7

54.2
50.9

50.3
+13.7

+13.0
42.7

37.2

35
Swin Small

Swin Large

Figure 1: We improve the plain DETR detectors, which
rely on global cross-attention calculation and single-scale
(s.s.) feature maps, by huge margins, using both Swin-S
and Swin-L backbones. It makes plain DETRs as competitive as the present leading DETR detectors based on local
cross-attention and multi-scale (m.s.) feature maps.
continues to focus heavily on the tuning and complexity
of task-specific heads, resulting in designs that are increasingly heavy and complex.
The development of DETR-based object detection methods follows this trajectory. The original DETR approach [4]
is impressive in that it discarded complex and domainspecific designs such as multi-scale feature maps and
region-based feature extraction that require a dedicated understanding of the specific object detection problem. Yet,
subsequent developments [55, 54] in the field have reintroduced these designs, which do improve training speed and
accuracy but also contravene the principle of “fewer inductive biases” [13].
In this work, we aim to improve upon the original DETR
detector, while preserving its “plain” nature: no multi-scale
feature maps, no locality design for cross-attention calculation. This is challenging as object detectors need to handle objects of varying scales and locations. Despite the latest improvements in training and problem formulation, as
shown in Table 1, the plain DETR method still lags greatly
16545

