This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Domain Generalization Guided by Gradient Signal to Noise Ratio of Parameters
Mateusz Michalkiewicz
University of Queensland

Masoud Faraki
NEC Labs America

Manmohan Chandraker
NEC Labs America,
University of California, San Diego

Xiang Yu
Amazon *

Mahsa Baktashmotlagh
University of Queensland

Abstract
Overfitting to the source domain is a common issue in
gradient-based training of deep neural networks. To compensate for the over-parameterized models, numerous regularization techniques have been introduced such as those
based on dropout. While these methods achieve significant
improvements on classical benchmarks such as ImageNet,
their performance diminishes with the introduction of domain shift in the test set i.e. when the unseen data comes
from a significantly different distribution. In this paper, we
move away from the classical approach of Bernoulli sampled dropout mask construction and propose to base the
selection on gradient-signal-to-noise ratio (GSNR) of network’s parameters. Specifically, at each training step, parameters with high GSNR will be discarded. Furthermore,
we alleviate the burden of manually searching for the optimal dropout ratio by leveraging a meta-learning approach.
We evaluate our method on standard domain generalization
benchmarks and achieve competitive results on classification and face anti-spoofing problems.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks achieved remarkably good results on several classification tasks, facilitated
by regularization methods that successfully reduce overfitting of large models to the training data. A simple yet
powerful technique is Dropout [51], which mutes randomly
chosen activations of fully connected layers at each training
iteration. A better-suited variant for Convolutional Neural
Networks is Dropblock [14], which masks contiguous
regions of feature maps with spatial correlation. While
existing regularization techniques achieve great results,
* Work done while Xiang was at NEC Labs America

(a) Classical

(b) RSC

(c) Proposed

Figure 1: Different approaches to dropout mask construction. Left to right: (a) classical approach where values
are sampled from a Bernoulli distribution [51]; (b) RSC
[19], where parameters with highest gradients are masked
; (c) ours, where parameters with highest gradient-signalto-noise ratio are masked. The amount of discarded parameters is controlled by a dropout ratio p which is typically
(b)
manually chosen, whereas in our approach
it is automatically learned.
their success is based on the underlying assumption that
the train and test data follow similar distributions. A
more practical scenario, however, is presented in a domain
generalization setting, where there is a distribution shift
between the train and test set [50, 74]. Here, models
equipped with classical regularization techniques often fail
to generalize their inference to unseen examples.
The goal of our work is to build a model that is robust to
the domain shift and performs equally well on both source
and unseen test domains. We build our model on two observations. First, models with high Gradient Signal to Noise
Ratio (GSNR), defined as the ratio of squared mean over
variance of parameters gradients on a particular data distribution, exhibit a smaller generalization gap i.e. their performance does not drastically decrease when evaluated on the
unseen data [32]. Second, by iteratively dropping the most
predictive parameters, the model is forced to learn less dom-

6177

