This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

I can’t believe there’s no images!
Learning Visual Tasks Using Only Language Supervision
Sophia Gu*
Christopher Clark*
Aniruddha Kembhavi
Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
{sophiag, chrisc, anik}@allenai.org

Abstract
Many high-level skills that are required for computer vision tasks, such as parsing questions, comparing and contrasting semantics, and writing descriptions, are also required in other domains such as natural language processing. In this paper, we ask whether it is possible to learn
those skills from text data and then transfer them to vision
tasks without ever training on visual training data. Key
to our approach is exploiting the joint embedding space
of contrastively trained vision and language encoders. In
practice, there can be systematic differences between embedding spaces for different modalities in contrastive models, and we analyze how these differences affect our approach and study strategies to mitigate this concern. We
produce models using only text training data on four representative tasks: image captioning, visual entailment, visual
question answering and visual news captioning, and evaluate them on standard benchmarks using images. We ﬁnd
these models perform close to models trained on images,
while surpassing prior work for captioning and visual entailment in this text-only setting by over 9 points, and outperforming all prior work on visual news by over 30 points.
We also showcase a variety of stylistic image captioning
models that are trained using no image data and no humancurated language data, but instead using readily-available
text data from books, the web, or language models.

1. Introduction
Although vision and natural language processing (NLP)
tasks are typically thought of as being very distinct, there is
often a high degree of overlap in the skills needed to complete them. Visual question answering and reading comprehension question answering both require parsing and understanding questions, visual entailment and textual entailment require comparing different semantic meanings, and
captioning and summarization require writing text that sum* Equal contribution

marizes the semantics of the input. This raises an intriguing possibility: if a model learned to complete one of these
tasks using a high-level semantic representation of the input
text, then in theory it could immediately be able to complete
the corresponding visual task as long as the input image is
encoded in the same semantic representation. We call this
challenge zero-shot cross-modal transfer because it requires
applying skills learned from one modality to a different
one. Achieving this would be a step towards building multimodal models that can generalize skills across modalities
without needing expensive training data for each modality,
and has potential applications for tasks where visual training data is scarce but text data is relatively easy to collect.
Accomplishing this requires encoding images and text
into a shared semantic space. We use vision and language
(V&L) models trained with a contrastive loss for this purpose [51, 25]. These models learn to embed text and images
into vectors such that the vectors for matching images and
captions are close together, and vectors for unrelated images
and captions are far apart. Although this loss was originally
intended for representation learning and zero-shot classiﬁcation, here we show it also facilitates cross-modal transfer.
To do this, we propose a method called Cross modaL
transfer On Semantic Embeddings (CLOSE). An outline
of CLOSE is shown in Figure 1. During training, the text
inputs are encoded into a vector using the (frozen) text encoder from a contrastive model, which is then used as an
input to a model. During testing, the visual input is embedded with a (frozen) image encoder and used in place of
the text embedding. Because these encoders were explicitly trained to produce embeddings that encode semantics
in similar ways, learning to read and process the text vector should naturally translate to the ability to read and process the image vector. Although we focus on text-to-image
transfer in this paper, our approach is applicable to other
contrastive models such as videos [74], point clouds [1], and
audio [22, 11, 72], potentially allowing transfer between
many other modalities.
One potential difﬁculty with this approach is that, while
contrastive embeddings do share some structure between

2672

