This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Localizing Object-level Shape Variations with Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Or Patashnik1

Daniel Garibi1
1

Idan Azuri2

Tel-Aviv University

Hadar Averbuch-Elor1
2

Daniel Cohen-Or1

Independent Researcher

https://orpatashnik.github.io/local-prompt-mixing/

Abstract
Text-to-image models give rise to workflows which often begin with an exploration step, where users sift through
a large collection of generated images. The global nature
of the text-to-image generation process prevents users from
narrowing their exploration to a particular object in the
image. In this paper, we present a technique to generate
a collection of images that depicts variations in the shape
of a specific object, enabling an object-level shape exploration process. Creating plausible variations is challenging
as it requires control over the shape of the generated object while respecting its semantics. A particular challenge
when generating object variations is accurately localizing
the manipulation applied over the object’s shape. We introduce a prompt-mixing technique that switches between
prompts along the denoising process to attain a variety of
shape choices. To localize the image-space operation, we
present two techniques that use the self-attention layers in
conjunction with the cross-attention layers. Moreover, we
show that these localization techniques are general and effective beyond the scope of generating object variations.
Extensive results and comparisons demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in generating object variations, and
the competence of our localization techniques.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image diffusion models have recently shown unprecedented image quality and diversity [35, 41, 39], and
have opened a new era in image synthesis. Still, the control
over the generated image is limited, resulting in a tedious
selection procedure, where users sample numerous initial
seed noises, from which they can select a preferred one.
Images generated from different initial noise with the same
text prompt share semantics, but the shape, appearance, and
location of the generated shapes may differ greatly. The uncontrolled global changes realized by such a sampling process, do not allow users to interact with the generated image
and narrow down their open-ended exploration process. In
particular, the lack of object-level control of the user with
the generated image hinders the user’s ability to focus on

“A mug and a basket
on the table”
Basket Variations

Mug Variations

Figure 1. Our method generates shape variations of an object.
Here, given the text prompt, we generate variations of the basket.
After selecting a preferred basket, we generate variations of the
mug. We develop general techniques for localizing modifications.

refining specific objects during their exploration.
A possible approach for interacting with the generated
image as a means to explore the shape and appearance of
a specific object in the image is to use text-guided image
inpainting [39] or SDEdit [29]. These methods mainly excel in changing the texture of an object and are therefore
more suitable for textural exploration. However, changing
the shape of an object, particularly if other regions in the image should be preserved, is significantly more challenging,
and these methods struggle to achieve that without affecting
the entire image. Figure 2 demonstrates the lack of shape
variations with the above approaches.

23051

