This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Flexible Visual Recognition by Evidential Modeling of
Confusion and Ignorance
Lei Fan1 , Bo Liu2 , Haoxiang Li2 , Ying Wu1 and Gang Hua2
1
Northwestern University 2 Wormpex AI Research
leifan@u.northwestern.edu,yingwu@northwestern.edu,{richardboliu,lhxustcer,ganghua}@gmail.com

Abstract
In real-world scenarios, typical visual recognition systems could fail under two major causes, i.e., the misclassification between known classes and the excusable misbehavior on unknown-class images. To tackle these deficiencies, flexible visual recognition should dynamically predict
multiple classes when they are unconfident between choices
and reject making predictions when the input is entirely out
of the training distribution. Two challenges emerge along
with this novel task. First, prediction uncertainty should
be separately quantified as confusion depicting inter-class
uncertainties and ignorance identifying out-of-distribution
samples. Second, both confusion and ignorance should be
comparable between samples to enable effective decisionmaking. In this paper, we propose to model these two
sources of uncertainty explicitly with the theory of Subjective Logic. Regarding recognition as an evidence-collecting
process, confusion is then defined as conflicting evidence,
while ignorance is the absence of evidence. By predicting
Dirichlet concentration parameters for singletons, comprehensive subjective opinions, including confusion and ignorance, could be achieved via further evidence combinations.
Through a series of experiments on synthetic data analysis,
visual recognition, and open-set detection, we demonstrate
the effectiveness of our methods in quantifying two sources
of uncertainties and dealing with flexible recognition.

1. Introduction
When employing visual classifiers in open-world conditions, obtaining reliable uncertainty estimations could significantly benefit downstream tasks, including autonomous
driving [1, 13, 37], medical diagnosis [36, 49], and embodied intelligence [40, 35]. Recent uncertainty quantification
techniques [53, 15, 28, 32, 34, 33, 9, 43] have achieved notable progress toward this goal by saying “I do not know”
when the testing distributions differ from the training. However, besides directly giving no prediction, a more flexible

Known
Class 1 - Cat

Mixup

Known
Class 2 - Dog

Mixup

“Cat”

“Cat or Dog”

“Dog”

“I do not know”

Unknown
Our Flexible
Prediction

Figure 1: Classification of the proposed approach on images interpolated from a known-known-unknown triplet. Ignorance reflects the lack of evidence, whereas confusion is
caused by conflicting evidence, i.e., evidence that fails to
provide discrimination between specific classes. A flexible
visual recognition system could provide combined predictions when having large confusion and reject making predictions for unknown-class samples. Note the mixup images are for illustrative purposes and are not a requisite in
our training.
and informative visual recognition system could also give
combined predictions when possible, implying the correct
answer is one of its predictions but uncertain. Naturally, the
capability of rejecting or providing unspecific predictions
demands separately measuring different sources of uncertainties, i.e., ignorance and confusion, if seen from the Subjective Logic [21] perspective. Furthermore, to enable flexible recognition, both uncertainties should possess the virtue
of comparability between samples and in-sample additivity.
In evidential deep learning, the training of a recognition model could be regarded as an evidence-collecting process [21, 44]. Unlike ignorance describing a total lack of evidence, confusion is defined as conflicting evidence, which
mandates the existence of multiple hypotheses in the frame
of discernment. In other words, we cannot assess confusion
for a single-class classification problem. The mass of confusion between two classes then reflects shared features that
contribute to both classes while not discriminative. Likewise, confusion exists for all combinations of classes larger
than two. Unlike typical visual classifiers that only predict

1338

