This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-modal Gated Mixture of Local-to-Global Experts for
Dynamic Image Fusion
Bing Cao∗ , Yiming Sun,* Pengfei Zhu†, Qinghua Hu
Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
Haihe Laboratory of Information Technology Application Innovation, China
{caobing,sunyiming1895,zhupengfei,huqinghua}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

Missing detection

Infrared and visible image fusion aims to integrate comprehensive information from multiple sources to achieve superior performances on various practical tasks, such as detection, over that of a single modality. However, most existing methods directly combined the texture details and object contrast of different modalities, ignoring the dynamic
changes in reality, which diminishes the visible texture in
good lighting conditions and the infrared contrast in low
lighting conditions. To ﬁll this gap, we propose a dynamic
image fusion framework with a multi-modal gated mixture
of local-to-global experts, termed MoE-Fusion, to dynamically extract effective and comprehensive information from
the respective modalities. Our model consists of a Mixture
of Local Experts (MoLE) and a Mixture of Global Experts
(MoGE) guided by a multi-modal gate. The MoLE performs specialized learning of multi-modal local features,
prompting the fused images to retain the local information in a sample-adaptive manner, while the MoGE focuses
on the global information that complements the fused image with overall texture detail and contrast. Extensive experiments show that our MoE-Fusion outperforms stateof-the-art methods in preserving multi-modal image texture
and contrast through the local-to-global dynamic learning
paradigm, and also achieves superior performance on detection tasks. Our code is available: https://github.
com/SunYM2020/MoE-Fusion.

1. Introduction
Infrared and visible image fusion focus on generating
appealing and informative fused images that enable superior performance in practical downstream tasks over that
of using single modality alone [24, 45, 41, 21]. In recent
years, infrared-visible image fusion has been widely used
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

23555

Visible image
Missing detection

DIDF (IJCAI’20)

Missing detection

Infrared image

Error detection

DF (IEEE TIP’19)

Missing detection

TDL (CVPR’22)

MoE-Fusion (Ours)

Figure 1. The importance of dynamic image fusion. In the SOTA
methods (DF [16], DIDF [49], and TDL [18]), the texture details
of objects (e.g., car, truck, and trafﬁc sign) in the fused image are
suppressed by the contrast of infrared image, leading to terrible
detection results. Beneﬁting from the dynamic fusion, our method
can preserve clear texture details without being interrupted by unsuitable contrast, achieving the best performance.

in many applications, such as autonomous vehicles [9] and
unmanned aerial vehicles [34]. According to the thermal infrared imaging mechanism, infrared images can be adapted
to various lighting conditions but has the disadvantage of
few texture details [25, 50, 19]. By contrast, visible images
contain rich texture detail information, but cannot provide
clear information in low light conditions. Therefore, how
to design advanced fusion methods such that the fused images preserve sufﬁcient texture details and valuable thermal
information has attracted a lot of research attention.
Existing infrared-visible fusion methods [46, 38, 33, 42]
can be mainly categorized to traditional approaches (image decomposition [15], sparse representation [47], etc.)
and deep learning-based approaches (autoencoder based
methods [16, 49, 17], generative adversarial network based

