This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instance-aware Dynamic Prompt Tuning for Pre-trained Point Cloud Models
Yaohua Zha1 *

Jinpeng Wang1∗

Tao Dai2†

Bin Chen3

Zhi Wang1

Shu-Tao Xia4

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University1
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University2
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen3
Research Center of Artificial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory4
{chayh21,wjp20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Pre-trained point cloud models have found extensive applications in 3D understanding tasks like object classification and part segmentation. However, the prevailing strategy of full fine-tuning in downstream tasks leads to large
per-task storage overhead for model parameters, which
limits the efficiency when applying large-scale pre-trained
models. Inspired by the recent success of visual prompt tuning (VPT), this paper attempts to explore prompt tuning on
pre-trained point cloud models, to pursue an elegant balance between performance and parameter efficiency. We
find while instance-agnostic static prompting, e.g. VPT,
shows some efficacy in downstream transfer, it is vulnerable to the distribution diversity caused by various types of
noises in real-world point cloud data. To conquer this limitation, we propose a novel Instance-aware Dynamic Prompt
Tuning (IDPT) strategy for pre-trained point cloud models. The essence of IDPT is to develop a dynamic prompt
generation module to perceive semantic prior features of
each point cloud instance and generate adaptive prompt tokens to enhance the model’s robustness. Notably, extensive
experiments demonstrate that IDPT outperforms full finetuning in most tasks with a mere 7% of the trainable parameters, providing a promising solution to parameter-efficient
learning for pre-trained point cloud models. Code is available at https://github.com/zyh16143998882/
ICCV23-IDPT.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of 3D scanning technology, point clouds, as irregular point sets that represent
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author. (
daitao.edu@gmail.com)

Tuned Layer

Frozen [CLS] Token

Tuned Static Prompt Token

Frozen Layer

Patch Token

Tuned Dynamic Prompt Token

Downstream Task Head

Downstream Task Head

Transformer Encoder Layer LN

Transformer Encoder Layer LN

···
Transformer Encoder Layer LN-1

···
Transformer Encoder Layer L1

···

(a) Static Prompt Tuning

···
Dynamically
Generated

Transformer Encoder Layer LN-1

···
Transformer Encoder Layer L1

···

(b) Dynamic Prompt Tuning (Ours)

Figure 1. The pipeline of (a) the previous static prompt tuning in
VPT [22] and (b) our dynamic prompt tuning. Unlike the static
prompt tuning that is instance-agnostic, ours is adaptive to input by
concatenating the instance-aware prompt generated by a prompt
module into the last Transformer layer input.

3D geometry, have been widely used in various fields and
tasks. Deep learning-based point cloud processing techniques [16, 24, 31, 33, 34, 45, 35] have drawn considerable attention as they can directly process raw point cloud
data while preserving its rich information. As a classic deep
learning paradigm, fine-tuning the foundation model pretrained [11, 26, 32, 51, 55] on massive raw point clouds in
specific downstream tasks has achieved state-of-the-art performance. However, this approach is storage-intensive, as it
requires storing and deploying a separate copy of the backbone parameters for each task.
Recently, prompt tuning has surpassed fine-tuning in
multiple downstream tasks in the language and image domains, significantly reducing storage requirements by fixing the parameters of a pre-trained model and introducing
a small amount of task-specific learnable parameters into
the input space. Although some work [21, 20, 46, 54] have
attempted to introduce prompt into point cloud processing,
they all relied on pre-trained image models [38, 12]. To
date, less research has been denoted to prompt tuning in

14161

