This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking the Role of Pre-Trained Networks
in Source-Free Domain Adaptation
Wenyu Zhang1 , Li Shen1 , Chuan-Sheng Foo1,2
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR)
2
Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR)
1

Abstract
Source-free domain adaptation (SFDA) aims to adapt a
source model trained on a fully-labeled source domain to an
unlabeled target domain. Large-data pre-trained networks
are used to initialize source models during source training,
and subsequently discarded. However, source training can
cause the model to overfit to source data distribution and
lose applicable target domain knowledge. We propose to
integrate the pre-trained network into the target adaptation
process as it has diversified features important for generalization and provides an alternate view of features and classification decisions different from the source model. We propose to distil useful target domain information through a
co-learning strategy to improve target pseudolabel quality
for finetuning the source model. Evaluation on 4 benchmark
datasets show that our proposed strategy improves adaptation performance and can be successfully integrated with
existing SFDA methods. Leveraging modern pre-trained
networks that have stronger representation learning ability
in the co-learning strategy further boosts performance.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have demonstrated remarkable
ability in diverse applications, but their performance typically relies on the assumption that training (source domain)
and test (target domain) data distributions are the same.
This assumption can be violated in practice when the source
data does not fully represent the entire data distribution due
to difficulties of real-world data collection. Target samples
distributed differently from source samples (due to factors
such as background, illumination and style [13, 20]) are
subject to domain shift (also known as covariate shift), and
can severely degrade model performance.
Domain adaptation (DA) aims to tackle the domain shift
problem by transferring knowledge from a fully-labeled
source domain to an unlabeled target domain. The classic
setting of unsupervised domain adaptation assumes source

and target data are jointly available for training [45]. Motivated by the theoretical bound on target risk derived in
[3], a key strategy is to minimize the discrepancy between
source and target features to learn domain-invariant features [11, 27, 24, 42, 52, 14, 17, 12, 47]. However, access
to source data can be impractical due to data privacy concerns. Recently, the source-free domain adaptation (SFDA)
setting is proposed [28] to split adaptation into two stages:
(a) training network with fully labeled source data, and (b)
adapting source model with unlabeled target data. An example use case in a corporate context is when the vendor
has collected data to train a source model, and clients seek
to address the same task for their own environments, but
data sharing for joint training cannot be achieved due to
proprietary or privacy reasons. The vendor makes available
the source model, which the clients can adapt with available
resources. In this work, we assume the role of the clients.
We focus on the classification task where source and target domain share the same label space. The source model is
typically obtained by training a selected network on source
data with supervised loss. For adaptation, existing SFDA
methods generate or estimate source-like representations to
align source and target distributions [38, 8], make use of
local clustering structures in the target data [49, 48, 50],
and learn semantics through self-supervised tasks [46, 29].
[28, 23, 25] use the source model to generate target pseudolabels for finetuning, and [19, 5, 29] further select samples with the low-entropy or low-loss criterion. However,
model calibration is known to degrade under distribution
shift [35]. We observe in Figure 1 that target pseudolabels produced by source model can be biased, and outputs
such as prediction confidence (and consequently entropy
and loss) may not reflect accuracy and cannot reliably be
used alone to improve pseudolabel quality.
We reconsider the role of pre-trained networks in SFDA.
Due to their common usage, the discussion in this paper
is within the scope of ImageNet networks, but can be applied to other large data pre-trained networks. As in Figure 2, ImageNet weights are conventionally used to initialize source models and subsequently discarded. However,

18841

