This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Template-guided Hierarchical Feature Restoration for Anomaly Detection
Hewei Guo1∗‡ Liping Ren2∗‡ Jingjing Fu3† Yuwang Wang2† Zhizheng Zhang3
Cuiling Lan3 Haoqian Wang2 Xinwen Hou1
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Tsinghua University 3 Microsoft Research Asia
{guohewei2020, xinwen.hou}@ia.ac.cn
{rlp20@mails., wang-yuwang@mail., wanghaoqian@}tsinghua.edu.cn
{jifu, zhizzhang, culan}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Targeting for detecting anomalies of various sizes for
complicated normal patterns, we propose a Templateguided Hierarchical Feature Restoration method, which introduces two key techniques, bottleneck compression and
template-guided compensation, for anomaly-free feature
restoration. Specially, our framework compresses hierarchical features of an image by bottleneck structure to preserve the most crucial features shared among normal samples. We design template-guided compensation to restore
the distorted features towards anomaly-free features. Particularly, we choose the most similar normal sample as the
template, and leverage hierarchical features from the template to compensate the distorted features. The bottleneck
could partially filter out anomaly features, while the compensation further converts the reminding anomaly features
towards normal with template guidance. Finally, anomalies are detected in terms of the cosine distance between the
pre-trained features of an inference image and the corresponding restored anomaly-free features. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, which
achieves the state-of-the-art performance on the MVTec
LOCO AD dataset.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection is typically treated as an out-ofdistribution detection problem, which learns the distribution
from normal samples during training and detects outliers
as anomalies during inference. Existing anomaly detection
methods have achieved promising results on the MVTec AD
benchmark [4], which is mainly composed of images with
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.
‡ Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.

Normal

Anomaly

PatchCore

RD4AD

Ours

GT

Figure 1: Anomaly detection on different categories. From
top to bottom: breakfast box, pushpins, splicing connectors
in MVTec LOCO AD [3], and cable, transistor in MVTec
AD [4]. From left to right: normal image, anomaly image, anomaly maps of PatchCore [28], RD4AD [11] and
our method, and ground truth. The red color corresponds
to high anomaly score, whereas the blue represents low
anomaly score. Best view in color.

simple normal patterns, i.e. the material surface is uniform,
and background is clean, and only one object exists. However, in many practical applications, normal samples are
composed of multiple objects placed by rule, such as PCBs
with multiple electronic components, printed surfaces with
diverse contents and products with parts assembly. Figure 1
illustrates several examples with complicated structures and
predefined normal layout patterns. For example, a normal
breakfast box contains oatmeal, nuts, oranges, and peach,
which are carefully arranged following a certain rule. Its
complicated normal pattern creates difficulties for the existing methods to formulate its normal distribution, and consequently leads to degradation on detection accuracy. More-

6447

