This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UpCycling: Semi-supervised 3D Object Detection without Sharing
Raw-level Unlabeled Scenes
Sunwook Hwang†

Youngseok Kim†

Seongwon Kim§

Saewoong Bahk† ⇤ Hyung-Sin Kim‡ ⇤

†Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, ⇤Corresponding author
§SK Telecom, Seoul, Korea, ‡Graduate School of Data Science, Seoul National University

{swhwang, yskim}@netlab.snu.ac.kr, s1kim@sk.com, {sbahk, hyungkim}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Semi-supervised Learning (SSL) has received increasing
attention in autonomous driving to reduce the enormous burden of 3D annotation. In this paper, we propose UpCycling,
a novel SSL framework for 3D object detection with zero
additional raw-level point cloud: learning from unlabeled
de-identified intermediate features (i.e., “smashed” data)
to preserve privacy. Since these intermediate features are
naturally produced by the inference pipeline, no additional
computation is required on autonomous vehicles. However,
generating effective consistency loss for unlabeled featurelevel scene turns out to be a critical challenge. The latest SSL
frameworks for 3D object detection that enforce consistency
regularization between different augmentations of an unlabeled raw-point scene become detrimental when applied to
intermediate features. To solve the problem, we introduce a
novel combination of hybrid pseudo labels and feature-level
Ground Truth sampling (F-GT), which safely augments unlabeled multi-type 3D scene features and provides high-quality
supervision. We implement UpCycling on two representative
3D object detection models: SECOND-IoU and PV-RCNN.
Experiments on widely-used datasets (Waymo, KITTI, and
Lyft) verify that UpCycling outperforms other augmentation
methods applied at the feature level. In addition, while preserving privacy, UpCycling performs better or comparably to
the state-of-the-art methods that utilize raw-level unlabeled
data in both domain adaptation and partial-label scenarios.

1. Introduction
Although the concept of Autonomous Vehicles (AVs) has
been around for years, ensuring the safety of users driving
AVs on real roads via 3D object detection models is still
challenging. To this end, there have been continuous efforts
to collect large datasets of 3D road scenes and annotate them
carefully [11, 14, 38]. While rapid advances in sensor technology facilitate the collection of 3D scenes at scale, the
severe annotation burden remains as a main challenge. To

(a) Raw-point data

(b) Feature data produced from
the 3D object detection network

(c) Original point cloud scene (d) Restored point cloud scene
using the inversion attack

Figure 1: Visualization of point cloud scenes. UpCycling
improves level of privacy protection since an original point
cloud scene cannot be restored from its intermediate feature.
alleviate the problem, a couple of semi-supervised learning
(SSL) methods for 3D object detection have been proposed
recently, such as a combination of perturbation and consistency loss [51] and confidence-based filtering using IoU
prediction results [45].
However, these methods learn from unlabeled raw 3D
scenes. Collecting a vast amount of raw-level road scenes
from AVs can potentially cause disclosure of sensitive private information on the roads [10, 25, 48]. Moreover, the
demand for privacy-preserving domains is rapidly accelerating. The EU’s General Data Protection Regulation requires
firms to implement data protection measures, safeguarding
consumers’ privacy. This applies even to companies collecting autonomous driving data [27]. In addition, as 2D images
can be restored from limited 3D data [28], it’s critical to
fundamentally secure raw 3D point data.
Given that the problem of potential privacy leakage from

23351

