This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Point-TTA: Test-Time Adaptation for Point Cloud Registration
Using Multitask Meta-Auxiliary Learning
Ahmed Hatem
University of Manitoba

Yiming Qian
University of Manitoba

Yang Wang
Concordia University

hatema@myumanitoba.ca

yiming.qian@umanitoba.ca

yang.wang@concordia.ca

Abstract
We present Point-TTA, a novel test-time adaptation
framework for point cloud registration (PCR) that improves
the generalization and the performance of registration models. While learning-based approaches have achieved impressive progress, generalization to unknown testing environments remains a major challenge due to the variations in
3D scans. Existing methods typically train a generic model
and the same trained model is applied on each instance during testing. This could be sub-optimal since it is difficult for
the same model to handle all the variations during testing.
In this paper, we propose a test-time adaptation approach
for PCR. Our model can adapt to unseen distributions at
test-time without requiring any prior knowledge of the test
data. Concretely, we design three self-supervised auxiliary
tasks that are optimized jointly with the primary PCR task.
Given a test instance, we adapt our model using these auxiliary tasks and the updated model is used to perform the
inference. During training, our model is trained using a
meta-auxiliary learning approach, such that the adapted
model via auxiliary tasks improves the accuracy of the primary task. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in improving generalization of point
cloud registration and outperforming other state-of-the-art
approaches.

1. Introduction
Given a pair of overlapping 3D point clouds, the goal of
point cloud registration (PCR) is to estimate the 3D transformation that aligns these point clouds. PCR plays a vital role in a variety of applications, such as autonomous
driving [7], augmented reality [5], and robotics [30]. Standard PCR approaches start with extracting the pointwise
features. These features are matched to establish the correspondences between points in the pair. Then an outlier
rejection module is used to remove outliers since the correspondences obtained by feature matching are not com-

pletely reliable. Finally, the correspondences are used to
estimate the optimal 3D rotation and translation to align
the two point cloud fragments. Traditional approaches establish correspondences by matching hand-crafted features
and leveraging robust iterative sampling strategies such as
RANSAC [17] for model estimation. However, these approaches take a long time to converge and their accuracy
drops in the presence of high outliers.
To address the limitation of traditional approaches, most
recent PCR methods use learning-based approaches instead
of handcrafted features. These approaches first learn a
model on a labeled dataset. Then the model is fixed when
evaluating on unseen test data. The single set of model parameters may not be optimal for different test environments
captured with different 3D scanners due to the domain shift.
Our work is inspired by the success of test-time adaption
(TTA) [47] in image classification, where an auxiliary task
is used to update the model parameters at inference time to
learn feature representation specifically for a test instance.
In this paper, we introduce a TTA approach for point cloud
registration that adapts to new distributions at test-time. Unlike existing 3D point cloud domain adaptation approaches
[27, 54, 40, 28, 51], our method does not require any prior
knowledge about the test data distributions. We adapt the
model parameters in an instance-specific manner during inference and obtain a different set of network parameters for
each different instance. This allows our model to better capture the uniqueness of each test instance and thus generalize
better to unseen data. More importantly, our TTA formulation is a generic framework that can be applied in a plugand-play manner to boost standard PCR pipelines.
Auxiliary learning has been shown to be effective to
improve a predefined primary task and is used in multiple 2D computer vision tasks [35, 36, 47, 9]. Recently,
there have been some attempts at using auxiliary tasks for
improving the representation learning of 3D point clouds
[1, 24, 44, 15]. However, using auxiliary tasks for test-time
adaptation is still largely unexplored for 3D point cloud
data. In this work, we introduce three self-supervised auxiliary tasks: point cloud reconstruction, feature learning, and

16494

