This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dense Text-to-Image Generation with Attention Modulation
Yunji Kim1

Jiyoung Lee1
1

Jin-Hwa Kim1

NAVER AI Lab

2

Jung-Woo Ha1

Jun-Yan Zhu2

Carnegie Mellon University

DenseDiffusion (Ours)

Stable Diffusion [45]

A painting of a couple holding a yellow umbrella in a street on a rainy night. The woman is wearing a white dress and the man is wearing a blue suit.

There is a cute monkey on a thick branch who is holding a pink rose. It is on the top of a huge tree, and the sky is so wide and blue.

A painting of a dog riding a flying bicycle, over a big city with a yellowish full moon in the night sky.

Figure 1: DenseDiffusion enables us to incorporate both text and layout information into pre-trained text-to-image models without requiring
additional fine-tuning. Our method not only synthesizes images that follow text prompts more faithfully but also offers users greater control
over object and scene layout. We achieve it by modulating attention maps of pre-trained models, such as Stable Diffusion [45], according to
both text and layout conditions.

Abstract
Existing text-to-image diffusion models struggle to synthesize realistic images given dense captions, where each
text prompt provides a detailed description for a specific
image region. To address this, we propose DenseDiffusion, a
training-free method that adapts a pre-trained text-to-image
model to handle such dense captions while offering control over the scene layout. We first analyze the relationship between generated images’ layouts and the pre-trained

model’s intermediate attention maps. Next, we develop an
attention modulation method that guides objects to appear
in specific regions according to layout guidance. Without
requiring additional fine-tuning or datasets, we improve
image generation performance given dense captions regarding both automatic and human evaluation scores. In addition, we achieve similar-quality visual results with models
specifically trained with layout conditions. Code and data
are available at https://github.com/naver-ai/
DenseDiffusion.
17701

