This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LMR: A Large-Scale Multi-Reference Dataset for Reference-based
Super-Resolution
Lin Zhang* 1,3,4,5 , Xin Li2 , Dongliang He2 , Fu Li2 , Errui Ding2 , Zhaoxiang Zhang1,3,4,6
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc.
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems
5
School of Future Technology, UCAS
6
Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI CAS

Abstract
It is widely agreed that reference-based super-resolution
(RefSR) achieves superior results by referring to similar high quality images, compared to single image superresolution (SISR). Intuitively, the more references, the better performance. However, previous RefSR methods have
all focused on single-reference image training, while multiple reference images are often available in testing or
practical applications. The root cause of such trainingtesting mismatch is the absence of publicly available multireference SR training datasets, which greatly hinders research efforts on multi-reference super-resolution. To this
end, we construct a large-scale, multi-reference superresolution dataset, named LMR. It contains 112,142 groups
of 300×300 training images, which is 10× of the existing largest RefSR dataset. The image size is also some
times larger. More importantly, each group is equipped
with 5 reference images with different similarity levels. Furthermore, we propose a new baseline method for multireference super-resolution: MRefSR, including a MultiReference Attention Module (MAM) for feature fusion of an
arbitrary number of reference images, and a Spatial Aware
Filtering Module (SAFM) for the fused feature selection.
The proposed MRefSR achieves significant improvements
over state-of-the-art approaches on both quantitative and
qualitative evaluations. Our code and data are available
at: https://github.com/wdmwhh/MRefSR.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) is to restore a
degraded low-resolution (LR) image to a texture-realistic
* Work done during an internship at Baidu Inc.

Input LR

C²-Matching

Refs

Ours

Figure 1. Visual comparison of single-reference training RefSR
method C 2 -Matching [12] and our multi-reference training
MRefSR. Our MRefSR can more fully utilize arbitrary number
of multiple reference images to achieve the best results. The fullresolution comparison is provided in supplementary material.

high-resolution (HR) image [11]. SISR has a wide range
of applications in surveillance [40], astronomy [8], medical
imaging [7], film and television [24, 14], and other industries [27, 38, 34]. With the development of deep learning,
SISR has made great progress over these years [4, 5, 16,
19, 13, 41, 32, 20, 3, 23]. Compared with SISR, referencebased super-resolution (RefSR) can leverage relevant textures from additional similar HR reference images, so it
often achieves better performance. Similar high-definition
images can be acquired from web-searching, expertly curated data repositories or websites, etc.
Because of promising results shown by recent RefSR
methods [29, 37, 43, 42, 28, 30, 12, 21, 35], it attracts more
and more research interest. However, all these previous
RefSR methods have focused on using a single reference

13118

