This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

See More and Know More: Zero-shot Point Cloud Segmentation via
Multi-modal Visual Data
Yuhang Lu1, *, Qi Jiang1, *, Runnan Chen2 , Yuenan Hou3 , Xinge Zhu4 , Yuexin Ma1,†
1
ShanghaiTech University 2 The University of Hong Kong
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{luyh2,jiangqi,mayuexin}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Zero-shot point cloud segmentation aims to make deep
models capable of recognizing novel objects in point cloud
that are unseen in the training phase. Recent trends favor
the pipeline which transfers knowledge from seen classes
with labels to unseen classes without labels. They typically
align visual features with semantic features obtained from
word embedding by the supervision of seen classes’ annotations. However, point cloud contains limited information
to fully match with semantic features. In fact, the rich appearance information of images is a natural complement to
the textureless point cloud, which is not well explored in
previous literature. Motivated by this, we propose a novel
multi-modal zero-shot learning method to better utilize the
complementary information of point clouds and images for
more accurate visual-semantic alignment. Extensive experiments are performed in two popular benchmarks, i.e., SemanticKITTI and nuScenes, and our method outperforms
current SOTA methods with 52% and 49% improvement on
average for unseen class mIoU, respectively.

1. Introduction
Point cloud segmentation is a critical task for 3D scene
understanding, which promotes the development of autonomous driving, assistive robots, digital urban, AR/VR,
etc. Fully supervised methods [76, 66, 29, 36] have
achieved impressive performance. However, there exist
tremendous categories of objects in the real world, especially in large-scale outdoor scenes, bringing challenges
for such methods to generalize to novel objects without
labels in training data. Furthermore, manual annotations
for 3D point clouds are extremely time-consuming and expensive. Zero-shot learning can recognize unseen objects
by utilizing side information, especially the word embedding, to transfer the knowledge of seen categories to unseen
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Semantic features of objects obtained by word embedding contain rich and diverse information, including appearance characteristics existing in images(i.e., color, light), geometry
and location information contained in LiDAR point clouds(i.e.,
scale, shape), and some other non-visual properties(i.e., smell,
weight). Previous image-based or point cloud-based zero-shot
learning only considers the alignment between uni-modal visual
features and semantic features, where the former can just match a
small subset of the latter. We propose a more effective solution for
zero-shot 3D segmentation by using multi-modal visual features.

ones, which is important for the point cloud segmentation
in large-scale scenes.
Zero-shot semantic segmentation on 2D images has
made promising progress in the past few years [63, 3, 8,
40, 17, 27, 31, 32]. There are two main streams of methods,
including generative methods and projection-based methods, which inspire the following research works on 3D
point clouds. For generative methods [47, 44], they usually train a fake feature generator supervised by seen classes
and fine-tune a classifier for recognizing real seen-class features and synthesized unseen-class features. However, 3D
features are more difficult to generate than 2D features due
to higher dimensional information, making such strategies

21674

