This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffV2S: Diffusion-based Video-to-Speech Synthesis
with Vision-guided Speaker Embedding
Jeongsoo Choi*
Joanna Hong*
Yong Man Ro
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST
{jeongsoo.choi, joanna2587, ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent research has demonstrated impressive results
in video-to-speech synthesis which involves reconstructing
speech solely from visual input. However, previous works
have struggled to accurately synthesize speech due to a lack
of sufficient guidance for the model to infer the correct content with the appropriate sound. To resolve the issue, they
have adopted an extra speaker embedding as a speaking style
guidance from a reference auditory information. Nevertheless, it is not always possible to obtain the audio information
from the corresponding video input, especially during the inference time. In this paper, we present a novel vision-guided
speaker embedding extractor using a self-supervised pretrained model and prompt tuning technique. In doing so, the
rich speaker embedding information can be produced solely
from input visual information, and the extra audio information is not necessary during the inference time. Using the
extracted vision-guided speaker embedding representations,
we further develop a diffusion-based video-to-speech synthesis model, so called DiffV2S, conditioned on those speaker
embeddings and the visual representation extracted from
the input video. The proposed DiffV2S not only maintains
phoneme details contained in the input video frames, but
also creates a highly intelligible mel-spectrogram in which
the speaker identities of the multiple speakers are all preserved. Our experimental results show that DiffV2S achieves
the state-of-the-art performance compared to the previous
video-to-speech synthesis technique.

1. Introduction
Video-to-speech synthesis techniques [7, 15, 21, 22, 23,
33, 34, 39] have been broadly studied in lip-reading research
areas. It reconstructs speech from a silent talking face video,
which has an advantage of not requiring extra text information of the given video input during training. However, it
is still regarded as a challenging task, especially in multi* Both authors have contributed equally to this work.

speaker and noisy environment settings, since the video-tospeech synthesis technique needs to capture the complex
relationship between various lip movements and speech.
The relationship between lip movements and speech is
not always straightforward; there is considerable variation
in how different people articulate sounds, as well as how
their lip movements are affected by factors such as facial
expressions, accents, and noise. To resolve the complicated
factors that speakers themselves contain, several recent studies [7, 23, 33, 39] have utilized extra speaker embedding
representations obtained from the original audio information
of the video input with the same speaker. The speaker embeddings are helpful for obtaining the speaker’s characteristics,
where those characteristics cannot be directly derived from
silent talking face video. However, directly manipulating
the reference audio information during the inference is not
always possible as the audio information is sometimes unobtainable because of noisy environments, absence of speech,
and unseen speakers during the inference time.
To alleviate the aforementioned issue, we present a novel
vision-guided speaker embedding extractor using a selfsupervised pre-trained model. With the largely trained audiovisual speech representation model [40], we adopt a prompt
tuning technique [28] to train the certain part of the model in
order to extract the appropriate speaker embedding features
from the input video sequences. We set only a small amount
of downstream task-specific parameters as the learnable parameters for extracting speaker embedding into the input
space while freezing the other parts of the pre-trained model.
By doing so, the rich speaker embedding information can be
produced from solely on input visual information, and the
extra audio information is not necessary during the inference
time period.
Furthermore, we propose a conditional diffusion-based
video-to-speech synthesis model, named DiffV2S, using
the vision-guided speaker embedding representations. As
the denoising diffusion model has been proven to be effective in generating semantically meaningful representation
in both image and audio processing [18, 32, 43], we also
newly adopt the diffusion model to achieve high-quality mel-

7812

