This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HiTeA: Hierarchical Temporal-Aware Video-Language Pre-training
Qinghao Ye Guohai Xu Ming Yan∗ Haiyang Xu∗
Qi Qian Ji Zhang Fei Huang
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
yeqinghao.yqh@alibaba-inc.com

Video

Abstract
Video-language pre-training has advanced the performance of various downstream video-language tasks. However, most previous methods directly inherit or adapt typical
image-language pre-training paradigms to video-language
pre-training, thus not fully exploiting the unique characteristic of video, i.e., temporal. In this paper, we propose a Hierarchical Temporal-Aware video-language pretraining framework, HiTeA, with two novel pre-training
tasks for yielding temporal-aware multi-modal representation with cross-modal fine-grained temporal moment information and temporal contextual relations between video-text
multi-modal pairs. First, we propose a cross-modal moment
exploration task to explore moments in videos by mining the
paired texts, which results in detailed video moment representation. Then, based on the learned detailed moment
representations, the inherent temporal contextual relations
are captured by aligning video-text pairs as a whole in different time resolutions with multi-modal temporal relation
exploration task. Furthermore, we introduce the shuffling
test to evaluate the temporal reliance of datasets and videolanguage pre-training models. We achieve state-of-the-art
results on 15 well-established video-language understanding and generation tasks, especially on temporal-oriented
datasets (e.g., SSv2-Template and SSv2-Label) with 8.6%
and 11.1% improvement respectively. HiTeA also demonstrates strong generalization ability when directly transferred to downstream tasks in a zero-shot manner.

1. Introduction
Vision and language are two primary signals that constitute the real-world perception of humanity. With the
success of image-language pre-training [8,22,25,47], videolanguage pre-training [23,26,27,34] has recently received increasing attention. Large-scale video-language pre-training
helps the model to learn effective multi-modal representation, which has shown significant improvement on a variety of video-language downstream tasks, such as videotext retrieval, video question answering and video caption∗ Corresponding Author.

Text
A Caucasian boy is eating

Alignment

ice cream. He licks his
fingers with pleasure.

(a)
(b)

Long-view
A Caucasian boy is eating

Event-Text

ice cream. He licks his

Alignment

fingers with pleasure.
Multi-Modal
Alignment

Moment-Text
Short-view

boy, licks, fingers

Alignment

Figure 1: Comparison between existing paradigms and ours
for video-language pre-training. (a) Previous methods align
video and text within global perspective as the pretext. (b)
We introduce HiTeA by varying video in different temporal
views and modeling cross-modal temporal information between moments and texts, as well as the temporal contextual
relations between multi-modal pairs.

ing [5, 33, 44, 48, 50, 53, 59].
Inspired by the success of image-language pre-training
paradigm, various methods [10,11,23,26,27] have been proposed to adapt it to video-language pre-training. ClipBERT
[21] and Singularity [20] directly build on representations
from image encoders and aggregate them via score aggregation function and temporal encoder. Furthermore, MILNCE [34] and Frozen [2] switch image encoder to video encoder for spatio-temporal video representation learning and
align the video with corresponding text. In addition, some
advanced pre-training tasks are designed through modeling
entity [23], reconstructing masked patches [10] and predicting frame order [26, 61]. Despite their promising performance on downstream tasks, they treat video within global
perspective illustrated in Figure 1(a), thus failing to consider
fine-grained temporal information and temporal contextual
relations which are essential to video-language pre-training.
Since untrimmed video contains various temporal details,

15405

