This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Does Physical Adversarial Example Really Matter to Autonomous Driving?
Towards System-Level Effect of Adversarial Object Evasion Attack
Ningfei Wang Yunpeng Luo Takami Sato Kaidi Xu† Qi Alfred Chen
University of California, Irvine {ningfei.wang, yunpel3, takamis, alfchen}@uci.edu
†
Drexel University kx46@drexel.edu

Abstract
In autonomous driving (AD), accurate perception is indispensable to achieving safe and secure driving. Due to
its safety-criticality, the security of AD perception has been
widely studied. Among different attacks on AD perception,
the physical adversarial object evasion attacks are especially severe. However, we find that all existing literature
only evaluates their attack effect at the targeted AI component level but not at the system level, i.e., with the entire
system semantics and context such as the full AD pipeline.
Thereby, this raises a critical research question: can these
existing researches effectively achieve system-level attack
effects (e.g., traffic rule violations) in the real-world AD
context? In this work, we conduct the first measurement
study on whether and how effectively the existing designs
can lead to system-level effects, especially for the STOP
sign-evasion attacks due to their popularity and severity.
Our evaluation results show that all the representative prior
works cannot achieve any system-level effects. We observe two design limitations in the prior works: 1) physical
model-inconsistent object size distribution in pixel sampling
and 2) lack of vehicle plant model and AD system model
consideration. Then, we propose SysAdv, a novel systemdriven attack design in the AD context and our evaluation
results show that the system-level effects can be significantly
improved, i.e., the violation rate increases by around 70%.

1. Introduction
Autonomous Driving (AD) vehicles are now a reality in
our daily life, where a wide variety of commercial and private AD vehicles are driving on the road. For instance, the
millions of Tesla cars [30] equipped with Autopilot [54] are
publicly available. To ensure safe and correct driving, a
fundamental pillar is perception, which is designed to detect surrounding objects in real time. Due to the safety- and
security-criticality of AD perception, various prior works
have studied its security, especially the ones that aim at
causing the evasion of critical physical road objects (e.g.,

STOP signs and pedestrians), or physical adversarial object evasion attack [7, 8, 12, 16, 27, 32, 62, 66, 70].
Although these attacks are all motivated by causing erroneous driving behaviors at the AD system level (e.g., vehicle collisions and traffic rule violations), we find that so
far they predominately only evaluate the attack success at
the targeted AI component level alone (e.g., judged by perframe object misdetection rates [12, 16, 27, 66, 70]), without
further evaluation at the system level. Specifically, to systematically perform such system-level evaluation, we need
to measure the end-to-end system-level attack success metrics (e.g., collision rates) with the full system-level attack
context enclosing the attack-targeted AI component, for example, the remaining AD system pipeline such as object
tracking, planning, and control, closed-loop control, and the
attack-targeted driving scenario. In this paper, we call such
system-level attack context system model for such adversarial attacks (§2). This thus raises a critical research question:
can these existing works on physical adversarial object evasion attacks effectively achieve the desired system-level attack effects in the realistic AD system settings?
To systematically answer this critical research question,
we conduct the first measurement study on representative
prior object-evasion attacks with regard to their capabilities in causing system-level effects (§3). We propose a general framework, i.e., a system model, including perception
modeling from the physical world, to measure STOP signevasion attack which is our target due to its high representativeness [53] and its direct impacts on driving correctness
and road safety. Our results show that all the representative existing works cannot cause any STOP sign traffic rule
violation within the system model including a representative closed-loop control AD system in the common speed
range for STOP sign-controlled roads in the real world even
though the most effective attack can achieve more than 70%
average attack success rate at the AI component alone.
We further investigate the root causes and find that all
the existing works have design limitations on achieving
effective system-level effects due to the lack of a system
model in AD context for attack design: 1) physical model-

4412

