This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LLM-Planner: Few-Shot Grounded Planning for Embodied Agents
with Large Language Models
Chan Hee Song
The Ohio State University

Jiaman Wu
The Ohio State University

Clayton Washington
The Ohio State University

song.1855@osu.edu

wu.5686@osu.edu

washington.534@osu.edu

Brian M. Sadler
DEVCOM ARL

Wei-Lun Chao
The Ohio State University

Yu Su
The Ohio State University

chao.209@osu.edu

su.806@osu.edu

brian.m.sadler6.civ@army.mil

Abstract
t=0

This study focuses on using large language models
(LLMs) as a planner for embodied agents that can follow
natural language instructions to complete complex tasks
in a visually-perceived environment. The high data cost
and poor sample efficiency of existing methods hinders the
development of versatile agents that are capable of many
tasks and can learn new tasks quickly. In this work, we
propose a novel method, LLM-Planner, that harnesses the
power of large language models to do few-shot planning
for embodied agents. We further propose a simple but effective way to enhance LLMs with physical grounding to
generate and update plans that are grounded in the current
environment. Experiments on the ALFRED dataset show
that our method can achieve very competitive few-shot performance: Despite using less than 0.5% of paired training data, LLM-Planner achieves competitive performance
with recent baselines that are trained using the full training
data. Existing methods can barely complete any task successfully under the same few-shot setting. Our work opens
the door for developing versatile and sample-efficient embodied agents that can quickly learn many tasks. 1

1. Introduction
Building versatile embodied agents such as robots that
can follow natural language commands to do different tasks
as well as learn to do new tasks quickly has long been desired. However, contemporary language-driven agents still
require a large number of labeled examples (pairs of language instructions and gold trajectories) to learn each task,
which is highly costly and hinders the development of truly
versatile agents [35, 31, 26, 8, 38, 18, 42, 29, 11, 2, 17]. Re-

Cook a potato and put it into the recycle bin.
Navigation potato, Pickup potato,
…., PutObject potato recyclebin

Embodied Agent &
Environment

t=5

I cannot find a potato, but I saw a fridge.

LLM
Planner

Navigation fridge, OpenObject fridge,
Pickup potato, CloseObject fridge, ….,
PutObject potato recyclebin
t = 20

I cannot find a recycle bin, but I saw a
garbage can.
Navigation garbagecan,
PutObject potato garbagecan
Instruction

High-level Plan

HLP after Re-planning

Observation

Figure 1: An illustration of LLM-Planner for high-level
planning. After receiving the natural language instruction
(t = 0), LLM-Planner first generates a high-level plan by
prompting a large language model (e.g., GPT-3). When
the embodied agent gets stuck during the execution of the
current plan (t = 5 and 20), LLM-Planner re-plans based
on observations from the environment to generate a more
grounded plan, which may help the agent get unstuck. The
commonsense knowledge in the LLM (e.g., food is often
stored in a fridge) allows it to produce plausible high-level
plans and re-plan based on new environmental perception.

cently, an array of seminal work has shown the remarkable
potential of large language models (LLMs) such as GPT3 [4] as a few-shot planner for embodied AI agents [1, 13,
22, 36]. Agents equipped with LLM-based planners have
started to show the ability to learn a new task with a few
training examples.

1 https://osu-nlp-group.github.io/LLM-Planner/

While showing great promises as proof of concepts, ex-

2998

