This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Physics-Augmented Autoencoder for 3D Skeleton-Based Gait Recognition
Hongji Guo and Qiang Ji
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180
{guoh11, jiq}@rpi.edu

Encoder

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce physics-augmented autoencoder (PAA) framework for 3D skeleton-based human gait
recognition. Specifically, we construct the autoencoder with
a graph-convolution-based encoder and a physics-based
decoder. The encoder takes the skeleton sequence as input and produces the generalized positions and forces of
each joint, which are taken by the decoder to reconstruct the
input skeleton based on the Lagrangian dynamics. In this
way, the intermediate representations are physically plausible and discriminative. During the inference, the decoder is
discared and a RNN-based classifier takes the output of the
encoder for gait recognition. We evaluated our proposed
method on three benchmark datasets including Gait3D,
GREW, and KinectGait. Our method achieves state-ofthe-art performance for 3D skeleton-based gait recognition. Furthermore, extensive ablation studies show that our
method generalizes better and is more robust with smallscale training data by incorporating the physics knowledge.
We also validated the physical plausibility of the intermediate representations by making force predictions on real data
with physical annotations.

1. Introduction
In general, gait refers to the walking style of a person.
It is a unique biometric pattern varying from person to person. Gait recognition aims at identifying humans based on
their gaits. It has many important applications such as security surveillance [2], smart homes [58], and healthcare [43].
Extensive work have been focusing on 2D-based gait recognition such as using silhouettes [11], gait energy image [32]
and 2D human skeleton [49]. However, 2D-based gait
recognition suffers from occlusion and changing of view
angles. The occlusion caused by the clothes and stuffs being carried introduce irrelevant information which lead to
degradation of the performance. And 2D-based methods
may not generalize well if the training data and query input
are from different view angles. Besides, human gait is a dynamic process taking place in the 3D space. 2D-based gait

Input
skeleton

Decoder

classiﬁer

Reconstructed
skeleton

Figure 1: Illustration of physics-augmented autoencoder
(PAA). It contains a graph-convolution-based encoder and a
physics-based decoder to generate physical representations,
which are fed into a classifier for gait recognition.
recognition methods rely on appearance features, which ignore the underlying physical dynamics that are crucial for
model robustness and generalization. So modeling 3D is
intuitive and effective for the understanding of gait. On the
other hand, 2D-based methods may require large amount of
data for training, which is impractical for many real cases.
To address these issues, we study 3D skeleton-based
gait recognition in this paper, with a focus on modeling
the physical dynamics of human gait. The objective is to
leverage the widely applicable physics laws to improve the
model generalization, robustness, and interpretability. By
incorporating the physics knowledge into the model, we
aim to obtain physical features of human gait so that they
can be used for recognition. Specifically, we model the human joint positions and forces in the generalized coordinates. With the joint positions and the forces applied onto
them, the gait dynamics can be captured in a compact and
precise way. Another advantage of modeling physics is that
the model can generalize better since the embedded physics
laws are universal for different subjects.
To encode the physical representations of human gait, we
adopt an autoencoder [20, 61] architecture. Specifically, we
construct a spatial-temporal graph convolution network as
the encoder to better adapt the skeleton topology of the input. The output of the graph convolution network is fed into
two networks to predict the joint positions and forces in the
generalized coordinates, which are treated as the intermediate representations of the autoencoder. Then the decoder
takes the generalized joint positions and forces to reconstruct the input skeleton sequence based on the Lagrangian

19627

