This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Inverse Compositional Learning for Weakly-supervised Relation Grounding
Huan Li, Ping Wei,* Zeyu Ma, Nanning Zheng
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
{huanli@stu., pingwei@, zeyu98@stu., nnzheng@}xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Video relation grounding (VRG) is a significant and
challenging problem in the domains of cross-modal learning and video understanding. In this study, we introduce a
novel approach called inverse compositional learning (ICL)
for weakly-supervised video relation grounding. Our approach represents relations at both the holistic and partial
levels, formulating VRG as a joint optimization problem
that encompasses reasoning at both levels. For holisticlevel reasoning, we propose an inverse attention mechanism
and a compositional encoder to generate compositional relevance features. Additionally, we introduce an inverse loss
to evaluate and learn the relevance between visual features
and relation features. At the partial-level reasoning, we
introduce a grounding by classification scheme. By leveraging the learned holistic-level features and partial-level
features, we train the entire model in an end-to-end manner. We conduct evaluations on two challenging datasets
and demonstrate the substantial superiority of our proposed
method over state-of-the-art methods. Extensive ablation
studies confirm the effectiveness of our approach.

1. Introduction
The objective of the Video Relation Grounding (VRG)
task is to determine the spatial and temporal extents
of a given query relation within an untrimmed video.
A relation is represented as a three-tuple linguistic
phrase ⟨subject, predicate, object⟩, where the subject and
object are interconnected by the predicate, such as
⟨person, ride, bicycle⟩, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (a). VRG
is approached as a weakly supervised problem [40], where
only the relation phrase is provided during training, while
the spatial bounding boxes of the subject and object, and
the temporal duration of the relation in the video, are not
available. VRG is a crucial task for various multimodal applications, including video captioning [34] and visual ques* Ping Wei is the corresponding author.

person ride bicycle a man in a white t-shirt rides a person ride bicycle
bike and jumps up
(c)
(b)
(a)

<s-p-o>
person-ride-bicycle
person
s
S

P
O

bicycle
o

ride
p

holistic

partial

(d)

Figure 1. (a) VRG task. (b) An ambiguous result. (c) Video
grounding. (d) Holistic-partial structure of a relation.

tion answering [14].
Existing visual grounding approaches adopt the
paradigm of linguistic reconstruction to ground targets
[40, 25, 46, 18, 12]. They learn a linguistic description
representation to match visual features of the targets and
then reconstruct the linguistic description with the matched
visual features. This paradigm has demonstrated effectiveness in previous visual grounding tasks involving lengthy
and intricate linguistic descriptions [25, 18], as depicted
in Fig. 1 (b). The effectiveness of this paradigm can be
attributed to the fact that sophisticated linguistic descriptions contain abundant semantic and intricate information,
imposing stringent constraints on feature matching and
enabling precise target grounding. However, this paradigm
proves to be less productive in the VRG, primarily due to
the simplicity and sparsity of the information present in
a 3-tuple relation phrase. These relation phrases impose
weaker constraints on feature matching. As a result, certain
visual features that are weakly related or ambiguous, as
illustrated in Fig. 1 (c), can still effectively reconstruct the
relation phrase. This phenomenon can potentially cause the

15477

