This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SurroundOcc: Multi-Camera 3D Occupancy Prediction for Autonomous Driving
Yi Wei1,2 ,* Linqing Zhao3 ,* Wenzhao Zheng1,2 , Zheng Zhu4 , Jie Zhou1,2 , Jiwen Lu1,2†
1

Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
3
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, China
4
PhiGent Robotics
{y-wei19,zhengwz18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; linqingzhao@tju.edu.cn;
zhengzhu@ieee.org; {jzhou, lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
3D scene understanding plays a vital role in visionbased autonomous driving. While most existing methods focus on 3D object detection, they have difficulty describing real-world objects of arbitrary shapes and infinite classes. Towards a more comprehensive perception
of a 3D scene, in this paper, we propose a SurroundOcc
method to predict the 3D occupancy with multi-camera images. We first extract multi-scale features for each image
and adopt spatial 2D-3D attention to lift them to the 3D
volume space. Then we apply 3D convolutions to progressively upsample the volume features and impose supervision
on multiple levels. To obtain dense occupancy prediction,
we design a pipeline to generate dense occupancy ground
truth without expansive occupancy annotations. Specifically, we fuse multi-frame LiDAR scans of dynamic objects and static scenes separately. Then we adopt Poisson Reconstruction to fill the holes and voxelize the mesh
to get dense occupancy labels. Extensive experiments on
nuScenes and SemanticKITTI datasets demonstrate the superiority of our method. Code and dataset are available at
https://github.com/weiyithu/SurroundOcc.

1. Introduction
Understanding the 3D geometry of the surrounding
scene serves as the basic procedure in an autonomous driving system. While LiDAR is a direct solution to capture
this geometric information, it suffers from high-cost sensors
and sparse scanned points, limiting its further application.
Recently, vision-centric autonomous driving has attracted
extensive attention as a promising direction. Taking multi* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. The overview of SurroundOcc. Given multi-camera images, our method can predict volumetric occupancy of surrounding
3D scenes. To train the network, we design a pipeline to generate
dense occupancy labels with sparse LiDAR points. Better viewed
when zoomed in.

camera images as inputs, it has demonstrated competitive
performance in various 3D perception tasks including depth
estimation [17, 58], 3D object detection [30, 27, 36, 34, 20],
and semantic map construction [66, 19, 1].
Although multi-camera 3D object detection plays an important role [30, 27, 34, 20] in vision-based 3D perception,
it is easy to suffer from the long-tail problem and difficult
to recognize all classes of objects in the real world. Complementary to 3D detection, reconstructing surrounding 3D
scenes can better help the downstream perception tasks. Recent works [17, 58] incorporate information from multiple
views and predict surrounding depth maps. However, depth
maps only predict the nearest occupied point in each optical
ray and are unable to recover the occluded parts of the 3D

21729

