This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PhysDiff: Physics-Guided Human Motion Diffusion Model
Ye Yuan

Jiaming Song

Umar Iqbal
Arash Vahdat
NVIDIA
https://nvlabs.github.io/PhysDiff

Ours

SOTA Motion Diffusion Model

N times

Noise

Text or Action

Denoising
Motion
Diffusion

Jan Kautz

N times

Physics-Based
Motion
Projection

Noise

Text or Action

Denoising
Motion
Diffusion

Floating

“Person got down and is crawling across the floor.”

“A person walks around two edges of a room.”

Penetration

Floating

Figure 1. Our PhysDiff model generates physically-plausible motions using a physics-based motion projection in the diffusion process,
eliminating artifacts such as floating, ground penetration, and foot sliding, often observed with state-of-the-art models.

Abstract
Denoising diffusion models hold great promise for generating diverse and realistic human motions. However, existing motion diffusion models largely disregard the laws
of physics in the diffusion process and often generate
physically-implausible motions with pronounced artifacts
such as floating, foot sliding, and ground penetration. This
seriously impacts the quality of generated motions and limits their real-world application. To address this issue,
we present a novel physics-guided motion diffusion model
(PhysDiff), which incorporates physical constraints into
the diffusion process. Specifically, we propose a physicsbased motion projection module that uses motion imitation
in a physics simulator to project the denoised motion of a
diffusion step to a physically-plausible motion. The projected motion is further used in the next diffusion step to
guide the denoising diffusion process. Intuitively, the use
of physics in our model iteratively pulls the motion toward
a physically-plausible space, which cannot be achieved by
simple post-processing. Experiments on large-scale human

motion datasets show that our approach achieves state-ofthe-art motion quality and improves physical plausibility
drastically (>78% for all datasets).

1. Introduction
Deep learning-based human motion generation is an important task with numerous applications in animation, gaming, and virtual reality. In common settings such as text-tomotion synthesis, we need to learn a conditional generative
model that can capture the multi-modal distribution of human motions. The distribution can be highly complex due
to the high variety of human motions and the intricate interaction between human body parts. Denoising diffusion
models [73, 25, 74] are a class of generative models that are
especially suited for this task due to their strong ability to
model complex distributions, which has been demonstrated
extensively in the image generation domain [67, 62, 66, 13].
These models have exhibited strong mode coverage often
indicated by high test likelihood [75, 33, 79]. They also

16010

