This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion-SDF: Conditional Generative Modeling of Signed Distance Functions
Gene Chou

Yuval Bahat

Felix Heide

Princeton University

Abstract
Probabilistic diffusion models have achieved stateof-the-art results for image synthesis, inpainting, and
text-to-image tasks. However, they are still in the early
stages of generating complex 3D shapes. This work
proposes Diffusion-SDF, a generative model for shape
completion, single-view reconstruction, and reconstruction
of real-scanned point clouds. We use neural signed distance
functions (SDFs) as our 3D representation to parameterize
the geometry of various signals (e.g., point clouds, 2D
images) through neural networks. Neural SDFs are implicit
functions and diffusing them amounts to learning the
reversal of their neural network weights, which we solve
using a custom modulation module. Extensive experiments
show that our method is capable of both realistic unconditional generation and conditional generation from partial
inputs. This work expands the domain of diffusion models
from learning 2D, explicit representations, to 3D, implicit
representations. Code is released at https://github.
com/princeton-computational-imaging/
Diffusion-SDF .

1. Introduction
Diffusion probabilistic models [51, 18] have become a
popular choice for generative tasks and can produce impressive results, such as the images generated by DALLE2 [44] and Stable Diffusion [46] from text input. Diffusion
models are a type of likelihood-based models whose training objective can be expressed as a variational lower bound
[18, 53]. On a high level, they learn to gradually remove
noise from a signal and repeat this process to generate samples from Gaussian noise. Recent advances [38, 10, 44, 46]
show that diffusion models produce images with quality
on par with state-of-the-art generative adversarial networks
(GANs) [15] without the common drawbacks of mode collapse [38, 37] and unstable training [36, 2]. Diffusion has
also been applied to 3D tasks although these works are still
in the early stages of producing complex shapes. In this
work, we investigate the generation of 3D shapes of neural
signed distance functions via diffusion.

3D modeling and generation are essential to vision and
graphics tasks. 3D generation of high-quality assets and
large volumes of realistic data is often essential where training data is expensive to collect [24, 27, 47, 34, 48, 3].
Additionally, generation can be applied to 3D reconstruction of imperfect visual observations as there exists a oneto-many mapping that requires a probabilistic approach to
solve. This has applications in self-driving [54, 67, 39] and
robotics grasping [4, 22, 65] where occlusion and camera
measurement errors are common.
We propose Diffusion-SDF, a generative model for shape
completion, single-view reconstruction, and reconstruction
of real-scanned point clouds. We choose neural signed distance functions (SDFs) [40] as the 3D representation to parameterize the surfaces described by various input signals
such as point clouds and 2D images. They implicitly encode an object surface by the signed distances between 3D
coordinate queries to their closest surface point through a
coordinate-based MLP [40, 8]. Compared to discrete 3D
representations [25, 30, 43, 13, 16], SDFs have proven to
be a versatile representation that supports arbitrary resolution during test-time [55], small memory footprints [9], and
strong generalization [8].
We make the following two key insights. First, implicit functions can directly be used as data and diffusing
them amounts to learning the reversal of the neural network
weights. Furthermore, we introduce geometrical constraints
to produce complex shapes and outputs consistent with the
geometry of conditioned inputs. Very recently, Dupont et
al. [11] similarly diffuse implicit functions but do not address SDFs nor geometric constraints. Second, by using
SDFs as a unified 3D representation, we condition training
to learn a mapping between various input types and their
possible reconstructions. Then, we leverage a probabilistic diffusion model to generate diverse completions. Thus,
our work can be applied to shape synthesis and multi-modal
shape completion.
The proposed method consists of two steps, shown in
Fig. 2. First, we create a compressed representation of
SDFs using modulation [11, 5, 31]. We find that diffusing
SDFs is impractical due to the large number of parameters
and the lack of a smoothed data distribution. Our modu-

2262

