This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

a bear wearing sunglasses and a tie looks very proud

BoxDiff: Text-to-Image Synthesis with Training-Free Box-Constrained Diffusion
Jinheng Xie1

Yuexiang Li2∗ Yawen Huang2 Haozhe Liu2,3 Wentian Zhang2
Yefeng Zheng2 Mike Zheng Shou1∗
1
Show Lab, National University of Singapore 2 Jarvis Lab, Tencent
3
AI Initiative, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
{sierkinhane,mike.zheng.shou}@gmail.com

-- written by ChatGPT

https://github.com/showlab/BoxDiff

“As the aurora lights up the sky, a herd of reindeer leisurely wanders on the grassy meadow, admiring the breathtaking view, a serene lake
quietly reflects the magnificent display, and in the distance, a snow-capped mountain stands majestically, fantasy, 8k, highly detailed”

“A smiling cat, a crown, a balloon, and a red bow”

“A giraffe wearing sunglasses and a tie looks very proud”

“A bear wearing sunglasses and a tie looks very proud”

Figure 1: In a training-free manner, BoxDiff consumes the simplest form of user-provided conditions, such as box or scribble,
to control the location and scale of contents in the image synthesized by the pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model.

Abstract
Recent text-to-image diffusion models have demonstrated an astonishing capacity to generate high-quality images. However, researchers mainly studied the way of synthesizing images with only text prompts. While some works
have explored using other modalities as conditions, considerable paired data, e.g., box/mask-image pairs, and finetuning time are required for nurturing models. As such
paired data is time-consuming and labor-intensive to acquire and restricted to a closed set, this potentially becomes
the bottleneck for applications in an open world. This paper

focuses on the simplest form of user-provided conditions,
e.g., box or scribble. To mitigate the aforementioned problem, we propose a training-free method to control objects
and contexts in the synthesized images adhering to the given
spatial conditions. Specifically, three spatial constraints,
i.e., Inner-Box, Outer-Box, and Corner Constraints, are designed and seamlessly integrated into the denoising step of
diffusion models, requiring no additional training and massive annotated layout data. Extensive experimental results
demonstrate that the proposed constraints can control what
and where to present in the images while retaining the ability of Diffusion models to synthesize with high fidelity and
diverse concept coverage.

* Corresponding Author

7452

