This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Focus on Your Target: A Dual Teacher-Student Framework
for Domain-adaptive Semantic Segmentation
Xinyue Huo1,2 Lingxi Xie2 Wengang Zhou1 Houqiang Li1 Qi Tian2 *
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Huawei Inc.
xinyueh@mail.ustc.edu.cn

198808xc@gmail.com

{zhwg,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
We study unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) for semantic segmentation. Currently, a popular UDA framework
lies in self-training which endows the model with two-fold
abilities: (i) learning reliable semantics from the labeled
images in the source domain, and (ii) adapting to the target
domain via generating pseudo labels on the unlabeled images. We find that, by decreasing/increasing the proportion
of training samples from the target domain, the ‘learning
ability’ is strengthened/weakened while the ‘adapting ability’ goes in the opposite direction, implying a conflict between these two abilities, especially for a single model. To
alleviate the issue, we propose a novel dual teacher-student
(DTS) framework and equip it with a bidirectional learning strategy. By increasing the proportion of target-domain
data, the second teacher-student model learns to ‘Focus
on Your Target’ while the first model is not affected. DTS
is easily plugged into existing self-training approaches.
In a standard UDA scenario (training on synthetic, labeled data and real, unlabeled data), DTS shows consistent gains over the baselines and sets new state-of-the-art
results of 76.5% and 75.1% mIoUs on GTAv→Cityscapes
and SYNTHIA→Cityscapes, respectively. The implementation is available at https://github.com/xinyuehuo/DTS.

Iteration 4000

Target A

Iteration 12000

Target B

DAFormer Target
DTS
DTS

* Corresponding Author.

Target

Iteration 40000
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

DAFormer

Ground Truth
IoU (%)

Target A

Target B

DTS
DAFormer

Iteration（k）
4

8

12

16

20

24

28

32

36

40

DTS

Figure 1. Segmentation results on a test image from Cityscapes
(the model is trained on GTAv). There are two traffic signs with
different styles, where Target A is similar to the training data in the
source domain while Target B is not. The baseline (DAFormer)
gradually improves the accuracy on Target A but achieves the best
accuracy on Target B in the midst (at 12K iterations). Our method,
DTS, achieves good accuracy for both targets and the trend is more
stable throughout the training process (see the curves).

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks [28] have been proven effective in
learning from labeled, in-domain visual data, but their ability to adapt to unlabeled data or unknown domains is often
not guaranteed. We delve into this topic by studying the unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) problem for semantic
segmentation, where densely (pixel-wise) labeled data are
available for the source domain but only unlabeled images
are provided for the target domain. The setting is useful

Target

DAFormer Target

in real-world applications where new domains emerge frequently but annotating them is a major burden.
The state-of-the-art UDA approaches for semantic segmentation are mostly built upon a self-training framework.
It first learns semantics from labeled data in the source domain and then generates pseudo labels in the target domain,
so that the model adapts to the target domain by fitting the
pseudo labels. Conceptually, the two steps of self-training
endow the model with two-fold abilities, namely, learning
knowledge (semantics) from the source domain and adapt-

19027

1

