This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffDis: Empowering Generative Diffusion Model with Cross-Modal
Discrimination Capability
Runhui Huang1 Jianhua Han2 Guansong Lu2 Xiaodan Liang1 *
Yihan Zeng2 Wei Zhang2 Hang Xu2
1
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
Recently, large-scale diffusion models, e.g., Stable diffusion and DallE2, have shown remarkable results on image
synthesis. On the other hand, large-scale cross-modal pretrained models (e.g., CLIP, ALIGN, and FILIP) are competent for various downstream tasks by learning to align
vision and language embeddings. In this paper, we explore the possibility of jointly modeling generation and discrimination. Specifically, we propose DiffDis to unify the
cross-modal generative and discriminative pretraining into
one single framework under the diffusion process. DiffDis
first formulates the image-text discriminative problem as a
generative diffusion process of the text embedding from the
text encoder conditioned on the image. Then, we propose
a novel dual-stream network architecture, which fuses the
noisy text embedding with the knowledge of latent images
from different scales for image-text discriminative learning.
Moreover, the generative and discriminative tasks can efficiently share the image-branch network structure in the
multi-modality model. Benefiting from diffusion-based unified training, DiffDis achieves both better generation ability and cross-modal semantic alignment in one architecture.
Experimental results show that DiffDis outperforms singletask models on both the image generation and the imagetext discriminative tasks, e.g., 1.65% improvement on average accuracy of zero-shot classification over 12 datasets
and 2.42 improvement on FID of zero-shot image synthesis.

1. Introduction
“What I cannot create, I do not understand.” by Richard
Feynman (a well-known theoretical physicist).
Recently, large-scale diffusion models (DM) [17, 45, 51]
such as Stable Diffusion [42] and DallE2 [40] have shown
impressive results in image synthesis and re-define the capacity of state-of-the-art text-guided image synthesis. Typ* Corresponding author: xdliang328@gmail.com

(a) Generation Only
Forward Process

…
Reverse Process

(b) Discrimination Only
Image
Encoder

Text
Encoder

Sim

‘Three
teddy
bears’

(c) Joint Discrimination and Generation (Ours)
Forward Process

…
…

‘Three
teddy bears’

Reverse Process

Denoising U-Net
‘Three
teddy bears’

‘Three teddy
bears’

Sim

Generation stream

Discrimination stream

Figure 1. Comparison of our framework and single-task models.
(a) The diffusion-based image generation-only model. (b) The
image-text discrimination-only model. (c) Our DiffDis joints the
discriminative and generative tasks under the diffusion processing
into one framework. Better viewed in colors.

ically speaking, these models contain more than one billion parameters and have a large model capacity; thus
have a good generalization and cover an extensive range
of domains. Here, by rethinking the famous remarks from
Richard Feynman, we explore whether such powerful generative models can learn the ability to further discriminate
and understand cross-modal data.
On the other hand, recent large-scale Vision-Language
Pre-training (VLP) models [39, 20, 53, 26] like CLIP[39]
and ALIGN [20] have demonstrated success in vari-

15713

