This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ConSlide: Asynchronous Hierarchical Interaction Transformer with
Breakup-Reorganize Rehearsal for Continual Whole Slide Image Analysis
Yanyan Huang1,2 *, Weiqin Zhao1 *, Shujun Wang3 , Yu Fu2 , Yuming Jiang4 , Lequan Yu1†
1
The University of Hong Kong
2
Zhejiang University
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
4
Stanford University
{yanyanh, wqzhao98}@connect.hku.hk, shu-jun.wang@polyu.edu.hk,
yufu1994@zju.edu.cn, ymjiang2@stanford.edu, lqyu@hku.hk

Abstract
Whole slide image (WSI) analysis has become increasingly important in the medical imaging community, enabling automated and objective diagnosis, prognosis, and
therapeutic-response prediction. However, in clinical practice, the ever-evolving environment hamper the utility of
WSI analysis models. In this paper, we propose the FIRST
continual learning framework for WSI analysis, named
ConSlide, to tackle the challenges of enormous image size,
utilization of hierarchical structure, and catastrophic forgetting by progressive model updating on multiple sequential datasets. Our framework contains three key components. The Hierarchical Interaction Transformer (HIT) is
proposed to model and utilize the hierarchical structural
knowledge of WSI. The Breakup-Reorganize (BuRo) rehearsal method is developed for WSI data replay with efficient region storing buffer and WSI reorganizing operation. The asynchronous updating mechanism is devised to
encourage the network to learn generic and specific knowledge respectively during the replay stage, based on a nested
cross-scale similarity learning (CSSL) module. We evaluated the proposed ConSlide on four public WSI datasets
from TCGA projects. It performs best over other state-ofthe-art methods with a fair WSI-based continual learning
setting and achieves a better trade-off of the overall performance and forgetting on previous tasks.

1. Introduction
Whole slide images (WSIs) contain rich histopathological information of the tissue sections and are routinely
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding Author.

(a) Dataset 1

Dataset 2

Dataset 3

Dataset N

…

(b)

90000 × 90000

Region Level
4096 × 4096

Patch Level
512 × 512

Figure 1. Illustration of concept and challenges of continual WSI
analysis. (a) Continual WSI learning aims to alleviate catastrophic
forgetting while exploiting knowledge from sequentially incoming datasets from the different tasks/domains. (b) The hierarchical
structure of WSIs raises challenges for network architecture and
learning strategy design.

used for clinical practice. With recent advances in deep
learning, computational WSI have attracted widespread attention in the medical image analysis community, which
can provide automated and objective diagnosis, prognosis,
and therapeutic-response prediction [18, 46, 57, 60]. However, the huge size and expensive pixel-level annotations of
WSI bring computational challenges in deep model architecture design [47, 28, 31]. Therefore, multiple instance
learning (MIL)-based approaches are proposed for weaklysupervised WSI analysis [13, 46, 59], where they first divide
WSI into a set of patches, conduct analysis for each patch,
and then aggregate them together for slide-level prediction.
Although encouraging results are achieved, these ap-

21349

