This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Spatial-context-aware Global Visual Feature Representation
for Instance Image Retrieval
Zhongyan Zhang1 , Lei Wang1 , Luping Zhou2 , Piotr Koniusz3,4
University of Wollongong1 , University of Sydney2 , Data61rCSIRO3 , Australian National University4
zhongyan@uow.edu.au, leiw@uow.edu.au, luping.zhou@sydney.edu.au, peter.koniusz@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
In instance image retrieval, considering local spatial information within an image has proven effective to boost retrieval performance, as demonstrated by local visual descriptor based geometric verification. Nevertheless, it will
be highly valuable to make ordinary global image representations spatial-context-aware because global representation based image retrieval is appealing thanks to its algorithmic simplicity, low memory cost, and being friendly
to sophisticated data structures. To this end, we propose
a novel feature learning framework for instance image retrieval, which embeds local spatial context information into
the learned global feature representations. Specifically, in
parallel to the visual feature branch in a CNN backbone,
we design a spatial context branch that consists of two
modules called online token learning and distance encoding. For each local descriptor learned in CNN, the former module is used to indicate the types of its surrounding
descriptors, while their spatial distribution information is
captured by the latter module. After that, the visual feature branch and the spatial context branch are fused to
produce a single global feature representation per image.
As experimentally demonstrated, with the spatial-contextaware characteristic, we can well improve the performance
of global representation based image retrieval while maintaining all of its appealing properties. Our code is available
at https://github.com/Zy-Zhang/SpCa.

1. Introduction
Given a query image, the purpose of instance-level image retrieval is to search and retrieve the images containing
the identical object described by the query from a largescale image dataset. In this task, visual feature representations of images play a crucial role in measuring the similarities between a query and candidate images. A variety of handcrafted feature-based methods [14, 38, 2] have
been proposed to significantly improve the performance in

the past two decades. Recently, due to the development
of deep learning technologies, deep feature representations
have been overtaking the position of conventional handcrafted ones and bringing great progress in the task of instance image retrieval [1, 3, 17, 28, 15].
Generally, deep feature representations used in instance
image retrieval can be categorized into two types. One type
is global feature representation, which describes the visual
content of an image as a whole. As a multi-dimensional
vector, it can be efficiently used to measure the similarity of
two images, say, via Euclidean distance or cosine similarity.
For a retrieval task, the total number of global feature representations is just the size of image database, and they can be
pre-extracted and economically stored for use. In addition,
one global feature representation per image works well with
the classic data structures designed for searching. The other
type is local descriptors, which describe the local information within an image and collectively reflect the spatial information of the visual cues in an image. In image retrieval,
they are important for conducting geometric verification to
confirm if two images truly match or not. However, the
total number of local descriptors per image could be large
(e.g., 1, 000) and the verification involves non-trivial computation, making this process expensive in computational
cost and memory footprint.
This situation leads to a wide use of “two-stage”
paradigm in instance image retrieval [23, 3, 17]. An initial retrieval result is firstly obtained via the global feature
representation. After that, a re-ranking step utilizes the local descriptors to refine a small number of top-retrieved images. Nevertheless, this two-stage paradigm not only results in two separate procedures [26, 10] but also considerably increases retrieval time and memory expense for practical retrieval tasks [18], due to the presence of the local
descriptor-based spatial verification step. Therefore, it will
be highly valuable to make ordinary global image representations spatial-context-aware by considering their appealing
properties of algorithmic simplicity, low memory cost, and
being friendly to data structures.
To achieve this, we propose a novel feature learning

11250

