This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ITI-G EN: Inclusive Text-to-Image Generation
Cheng Zhang 1

Xuanbai Chen 1 Siqi Chai 1 Chen Henry Wu 1
Thabo Beeler 2 Fernando De la Torre 1
1

2

Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Text-to-image generative models often reflect the biases
of the training data, leading to unequal representations of
underrepresented groups. This study investigates inclusive
text-to-image generative models that generate images based
on human-written prompts and ensure the resulting images
are uniformly distributed across attributes of interest. Unfortunately, directly expressing the desired attributes in the
prompt often leads to sub-optimal results due to linguistic
ambiguity or model misrepresentation. Hence, this paper
proposes a drastically different approach that adheres to the
maxim that “a picture is worth a thousand words”. We show
that, for some attributes, images can represent concepts
more expressively than text. For instance, categories of skin
tones are typically hard to specify by text but can be easily represented by example images. Building upon these insights, we propose a novel approach, ITI-G EN1 , that leverages readily available reference images for Inclusive Textto-Image GENeration. The key idea is learning a set of
prompt embeddings to generate images that can effectively
represent all desired attribute categories. More importantly,
ITI-G EN requires no model fine-tuning, making it computationally efficient to augment existing text-to-image models.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that ITI-G EN largely
improves over state-of-the-art models to generate inclusive
images from a prompt.

1. Introduction
In recent years we have witnessed a remarkable leap in
text-based visual content creation, driven by breakthroughs
in generative modeling [69, 27, 59, 58, 63] and the access to
large-scale multimodal datasets [67, 35]. Particularly, publicly released models, such as Stable Diffusion [63], have
matured to the point where they can produce highly realistic images based on human-written prompts.
However, one major drawback of existing text-to-image
models is that they inherit biases from the training data [6,
1 Project page: https://czhang0528.github.io/iti-gen

Dmitry Lagun 2

Google

(a) Original

(b) Hard Prompts
eyeglasses

etc.} eyeglasses

…

…

…
92%

w/o eyeglasses
w/ eyeglasses

[…] with

[…] {without, no,

a headshot of a person

8%

12%

w/o eyeglasses

88%

w/ eyeglasses

(c) Inclusive Text-to-Image Generation, ITI-GEN (ours)

ITI-GEN

,
Reference Images

…

a headshot of a person

w/o eyeglasses

50%

w/ eyeglasses

50%

generated images without eyeglasses

generated images with eyeglasses

Figure 1. (a) Given a human-written prompt (“a headshot of a person”), existing text-to-image models [63] can hardly synthesize
pictures representing minority groups (i.e., people with eyeglasses
in this example). (b) Conventional hard prompt searching [18]
is sub-optimal due to linguistic ambiguity. (c) We address these
problems by leveraging a small set of reference images for inclusive text-to-image generation (ITI-G EN).

58, 63, 12, 5] and thus have yet to exhibit inclusiveness —
the generated images based on the input text may reflect
stereotypes, leading to the exclusion of certain attributes or
minority groups. For instance, given the prompt “a headshot
of a person”, Figure 1(a) shows how a state-of-the-art system generates about 92% images of subjects without eyeglasses, and only 8% with eyeglasses, showing a clear bias
towards people without eyeglasses. Alternatively, as shown
in Figure 1(b), one could specify the attribute in the prompt,
resulting in better outcomes; however, this will still result
in a sub-optimal solution due to linguistic ambiguity. While
inclusiveness has been critical to responsible AI, existing
text-to-image models are still lagging [12, 5, 55, 53, 46]. In
this work, we propose a new method that achieves inclusive-

3969

