This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

When to Learn What: Model-Adaptive Data Augmentation Curriculum
Chengkai Hou1 , Jieyu Zhang2 , Tianyi Zhou3 *
1
Jilin university, 2 University of Washington, 3 University of Maryland
houck20@mails.jlu.edu.cn, jieyuz2@cs.washington.edu, tianyi@umd.edu

Abstract
Data augmentation (DA) is widely used to improve the
generalization of neural networks by enforcing the invariances and symmetries to pre-defined transformations applied to input data. However, a fixed augmentation policy may have different effects on each sample in different training stages but existing approaches cannot adjust
the policy to be adaptive to each sample and the training
model. In this paper, we propose “Model-Adaptive Data
Augmentation (MADAug)” that jointly trains an augmentation policy network to teach the model “when to learn
what”. Unlike previous work, MADAug selects augmentation operators for each input image by a model-adaptive
policy varying between training stages, producing a data
augmentation curriculum optimized for better generalization. In MADAug, we train the policy through a bi-level
optimization scheme, which aims to minimize a validationset loss of a model trained using the policy-produced data
augmentations. We conduct an extensive evaluation of
MADAug on multiple image classification tasks and network architectures with thorough comparisons to existing
DA approaches. MADAug outperforms or is on par with
other baselines and exhibits better fairness: it brings improvement to all classes and more to the difficult ones.
Moreover, MADAug learned policy shows better performance when transferred to fine-grained datasets. In addition, the auto-optimized policy in MADAug gradually introduces increasing perturbations and naturally forms an
easy-to-hard curriculum. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/JackHck/MADAug.

1. Introduction
Data augmentation is a widely used strategy to increase
the diversity of training data, which improves the model
generalization, especially in image recognition tasks [21,
35, 17]. Unlike previous works that apply manuallydesigned augmentation operations [6, 44, 47, 23, 4, 24], re* Corresponding author

cent researchers have resorted to searching a data augmentation policy for a target dataset/samples. Despite the success of these learnable and dataset-dependent augmentation
policies, they are fixed once learned and thus non-adaptive
to either different samples or models at different training
stages, resulting in biases across different data regions [2]
or inefficient training.
In this paper, we study two fundamental problems towards developing a data-and-model-adaptive data augmentation policy that determines a curriculum of “when to learn
what” to train a model: (1) when to apply data augmentation in training? (2) what data augmentations should be
applied to each training sample at different training stages?
First, applying data augmentation does not always bring
improvement over the whole course of training. For example, we observed that a model tends to learn faster during
earlier training stages without using data augmentation. We
hypothesize that models at the early stage of training even
have no capability to recognize the original images so excessively augmented images are not conducive to the convergence of the models. Motivated by this observation, we
first design a strategy called monotonic curriculum to progressively introduce more augmented data to the training.
In particular, we gradually increase the probability of applying data augmentation to each sample by following the Tanh
function (see Figure 1), so the model can be quickly improved in earlier stages without distractions from augmentations while reaching a better performance in later stages
through learning from augmented data.
Secondly, a fixed augmentation policy is not optimal
for learning every sample or different training stages. Although the monotonic curriculum gradually increases the
augmented data as the model improves, it does not determine which augmentations applied to each sample can bring
the most improvement to the model training. Intuitively,
the model can learn more from diverse data augmentations.
Moreover, the difficulty of augmented data also has a great
impact on the training and it depends on both the augmentations and the sample they are applied to. For example,
“simple” augmentation is preferred in the early stages to
accelerate model convergence but more challenging aug-

1717

