This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bidirectional Alignment for Domain Adaptive Detection with Transformers
Liqiang He1 , Wei Wang2 , Albert Chen2 , Min Sun2 , Cheng-Hao Kuo2 , and Sinisa Todorovic1
1

Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA
{heli, sinisa}@oregonstate.edu
2
Amazon, Bellevue, WA, USA
{wweiwan, aycchen, minnsun, chkuo}@amazon.com

Abstract
We propose a Bidirectional Alignment for domain adaptive Detection with Transformers (BiADT) to improve cross
domain object detection performance. Existing adversarial
learning based methods use gradient reverse layer (GRL)
to reduce the domain gap between the source and target
domains in feature representations. Since different image
parts and objects may exhibit various degrees of domainspecific characteristics, directly applying GRL on a global
image or object representation may not be suitable. Our
proposed BiADT explicitly estimates token-wise domaininvariant and domain-specific features in the image and object token sequences. BiADT has a novel deformable attention and self-attention, aimed at bi-directional domain
alignment and mutual information minimization. These
two objectives reduce the domain gap in domain-invariant
representations, and simultaneously increase the distinctiveness of domain-specific features. Our experiments
show that BiADT achieves very competitive performance
to SOTA consistently on Cityscapes-to-FoggyCityscapes,
Sim10K-to-Citiscapes and Cityscapes-to-BDD100K, outperforming the strong baseline, AQT, by 2.0, 2.1, and 2.4
in mAP50 , respectively. The implementation is available at
https://github.com/helq2612/biADT

1. Introduction
This paper focuses on cross-domain object detection – an
important problem for vision applications which requires a
detector trained on source-domain images generalize well
on target-domain images. We say that there is a “domain
gap” (or “domain shift”) between the source and target domains, since their respective images significantly differ in
appearance and texture, while they do share the same object
classes of interest. Despite recent advances in standard ob-

Token-wise
Entangled feature
Aligned domaininvariant feature
Diverged domainspecific feature
source

target

CNN

Domain Specific Feature
Discrimination Loss

…

…

Domain Invariant Feature
Alignment loss

…

…

…
Encoder Layer

…
Decoder Layer

…

…

…

…

Encoder Layer

Decoder Layer

…

…

Image Tokens

Encoder

…

…

Objects Query

Decoder

Figure 1. The proposed BiADT is a transformer that consists
of the encoder and decoder (for clarity, we only show 2-encoderlayer and 2-decoder-layer). At the input, the encoder takes imagelevel entangled features (black-white pattern) as image tokens and
gradually disentangles them into domain-specific features (marked
black for the source and white for the target) and domain-invariant
features (marked gray). The decoder decodes object queries on
the image, and similarly disentangles the features. We say that
the encoder and decoder perform bidirectional feature alignment.
This means that they both seek to align domain-invariant features
and increase distinctiveness of domain-specific features, at their
respective image and object levels.

ject detection [33, 27, 2, 50, 26], their direct application in
the cross-domain settings typically yields poor results.
We address cross-domain object detection within the unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) framework, where
training of a detector has access to images of both source
and target domains, but object annotations are only available for the source images. A common approach is to learn
a domain agnostic feature space in which feature distributions from the source and target domains are aligned by met-

18775

