This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Phasic Content Fusing Diffusion Model with Directional Distribution
Consistency for Few-Shot Model Adaption
Teng Hu1 *, Jiangning Zhang2 *, Liang Liu2 , Ran Yi1†, Siqi Kou1
Haokun Zhu1 , Xu Chen2 , Yabiao Wang2,3 , Chengjie Wang1,2 , Lizhuang Ma1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent 3 Zhejiang University
{hu-teng, ranyi, happy-karry, zhuhaokun, ma-lz}@sjtu.edu.cn;
{vtzhang, leoneliu, cxxuchen, caseywang, jasoncjwang}@tencent.com;

Abstract
Training a generative model with limited number of samples is a challenging task. Current methods primarily rely
on few-shot model adaption to train the network. However, in scenarios where data is extremely limited (less
than 10), the generative network tends to overfit and suffers from content degradation. To address these problems,
we propose a novel phasic content fusing few-shot diffusion model with directional distribution consistency loss,
which targets different learning objectives at distinct training stages of the diffusion model. Specifically, we design a
phasic training strategy with phasic content fusion to help
our model learn content and style information when t is
large, and learn local details of target domain when t is
small, leading to an improvement in the capture of content, style and local details. Furthermore, we introduce
a novel directional distribution consistency loss that ensures the consistency between the generated and source
distributions more efficiently and stably than the prior
methods, preventing our model from overfitting. Finally,
we propose a cross-domain structure guidance strategy
that enhances structure consistency during domain adaptation. Theoretical analysis, qualitative and quantitative
experiments demonstrate the superiority of our approach
in few-shot generative model adaption tasks compared to
state-of-the-art methods. The source code is available at:
https://github.com/sjtuplayer/few-shot-diffusion.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models [8, 9] have achieved significant
success in image generation tasks in recent years [39, 33].
However, when the number of samples is limited, i.e.,
under few-shot image generation, they still suffer from
* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding author.

Source Domain

Target Domain
Add t-step
noise

Denoise

Failure in style
transfer at t-small

Model Adaption

T Large
Learn contents and style

T Small
Learn details

Denoise

Denoise

Predict

Predict

Diffusion+IDC loss

Our model

Figure 1. Comparison with the diffusion model [43] directly
trained with IDC loss [20], which captures an inaccurate style due
to the failed style transfer when t is small.

the problem of overfitting. Most of the few-shot generative models are based on Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [8, 2, 5, 15, 30] using few-shot model adaption.
Some existing works have attempted to mitigate the overfitting problem through regularization or data augmentation [14, 36, 26, 41, 42], but still face difficulties when
the samples are extremely limited (less than 10). Recently,
IDC [20] and RSSA [31] propose new cross-domain consistency loss functions to maintain similarity between the generated and original distributions and demonstrate promising
results. However, due to the inherent limitations of GAN’s
architecture and generation process, there is still room for
improvement for these methods in terms of preserving content information and enhancing image quality.
Over the last few years, diffusion models [9] have shown
great success in image generation and have surpassed GAN
model in sub-tasks like text-to-image synthesis and image
inpainting [23]. Especially, the flexible controlling process
and good generation quality of diffusion models can help
enhance the content information and structure consistency
during domain adaption and are suitable for few-shot image generation task, which inspires us to study few-shot
diffusion generation. However, training few-shot diffusion

2406

