This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SGAligner: 3D Scene Alignment with Scene Graphs
Sayan Deb Sarkar 1 , Ondrej Miksik 2 , Marc Pollefeys 1,2 , Daniel Barath 1 , Iro Armeni 1
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
2
Microsoft Mixed Reality & AI Lab, Zurich, Switzerland
sgaligner.github.io

Abstract
Building 3D scene graphs has recently emerged as a
topic in scene representation for several embodied AI applications to represent the world in a structured and rich
manner. With their increased use in solving downstream
tasks (e.g., navigation and room rearrangement), can we
leverage and recycle them for creating 3D maps of environments, a pivotal step in agent operation? We focus on the
fundamental problem of aligning pairs of 3D scene graphs
whose overlap can range from zero to partial and can contain arbitrary changes. We propose SGAligner, the first
method for aligning pairs of 3D scene graphs that is robust
to in-the-wild scenarios (i.e., unknown overlap – if any –
and changes in the environment). We get inspired by multimodality knowledge graphs and use contrastive learning to
learn a joint, multi-modal embedding space. We evaluate on
the 3RScan dataset and further showcase that our method
can be used for estimating the transformation between pairs
of 3D scenes. Since benchmarks for these tasks are missing,
we create them on this dataset. The code, benchmark, and
trained models are available on the project website.

1. Introduction
Generating accurate 3D maps of environments is a key
focus in computer vision and robotics, being a fundamental
component for agents and machines to operate within the
scene, make decisions, and perform tasks. As such, these
maps should be actionable, i.e., containing information
(such as objects, instances, their position, and relationship
to other elements) that allows agents to perform an action
and represented such that it is easily scalable, updateable,
and shareable. Recently, 3D scene graphs [2, 40, 33, 18]
have emerged as a topic in scene representation, providing
a structured and rich way to represent the world. Not only
do they fit the above requirements, but they can also be a
lighter-weight [6] and more privacy-aware representation of
3D scenes than the predominantly used 3D point clouds or
voxel grids – hence being easier and safer to share across

Figure 1. SGAligner. We address the problem of aligning 3D
scene graphs of environments using multi-modal learning and
leverage the output for the downstream task of 3D point cloud registration. Our approach operates directly on 3D scene graph level,
is fast and robust to real-world scenarios.

agents and humans operating in the same scene [22, 47].
Given their potential, 3D scene graphs are increasingly
used in embodied agents as a representation – commonly
built on the fly – to perform robotic navigation [35, 34, 32,
22, 6] and task completion [12, 1, 31, 17, 20]. Since more
and more agents are already building 3D scene graphs for
downstream tasks, we investigate how to leverage and recycle them for creating 3D maps of the environment – a
pivotal step in the agent operation – directly on the scene
graph level. Specifically, we examine the fundamental problem of aligning partial 3D scene graphs of an environment
that originate from different observations. We focus on
real-world scenarios and specifically formulate the problem
as follows: given two 3D scene graphs that represent 3D
scenes whose overlap can range from zero to partial or full
and can contain changes, our goal is to find an alignment
across nodes, if it exists. Interestingly enough, even though
entity alignment (i.e., node alignment) is used in knowledge
graphs and in linguistics [24, 13, 26, 46, 7, 9, 36, 23], the
task of aligning 3D scene graphs of environments has not
been explored. An important note is that entity alignment in
these domains assumes that there is overlap between graphs
and that all inputs contain true information.
We propose SGAligner, the first method for aligning
pairs of 3D scene graphs that is robust to in-the-wild sce-

21927

