This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Structure and Content-Guided Video Synthesis with Diffusion Models
Patrick Esser
Johnathan Chiu
Parmida Atighehchian
Jonathan Granskog
Anastasis Germanidis
Runway
https://research.runwayml.com/gen1

Figure 1. Guided Video Synthesis We present an approach based on latent video diffusion models that synthesizes videos (top and bottom)
guided by content described through text (top) or images (bottom) while keeping the structure of an input video (middle).

Abstract
Text-guided generative diffusion models unlock powerful
image creation and editing tools. Recent approaches that
edit the content of footage while retaining structure require
expensive re-training for every input or rely on error-prone
propagation of image edits across frames.
In this work, we present a structure and content-guided
video diffusion model that edits videos based on descriptions of the desired output. Conflicts between user-provided
content edits and structure representations occur due to insufficient disentanglement between the two aspects. As a solution, we show that training on monocular depth estimates
with varying levels of detail provides control over structure
and content fidelity. A novel guidance method, enabled by
joint video and image training, exposes explicit control over
temporal consistency. Our experiments demonstrate a wide
variety of successes; fine-grained control over output characteristics, customization based on a few reference images,
and a strong user preference towards results by our model.

1. Introduction
Demand for more intuitive and performant video editing tools has increased as video-centric platforms have been
popularized. But editing in the format is still complex
and time-consuming due the temporal nature of video data.
State-of-the-art machine learning models have shown great
promise in improving editing workflows.
Generative approaches for image synthesis recently experienced a rapid surge in quality and popularity due to the
introduction of powerful diffusion models trained on largescale datasets. Text-conditioned models, such as DALLE 2 [34] and Stable Diffusion [38], enable novice users to
generate detailed imagery given only a text prompt as input.
Latent diffusion models especially enable efficient methods
for producing imagery via synthesis in a perceptually compressed space.
Motivated by this progress, we investigate generative
models suited for interactive applications in video editing.
17346

