This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CMDA: Cross-Modality Domain Adaptation for Nighttime
Semantic Segmentation
Ruihao Xia1 Chaoqiang Zhao1 Meng Zheng2 Ziyan Wu2 Qiyu Sun1 Yang Tang1 *
1
East China University of Science and Technology 2 United Imaging Intelligence
{xia rho, zhaocq, qysun}@mail.ecust.edu.cn, {meng.zheng, ziyan.wu}@uii-ai.com
yangtang@ecust.edu.cn

Abstract
Most nighttime semantic segmentation studies are based
on domain adaptation approaches and image input. However, limited by the low dynamic range of conventional cameras, images fail to capture structural details and boundary
information in low-light conditions. Event cameras, as a
new form of vision sensors, are complementary to conventional cameras with their high dynamic range. To this end,
we propose a novel unsupervised Cross-Modality Domain
Adaptation (CMDA) framework to leverage multi-modality
(Images and Events) information for nighttime semantic segmentation, with only labels on daytime images. In CMDA, we
design the Image Motion-Extractor to extract motion information and the Image Content-Extractor to extract content
information from images, in order to bridge the gap between
different modalities (Images ⇌ Events) and domains (Day
⇌ Night). Besides, we introduce the first image-event nighttime semantic segmentation dataset. Extensive experiments
on both the public image dataset and the proposed imageevent dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
approach. We open-source our code, models, and dataset at
https://github.com/XiaRho/CMDA.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a crucial aspect of computer
vision, which is essential for many applications, such as autonomous driving [20, 28], robotics [4, 19, 21], and surveillance [18]. While semantic segmentation of daytime scenes
has made significant progress [5, 29, 36, 41], challenges
remain unsolved for nighttime scenes due to the muchdegraded image quality at night, as well as the lack of highquality annotations. Most existing works [11, 33, 34, 37] employed unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) for nighttime
semantic segmentation to solve the label scarcity problem,
which leverage labeled daytime images (Source Domain)
* Corresponding author.

Daytime Image

Nighttime Image

Nighttime Events

SegFormer [36]
(Image)

DAFormer [14]
(Image)

CMDA
(Image + Events)

Figure 1. Images captured at different moments in the same location show that the low dynamic range of frame-based cameras
leads to reduced color contrast and detailed edges of objects at
night. To overcome this challenge, we introduce event cameras
that have a high dynamic range and are capable of capturing more
nighttime details. In comparison to the semantic segmentation results obtained from daytime images [36], nighttime images result
in misclassification cases [14]. However, our proposed CMDA
improves this by introducing event modality for the first time.

and unlabeled nighttime images (Target Domain). However,
the low dynamic range of conventional frame-based cameras
results in poor image quality at night compared to daytime
images, i.e., the decrease in color contrast and details results
in a reduction of clarity in nighttime images. This impedes
the effective discrimination of object boundaries. Thus, the
performance of methods solely relying on nighttime images
as input is limited.
To address the limitations of frame-based cameras, we
propose to employ event cameras for nighttime semantic
segmentation. Event cameras output the spatio-temporal
coordinates of pixels whose luminosity changes exceeding
a certain threshold value [9, 17]. Their unique operating
principle offers a higher dynamic range (140 dB vs. 60 dB)

21572

