This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-supervised Learning of Implicit Shape Representation with
Dense Correspondence for Deformable Objects
Yinda Zhang3∗
Jiahe Li1,2
Xiaoming Deng1,2 *
1,2
1,2
Cuixia Ma
Hongan Wang
1
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Google
Baowen Zhang1,2

Abstract
Learning 3D shape representation with dense correspondence for deformable objects is a fundamental problem
in computer vision. Existing approaches often need additional annotations of specific semantic domain, e.g., skeleton poses for human bodies or animals, which require extra
annotation effort and suffer from error accumulation, and
they are limited to specific domain. In this paper, we propose a novel self-supervised approach to learn neural implicit shape representation for deformable objects, which
can represent shapes with a template shape and dense correspondence in 3D. Our method does not require the priors of skeleton and skinning weight, and only requires a
collection of shapes represented in signed distance fields.
To handle the large deformation, we constrain the learned
template shape in the same latent space with the training shapes, design a new formulation of local rigid constraint that enforces rigid transformation in local region
and addresses local reflection issue, and present a new hierarchical rigid constraint to reduce the ambiguity due to
the joint learning of template shape and correspondences.
Extensive experiments show that our model can represent
shapes with large deformations. We also show that our
shape representation can support two typical applications,
such as texture transfer and shape editing, with competitive performance. The code and models are available at
https://iscas3dv.github.io/deformshape.

1. Introduction
Shape representation with dense correspondence is a
fundamental problem in computer vision. It plays a key role
in many applications such as shape reconstruction [28, 34,
24], texture mapping [32, 10], and shape editing [10, 9, 36].
Early works often need additional semantic prior or annotations to learn such representation, e.g., SMPL [22] and
* indicates corresponding author

Figure 1: We present a self-supervised method to learn neural implicit representation for deformable objects with a collection of shapes. Our method can generate shapes by deforming a learned template and get dense correspondence.

SMAL [42] use registered meshes in certain semantic categories and LEAP [27] and NASA [9] require annotations of
skeletons and skinning weights, which limits the use cases
and scalability of these representations. On the other hand,
with the emerging implicit representation, more 3D assets
are encoded in implicit sign distance function (SDF), and a
shape representation for deformable objects in SDF is still
largely missing in the community.
In this paper, we aim to design a neural representation for
deformable objects (Figure 1). Given a target deformable
object represented as a set of sign distance field under various deformations, our method learns an implicit representation that is able to reconstruct the 3D shapes, interpolate
between the given examples, and provide dense correspondence across shapes, in a fully self-supervised manner without any additional annotation or semantic prior. Following
the common idea [10, 31], we formulate the deformable
shape as a static shape in a canonical (or template) space,
plus the mappings from any target deformation space to the
template space for arbitrary locations in the 3D space. However, in the existence of large deformation, such as humans

14268

