This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Building More Robust Models with Frequency Bias
Heming Cui1,2
Qingwen Bu1,3
Dong Huang2 *
1
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 2 The University of Hong Kong
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
qwbu01@sjtu.edu.cn,

dhuang@cs.hku.hk,

Abstract
The vulnerability of deep neural networks to adversarial
samples has been a major impediment to their broad applications, despite their success in various fields. Recently,
some works suggested that adversarially-trained models
emphasize the importance of low-frequency information to
achieve higher robustness. While several attempts have
been made to leverage this frequency characteristic, they
have all faced the issue that applying low-pass filters directly to input images leads to irreversible loss of discriminative information and poor generalizability to datasets
with distinct frequency features. This paper presents a plugand-play module called the Frequency Preference Control
Module that adaptively reconfigures the low- and highfrequency components of intermediate feature representations, providing better utilization of frequency in robust
learning. Empirical studies show that our proposed module can be easily incorporated into any adversarial training framework, further improving model robustness across
different architectures and datasets. Additionally, experiments were conducted to examine how the frequency bias of
robust models impacts the adversarial training process and
its final robustness, revealing interesting insights.

1. Introduction
As deep learning methods are making a splash in various
fields, their security and robustness are drawing more and
more attention from both academia and industry. DNNs for
image classification have been proven to be easily fooled
by adversarial examples, with imperceptible perturbations
added to natural images. The vulnerability is also uncovered in many other safety-critical fields like medical diagnosis [10] and autonomous driving [8]. Adversarial training
is regarded as a trustworthy approach for producing robust
models, and considerable subsequent effort has been done
to increase its efficiency [28, 33] and efficacy [40, 41]. De* Corresponding author.

heming@cs.hku.hk

spite continuously advanced robust learning methods, the
relationship between some intrinsic characteristics of the
model structure, such as frequency characteristics, and the
robustness it exhibits seems to be rarely discussed.
The emergence of vision transformers (ViTs) revealed a
novel architecture that performs on par or even better than
convolutional networks (CNNs) in many vision tasks. As
more and more in-depth work unfolds, some of ViT’s fundamentals and characteristics are exposed. Several recent
works try to improve the performance of ViTs with a frequency lens. [29] proposed naturally trained ViTs are more
robust to adversarial attack, especially for high-frequency
perturbations. It is also noticed that ViTs reduce highfrequency signals while CNNs amplify them [25]. [31] successfully enhances ViT performance by deliberately retaining high-frequency information. The complementarity of
CNNs and ViTs exhibited in the frequency domain is an intriguing starting point for studying and further improving
the robustness of the model. But the relations between robustness and the frequency bias of models have not been
fully studied and utilized in the context of robust learning.
Research [11] has suggested that deep neural networks,
when trained on image classification data sets, tend to exhibit bias towards texture information, which is the highfrequency element present in images. By contrast, models that are adversarially trained primarily emphasize the
importance of low-frequency information, leading to improved robustness [42]. To delve further into this phenomenon, several studies have experimented with adjusting
the constraints placed on either low or high-frequency signals in the loss regularization term [2], or incorporating perturbations of variable frequencies during adversarial training [23]. There are also several attempts [43, 16] aimed
at exploiting the above mentioned frequency properties to
build more robust models. However, they have primarily
been limited to applying low-pass filtering directly to clean
or adversarial inputs. Regrettably, this methodology is associated with an irreversible loss of high-frequency information within the image and thus causes a marked decrease
in accuracy across clean samples (e.g., 4-5% clean accuracy

4402

