This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tube-Link: A Flexible Cross Tube Framework for Universal Video Segmentation
Xiangtai Li1
Guangliang Cheng2,3
1

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

Haobo Yuan1 Wenwei Zhang1
Jiangmiao Pang4 Chen Change Loy1
2

3

University of Liverpool

SenseTime Research

4

Shanghai AI Lab

{xiangtai.li, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Video segmentation aims to segment and track every
pixel in diverse scenarios accurately. In this paper, we
present Tube-Link, a versatile framework that addresses
multiple core tasks of video segmentation with a unified
architecture. Our framework is a near-online approach
that takes a short subclip as input and outputs the corresponding spatial-temporal tube masks. To enhance the
modeling of cross-tube relationships, we propose an effective way to perform tube-level linking via attention along
the queries. In addition, we introduce temporal contrastive
learning to instance-wise discriminative features for tubelevel association. Our approach offers flexibility and efficiency for both short and long video inputs, as the length
of each subclip can be varied according to the needs of
datasets or scenarios. Tube-Link outperforms existing specialized architectures by a significant margin on five video
segmentation datasets. Specifically, it achieves almost
13% relative improvements on VIPSeg and 4% improvements on KITTI-STEP over the strong baseline Video KNet. When using a ResNet50 backbone on Youtube-VIS2019 and 2021, Tube-Link boosts IDOL by 3% and 4%,
respectively. Code is available at https://github.
com/lxtGH/Tube-Link.

1. Introduction
The success of the Detection Transformer (DETR) [3]
has inspired recent works [8, 64, 9, 47] to develop universal architectures for addressing all image segmentation
tasks using the same architecture, also known as universal image segmentation. In video segmentation, the Video
Panoptic Segmentation (VPS) task involves segmenting and
tracking each pixel in input video clips [20, 52, 18], unifying the Video Semantic Segmentation (VSS) [30] and
Video Instance Segmentation (VIS) [60] tasks. To minimize specialized architecture design for each task, recent
studies [25, 21] follow a universal approach to video seg-

Tube-Link aims For Universal Video Segmentation
Video Semantic Segmentation

Video Instance Segmentation

Video Panoptic Segmentation

Sub-Cip

Video Clip
Sub-Cip

Sub-Cip

Tube Association

Global Queries

Tube Mask

52.8
48.9

Tube Association

Global Queries

Tube Mask

Ours

44.2

47.9

Global Queries

Tube Mask

64.9

50.4
Ours

Ours

59.0

Ours

39.8
`

[VIS]-Youtube-2019

[VIS]-Youtube-2021

Previous SOTA architectures

VITA

[VPS]-VIP-Seg
Video K-Net

[VSS]-VIP-Seg
IDOL

Figure 1: Tube-Link takes subclips as inputs and links the resulting tubes in a near online manner. Our design embraces flexibility,
efficiency, and temporal consistency, making it suitable for various video segmentation tasks, including VSS, VIS, and VPS. Notably, our method outperforms the best-specialized architectures
for these tasks on multiple datasets. Best viewed in color.

mentation by solving sub-tasks of VPS in a single unified
framework. These methods typically use an end-to-end set
prediction objective and successfully address multiple tasks
without modifying the architecture and loss.
While recent studies have demonstrated promising results, there are still several issues with VPS models and universal video segmentation methods. One major challenge is
the lack of exploration of VPS for arbitrary scenes and video
clip lengths. To address this gap, Miao et al. [29] have introduced a more challenging benchmark, named VIPSeg,
which features long videos and diverse indoor and outdoor
scenes. This new dataset presents new challenges to existing VPS methods [20, 29, 25, 37], such as increased occlusions and appearance changes in diverse scenarios. Another issue with universal methods [25, 21] is that they cannot achieve comparable results to recent Transformer-based
VIS methods [57, 55], which raises the question of whether
we can design a universal video segmentation method to

13923

