This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Correction Filter via Degradation-Adaptive Regression for Blind
Single Image Super-Resolution
Hongyang Zhou1 , Xiaobin Zhu1∗, Jianqing Zhu2 , Zheng Han1 , Shi-Xue Zhang1
Jingyan Qin1 , Xu-Cheng Yin1
1
University Of Science and Technology Beijing, 2 College of Engineering, Huaqiao University
ilaopi@foxmail.com, zhuxiaobin@ustb.edu.cn, jqzhu@hqu.edu.cn, han970421@foxmail.com
zhangshixue111@163.com, qinjingyanking@foxmail.com, xuchengyin@ustb.edu.cn

Abstract
Although existing image deep learning super-resolution
(SR) methods achieve promising performance on benchmark datasets, they still suffer from severe performance
drops when the degradation of the low-resolution (LR) input is not covered in training. To address the problem,
we propose an innovative unsupervised method of Learning Correction Filter via Degradation-Adaptive Regression
for Blind Single Image Super-Resolution. Highly inspired
by the generalized sampling theory, our method aims to enhance the strength of off-the-shelf SR methods trained on
known degradations and adapt to unknown complex degradations to generate improved results. Specifically, we first
conduct degradation estimation for each local image region
by learning the internal distribution in an unsupervised
manner via GAN. Instead of assuming degradation are spatially invariant across the whole image, we learn correction filters to adjust degradations to known degradations in
a spatially variant way by a novel linearly-assembled pixel
degradation-adaptive regression module (DARM). DARM is
lightweight and easy to optimize on a dictionary of multiple pre-defined filter bases. Extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets verify the effectiveness of our
method both qualitatively and quantitatively. Code can be
available at: https://github.com/edbca/DARSR.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) aims to recover a
photo-realistic HR image from its LR counterpart. As a fundamental computer vision task, SISR has been widely used
in various applications, such as enhancing the images’ visual perception on high-resolution devices and improving
the image quality for other vision tasks [7]. In recent years,
∗ Corresponding author (zhuxiaobin@ustb.edu.cn).

Degradation
Estimator

SR
Network

LR
(a) Most degradation estimation strategies

Correction
Filters

LR

Trained
SR model

Corrected LR
(b) Our method

Figure 1. Illustration of most degradation estimation strategies for
blindSR and our method. (a) Most methods assume degradations
are spatially invariant and estimate a single degradation for the
whole image. (b) Our method can learns correction filters to adjust
the degradations to a known degradation in a spatially variant way.

a multiplicity of deep learning-based SISR methods have
been proposed [33, 18, 25, 52, 51, 8, 29, 54] and achieved
substantial performance improvement.
Typically, training and testing LR images in existing
SISR approaches are simulated from a large collection of
HR images. As a pioneer work, Dong et al. [9] first introduced a three-layer convolutional neural network in SISR to
learn LR-HR mapping. Zhang et al. [51] proposed a channel attention mechanism to build a deep model for SISR.
Liang et al. [22] proposed a baseline model SwinIR for
SISR based on the transformer mechanism. In these methods, the LR images are often generated by limited numbers of fixed degradations (e.g., Bicubic or blur-downscale).
However, the degradation process in real-world scenarios is
extremely complicated and unpredictable. Although existing methods [25, 51, 29, 21, 18, 8] have achieved promising performance, they often encounter severe performance
drops when the degradation is not well covered in training.

12365

