This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EgoLoc: Revisiting 3D Object Localization from Egocentric Videos
with Visual Queries
Jinjie Mai1 Abdullah Hamdi2,1 Silvio Giancola1 Chen Zhao1 Bernard Ghanem1
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)

2

Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford

{jinjie.mai,silvio.giancola,chen.zhao,bernard.ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa
abdullah.hamdi@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
With the recent advances in video and 3D understanding, novel 4D spatio-temporal methods fusing both concepts
have emerged. Towards this direction, the Ego4D Episodic
Memory Benchmark proposed a task for Visual Queries with
3D Localization (VQ3D). Given an egocentric video clip
and an image crop depicting a query object, the goal is to
localize the 3D position of the center of that query object
with respect to the camera pose of a query frame. Current
methods tackle the problem of VQ3D by unprojecting the
2D localization results of the sibling task Visual Queries
with 2D Localization (VQ2D) into 3D predictions. Yet, we
point out that the low number of camera poses caused by
camera re-localization from previous VQ3D methods severally hinders their overall success rate. In this work, we
formalize a pipeline (we dub EgoLoc) that better entangles
3D multiview geometry with 2D object retrieval from egocentric videos. Our approach involves estimating more robust
camera poses and aggregating multi-view 3D displacements
by leveraging the 2D detection confidence, which enhances
the success rate of object queries and leads to a significant
improvement in the VQ3D baseline performance. Specifically, our approach achieves an overall success rate of up
to 87.12%, which sets a new state-of-the-art result in the
VQ3D task1 . We provide a comprehensive empirical analysis
of the VQ3D task and existing solutions, and highlight the
remaining challenges in VQ3D. The code is available at
https://github.com/Wayne-Mai/EgoLoc.

1. Introduction
Time moves forward, from the past to the future, and we
cannot turn it back. But our minds have a special ability
to remember past events, almost as if we are traveling back
in time. This ability is called Episodic Memory, and it’s
1 https://eval.ai/web/challenges/challenge-page/
1646/leaderboard/3947

Q : Where is my water bottle

? A:(ΔX, ΔY, ΔZ)

Figure 1. Visual Query with 3D Localization Task in Egocentric Videos. Given an egocentric video clip and an image crop
depicting a query object, the goal is to localize the last time a query
object was seen in the video and return the 3D displacement vector
from the camera center of the query frame to the center of the object
in 3D.

unique to humans [88]. It’s more than just remembering
facts; it’s about reliving past experiences, knowing when
they happened, and understanding that they happened to us
[88]. In the pursuit of more human-like AI systems, infusing
Episodic Memory capabilities into our machines holds great
promise, especially in assisting people to recall their past
experiences.
Towards such efforts, the massive-scale dataset and benchmark suite Ego4D [26] introduced multiple tasks on Episodic
Memory from egocentric videos, with the scope of browsing and searching past human experiences. Among those
challenges, the task of Visual Queries (VQ) aimed at answering “Where was object X last seen in the video?”, with X
being a single image crop of an object, clearly visible and
humanly identifiable. In particular, Visual Queries with 3D
Localization (VQ3D) focuses on retrieving the relative 3D
localization of a query object with respect to a current query
frame, as illustrated in Figure 1.

45

