This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Dynamic Dual-Processing Object Detection Framework Inspired by the
Brain’s Recognition Mechanism
Minying Zhang*† Tianpeng Bu* Lulu Hu
Alibaba Group
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
{minying.zmy, tianpeng.btp, chudu.hll} @alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
There are two main approaches to object detection:
CNN-based and Transformer-based. The former views object detection as a dense local matching problem, while the
latter sees it as a sparse global retrieval problem. Research
in neuroscience has shown that the recognition decision in
the brain is based on two processes, namely familiarity and
recollection. Based on this biological support, we propose
an efficient and effective dual-processing object detection
framework. It integrates CNN- and Transformer-based detectors into a comprehensive object detection system consisting of a shared backbone, an efficient dual-stream encoder, and a dynamic dual-decoder. To better integrate
local and global features, we design a search space for
the CNN-Transformer dual-stream encoder to find the optimal fusion solution. To enable better coordination between
the CNN- and Transformer-based decoders, we provide the
dual-decoder with a selective mask. This mask dynamically
chooses the more advantageous decoder for each position
in the image based on high-level representation. As demonstrated by extensive experiments, our approach shows flexibility and effectiveness in prompting the mAP of the various
source detectors by 3.0∼3.7 without increasing FLOPs.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental and challenging research problem in the field of computer vision. The task
is to predict a bounding box and a category label for each
object in an image. In early times, CNN-based method
has made significant progresses in this field, which utilizes
convolution to attain both low- and high-level local pattern
information from the input image, and performs classification on all candidate grids paved on the image [33, 22,
39, 5, 9, 17]. Recently, Transformer-based detector is pro* Equal contribution.
† Minying Zhang is the corresponding author.

posed as an alternative solution to this problem. It employs a Transformer-based encoder and decoder to build
attention-based global representation and reason about relationships between objects and the global image context
via a set of queries [3, 46, 24, 43, 41, 28, 19, 45]. Overall,
CNN- and Transformer-based detectors can be structured
into a backbone-encoder-decoder architecture. This architecture includes a backbone that extracts rich and general
shallow features, an encoder that generates task-relevant
high-level representations, and a decoder that predicts the
results. Studies in [35, 44] show that visual perception process in human brain is also hierarchical and conclude that
the ventral visual stream (VVS) of the human brain can be
abstracted by a backbone-encoder-decoder structure, which
provides biologically-plausible explanation to the structure
of current deep learning based object detectors, as shown in
Figure 2(c).
There is increasing evidence that brain’s recognition is,
in fact, on the basis of the dual-process detection theory
which has already a far-reaching influence in the field of
psychology and cognitive neuroscience [44]. It claims that
brain’s recognition reflects the joint contribution of two separable retrieval processes, namely familiarity and recollection. Neuroscientists find that familiarity is associated with
distinct visual cortex area whose biological mechanism inspires the CNN architecture [34] and recollection is typically ascribed to the hippocampus which has close relationship to the Transformer [42]. These findings indicate that in
the field of deep learning based object detectors, the function and working mechanism of CNN- and Transformerbased detectors are both bio-inspired and have close relation to familiarity and recollection processes. But each single process can not fully reflect how human brain delivering object detection tasks and may easily reach its limit as
shown in Figure 1. Some recent works attempt to improve
the performances of detectors with CNN-Transformer hybrid methods [7, 43, 6, 8, 37], by introducing the key properties of one to the other. However they only consider either
familiarity-like CNN-based encoding-decoding pipeline or

6264

