This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Variational Degeneration to Structural Reﬁnement: A Uniﬁed Framework for
Superimposed Image Decomposition
Wenyu Li1 , Yan Xu1 , Yang Yang1 ,* Haoran Ji1 , Yue Lang2
1
Tianjin University, Tianjin, China.
2
Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China.
Abstract
Decomposing a single mixed image into individual image layers is the common crux of a classical category of
tasks in image restoration. Several uniﬁed frameworks have
been proposed that can handle different types of degradation in superimposed image decomposition. However, there
are always undesired structural distortions in the separated
images when dealing with complicated degradation patterns. In this paper, we propose a uniﬁed framework for
superimposed image decomposition that can cope with intricate degradation patterns adaptively. Considering the
different mixing patterns between the layers, we introduce
a degeneration representation in the latent space to mine
the intrinsic relationship between the superimposed image and the degeneration pattern. Moreover, by extracting
structure-guided knowledge from the superimposed image,
we further propose structural guidance reﬁnement to avoid
confusing content caused by structure distortion. Extensive
experiments have demonstrated that our method remarkably outperforms other popular image separation frameworks. The method also achieves competitive results on related applications including image deraining, image reﬂection removal, and image shadow removal, which validates
the generalization of the framework.

1. Introduction
Single superimposed image decomposition aims to decompose a given superimposed image into the corresponding source images. It involves many critical research tasks,
such as image deraining, reﬂection removal, and shadow removal, etc. The key feature of this type of task is that the
input degraded image can be viewed as a superimposing of
two layers. For example, image deraining can be treated as
decomposing a rainy image into a rain-free image and rain
streaks.
In superimposed image decomposition, the degradation
* Corresponding author.

12206

(a) Input

(b) DAD

(c) GIP

(d) BIDeN

(e) VDSR (Ours)

(f) Ground truth

Figure 1. Image decomposition results on the Stanford-Dogs [23]
+ VGG-Flowers [29] dataset. We only present one output here. It
can be observed that both DAD [51] and GIP [52] contain blurred
edges of “ﬂower”, and BIDeN [14] produces slight blur and color
distortion. Our result preserve ﬁner geometric structures.

model is formulated as follows:
I = g (x1 ) + f (x2 ) ,

(1)

where g (·) and f (·) represent various degradation representations for x1 and x2 , which act as crucial components
to model the degradation. A challenge of this task is dealing with various and complicated degradation patterns produced in different degradation processes, like the mixing
factor of two layers in Eq. (1). These degradation patterns are extremely difﬁcult to identify, therefore, previous methods usually formulate these tasks as individual research problems, making great progress [8, 42, 15]. However, the model well-designed for one task is hard to apply
directly to another, due to the degradation changes. There
is a high expectation to handle all the above tasks within a
uniﬁed framework.
In recent years, existing studies have exploited the Unetbased [33] single lane structure to restore source images in
a uniﬁed framework (see Figure 2). While high-ﬁdelity results can be generated, this structure always suffers from

