This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmniLabel: A Challenging Benchmark for Language-Based Object Detection
Samuel Schulter1, †

Vijay Kumar B G1

Zhixing Zhang2,*
*

Yumin Suh1

Shiyu Zhao2,*

†

project lead

1

NEC Laboratories America

Konstantinos M. Dafnis2,*

Dimitris Metaxas2

equal technical contribution, alphabetic order
2

Rutgers University

Abstract
Language-based object detection is a promising direction towards building a natural interface to describe objects
in images that goes far beyond plain category names. While
recent methods show great progress in that direction, proper
evaluation is lacking. With OmniLabel, we propose a novel
task definition, dataset, and evaluation metric. The task
subsumes standard- and open-vocabulary detection as well
as referring expressions. With more than 28K unique object descriptions on over 25K images, OmniLabel provides
a challenging benchmark with diverse and complex object
descriptions in a naturally open-vocabulary setting. Moreover, a key differentiation to existing benchmarks is that our
object descriptions can refer to one, multiple or even no object, hence, providing negative examples in free-form text.
The proposed evaluation handles the large label space and
judges performance via a modified average precision metric, which we validate by evaluating strong language-based
baselines. OmniLabel indeed provides a challenging test
bed for future research on language-based detection. Visit
the project website at https://www.omnilabel.org

1. Introduction
A nuanced understanding of the rich semantics of the
world around us is a key ability in the visual perception
system of humans. Identifying objects from a description
like “person wearing blue-and-white striped T-shirt standing next to the traffic sign” feels easy, because humans
understand the composition of object category names, attributes, actions, and spatial or semantic relations between
objects. When automated, this same ability can improve and
enable a plethora of applications in robotics, autonomous
vehicles, navigation, retail, etc.
With the recent advances in vision & language models [17, 19, 37], along with extensions towards object lo-

Figure 1: (Left) OmniLabel extends upon standard detection, open-vocabulary detection, as well as referring expressions, subsuming these tasks as special cases. (Right) The
OmniLabel dataset is semantically rich with diverse freeform text descriptions of objects. Moreover, with object
descriptions referring to multiple instances, dedicated negative descriptions, and a novel evaluation metric, our benchmark poses a challenging task for language-based detectors.

calization [15, 18, 24, 27, 49], a comprehensive evaluation
benchmark is needed. However, existing ones fall short
in various aspects. While object detection datasets significantly increased the label space over time (from 20 in
Pascal [12] to 1200 in LVIS [16]), a fixed label space is
assumed. The zero-shot [4] and open-vocabulary detection [15, 46] settings drop the fixed-labelspace assumption,
but corresponding benchmarks only evaluate simple category names, neglecting more complex descriptions. Referring expression datasets [33, 45] probe models with freeform text descriptions of objects. However, the corresponding dataset annotations and metrics do not allow for a comprehensive evaluation of models.
We introduce a novel benchmark called OmniLabel with
the goal to comprehensively probe models for their ability to understand complex, free-form textual descriptions of
objects and to locate the corresponding instances. This requires a novel task definition and evaluation metric, which
we propose in Sec. 3. Our evaluation benchmark does not
assume a fixed label space (unlike standard detection), uses

11953

