This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TARGET: Federated Class-Continual Learning via Exemplar-Free Distillation
Jie Zhang*
ETH Zurich
zj.jayzhang@gmail.com
Chen Chen & Weiming Zhuang & Lingjuan Lyu†
Sony AI
{ChenA.Chen, weiming.zhuang, Lingjuan.Lv}@sony.com

Abstract
This paper focuses on an under-explored yet important
problem: Federated Class-Continual Learning (FCCL),
where new classes are dynamically added in federated
learning. Existing FCCL works suffer from various limitations, such as requiring additional datasets or storing
the private data from previous tasks. In response, we first
demonstrate that non-IID data exacerbates catastrophic
forgetting issue in FL. Then we propose a novel method
called TARGET (federatTed clAss-continual leaRninG via
Exemplar-free disTillation), which alleviates catastrophic
forgetting in FCCL while preserving client data privacy.
Our proposed method leverages the previously trained
global model to transfer knowledge of old tasks to the current task at the model level. Moreover, a generator is
trained to produce synthetic data to simulate the global distribution of data on each client at the data level. Compared
to previous FCCL methods, TARGET does not require any
additional datasets or storing real data from previous tasks,
which makes it ideal for data-sensitive scenarios.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is a privacy-aware learning
paradigm that facilitates collaborations among multiple entities (e.g., edge devices or organizations) [38, 20, 28, 66,
17]. Each entity or client in FL retains data locally and
transfers only training updates to the central server for aggregation.
Conventional FL studies assume that the data classes
and domains are static, but the new classes could emerge
and data domains could change over time in reality [64,
* Work done during internship at Sony AI.
† Corresponding author.

40, 1, 65]. For example, multiple health institutions could
use FL to collaborate and train models to identify COVID19 [56, 9, 2] strains; new COVID-19 strains, however, continue to emerge due to high mutation rate of virus. An intuitive solution to this issue of continuously emerging data
classes is training new models from scratch, but this is impractical as it would require significant extra computation
cost. Another method is transfer learning from the previously trained model, but this method suffers from catastrophic forgetting [23, 22, 47, 16], degrading performance
on the previous classes.
To address these issues, recent research [36, 11, 3, 19]
has introduced the concept of Continual Learning (CL) [61,
42, 51, 49, 48] within the FL framework. These methods, collectively referred to as Federated Continual Learning (FCL), aim to mitigate the problems of catastrophic forgetting in FL. In most FCL scenarios, new classes are dynamically added, which we call Federated Class-Continual
Learning (FCCL). FCCL allows local clients to continuously collect new data, and new classes can be added at any
time.
Unfortunately, existing FCCL works suffer from various
limitations. For example, Ma et al. [36] utilize an unlabeled surrogate dataset to address the catastrophic forgetting problem, which may be difficult to obtain in some
data sensitive scenarios. Furthermore, the usage of an unlabeled surrogate dataset may not be ideal for certain types of
data, as it may not capture the full complexity of the original data. In CL, exemplar-based methods [44, 33, 54, 13]
have achieved leading performance. An exemplar refers to
a sample or instance of a previously seen data point that
is retained in a memory buffer for future use in the learning process. Dong et al. [11] propose a exemplar-based
method that stores historical data to address catastrophic
forgetting. However, in many privacy-sensitive scenarios
(e.g., hospitals and medical research institutions), users are

4782

