This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Class-Incremental Grouping Network for
Continual Audio-Visual Learning
Shentong Mo†
Carnegie Mellon University

Weiguo Pian†
University of Texas at Dallas

Yapeng Tian*
University of Texas at Dallas

Abstract
Continual learning is a challenging problem in which
models need to be trained on non-stationary data across sequential tasks for class-incremental learning. While previous methods have focused on using either regularization or
rehearsal-based frameworks to alleviate catastrophic forgetting in image classification, they are limited to a single modality and cannot learn compact class-aware crossmodal representations for continual audio-visual learning.
To address this gap, we propose a novel class-incremental
grouping network (CIGN) that can learn category-wise semantic features to achieve continual audio-visual learning. Our CIGN leverages learnable audio-visual class tokens and audio-visual grouping to continually aggregate
class-aware features. Additionally, it utilizes class tokens
distillation and continual grouping to prevent forgetting
parameters learned from previous tasks, thereby improving the model’s ability to capture discriminative audiovisual categories. We conduct extensive experiments on
VGGSound-Instruments, VGGSound-100, and VGG-Sound
Sources benchmarks. Our experimental results demonstrate
that the CIGN achieves state-of-the-art audio-visual classincremental learning performance. Code is available at
https://github.com/stoneMo/CIGN .

1. Introduction
The strong correspondence between audio signals and
visual objects in the world enables humans to perceive
the source of a sound, such as a meowing cat. This
perception intelligence has motivated researchers to explore audio-visual joint learning for various tasks, such as
audio-visual event classification [60], sound source separation [69, 17, 58], and visual sound localization [55, 12, 39].
In this work, we focus on the problem of classifying sound
sources from both video frames and audio in a continual
learning [28, 37] setting, i.e., train audio-visual learning
models on non-stationary audio-visual pairs, enabling the
model to classify sound sources in videos incrementally.
* Corresponding author, † Equal contribution.

Figure 1. Comparison of our CIGN with state-of-the-art approaches on Average Accuracy (Top Row, higher is better) and
Forgetting (Bottom Row, lower is better) for continual audiovisual learning on VGGSound-Instruments [26], VGGSound100 [13], and VGG-Sound Sources [13] benchmarks.

Continual learning is a recently popular and challenging
problem that aims to train models on non-stationary data
given sequential tasks for class-incremental learning. Previous methods [28, 53, 34, 8, 65, 23, 51] mainly used either regularization or rehearsal-based approaches to alleviate catastrophic forgetting between old and new classes for
image classification. A typical regularization-based work,
EWC [28] addressed catastrophic forgetting in neural networks by training sequential models to protect the weights
crucial for previous tasks. Similarly, LwF [34] used only
new task data for training while preserving the original capabilities. To improve the performance under challenging
datasets, BiC [65] adopted two bias parameters in a linear
model to address the bias to new classes. SS-IL [2] combined separated softmax with task-wise knowledge distillation to solve this bias. However, those baselines are based
on a single input modality and perform worse for continual
audio-visual learning. In this work, we address a new multimodal continual problem by extracting disentangled and
compact representations with learnable audio-visual classincremental tokens as guidance for continual learning.
Since prompts can learn task-specific knowledge [50, 31,
33, 25] for transfer learning, recent researchers have tried
17788

