This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Joint-Relation Transformer for Multi-Person Motion Prediction
Qingyao Xu1*, Weibo Mao1*, Jingze Gong1 , Chenxin Xu1 ,
†
†
Siheng Chen1,2 , Weidi Xie1,2 , Ya Zhang1,2 , Yanfeng Wang1,2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{xuqingyao, kirino.mao, xcxwakaka, sihengc, weidi, ya zhang, wangyanfeng}@sjtu.edu.cn
autubot@163.com

multi-head attention

Abstract
Joints

Multi-person motion prediction is a challenging problem due to the dependency of motion on both individual past movements and interactions with other people.
Transformer-based methods have shown promising results
on this task, but they miss the explicit relation representation between joints, such as skeleton structure and pairwise
distance, which is crucial for accurate interaction modeling.
In this paper, we propose the Joint-Relation Transformer,
which utilizes relation information to enhance interaction
modeling and improve future motion prediction. Our relation information contains the relative distance and the intra/inter-person physical constraints. To fuse relation and joint
information, we design a novel joint-relation fusion layer
with relation-aware attention to update both features. Additionally, we supervise the relation information by forecasting future distance. Experiments show that our method
achieves a 13.4% improvement of 900ms VIM on 3DPWSoMoF/RC and 17.8%/12.0% improvement of 3s MPJPE
on CMU-Mpcap/MuPoTS-3D dataset. Code is available at
https://github.com/MediaBrain-SJTU/JRTransformer.

1. Introduction
Multi-person motion prediction aims to predict the future
positions of skeleton joints for multiple individuals based on
their historical movements. Compared to traditional singleperson motion prediction [11, 7, 4, 24, 48, 47, 27], multiperson motion prediction is more practical as people are
mostly associated with a group and interacting with each
other. It is also more challenging because sophisticated
interactions across different individuals need to be considered. The related methods are playing significant roles in a
wide range of practical applications, including autonomous
driving [15, 38, 10, 51], surveillance systems [13, 42, 52]
and healthcare monitoring [43]. They also pave a path to
better human-robot interaction [6, 12].
Previous works on multi-person motion prediction gen* Equal contribution.

† Corresponding author.

Standard Transformer

relation feature learning
Relations

Predicted Relations

joint feature learning
Joints

Joint-Relation Transformer Predicted Joints

Figure 1. System comparison between the standard Transformer
and the proposed Joint-Relation Transformer.

erally adopt two types of architectures, including graph neural networks (GNNs) and Transformer. The former one,
such as TRiPOD [3], models the multi-person interaction
via a graph structure, however, it suffers from the inherent
oversoomthing problem in GNNs, thus can only afford shallow models with limited learning capacities; while the latter
one, such as MRT [46] and SoMoFormer [40], treat temporal sequence or skeleton joints as a sequence input, and learn
to establish the relations between them via self-attention
mechanism. Compared with GNN-based methods, Transformer has shown strong learning ability, thus becoming a
default backbone for multi-person motion prediction.
While encouraging results are shown in the Transformerbased methods, those previous works only implicitly learn
the inter-joint relation through the attention mechanism and
lack the explicit awareness of skeleton structure. To address this issue, we propose Joint-Relation Transformer, a
two-stream Transformer architecture for multi-person motion prediction. Instead of only updating the features for
body joints, Joint-Relation Transformer uses two streams
to achieve feature learning for both joints and relations. In
specific, one stream encodes the sequence of skeleton joints,
containing the historical movement information of the joints
in world coordinates; and the other one explicitly takes the
joints-to-joints relation as input, including the relative distance between two joints and physical constraints, such as
inter-body constraints and intra-body skeleton connections.
To effectively fuse and update features of joints and re-

9816

