This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MedKLIP: Medical Knowledge Enhanced Language-Image
Pre-Training for X-ray Diagnosis

1

Chaoyi Wu1,2 , Xiaoman Zhang1,2 , Ya Zhang1,2 , Yanfeng Wang1,2,† , Weidi Xie1,2,†
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{wtzxxxwcy02, xm99sjtu, ya zhang, wangyanfeng, weidi}@sjtu.edu.cn

https://chaoyi-wu.github.io/MedKLIP/

Abstract
In this paper, we consider enhancing medical visuallanguage pre-training (VLP) with domain-specific knowledge, by exploiting the paired image-text reports from the
radiological daily practice. In particular, we make the following contributions: First, unlike existing works that directly process the raw reports, we adopt a novel triplet extraction module to extract the medical-related information,
avoiding unnecessary complexity from language grammar
and enhancing the supervision signals; Second, we propose a novel triplet encoding module with entity translation
by querying a knowledge base, to exploit the rich domain
knowledge in medical field, and implicitly build relationships between medical entities in the language embedding
space; Third, we propose to use a Transformer-based fusion model for spatially aligning the entity description with
visual signals at the image patch level, enabling the ability for medical diagnosis; Fourth, we conduct thorough
experiments to validate the effectiveness of our architecture, and benchmark on numerous public benchmarks e.g.,
ChestX-ray14, RSNA Pneumonia, SIIM-ACR Pneumothorax, COVIDx CXR-2, COVID Rural, and EdemaSeverity.
In both zero-shot and fine-tuning settings, our model has
demonstrated strong performance compared with the former methods on disease classification and grounding.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of deep learning, numerous
works have been proposed to facilitate computer-aided diagnosis in the medical field [46, 20, 55, 19]. Despite the
tremendous progress, these models are normally trained to
recognize or segment the structures that fall into a certain
closed set of anatomical or disease categories, whenever a
new disease comes to be of interest, a costly procedure for
data annotation, model re-training are required, fundamen†: Corresponding author.

A. Classical VLP Training
Reports
General Text Encoding

Report-level
Matching

B. MedKLIP
Reports

Knowledge-enhanced
Triplet
Extraction

Entity
Translation

Entity-level
Query

Figure 1: Our method mainly considers combining medical
knowledge with VLP. We propose Triplet Extraction and
Entity Translation modules, so that the network can be supervised with detailed entity-level signals.
tally limiting its practical values. As an alternative, recent
research considers to train the model on the corpus, consisting of large amount of multi-modal data, that is generated
from daily clinical routine, for instance, the most common
example is the dataset of X-ray images with paired radiological reports [18, 28, 31].
This paper presents our preliminary investigation on
vision-language representation learning in the medical domain, with the goal of better zero-shot disease diagnosis
(classification) and grounding. Undoubtedly, these tasks
have also been widely investigated in the computer vision community, with significant progress made on developing Foundational Models in the past years, for example, CLIP [50], ALBEF [33], BLIP[32], etc. However, to
achieve such a goal in the medical domain, different challenges must be resolved, that requires research efforts from
the community: First, data availability, training Foundation
Models in computer vision normally require over millions
of image-text pairs, while in the medical domain, only a
few hundred thousand pairs are available [31]. The limited data challenges language models to understand the reports in free form [6]. Second, the problem considered in
computer-aided diagnosis is naturally fine-grained, that requires distinguishing the medical concepts to understand
the disease, as a consequence, domain knowledge is essen1
21372

