This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Parametric Classification for Generalized Category Discovery: A Baseline Study
Xiaojuan Qi1
Bingchen Zhao2 *
Xin Wen1 *
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 University of Edinburgh
{wenxin,xjqi}@eee.hku.hk

bingchen.zhao@ed.ac.uk

Representation Learning Objectives
① Classification-Based Learning
1

② Supervised Contrastive Learning
2

Current Works
③ Self-Supervised Contrastive Learning
3

RankStat+

3

Mangrove
Cuckoo

1

Green
Jay

5

UNO+

1
Classification Objectives

④ Non-Parametric Classification
4

⑤
5 Parametric Classification

5
GCD

2

3

4

Ours (SimGCD)

2

3

5

Figure 1. Left: building blocks for representation learning or classifier learning; Right: overall abstraction of current works, where ‘→’
separates different stages of the method. Our work builds on GCD [39], and jointly trains a parametric classifier.

Abstract
Generalized Category Discovery (GCD) aims to discover novel categories in unlabelled datasets using knowledge learned from labelled samples. Previous studies argued that parametric classifiers are prone to overfitting to
seen categories, and endorsed using a non-parametric classifier formed with semi-supervised k-means. However, in
this study, we investigate the failure of parametric classifiers, verify the effectiveness of previous design choices
when high-quality supervision is available, and identify unreliable pseudo-labels as a key problem. We demonstrate
that two prediction biases exist: the classifier tends to predict seen classes more often, and produces an imbalanced
distribution across seen and novel categories. Based on
these findings, we propose a simple yet effective parametric classification method that benefits from entropy regularisation, achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple
GCD benchmarks and shows strong robustness to unknown
class numbers. We hope the investigation and proposed
simple framework can serve as a strong baseline to facilitate future studies in this field. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/CVMI-Lab/SimGCD.
* Equal contribution.

1. Introduction
With large-scale labelled datasets, deep learning methods can surpass humans in recognising images [23]. However, it is not always possible to collect large-scale human
annotations for training deep learning models. Therefore,
there is a rich body of recognition models that focus on
learning with a large number of unlabelled data. Among
them, semi-supervised learning (SSL) [29, 4, 33] is regarded as a promising approach, yet with the assumption
that labelled instances are provided for each of the categories the model needs to classify. Generalized category
discovery (GCD) [39] is recently formalised to relax this
assumption by assuming the unlabelled data can also contain similar yet distinct categories from the labelled data.
The goal of GCD is to learn a model that is able to classify
the already-seen categories in the labelled data, and more
importantly, jointly discover the new categories in the unlabelled data and make correct classifications. Developing a
strong method for this problem could help us better utilise
the easily available large-scale unlabelled datasets.
Previous works [39, 20, 16, 5] approach this problem
from two perspectives: learning generic feature representations to facilitate the discovery of novel categories, and gen-

16590

