This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OrthoPlanes: A Novel Representation for Better 3D-Awareness of GANs
∗

∗

Shikai Li1 Bo Dai1 Wayne Wu1
Zhuoqian Yang1,3‡
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 Tsinghua University
3
School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL

Honglin He1,2†

hehl21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

zhuoqian.yang@epfl.ch

daibo@pjlab.org.cn

lishikai@pjlab.org.cn

wuwenyan0503@gmail.com

Figure 1: We build a new hybrid explicit-implicit 3D representation - OrthoPlanes. Our model can synthesize diverse objects with
reasonable geometry without target-specific 3D priors (Left). Furthermore, as a general representation, our approach can be translated to
conditional tasks expediently (Right).

1. Introduction
Abstract
We present a new method for generating realistic and
view-consistent images with fine geometry from 2D image collections. Our method proposes a hybrid explicitimplicit representation called OrthoPlanes, which encodes
fine-grained 3D information in feature maps that can be
efficiently generated by modifying 2D StyleGANs. Compared to previous representations, our method has better
scalability and expressiveness with clear and explicit information. As a result, our method can handle more challenging view-angles and synthesize articulated objects with
high spatial degree of freedom. Experiments demonstrate
that our method achieves state-of-the-art results on FFHQ
and SHHQ datasets, both quantitatively and qualitatively.
Project page: https://orthoplanes.github.io/.

∗ Equal contribution.

† Interns at Shanghai AI Laboratory.
‡ Work done as research engineer at Shanghai AI Laboratory.

Recovering 3D world from 2D images, known as inverse rendering, is a typical problem in computer vision
and computer graphics. It has many practical uses in VR/AR
and other domains like movie production and virtual tryon. Physically-based methods [9, 12] can yield superior
outcomes, but they are associated with notable costs and
intensive labor requirements. On the other hand, data-centric
approaches stand out for their adaptability, ease of use, and
photorealism [56]. In this study, our objective is to develop a
novel data-driven representation that enhances the 2D GAN’s
understanding of 3D geometry, enabling it to produce more
detailed and realistic images of diverse objects.
3D-aware GANs have advanced rapidly to synthesize
images that are consistent across multiple views from 2D
image collections [6, 5, 18, 43, 41, 49, 62, 22, 65, 51]. These
methods combine unsupervised learning, neural rendering
and super resolution to produce realistic results. However,
they continue to face challenges in accurately reconstructing
3D shapes from 2D images, a crucial step in rendering 2D
GAN genuinely aware of 3D contexts. Certain methods attempt to address this issue utilizing a tri-plane representation

22996

