This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Canonical Factors for Hybrid Neural Fields
Brent Yi1

Weijia Zeng1
1

UC Berkeley

Sam Buchanan2
2

Yi Ma1

TTI-Chicago

Figure 1: Learned transforms for factored feature volumes. Latent decompositions with fixed, axis-aligned projections
(left) introduce biases for axis-aligned signals. A more robust, transform-invariant latent decomposition (TILTED) can be
recovered by treating projections to feature grids as learnable functions, here parameterized by τt .

Abstract
Factored feature volumes offer a simple way to build more
compact, efficient, and intepretable neural fields, but also
introduce biases that are not necessarily beneficial for realworld data. In this work, we (1) characterize the undesirable biases that these architectures have for axis-aligned
signals—they can lead to radiance field reconstruction differences of as high as 2 PSNR—and (2) explore how learning a set of canonicalizing transformations can improve representations by removing these biases. We prove in a simple
two-dimensional model problem that a hybrid architecture
that simultaneously learns these transformations together
with scene appearance succeeds with drastically improved
efficiency. We validate the resulting architectures, which we
call TILTED, using 2D image, signed distance field, and
radiance field reconstruction tasks, where we observe improvements across quality, robustness, compactness, and
runtime. Results demonstrate that TILTED can enable capabilities comparable to baselines that are 2x larger, while
highlighting weaknesses of standard procedures for evaluating neural field representations.

1. Introduction
Our physical world layers complexity on top of regularity. Tucked below the details that imbue our environments
with character—the intricate fibers of a fine-grained veneer,

or the light-catching specularities of everyday metal, plastic,
and glass—one finds the simple geometric primitives and
symmetries associated with built and natural structures. The
challenge of representations for the world, such as those used
for 3D reconstruction, anchors itself in the interaction between the two ends of this dichotomy: point clouds and voxel
grids offer versatility, but their inability to capture structure
results in resource usage that can grow too intractably to be
useful for complex details; meshes harness the uniformity
of surfaces for compactness, but still fail on entities with details that step outside of an acceptable regime—consider fog
or deviations on curves.
In this work, we build on the idea that scalably capturing
the details of a complex signal is only possible when a representation enables capture of its structure. We use this theme
to study and improve state-of-the-art hybrid neural fields,
which typically pair neural decoders with factored feature
volumes [32, 51, 63, 66–68]. Aided by an ability to exploit
sparse and low-rank structure, factorization is simple to implement and offers a host of advantages, such as compactness, efficiency, and interpretability. However, naive factorization also introduces the disadvantage of an implicit frame
of representation, which is not guaranteed to be aligned with
the structure of scenes or signals one aims to represent.
Drawing on insights from both low-rank texture extraction
[9] and implicit regularization in optimization methods for
factorization [21, 42], we theoretically characterize the im-

3414

