This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prompt Tuning Inversion for Text-Driven Image Editing Using Diffusion Models
Wenkai Dong1

Song Xue1 Xiaoyue Duan1, 2 * Shumin Han1†
1
Baidu VIS, 2 Beihang University

{dongwenkai, xuesong06, duanxiaoyue, hanshumin}@baidu.com

Abstract
Recently large-scale language-image models (e.g., textguided diffusion models) have considerably improved the
image generation capabilities to generate photorealistic images in various domains. Based on this success, current
image editing methods use texts to achieve intuitive and
versatile modification of images. To edit a real image using diffusion models, one must first invert the image to a
noisy latent from which an edited image is sampled with
a target text prompt. However, most methods lack one of
the following: user-friendliness (e.g., additional masks or
precise descriptions of the input image are required), generalization to larger domains, or high fidelity to the input
image. In this paper, we design an accurate and quick inversion technique, Prompt Tuning Inversion, for text-driven
image editing. Specifically, our proposed editing method
consists of a reconstruction stage and an editing stage. In
the first stage, we encode the information of the input image
into a learnable conditional embedding via Prompt Tuning Inversion. In the second stage, we apply classifier-free
guidance to sample the edited image, where the conditional
embedding is calculated by linearly interpolating between
the target embedding and the optimized one obtained in the
first stage. This technique ensures a superior trade-off between editability and high fidelity to the input image of our
method. For example, we can change the color of a specific
object while preserving its original shape and background
under the guidance of only a target text prompt. Extensive
experiments on ImageNet demonstrate the superior editing
performance of our method compared to the state-of-the-art
baselines.

1. Introduction
Text-based image editing, a long-standing problem in
image processing, aims to modify an input image to align
its visual content with the target text prompts. It has
drawn increasing attention in recent years and many meth* This work was done when Xiaoyue Duan was an intern at Baidu VIS.
† Corresponding author

Input image

DDIM Inversion

DDIM-Edit

DiffEdit

DiffEdit w/o src

Ours

Figure 1. Illustration of different methods in editing the color
of the car. Methods based on the original DDIM inversion (i.e.,
DDIM-Edit, DiffEdit and DiffEdit w/o src) cannot preserve the
shape of the car. In contrast, our method successfully changes the
color while preserving the structural information. The target text
is “a yellow car”. The source text is “a red car” for DiffEdit.

ods built upon text-to-image generation have been developed. In past years, GAN-based image editing methods [30, 31, 52, 53] achieve impressive results due to the
powerful generation abilities of GANs [37, 23, 33, 60].
However, these methods only work well in domains where
the models are trained. More recently, diffusion models
such as DDPM [18] and score-based generative models [48]
have demonstrated competitive or even better capability of
generating images compared to VAE-, GAN-, flow- and
autoregressive-based models [36, 14, 38, 12]. Especially,
large-scale language-image models (LLIMs), such as Imagen [43], DALL-E2 [35] and Stable Diffusion [41], have
attracted unprecedented attention from the research community and public society. With the help of large-scale pretrained language models [34, 10], LLIMs can generate highfidelity images well aligned with the provided text prompts
without further fine-tuning. To fully leverage the generation
and generalization capabilities of LLIMs, we aim to develop
a text-driven image editing method based on open-sourced
LLIMs, e.g., Stable Diffusion [41].
Editability and fidelity are two essential requirements

7430

