This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Segmentation of Tubular Structures
Using Iterative Training with Tailored Samples
Wei Liao
Independent Researcher
liaowei.post@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose a minimal path method to simultaneously
compute segmentation masks and extract centerlines of
tubular structures with line-topology. Minimal path methods are commonly used for the segmentation of tubular
structures in a wide variety of applications. Recent methods use features extracted by CNNs, and often outperform
methods using hand-tuned features. However, for CNNbased methods, the samples used for training may be generated inappropriately, so that they can be very different
from samples encountered during inference. We approach
this discrepancy by introducing a novel iterative training
scheme, which enables generating better training samples
specifically tailored for the minimal path methods without
changing existing annotations. In our method, segmentation masks and centerlines are not determined after one another by post-processing, but obtained using the same steps.
Our method requires only very few annotated training images. Comparison with seven previous approaches on three
public datasets, including satellite images and medical images, shows that our method achieves state-of-the-art results both for segmentation masks and centerlines.

1. Introduction
Segmentation of tubular structures is an essential task in
many application areas of computer vision, including navigation, delineation of roads in satellite images, and analysis
of blood vessels in medical images (see Fig. 1 for examples). Beyond segmentation masks, such applications often
also require centerlines with line-topology, i.e., the centerlines should not contain interruptions, isolated pieces, or
width (Fig. 2). Centerlines with line-topology are usually
represented as sequences of coordinates.
While non-tubular object such as cars often have relatively high variance of appearance (e.g., color or texture)
but low variance of shapes, tubular structures typically have
relatively low variance of appearance but high variance of

(a) Input image

(b) Our results

Figure 1. Examples of application areas of tubular structure segmentation. First row: Finding path between two points in a satellite image (navigation). Second row: Segmentation of road network in a satellite image. Third row: Segmentation of the vessel
tree in a image of retinal vessels.

a

b

c

line-topology

interruptions

isolated pieces

d
width

Figure 2. Illustration of line-topology and non-line-topology.

shapes. For example, blood vessels in medical images of
the same imaging modality typically have similar intensity
distributions, but they may contain very irregular shapes
caused by pathology. General segmentation methods, such
as U-Net [23], are widely used also to segment tubular
structures, but these methods do not take the special properties of tubular structures into account, and cannot sat-

23643

