This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Coherent Event Guided Low-Light Video Enhancement
Jinxiu Liang1,2 Yixin Yang1,2 Boyu Li1,2 Peiqi Duan1,2 Yong Xu3 Boxin Shi∗1,2
1

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology

{cssherryliang, yangyixin93, liboyu, duanqi0001, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn

yxu@scut.edu.cn

(a) Short exposure, high ISO

(b) Unaligned events, upsampled

(c) Long exposure, low ISO

(d) Short exposure, low ISO, fill light

(e) Result of [12] from only (a)

(f) Result of [63] from only (a)

(g) Result of [64] from only (b)

(h) Our result from (a) and (b)

Figure 1. Comparison among different camera settings for capturing fast-moving scenes and different methods (conventional image enhancement [12],
deep-learning-based video enhancement [63], event-to-video reconstruction [64], and the proposed event guided video enhancement) for low-light dynamic
imaging. (a) and (b) are the inputs of the proposed method. Please refer to our project page1 for the corresponding animations.

Abstract
With frame-based cameras, capturing fast-moving scenes
without suffering from blur often comes at the cost of low
SNR and low contrast. Worse still, the photometric constancy that enhancement techniques heavily relied on is fragile for frames with short exposure. Event cameras can record
brightness changes at an extremely high temporal resolution.
For low-light videos, event data are not only suitable to help
capture temporal correspondences but also provide alternative observations in the form of intensity ratios between
consecutive frames and exposure-invariant information. Motivated by this, we propose a low-light video enhancement
method with hybrid inputs of events and frames. Specifically, a neural network is trained to establish spatiotemporal
coherence between visual signals with different modalities
and resolutions by constructing correlation volume across
space and time. Experimental results on synthetic and real
data demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method
compared to the state-of-the-art methods.
∗ Corresponding author
1 https://sherrycattt.github.io/EvLowLight

1. Introduction
Capturing fast-moving scenes without introducing blurry
artifacts (Figure 1 (c)) is challenging, especially in an environment with insufficient illumination. A fast shutter speed
helps to freeze motion (Figure 1 (a)), but it also causes excessive noise and low contrast. A popular choice in professional
photography, such as sports recording and filmmaking, is to
place large fill lights to allow sufficient illumination (Figure 1 (d)), however, they are limited in their portability and
power requirements in uncontrolled environments.
Video enhancement aims at improving the degraded
quality, in which the key is to exploit the temporal coherence [27, 59]. Its performance heavily depends on
the quality of image-based optical flow estimation that assumes spatiotemporally small translation and brightness constancy; however, it becomes fragile for low-light frames
whose features such as edges are less distinctive and are
contaminated by noise (Figure 1 (e)). Despite recent advances in learning-based low-light video enhancement methods [63, 49, 20, 30, 5], it remains challenging to improve the
quality of frames capturing fast-moving scenes where the
pixel displacements are large (Figure 1 (f)).

10615

