This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ACTIVE: Towards Highly Transferable 3D Physical Camouflage
for Universal and Robust Vehicle Evasion
Naufal Suryanto1,‡ , Yongsu Kim1,2,‡ , Harashta Tatimma Larasati1 , Hyoeun Kang1,2 , Thi-Thu-Huong Le1
Yoonyoung Hong1 , Hunmin Yang3 , Se-Yoon Oh3 , Howon Kim1,2,∗
1

Pusan National University, South Korea; 2 SmartM2M, South Korea; 3 Agency for Defense Development (ADD), South Korea
https://islab-ai.github.io/active-iccv2023/

Abstract
Adversarial camouflage has garnered attention for its
ability to attack object detectors from any viewpoint by covering the entire object’s surface. However, universality and
robustness in existing methods often fall short as the transferability aspect is often overlooked, thus restricting their
application only to a specific target with limited performance. To address these challenges, we present Adversarial Camouflage for Transferable and Intensive Vehicle Evasion (ACTIVE), a state-of-the-art physical camouflage attack framework designed to generate universal and robust
adversarial camouflage capable of concealing any 3D vehicle from detectors. Our framework incorporates innovative
techniques to enhance universality and robustness, including a refined texture rendering that enables common texture
application to different vehicles without being constrained
to a specific texture map, a novel stealth loss that renders
the vehicle undetectable, and a smooth and camouflage loss
to enhance the naturalness of the adversarial camouflage.
Our extensive experiments on 15 different models show that
ACTIVE consistently outperforms existing works on various
public detectors, including the latest YOLOv7. Notably, our
universality evaluations reveal promising transferability to
other vehicle classes, tasks (segmentation models), and the
real world, not just other vehicles.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved tremendous outcomes in a wide range of research fields, especially in computer vision, such as facial recognition and
self-driving cars [8, 34, 7]. Despite their remarkable performance, DNNs, including object detection models, are
vulnerable to adversarial attacks [2]. Generally, adversarial attacks can be classified into digital attacks and physical
attacks [36]. Digital attacks are primarily carried out by
‡

Equal contribution

*

Corresponding author

(a) FCA

(b) FCA on UE4

(d) ACTIVE (Ours)

(c) DTA

(e) Car Graffiti

Figure 1: Current state-of-the-art adversarial camouflage,
Full-coverage Camouflage Attack (FCA) [35]; (a) is undetected as car in their original result, but (b) is normally
detected when fully transferred to Unreal Engine 4 (UE4).
(c) The result of the Differentiable Transformation Attack
(DTA) [30], with stronger result than FCA, but limited to
unnatural mosaic pattern. (d) The result of ACTIVE, which
has better attack performance (i.e., not detected as a car at
all), is universal (i.e., implementable to other car), and has
a natural pattern comparable to (e) a real-world graffiti.

adding small perturbations to pixels of input images. However, digital attacks have limitations in real-world scenarios because they have to manipulate the digital systems that
may be configured with security schemes. To alleviate these
limitations, physical attacks have been proposed that modify the object in the physical space rather than in the digital.
Nonetheless, physical attacks are more challenging due
to the inherently complex physical constraints (camera
pose, lighting, occlusion, etc.). Therefore, most physical
attack methods exclude the perturbation constraint (i.e., the
result can be suspicious). There are mainly two types of
methods in physical attacks: adversarial patch and adversarial camouflage. The former [6, 32] is the method of physical

4305

