This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Objects do not disappear:
Video object detection by single-frame object location anticipation
Xin Liu1 Fatemeh Karimi Nejadasl2 Jan C. van Gemert1 Olaf Booij1 Silvia L. Pintea1
Computer Vision Lab, Delft University of Technology1
Institute for Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics, University of Amsterdam2

Abstract
Objects in videos are typically characterized by continuous smooth motion. We exploit continuous smooth motion
in three ways. 1) Improved accuracy by using object motion
as an additional source of supervision, which we obtain by
anticipating object locations from a static keyframe. 2) Improved efficiency by only doing the expensive feature computations on a small subset of all frames. Because neighboring video frames are often redundant, we only compute features for a single static keyframe and predict object locations in subsequent frames. 3) Reduced annotation
cost, where we only annotate the keyframe and use smooth
pseudo-motion between keyframes. We demonstrate computational efficiency, annotation efficiency, and improved
mean average precision compared to the state-of-the-art
on four datasets: ImageNet VID, EPIC KITCHENS-55,
YouTube-BoundingBoxes and Waymo Open dataset. Our
source code is available at https://github.com/L-KID/Videoobject-detection-by-location-anticipation.

1. Introduction
Humans assume object permanence: blink your eyes,
and the world is still there. Similarly, video frames are redundant, and missing some frames when watching a movie
does not drastically change the scene. Actually, for the
parts that did change, if these parts changed coherently, they
might hint at a sense of objectness, as hypothesized by the
Gestalt law of common fate.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, here we explore these observations in the context of video object detection in three ways:
1) Improved accuracy by exploiting an additional source of
supervision: the coherent motion from the law of common
fate; by predicting object motion from a static image. 2) Improved efficiency by exploiting redundancy to reduce computational cost by only processing sampled keyframes and
predict object motion for the missing frames in-between.
3) Reduced annotation cost by only annotating sampled

Figure 1. Anticipating future object locations from a static
keyframe is efficient. We only do the expensive feature extraction
on a small subset of keyframes, while still accessing bounding-box
locations for all video frames. Moreover, exploiting motion cues
as additional supervision improves object detection. By sampling
a static keyframe at time t and anticipating the object locations
over the next T timesteps, we incorporate temporal consistency
and smoothness of object motion.

keyframes. Thus, we improve accuracy and save computation and annotation time by simply skipping the feature
computation and/or the annotation for a large majority of
the frames.
We make the following contributions: (i) A video object detection method that samples static keyframes and predicts object motion for unseen future frames. (ii) Computational efficiency, as our method only extracts features for
sampled static keyframes; (iii) Data efficiency, as we use
sparse annotations only at the sampled keyframes, hallucinating motion in-between these sparse annotations. (iv)
Our extensive experimental results on ImageNet-VID [58],
EPIC KITCHENS-55 [11], YouTube-BoundingBoxes [56]
and Waymo Open dataset [15] show that our approach improves accuracy over the state-of-the-art methods, while being faster at both training and inference time.

6950

