This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Generalization of Universal Adversarial Perturbation through
Gradient Aggregation
Xuannan Liu, Yaoyao Zhong, Yuhang Zhang, Lixiong Qin, Weihong Deng*
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{liuxuannan, zhongyaoyao, zyhzyh, lxqin, whdeng}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks are vulnerable to universal adversarial perturbation (UAP), an instance-agnostic perturbation capable of fooling the target model for most samples.
Compared to instance-specific adversarial examples, UAP
is more challenging as it needs to generalize across various
samples and models. In this paper, we examine the serious
dilemma of UAP generation methods from a generalization
perspective – the gradient vanishing problem using smallbatch stochastic gradient optimization and the local optima
problem using large-batch optimization. To address these
problems, we propose a simple and effective method called
Stochastic Gradient Aggregation (SGA), which alleviates
the gradient vanishing and escapes from poor local optima
at the same time. Specifically, SGA employs the small-batch
training to perform multiple iterations of inner pre-search.
Then, all the inner gradients are aggregated as a one-step
gradient estimation to enhance the gradient stability and
reduce quantization errors. Extensive experiments on the
standard ImageNet dataset demonstrate that our method
significantly enhances the generalization ability of UAP and
outperforms other state-of-the-art methods. The code is
available at https://github.com/liuxuannan/
Stochastic-Gradient-Aggregation.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved significant
success in computer vision [9, 35, 34, 8, 11, 12], but are
widely known to be vulnerable to adversarial examples [36,
23, 26, 7, 15, 19, 39]. A more critical property of adversarial examples is that they have shown good transferability
between different models [18, 25, 5, 6, 17, 40, 50, 38, 29].
Unlike the instance-specific adversarial examples, a recent
work [22] reveals the existence of universal adversarial perturbation (UAP) which can deceive the majority of samples.
Compared to the instance-specific adversarial examples,
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. A universal adversarial perturbation is applied to images
belonging to different categories to get visually similar adversarial
examples with high attack success rates in the white-box scenario.
Left images: the original natural images. Central image: the
UAP by applying SGA on the VGG16 model (rescaled to [0,255]).
Right images: the adversarial images.

the generation of UAP is more challenging. Since most
UAPs are generated with limited training samples and are
expected to be applied to various unknown samples [14, 28,
33, 16] and even a variety of tasks [41, 4, 30, 1, 27, 51], the
diversity of samples and models has created dual demands
for higher generalization ability of UAPs. Therefore, we
aim to investigate the limitation of the current UAPs and
improve the generalization ability.
Despite many works on UAP, there are two main issues
in the generation of UAP. (1) Gradient instability. Due to
the inherent difference of samples and model parameters,
the optimization paths for adversarial perturbations vary
widely, as shown in Fig 2 (a). Such instability may hinder the optimization of adversarial attacks in the correct direction [38, 42, 37]. (2) Quantization error. The adversar-

4435

