This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Minimum Latency Deep Online Video Stabilization
†

Zhuofan Zhang1*
Zhen Liu2*
Ping Tan3
Bing Zeng1
Shuaicheng Liu1,2
1
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China Megvii Technology
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{zhangzf98@std., eezeng@, liushuaicheng@}uestc.edu.cn,

Synthesized

X-Profile Translation

Y-Profile Translation

We
present a novel stable
camera
path optimizationOriginal
framework
motion
Stable
Stable Video
for Video
the task of online video stabilization. Typically,
a stabilization (a)
pipeline
consists
three
steps:
motion estimatIllustration of
the of
dataset
synthesis
process.
ing, path smoothing, and novel view rendering. Most previous methods concentrate on motion estimation, proposing
various global or local motion models. In contrast, path
optimization receives relatively less attention, especially in
the important online setting, where no future frames are
available. In this work, we adopt recent off-the-shelf highquality deep motion models for motion estimation to recover the(b)
camera
trajectory
and focus
onpath.
the latter two
Illustration of
the synthesized
camera
steps. Our network takes a short 2D camera path in a
sliding window as input and outputs the stabilizing warp
field of the last frame in the window, which warps the coming frame to its stabilized position. A hybrid loss is welldefined to constrain the spatial and temporal consistency.
In addition, we build a motion dataset that contains stable
and unstable motion pairs for the training. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms state-of-the-art online methods both qualitatively
and quantitatively and achieves comparable performance
to offline methods. Our code and dataset are available at
https://github.com/liuzhen03/NNDVS.

1. Introduction
Video stabilization methods aim at removing unwanted
shaky motions of a video caused by unsteady moving capture [6]. Traditional methods often take three main steps: 1)
camera motion estimating for trajectory recovery; 2) camera
path smoothing; and 3) steady frame synthesis. According
to the adopted motion model in the first step, these methods can be broadly classified as 2D or 3D. 2D methods
adopt planar motion models such as affine [5], or homog* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Unstable
Video

Unstable Video

Stable
Video

unstable
motion

Motion
Transfer

Synthesized
Unstable Video

stable motion

Original
Stable Video

(a) Illustration of the dataset synthesis process.
Y-Profile Translation

Transfer

Motion
Estimation

Abstract
Motion

unstable
motion

X-Profile Translation

Unstable
Video

Motion
Estimation

liuzhen03@megvii.com, pingtan@ust.hk

(b) Illustration of the synthesized camera path.

Figure 1. Illustration of the dataset synthesis process (a) and the
synthesized camera path (b). We transfer an unstable path to a stable path, creating a synthesized path, which shares high frequencies of the unstable path with low frequencies of the stable path.

raphy [27], or mesh [25, 22, 33], or flow [26, 20, 41], while
3D methods resort to 3D depth [23, 17], or reconstructed
points [18], or epipolar geometry constraints [3].
In comparison, deep learning-based methods learn stabilization models from stable and unstable video pairs [33, 41,
35] without explicit steps of motion estimation and smoothing. However, the results of deep methods are often visually
inferior to those of traditional ones. A potential reason is
that these methods try to learn the three steps all in a unified
framework, each of which has different characteristics but
is learned in the network blindly.
On the other hand, deep affine [12], deep homography [38, 8], and deep mesh models [39, 24, 21, 28] have
demonstrated high-quality image registration, even under
adverse cases. They are robust to scenes with large depth
variation, large dynamic objects, and poor textures, fitting
perfectly for the camera motion estimation. In this work,
we argue that it is not necessary to enclose all three steps of
the stabilization into the learning pipeline, but let the motion estimation to the recent deep motion models [39, 24].

23030

