This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HAL3D: Hierarchical Active Learning for Fine-Grained 3D Part Labeling
Yiming Qian1
Francisca Gil-Ureta1
Fenggen Yu1,2 *
1
1
Brian Jackson
Eric Bennett
Hao Zhang1,2
1
2
Amazon
Simon Fraser University

Abstract
We present the first active learning tool for fine-grained
3D part labeling, a problem which challenges even the most
advanced deep learning (DL) methods due to the significant structural variations among the intricate parts. For the
same reason, the necessary effort to annotate training data
is tremendous, motivating approaches to minimize human
involvement. Our labeling tool iteratively verifies or modifies part labels predicted by a deep neural network, with
human feedback continually improving the network prediction. To effectively reduce human efforts, we develop two
novel features in our tool, hierarchical and symmetry-aware
active labeling. Our human-in-the-loop approach, coined
HAL3D, achieves close to error-free fine-grained annotations on any test set with pre-defined hierarchical part labels, with 80% time-saving over manual effort. We will release the finely labeled models to serve the community.

1. Introduction
Semantic shape segmentation and labeling [8, 27] is a
classical problem with numerous applications [18], including shape/part recognition, retrieval, indexing, and attribute
transfer. We consider the problem of fine-grained 3D part
labeling, a task that has not received as much attention as
the typical semantic segmentation into coarse/major parts
(e.g., backs, seats, and legs for chairs). While these coarse
semantic groups support high-level visual perception, they
do not possess sufficient granularity to address shape properties related to motion, function, interaction, or construction. Indeed, fine-grained object parts, e.g., the individual
wheels and the small mechanical parts in a swivel leg, are
both function-revealing and build-aware (see Fig. 1), with
strong ties to how the objects were physically assembled or
virtually built by artists. Real-world applications such as
product inspection, assembly, customization, and robot interaction all operate on fine-grained object parts.
Learning to label fine-grained parts is a highly challenging problem due to the great structural variations among
the small and intricate parts, even for shapes that belong
to the same category, as shown in Fig. 1. On a challenging

Figure 1. Fine-grained parts of the 3D models shown exhibit the
kind of geometric and structural complexity and diversity that part
labeling has to handle. No existing methods, whether learned
or heuristic-based, could obtain close-to-fully-accurate labeling in
these challenging cases, while our human-in-the-loop active learning tool can approach full accuracy, barring human errors.

dataset with average part counts per category ranging from
15 to more than 500, state-of-the-art learned models such
as [33] can only achieve mean IoU scores below 50%, out
of a maximum of 100% for ground truth (GT) results. Also
challenging is the tremendous data annotation effort needed
to train methods to segment and label fine-grained parts. On
the other hand, for applications which demand de facto full
accuracy, e.g., for diagnoses in medicine and quality assurance in e-commerce, one can hardly rely on a fully automatic method to reach the mark. It is arguable that the only
means to attain full accuracy is to have humans validate all
the results, as in the case of data annotation.
In this paper, we present the first active learning tool for
fine-grained 3D part labeling. Given a set of 3D shapes
segmented into fine parts, our labeling tool assigns one of
the predefined labels to each part. These input parts are
deemed atomic (i.e., indivisible); they can be as low-level
as mesh triangles and as high-level as results obtained by an
unlabelled semantic segmentation, or mid-level components
from an over-segmentation. In general, active learning iterates between automated labeling and human input for label
rectification [44]. Compared to conventional learned models with full autonomy, such a human-in-the-loop approach
provides a viable option to achieve close to error-free part
labeling on test sets, barring human errors1 .
1 During testing, accuracy is measured against GT labeling which has

* Work carried out during internship at Amazon.

865

