This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SKED: Sketch-guided Text-based 3D Editing
Aryan Mikaeili1

Or Perel2
1

Mehdi Safaee1

Simon Fraser University

2

Daniel Cohen-Or3

NVIDIA

3

Ali Mahdavi-Amiri1

Tel Aviv University

Figure 1: Examples of our Sketch-guided, Text-based 3D editing method. Taking a pretrained Neural Radiance Field as input, multiview
sketches determining the coarse region of edit and a text-prompt, our method is able to generate a localized, meaningful edit.

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion models are gradually introduced
into computer graphics, recently enabling the development
of Text-to-3D pipelines in an open domain. However, for
interactive editing purposes, local manipulations of content
through a simplistic textual interface can be arduous. Incorporating user guided sketches with Text-to-image pipelines
offers users more intuitive control. Still, as state-of-the-art
Text-to-3D pipelines rely on optimizing Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF) through gradients from arbitrary rendering
views, conditioning on sketches is not straightforward. In
this paper, we present SKED, a technique for editing 3D
shapes represented by NeRFs. Our technique utilizes as few
as two guiding sketches from different views to alter an existing neural field. The edited region respects the prompt
semantics through a pre-trained diffusion model. To ensure
the generated output adheres to the provided sketches, we
propose novel loss functions to generate the desired edits
while preserving the density and radiance of the base instance. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
method through several qualitative and quantitative experiments. https://sked-paper.github.io/

1. Introduction
Art is a reflection of the figments of human imagination.
While many are limited in their practical creative capabilities, by pushing the boundaries of digital media, new ways
can be created for casual artists and experts alike to express
their ideas. At the same time, current neural generative art
takes away much of the control from humans. In this work,
we attempt to take a step towards restoring some of that
control, enabling neural networks to complement users and
naturally extend their skills rather than taking hold over the
generative process.
The field of image synthesis has been significantly propelled by neural generative models, particularly by the latest text-to-image models that predominantly rely on large
language-image models [3, 54, 55, 56]. These models have
revolutionized the field of computer vision, as they can produce astonishing visual outcomes from text prompts alone.
The ability of text-to-image models has sparked a wave
of editing methods that utilize these models. Many of these
techniques rely on prompt editing [14, 18, 27, 36, 44, 52].
Nevertheless, simplifying the interface to text alone means
users lack the necessary level of granularity to produce their
exact desired outcomes. Sketch-guided editing, on the other

14607

