This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DECO: Dense Estimation of 3D Human-Scene Contact In The Wild
Shashank Tripathi1 * Agniv Chatterjee1 * Jean-Claude Passy1
Dimitrios Tzionas2 Michael J. Black1
1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany

2

Hongwei Yi1

University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands

{stripathi, achatterjee, jpassy, hyi, black}@tue.mpg.de

d.tzionas@uva.nl

Figure 1: Given an RGB image, DECO infers dense vertex-level 3D contacts on the full human body. To this end, it reasons
about the contacting body parts, human-object proximity, and the surrounding scene context to infer 3D contact for diverse
human-object and human-scene interactions. Blue areas show the inferred contact on the body, hands, and feet for each image.

Abstract
Understanding how humans use physical contact to interact with the world is key to enabling human-centric artificial
intelligence. While inferring 3D contact is crucial for modeling realistic and physically-plausible human-object interactions, existing methods either focus on 2D, consider body
joints rather than the surface, use coarse 3D body regions,
or do not generalize to in-the-wild images. In contrast, we
focus on inferring dense, 3D contact between the full body
surface and objects in arbitrary images. To achieve this,
we first collect DAMON, a new dataset containing dense
vertex-level contact annotations paired with RGB images
containing complex human-object and human-scene contact. Second, we train DECO, a novel 3D contact detector
that uses both body-part-driven and scene-context-driven
attention to estimate vertex-level contact on the SMPL body.
DECO builds on the insight that human observers recognize
contact by reasoning about the contacting body parts, their
proximity to scene objects, and the surrounding scene con*

Equal contribution

text. We perform extensive evaluations of our detector on
DAMON as well as on the RICH and BEHAVE datasets. We
significantly outperform existing SOTA methods across all
benchmarks. We also show qualitatively that DECO generalizes well to diverse and challenging real-world human
interactions in natural images. The code, data, and models
are available at https://deco.is.tue.mpg.de.

1. Introduction
Humans rely on contact to interact with the world. While
we use our hands and feet to support grasping and locomotion, we also leverage our entire body surface in our daily
interactions with the world; see Fig. 1. We sit on our buttocks and thighs, lie on our backs, kneel on our knees, carry
bags on our shoulders, and move heavy objects by holding
them against our bodies. Executing everyday tasks involves
diverse full-body and object contact. Thus, modeling and
inferring contact from images or videos is essential for applications such as human activity understanding, robotics,
biomechanics, and augmented or virtual reality.

8001

