This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep geometry-aware camera self-calibration from video
Annika Hagemann1,2 , Moritz Knorr1 , Christoph Stiller2
1
Bosch Research, Germany 2 Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
{annika.hagemann, moritzmichael.knorr}@de.bosch.com, stiller@kit.edu

Abstract
Accurate intrinsic calibration is essential for camerabased 3D perception, yet, it typically requires targets of
well-known geometry. Here, we propose a camera selfcalibration approach that infers camera intrinsics during
application, from monocular videos in the wild. We propose to explicitly model projection functions and multiview geometry, while leveraging the capabilities of deep
neural networks for feature extraction and matching. To
achieve this, we build upon recent research on integrating
bundle adjustment into deep learning models, and introduce a self-calibrating bundle adjustment layer. The selfcalibrating bundle adjustment layer optimizes camera intrinsics through classical Gauß-Newton steps and can be
adapted to different camera models without re-training. As
a specific realization, we implemented this layer within the
deep visual SLAM system DROID-SLAM, and show that
the resulting model, DroidCalib, yields state-of-the-art calibration accuracy across multiple public datasets. Our results suggest that the model generalizes to unseen environments and different camera models, including significant
lens distortion. Thereby, the approach enables performing 3D perception tasks without prior knowledge about the
camera. Code is available at https://github.com/
boschresearch/droidcalib.

1. Introduction
Inferring 3D structure and camera motion from a sequence of images typically requires knowledge about the
camera. Specifically, the camera’s mapping of 3D points to
the 2D image, characterized by the intrinsic camera parameters, must be known (Fig. 1). Intrinsic camera parameters
are commonly obtained in a calibration process in which
well-known calibration targets are moved in front of the
camera [53, 46]. As the 3D structure of these calibration
targets is precisely known, images of the target give 3D-2D
correspondences that can be used to infer intrinsic camera
parameters. However, this is a time-consuming process and
does not allow for continuous re-calibration.

intr.
intr. '

'

image i

fij
image j

wij

intr.
SC-BA layer

Loss (intr.)
Backpropagation

Figure 1. The proposed self-calibration infers the intrinsic camera parameters θ that define a camera’s projection function (top)
without relying on calibration targets. A deep neural network N
predicts weighted correspondences (flow fij , confidence weights
wij ), while the self-calibrating bundle adjustment (SC-BA) layer
estimates the intrinsics through differentiable Gauß Newton steps
(bottom).

Camera self-calibration aims at inferring camera intrinsics based on arbitrary images or image sequences, without
the need for a calibration target [14]. Yet, achieving accuracy and robustness comparable to target-based calibration remains challenging. Single-image self-calibration approaches (e.g. [52, 51, 22, 19]) have proven effective for
image undistortion and for cases in which only a single image is available, however, they have to rely on known or
learned properties of the environment (e.g. the existence of
straight lines) which limits their ability to generalize, and
they are typically limited to a subset of the intrinsics.
Multi-view approaches, on the other hand, use a sequence of images and exploit the consistency of the scene
structure over time to estimate camera intrinsics (e.g. [24,
33, 25]). The most common approach is to use a classical Structure-from-Motion (SfM) pipeline, and to refine intrinsics jointly with camera motion and 3D structure [33].
While classical SfM pipelines generalize well to unseen
environments, they typically rely on handcrafted features
and thus do not leverage the capabilities of learned features which have proven effective across a variety of 3D
computer vision tasks [43, 40, 48, 32]. Deep learning approaches, on the other hand, replace the SfM pipeline by a

3438

