This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Non-line-of-sight Imaging via
Learnable Inverse Kernel and Attention Mechanisms
Yanhua Yu, Siyuan Shen, Zi Wang, Binbin Huang, Yuehan Wang, Xingyue Peng, Suan Xia,
Ping Liu, Ruiqian Li, and Shiying Li
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging,
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China
{yuyh, shensy, wangzi, huangbb, wangyh8, pengxy, xiasa, lirq1, lishy1}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Figure 1: (a) A typical NLOS imaging setup includes a pulsed laser that illuminates a part of the relay wall, and a timeresolved detector that captures the returning photons after multiple bounces between the wall and the hidden object. (b) Top:
Fourier spectrum of different kernels. Bottom: Recovered depth maps using different kernels. Our proposed attention-guided
kernel has similar low-frequency components (centered in the image) to the physics-based kernel, but contains more highfrequency components (side parts in the image), resulting in a finer reconstruction.

Abstract
Recovering information from non-line-of-sight (NLOS)
imaging is a computationally-intensive inverse problem.
Most physics-based NLOS imaging methods address the
complexity of this problem by assuming three-bounce reflections and no self-occlusion. However, these assumptions may break down for objects with large depth variations, preventing physics-based algorithms from accurately
reconstructing the details and high-frequency information.
On the other hand, while learning-based methods can avoid
these assumptions, they may struggle to reconstruct details without specific designs due to the spectral bias of
neural networks. To overcome these issues, we propose a

novel approach that enhances physics-based NLOS imaging methods by introducing a learnable inverse kernel in
the Fourier domain and using an attention mechanism to
improve the neural network to learn high-frequency information. Our method is evaluated on publicly available
and new synthetic datasets, demonstrating its commendable performance compared to prior physics-based and
learning-based methods, especially for objects with large
depth variations. Moreover, our approach generalizes well
to real data and can be applied to tasks such as classification and depth reconstruction. We will make our code and
dataset publicly available:https://sci2020.github.io.

10563

