This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FACTS: First Amplify Correlations and Then Slice to Discover Bias
Sriram Yenamandra Pratik Ramesh Viraj Prabhu
Georgia Institute of Technology

Judy Hoffman

{sriramy, pratikramesh, virajp, judy}@gatech.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Real-world datasets frequently exhibit correlation biases, wherein a task-irrelevant attribute (say, the image
background) is correlated with the task label of interest [1, 2, 3]. Consider the task of distinguishing images
of chickens from airplanes (see Fig. 1). Naturally, most
images of airplanes are in the sky, whereas chickens are
typically found on the ground. A naive classifier trained on
this biased dataset may conceivably learn to over-rely on the
(relatively easier to learn) background and consequently underperform on bias-conflicting slices of the data (e.g. chickens in the air). Indeed, deep models trained with standard
empirical risk minimization [4] are notorious for exploiting
such “shortcuts” [5, 6], which may have serious repercussions in high-stakes applications like medicine [7, 8], face
recognition [3], and autonomous driving [9].
In this work, given a potentially biased dataset, we attempt to automatically identify such bias-conflicting slices:
dataset subsets wherein the spurious correlation does not
hold. Such identification could inform downstream mitiga-

Chicken

Class

Biased ERM
boundary
(ours)

Goal: Discover Bias
Conflicting Slices

Airplane

Computer vision datasets frequently contain spurious
correlations between task-relevant labels and (easy to
learn) latent task-irrelevant attributes (e.g. context). Models trained on such datasets learn “shortcuts” and underperform on bias-conflicting slices of data where the correlation does not hold. In this work, we study the problem
of identifying such slices to inform downstream bias mitigation strategies. We propose First Amplify Correlations
and Then Slice (FACTS), wherein we first amplify correlations to fit a simple bias-aligned hypothesis via strongly
regularized empirical risk minimization. Next, we perform
correlation-aware slicing via mixture modeling in biasaligned feature space to discover underperforming data
slices that capture distinct correlations. Despite its simplicity, our method considerably improves over prior work (by
as much as 35% precision@10) in correlation bias identification across a range of diverse evaluation settings. Code:
https://github.com/yvsriram/FACTS.

Standard ERM
boundary

Sky

Context
(spurious)

Ground

Figure 1: Consider the task of classifying images of chickens and airplanes. Real-world datasets typically also contain spurious correlations between (easy to learn) taskirrelevant attributes and labels: e.g. most airplane images
are airborne, whereas chickens are usually photographed on
the ground. Naively training on such a dataset would lead
to overfitting to the majority context within each class, and
to underperforming on bias-conflicting slices of data (e.g.
chickens in the sky). We study the problem of automatically identifying such bias-conflicting slices (dashed ovals),
which can then inform downstream mitigation strategies.
Our method, FACTS, first amplifies correlations to learn a
context-aligned decision boundary, and then clusters samples that are confidently misclassified by this biased model
to uncover bias-conflicting slices.

tion strategies based on reweighting [10, 11, 12, 13, 14] or
annotating [15, 16, 17] more instances of underrepresented
populations. Importantly, such a method should be able to
discover slices that represent semantically coherent and distinct bias-conflicting subpopulations, that may optionally be
“named” (say, using an image captioning model [18]), and
presented to a practitioner.
Why is discovering bias-conflicting slices hard? Presumably, one could annotate and control for potentially spurious attributes [19, 20, 21], but this is challenging to scale
to larger datasets. Further, tasks labels are sometimes spu-

4794

