This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continual Zero-Shot Learning through Semantically Guided Generative Random
Walks
Wenxuan Zhang1

Paul Janson1,2 *
Kai Yi1
Ivan Skorokhodov1
1
Mohamed Elhoseiny
KAUST1 University of Moratuwa2

{wenxuan.zhang, remond.janson, kai.yi, ivan.skorokhodov, mohamed.elhoseiny}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Learning novel concepts, remembering previous knowledge, and adapting it to future tasks occur simultaneously
throughout a human’s lifetime. To model such comprehensive
abilities, continual zero-shot learning (CZSL) has recently
been introduced. However, most existing methods overused
unseen semantic information that may not be continually
accessible in realistic settings. In this paper, we address the
challenge of continual zero-shot learning where unseen information is not provided during training, by leveraging generative modeling. The heart of the generative-based methods is
to learn quality representations from seen classes to improve
the generative understanding of the unseen visual space. Motivated by this, we introduce generalization-bound tools and
provide the first theoretical explanation for the benefits of
generative modeling to CZSL tasks. Guided by the theoretical analysis, we then propose our learning algorithm that
employs a novel semantically guided Generative Random
Walk (GRW) loss. The GRW loss augments the training by
continually encouraging the model to generate realistic and
characterized samples to represent the unseen space. Our
algorithm achieves state-of-the-art performance on AWA1,
AWA2, CUB, and SUN datasets, surpassing existing CZSL
methods by 3-7%. The code has been made available here
https://github.com/wx-zhang/IGCZSL .

1. Introduction
Researchers have devoted significant effort to developing
AI learners to mimic human cognition. One such endeavor
is zero-shot learning (ZSL), which aims to identify unseen
classes without accessing any of their images during training. However, human zero-shot learning abilities improve
dynamically over time. As individuals acquire more knowledge of seen tasks, they become better at recognizing unseen
tasks. To evaluate the zero-shot learning in such a dynamic
* Work done during internship at KAUST

seen-unseen distribution, the continual zero-shot learning
problem (CZSL) has been proposed [53]. CZSL emulates
the continuous learning process of a human’s life, where the
model continually sees more classes from the unseen world
and is evaluated on both seen and unseen classes. This CZSL
skill, may it get maturely developed to the world scale, has
the potential to accelerate research in species discovery, for
example, as known species grow continually, but close to
90% of the species are not yet discovered[55].
Generative models (e.g., GANs[26]) have made significant progress in producing photorealistic images by learning
high-dimensional probability distributions. This ability motivated researchers to adapt GANs to ZSL to generate missing
data of unseen classes conditioning on unseen semantic information, known as generative-based ZSL. Training the classifier on synthetic unseen samples can reduce model prediction bias towards seen classes and thus achieves competitive
zero-shot learning performance [38, 58, 42]. Some CZSL
works directly adopt this framework continually, known as
transductive continual zero-shot learning [25, 36]. However, in CZSL, the unseen world changes dynamically and
unexpectedly, making it unrealistic to use prior knowledge
about unseen classes[53]. When we do not assume access
to unseen semantic information in the CZSL setting, which
is known as inductive continual zero-shot learning, most
existing methods struggle to perform well, as we show in
our experiments. Furthermore, the theoretical understanding
of how zero-shot learning benefits from synthetic data is limited, which poses an obstacle to developing purely inductive
continual zero-shot methods. Recent analyses of training
generative models with synthetic data [8] provide a possible
avenue for developing the desired theoretical explanation.
This led us to develop a generalization-bound tool to understand the learning mechanism in generative-based CZSL and
further develop inductive methods based on it.
In our analysis, we have identified it is crucial to reduce
the distance between the generated and actual visual space of
unseen classes. This requires the model to generate realistic
samples to represent unseen space to augment the training
1
11574

