This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-task View Synthesis with Neural Radiance Fields
Shuhong Zheng1, * Zhipeng Bao2, * Martial Hebert2 Yu-Xiong Wang1
1
2
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Carnegie Mellon University
{szheng36, yxw}@illinois.edu

{zbao, hebert}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Multi-task visual learning is a critical aspect of computer vision. Current research, however, predominantly
concentrates on the multi-task dense prediction setting,
which overlooks the intrinsic 3D world and its multi-view
consistent structures, and lacks the capability for versatile
imagination. In response to these limitations, we present a
novel problem setting – multi-task view synthesis (MTVS),
which reinterprets multi-task prediction as a set of novelview synthesis tasks for multiple scene properties, including RGB. To tackle the MTVS problem, we propose MuvieNeRF, a framework that incorporates both multi-task and
cross-view knowledge to simultaneously synthesize multiple scene properties. MuvieNeRF integrates two key modules, the Cross-Task Attention (CTA) and Cross-View Attention (CVA) modules, enabling the efficient use of information across multiple views and tasks. Extensive evaluation
on both synthetic and realistic benchmarks demonstrates
that MuvieNeRF is capable of simultaneously synthesizing different scene properties with promising visual quality, even outperforming conventional discriminative models in various settings. Notably, we show that MuvieNeRF
exhibits universal applicability across a range of NeRF
backbones. Our code is available at https://github.
com/zsh2000/MuvieNeRF.

1. Introduction
When observing a given scene, human minds exhibit
a remarkable capability to mentally simulate the objects
within it from a novel viewpoint in a versatile manner [40].
It not only includes imagination of the colors of objects, but
also extends to numerous associated scene properties such
as surface orientation, semantic segmentation, and edge patterns. Prompted by this, a burgeoning interest has emerged,
seeking to equip modern robotic systems with similar capabilities for handling multiple tasks. Nevertheless, contemporary research [33, 65, 66] has primarily centered on
* Equal contribution

discriminative
model

(a) Conventional multi-task learning setting
volume
rendering

synthesis
model

(b) Our multi-task view synthesis pipeline

Figure 1. Comparison between (a) the conventional multi-task
learning scheme and (b) our multi-task view synthesis setting. The
conventional “discriminative” multi-task learning makes predictions for single images while multi-task view synthesis aims to
render visualizations for multiple scene properties at novel views.

the multi-task dense prediction setting, which employs a
conventional discriminative model to simultaneously predict multiple pixel-level scene properties using given RGB
images (refer to Figure 1(a)). Yet, the methodologies arising
from this context often demonstrate practical limitations,
primarily due to their tendency to treat each image as a separate entity, without constructing an explicit 3D model that
adheres to the principle of multi-view consistency. Even
more critically, they lack the ability to “imagine” – they
are incapable of inferring scene properties from an unseen
viewpoint, as these models invariably require RGB images.
To circumvent these constraints, we propose a novel approach that revisits multi-task learning (MTL) [5] from a
synthesis perspective. This leads to a more flexible problem setting that reinterprets multi-task visual learning as a
collection of novel-view synthesis problems, which we refer to as multi-task view synthesis (MTVS) (refer to Figure 1(b)). As an illustration, the task of predicting surface

21538

