This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CVSformer: Cross-View Synthesis Transformer for Semantic Scene Completion
Haotian Dong1 ,* Enhui Ma1 ,* Lubo Wang1 , Miaohui Wang2 , Wuyuan Xie2 ,
Qing Guo3 , Ping Li4 , Lingyu Liang5†, Kairui Yang6 , Di Lin1†
1

Tianjin University, 2 Shenzhen University, 3 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
4
IHPC and CFAR, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore,
5
Pazhou Lab, South China University of Technology, 6 Alibaba Damo Academy

Abstract
Semantic scene completion (SSC) requires an accurate
understanding of the geometric and semantic relationships
between the objects in the 3D scene for reasoning the occluded objects. The popular SSC methods voxelize the 3D
objects, allowing the deep 3D convolutional network (3D
CNN) to learn the object relationships from the complex
scenes. However, the current networks lack the controllable
kernels to model the object relationship across multiple
views, where appropriate views provide the relevant information for suggesting the existence of the occluded objects.
In this paper, we propose Cross-View Synthesis Transformer (CVSformer), which consists of Multi-View Feature
Synthesis and Cross-View Transformer for learning crossview object relationships. In the multi-view feature synthesis, we use a set of 3D convolutional kernels rotated differently to compute the multi-view features for each voxel.
In the cross-view transformer, we employ the cross-view fusion to comprehensively learn the cross-view relationships,
which form useful information for enhancing the features of
individual views. We use the enhanced features to predict
the geometric occupancies and semantic labels of all voxels. We evaluate CVSformer on public datasets, where CVSformer yields state-of-the-art results. Our code is available
at https://github.com/donghaotian123/CVSformer.

1. Introduction
The recent progress on artificial intelligence is mainly
driven by the advanced machine power of recognizing 3D
objects. It significantly benefits various downstream applications, such as autonomous driving and video surveillance.
An essential problem of 3D object recognition is letting the
machine accurately recognize the occluded objects in com* Co-first authors. The names are listed in alphabetical order.
† Co-corresponding authors.

plex 3D scenes. This problem leads to the emergence of
research on semantic scene completion (SSC).
The latest success of SSC is primarily attributed to deep
neural networks, which are good at learning the geometric
and semantic representations of 3D objects. To facilitate
fast representation learning in the large-scale 3D scene, the
popular SSC methods [5, 10, 13, 14, 19, 31, 38, 40, 21, 29,
39, 34, 2, 11, 27, 23, 22, 16] employ 3D CNN to learn representations from the voxelized objects. To alleviate the limitation of the regular 3D convolutional kernels that fix the
range of capturing the object relationship, the variant 3D
CNNs involve spatial pyramid [40] and deformation [36]
to diversify the kernel shapes, which attend to the object
relationships in different ranges. Yet, the pyramidal kernels lack the flexibility to exclude the irrelevant voxels; the
deformable kernels are sensitive to the object shapes, usually capturing the relationship between voxels from a monoview. These kernels work without the controllable view like
the camera. They are also less effective for modeling the object relationship across multiple perspectives, like multiple
cameras, which enable the change of view directions to offer the information of relevant objects for recognizing the
occluded things.
In this paper, we propose Cross-View Synthesis Transformer (CVSformer), which consists of Multi-View Feature Synthesis (MVFS) and Cross-View Transformer
(CVTr), as illustrated in Figure 1. CVSformer employs the
basic 3D CNN to learn the visual feature map from RGB-D
image. The original-view feature map contains the feature
of each voxel, whose correlation with the adjacent voxels
is captured from the original view. Next, MVFS controls
the rotation of the 3D convolutional kernel, synthesizing the
change of view direction and providing new object relationships. Here, we remark that 3D kernel’s view is an analogy
with the camera’s view. It has a conceptual view direction
to determines the center voxel’s spatial neighbors and their
correlations. MVFS employs the kernels with different rotations to compute the synthetic-view feature maps, which

8874

