This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VL-Match: Enhancing Vision-Language Pretraining
with Token-Level and Instance-Level Matching
Junyu Bi1,2 Daixuan Cheng3 Ping Yao1,2 Bochen Pang3 Yuefeng Zhan3
Chuanguang Yang1,2 Yujing Wang3 Hao Sun3 Weiwei Deng3 Qi Zhang3
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Microsoft Corporation
{bijunyu, yaoping, yangchuanguang}@ict.ac.cn

daixuancheng6@gmail.com

{bopa, yuefzh, yujwang, hasun, dedeng, qizhang}@microsoft.com

Abstract

(a) Masked Language Modeling

(b) Vision-Language Replaced Token Detection
[MASK] sweet dog is wearing a [MASK] hat

[MASK] sweet dog is wearing a [MASK] hat

Vision-Language Pretraining (VLP) has significantly improved the performance of various vision-language tasks
with the matching of images and texts. In this paper, we
propose VL-Match, a Vision-Language framework with Enhanced Token-level and Instance-level Matching. At the token level, a Vision-Language Replaced Token Detection task
is designed to boost the substantial interaction between text
tokens and images, where the text encoder of VLP works
as a generator to generate a corrupted text, and the multimodal encoder of VLP works as a discriminator to predict whether each text token in the corrupted text matches
the image. At the instance level, in the Image-Text Matching task that judges whether an image-text pair is matched,
we propose a novel bootstrapping method to generate hard
negative text samples that are different from the positive
ones only at the token level. In this way, we can force the
network to detect fine-grained differences between images
and texts. Notably, with a smaller amount of parameters,
VL-Match significantly outperforms previous SOTA on all
image-text retrieval tasks.

1. Introduction
The pretrain-then-finetune paradigm has achieved great
success in both natural language processing [7, 5, 24, 15]
and computer vision [14, 3, 2, 27]. Vision-Language Pretraining (VLP) [22, 44, 18, 21, 39] has also attracted much
attention in recent years, which aims to pretrain a model
that can understand and align the semantics of images and
texts through a variety of pretraining tasks based on massive
image-text pairs. These models can be finetuned to adapt
to various downstream vision-language tasks such as visual
question answering [12] and image-text retrieval [30, 23].

Text encoder (Generator)

Text encoder +
Multimodal encoder

a sweet dog is wearing a red hat

a sweet dog is wearing a white hat

Text encoder +
Multimodal encoder (Discriminator)

(c) Image-Text Matching

(d) Fine-Grained Image-Text Matching

a sweet dog is wearing a white hat

a sweet dog is wearing a white hat

a bear is walking outside near tall grass

a bear is walking outside near tall grass
a sweet dog is wearing a red hat

Figure 1. (a) Masked Language Modeling (MLM) predicts original tokens of the masked positions with image and text representations; (b) Vision-Language Replaced Token Detection (VLRTD) enhances token-level matching by discriminating whether
each token in the generated text aligns with the image and the
text context; (c) Image-Text Matching (ITM) predicts whether the
given texts match the image; (d) Fine-Grained Image-Text Matching (FG-ITM) adds a fine-grained negative sample to enhance the
matching ability at instance level.

To learn the matching between images and texts in
vision-language pretraining, two pretraining tasks are commonly adopted to train a multimodal encoder [18, 9, 34]:
Masked Language Modeling [35] tries to learn the tokenlevel matching of different modalities by predicting original tokens of the masked positions with the image and
text representations [22, 1]. The image and text representations are encoded with an image encoder and a text encoder respectively. Image-Text Matching attempts to match
vision and language at instance level in a binary classification task, which predicts whether the given texts match the
images [18, 22].

2584

