This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mining bias-target Alignment from Voronoi Cells
Rémi Nahon
Van-Tam Nguyen
Enzo Tartaglione
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
{remi.nahon, van-tam.nguyen, enzo.tartaglione}@telecom-paris.fr

Abstract
Despite significant research efforts, deep neural networks remain vulnerable to biases: this raises concerns
about their fairness and limits their generalization. In this
paper, we propose a bias-agnostic approach to mitigate the
impact of biases in deep neural networks. Unlike traditional
debiasing approaches, we rely on a metric to quantify “bias
alignment/misalignment” on target classes and use this
information to discourage the propagation of bias-target
alignment information through the network. We conduct experiments on several commonly used datasets for debiasing
and compare our method with supervised and bias-specific
approaches. Our results indicate that the proposed method
achieves comparable performance to state-of-the-art supervised approaches, despite being bias-agnostic, even in the
presence of multiple biases in the same sample.

1. Introduction
Today, deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are renowned for
their high performance and resilience in many areas of computer vision, such as image classification, semantic segmentation, and object detection, used in fields ranging from selfdriving vehicles to face recognition or surgical guidance.
However, it is well known that their tendency to rely heavily on any type of correlation present in the training data
exposes them to potential pitfalls [3, 16, 40]: some “spurious correlations” may be erroneously learned by the DNN.
These can act as biases [35].
Learned biases can reduce the generalization of the DNN [3,
5, 8, 16, 24, 30]. For example, if a DNN has learned to
distinguish airplanes flying in the sky from boats sailing in
the ocean, the model will probably use the background as a
base for its classification: detecting it instead of learning the
vehicle shape is a much simpler task. However, the model
does not generalize to scenarios such as a landing seaplane.
Differently from domain adaptation [9, 29, 36], where the
objective is to learn general features that compensate for
the domain shift or to adapt extracted features to different
domains, the goal of debiasing is to discourage the learning

Vanilla Network
Training

Dataset

Unbiased Network
Training

Mining of the
Bias-Target
Misalignment

Voronoi Cells
Inspection

Bias-Target
Misalignment
Information
Removal
Samples
Weighting

Figure 1. Our proposed approach to agnostically remove the bias.

of spurious correlations.
Many current debiasing approaches rely on prior information about the bias, such as the existence of an auxiliary
label indicating some side information, the presence of
bias(es) or their quality [5, 6, 8, 11, 34, 37]. However,
obtaining these labels or information on the nature of the
bias can be either very costly (due to annotation costs) or
very noisy: this is what motivates the development of biasagnostic approaches. Recent works have shown that bias
features are learned “early” [26, 30]; there are bias-target
aligned samples, for which the bias is learned, and the performance on the train set increases, and some misaligned
ones, for which the prediction is wrong. Since bias-agnostic
approaches delve into the biased information from the training set, it is common to amplify the first features learned
using Generalized Cross-Entropy [41] and then discourage
their learning in an “unbiased” model. However, there is no
guarantee that the very first features learned are the biased
ones: detecting them agnostically and effectively remains
an open question.
In this work, we propose a method that identifies the best
time to extract bias-target alignment information by observing the relative distance of misclassified samples to the
Voronoi boundary of the correct target class. We use this information to train an unbiased model, where we give higher
weight to bias-misaligned samples, and remove the biasalignment information from the bottleneck layer (Fig. 1).
At a glance, our contributions are the following:
• we propose a bias-agnostic approach that indicates,

4946

