This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LRRU: Long-short Range Recurrent Updating Networks for Depth Completion
Yufei Wang1 , Bo Li1∗ , Ge Zhang1 , Qi Liu1 , Tao Gao2 Yuchao Dai1 *
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University and Shaanxi Key Laboratory of
Information Acquisition and Processing 2 Chang’an University

Abstract

800

Model Parameters

RMSE[mm]

790

Existing deep learning-based depth completion methods generally employ massive stacked layers to predict
the dense depth map from sparse input data. Although
such approaches greatly advance this task, their accompanied huge computational complexity hinders their practical
applications. To accomplish depth completion more efficiently, we propose a novel lightweight deep network framework, the Long-short Range Recurrent Updating (LRRU)
network. Without learning complex feature representations, LRRU first roughly fills the sparse input to obtain
an initial dense depth map, and then iteratively updates
it through learned spatially-variant kernels. Our iterative update process is content-adaptive and highly flexible, where the kernel weights are learned by jointly considering the guidance RGB images and the depth map to
be updated, and large-to-small kernel scopes are dynamically adjusted to capture long-to-short range dependencies. Our initial depth map has coarse but complete scene
depth information, which helps relieve the burden of directly regressing the dense depth from sparse ones, while
our proposed method can effectively refine it to an accurate depth map with less learnable parameters and inference time. Experimental results demonstrate that our
proposed LRRU variants achieve state-of-the-art performance across different parameter regimes. In particular,
the LRRU-Base model outperforms competing approaches
on the NYUv2 dataset, and ranks 1st on the KITTI depth
completion benchmark at the time of submission. Project
page: https://npucvr.github.io/LRRU/.

1. Introduction
Acquiring accurate and dense scene depth plays a fundamental role in various applications, such as autonomous
driving [33] and augmented reality [25]. However, existing depth sensors have inevitable limitations for both indoor
and outdoor scenes [39], for example, the depth acquired by
* Corresponding authors {daiyuchao, libo}@nwpu.edu.cn.

780
770
760
750
740
730

LRRU-Mini
(ours)

700

ACMNet
(TIP21)
MDANet
(ICRA21)

LRRU-Small
(ours)

PENet
(ICRA21)
LRRU-Base
(ours)

690
680

130M

DeepLiDAR
(CVPR19)

LRRU-Tiny
(ours)

720
710

0.3M 1M 5M 20M
NLSPN
(ECCV20)

Runtime[ms]

Best
50

100

150

200

250

300

350

Figure 1. The performance in terms of RMSE versus runtime on
the KITTI test dataset. The bubble size represents the number of
parameters. LRRU performs better while maintaining efficiency.

LiDAR is too sparse to be used directly. Thus, depth completion, i.e., estimating the dense depth maps from sparse
distance measurements, has attracted extensive research interests in industry and research communities.
Recently, deep learning-based methods [32, 35] have
shown dominant performance for this task, which directly
maps sparse depth maps to dense depth maps through massive stacked filters and layers. Since the RGB images contain rich semantic cues that are critical for filling unknown
depth, some works [22, 23, 30, 42] utilize the RGB information to guide depth completion. Although many advanced
networks such as ResNet [10] and Transformer [8, 29, 43]
have been exploited, it is still difficult to directly predict
an accurate and dense depth map from a sparse input depth
map and the corresponding RGB image. Specifically, existing methods employ tens of millions of learnable parameters in exchange for a desirable model capacity to learn robust features, for example, 132M parameters are contained
in PENet [11]. Such large-scale networks usually require
heavy computing resources, which fail to be applied in the
real world, while the method performance drops significantly if the network size is simply reduced [13]. In addition, the predicted depth maps obtained by direct regression
suffer from blur effect and distortion of object boundaries,
which need to be further refined through extra refinement
modules [4]. For example, the popular spatial propagation

9422

