This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NEMTO: Neural Environment Matting for
Novel View and Relighting Synthesis of Transparent Objects
Dongqing Wang
Tong Zhang
Sabine Süsstrunk
School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL
{dongqing.wang, tong.zhang, sabine.susstrunk}@epfl.ch

Abstract
We propose NEMTO, the first end-to-end neural rendering pipeline to model 3D transparent objects with complex
geometry and unknown indices of refraction. Commonly
used appearance modeling such as the Disney BSDF model
cannot accurately address this challenging problem due to
the complex light paths bending through refractions and
the strong dependency of surface appearance on illumination. With 2D images of the transparent object as input,
our method is capable of high-quality novel view and relighting synthesis. We leverage implicit Signed Distance
Functions (SDF) to model the object geometry and propose a refraction-aware ray bending network to model the
effects of light refraction within the object. Our ray bending network is more tolerant to geometric inaccuracies than
traditional physically-based methods for rendering transparent objects. We provide extensive evaluations on both
synthetic and real-world datasets to demonstrate our highquality synthesis and the applicability of our method.

Input Images

NEMTO Synthesized Results
Surface Normal

Novel View

Relighting

Ground Truth

NEMTO

PhySG [40]

Novel View & Surface Normal Comparison

Figure 1. Given as input multi-view images captured under natural
illumination, NEMTO is capable of high-quality novel view synthesis and relighting through optimizing an end-to-end neural representation for a transparent object. NEMTO disentangles geometry and illumination-dependent appearance, which previous neural
rendering methods, such as PhySG [45], cannot.

1. Introduction
Modeling transparent objects is important for VR/AR
applications as the former are abundant in the real world.
Unlike opaque objects with close-to-zero light transmission,
transparent objects allow light to pass through. Such refraction and reflection create complex light paths and give transparent objects highly environment-dependent appearances.
Consequently, the appearance and geometry of transparent
objects are much more entangled than those of opaque objects [31]. A slight error in object geometry can lead to a
global change in appearance [42], as the light path for each
ray may thus vary substantially. For these reasons, deriving
material and object geometry from images of a transparent
object is a highly ill-posed and challenging problem.
Existing work for modeling transparent objects can be
classified into two categories. One assumes known indices
of refraction (IOR) and reconstructs the complex geometry
of transparent objects through either physical devices and
structured backlights [9, 24, 37, 38, 40, 42] or neural net-

works that model geometry with analytical refraction [23].
The other [3] focuses on optimizing the refractive ray path
in the scene without modeling the object surface geometry. However, neither approach is optimal for synthesizing
novel views and relighting for transparent objects with complex geometry. In this work, we propose a new framework
that combines recent advances in Neural Inverse Rendering [5, 6, 29, 45, 47, 48] to overcome these limitations.
Traditionally, physically-based rendering follows Snell’s
Law to render transparent objects. However, object appearance highly depends on geometry estimation, and jointly
optimizing both is highly ill-posed. Therefore, our key contribution is incorporating a physically-guided Ray Bending
Network (RBN) to disentangle object geometry and light refraction. RBN takes the learned geometry [44] as prior, and
models light refraction by mapping the incoming ray direction directly to the refracted ray direction exiting the object.
Our method does not assume a homogeneous refractive in1317

