This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InterFormer
Real-time Interactive Image Segmentation
You Huang 1 , Hao Yang 1 , Ke Sun 1 , Shengchuan Zhang 1 *, Liujuan Cao1 , Guannan Jiang2 , Rongrong Ji1
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University
2
Intelligent Manufacturing Department, Contemporary Amperex Technology Co. Limited (CATL)

Abstract
Interactive image segmentation enables annotators to
efficiently perform pixel-level annotation for segmentation tasks. However, the existing interactive segmentation
pipeline suffers from inefficient computations of interactive
models because of the following two issues. First, annotators’ later click is based on models’ feedback of annotators’ former click. This serial interaction is unable to
utilize model’s parallelism capabilities. Second, in each
interaction step, the model handles the invariant image
along with the sparse variable clicks, resulting in a process that’s highly repetitive and redundant. For efficient
computations, we propose a method named InterFormer
that follows a new pipeline to address these issues. InterFormer extracts and preprocesses the computationally
time-consuming part i.e. image processing from the existing
process. Specifically, InterFormer employs a large vision
transformer (ViT) on high-performance devices to preprocess images in parallel, and then uses a lightweight module called interactive multi-head self attention (I-MSA) for
interactive segmentation. Furthermore, the I-MSA module’s deployment on low-power devices extends the practical application of interactive segmentation. The I-MSA
module utilizes the preprocessed features to efficiently response to the annotator inputs in real-time. The experiments
on several datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of InterFormer, which outperforms previous interactive segmentation models in terms of computational efficiency and segmentation quality, achieve real-time high-quality interactive segmentation on CPU-only devices. The code is available at https://github.com/YouHuang67/InterFormer.

1. Introduction
As fueled by massive amounts of data [46], deep networks achieve compelling performance in various computer
* Corresponding author

Large Interactive Model
Encoder

x

Decoder

Online Inference
Online Inference
Offline Inference

Large
Encoder

Light
x
Decoder

Figure 1. Illustration of both the existing and proposed interactive
pipelines. The existing pipeline (top) provides both the image and
annotator clicks to the interactive model during each interaction,
while the proposed pipeline (bottom) employs a large encoder to
preprocess the image and then provides the fixed encoded features
and on-the-fly clicks to a light decoder during the interaction.

vision tasks [6, 8, 36]. The availability of accurately annotated data is essential for deep networks’ success. However,
the process of manual annotation is time-consuming and
resource-intensive. Therefore, the developed interactive image segmentation has become an indispensable tool in annotating large-scale image datasets [5]. Such techniques aim
to achieve high-quality pixel-level annotations with limited
annotator interactions, including scribbles [4], bounding
boxes [43, 50], polygons [1, 35], clicks [2, 41, 10, 33, 38],
and some combinations [57]. Among them, the click-based
methods have become the most prevalent due to its simplicity, and we focus on these methods in this work.
Recent works on click-based interactive segmentation
concentrate on various refinement modules [10, 33] incorporating sophisticated engineering optimization. However,
such refinement tricks still need the well-segmented results from early interactions in the interactive process. Producing such results keeps facing challenges in deploying
computationally-intensive models on low-power devices.
For example, it is challenging to utilize interactive segmentation models through crowdsourcing platforms [3]. Previ-

22301

