This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Novel Scenes & Classes: Towards Adaptive Open-set Object Detection
Wuyang Li1
1

City University of Hong Kong

wuyangli2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk

Xiaoqing Guo1,2
2

University of Oxford

Yixuan Yuan1,3, *
3

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

xiaoqing.guo@eng.ox.ac.uk

yxyuan@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Domain Adaptive Object Detection (DAOD) transfers an
object detector to a novel domain free of labels. However, in the real world, besides encountering novel scenes,
novel domains always contain novel-class objects de facto,
which are ignored in existing research. Thus, we formulate and study a more practical setting, Adaptive Open-set
Object Detection (AOOD), considering both novel scenes
and classes. Directly combing off-the-shelled cross-domain
and open-set approaches is sub-optimal since their loworder dependence, e.g., the confidence score, is insufficient for the AOOD with two dimensions of novel information. To address this, we propose a novel Structured
Motif Matching (SOMA) framework for AOOD, which models the high-order relation with motifs, i.e., statistically significant subgraphs, and formulates AOOD solution as motif
matching to learn with high-order patterns. In a nutshell,
SOMA consists of Structure-aware Novel-class Learning
(SNL) and Structure-aware Transfer Learning (STL). As
for SNL, we establish an instance-oriented graph to capture the class-independent object feature hidden in different base classes. Then, a high-order metric is proposed to match the most significant motif as high-order
patterns, serving for motif-guided novel-class learning. In
STL, we set up a semantic-oriented graph to model the
class-dependent relation across domains, and match unlabelled objects with high-order motifs to align the crossdomain distribution with structural awareness. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed SOMA
achieves state-of-the-art performance. Codes are available
at https://github.com/CityU-AIM-Group/SOMA.

1. Introduction
Domain Adaptive Object Detection (DAOD) studies robust object detection in cross-domain scenarios, where the
* Corresponding author.
This work was supported by Hong Kong Research Grants Council General Research Fund 11211221, 14204321, 14220622, and Innovation and
Technology Commission-Innovation and Technology Fund ITS/100/20.

Figure 1. Illustration of (a) existing DAOD assumption and (b) the
proposed AOOD setting.

independent and identically distributed constraint [17] is no
longer applicable due to the domain shift [7]. With tailordesigned techniques [7, 22, 5], the object detector trained in
a labeled domain can be generalized to a novel one free of
labels (Figure 1(a)), pushing forward its real-world grounding, e.g., self-driving with novel weather and street scenes.
While achieving great success, existing DAOD works
strongly assume a shared class space between the two domains (see Figure 1(a)), leading to a vast gap between
the transferred domain and real-world [24]. Since natural scenes are diverse and always contain objects beyond
pre-defined classes, this gap severely limits the scene understanding for industrial usage [19], e.g., confusing the autonomous driving system with wrong judgments. Hence, to
overcome this limitation, we relax the assumption and formulate a more practical setting, called Adaptive Open-set
Object Detection (AOOD), by allowing the target domain
with novel-class objects. As shown in Figure 1(b), in the
target domain, besides detecting the base-class car and person shared with the source domain, we also aim to identify
novel-class objects, e.g., dustbin and door sign, etc. Specifically, the object detector uses the base-class labels in the
source domain for training, and aims to detect base-class
objects and identify novel-class objects as unknown [19] in
the target domain. The proposed AOOD1 is a practical set1 See Appendix for comparing with other related task settings.

15780

