This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Erasing Concepts from Diffusion Models
Rohit Gandikota∗,1
Joanna Materzyńska∗,2
Jaden Fiotto-Kaufman1 David Bau1
1
2
Northeastern University
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
1

[gandikota.ro, fiotto-kaufman.j, davidbau]@northeastern.edu

Erasing Nudity
Original Model

Edited Model

Erasing Artistic Style
Original Model

Edited Model

2

jomat@mit.edu

Erasing Objects
Original Model

Edited Model

*

*
*
*

*

*
*

Added by authors
for publication

Erased from model:
“Nudity”

Erased from model:
“Van Gogh”

Erased from model:
“Car”

Figure 1: Given only a short text description of an undesired visual concept and no additional data, our method fine-tunes
model weights to erase the targeted concept. Our method can avoid NSFW content, stop imitation of a specific artist’s style, or
even erase a whole object class from model output, while preserving the model’s behavior and capabilities on other topics.

Abstract
Motivated by concerns that large-scale diffusion models
can produce undesirable output such as sexually explicit
content or copyrighted artistic styles, we study erasure of
specific concepts from diffusion model weights. We propose
a fine-tuning method that can erase a visual concept from a
pre-trained diffusion model, given only the name of the style
and using negative guidance as a teacher. We benchmark our
method against previous approaches that remove sexually explicit content and demonstrate its effectiveness, performing
on par with Safe Latent Diffusion and censored training. To
evaluate artistic style removal, we conduct experiments erasing five modern artists from the network and conduct a user
study to assess the human perception of the removed styles.
Unlike previous methods, our approach can remove concepts
from a diffusion model permanently rather than modifying
the output at the inference time, so it cannot be circumvented
even if a user has access to model weights. Our code, data,
and results are available at erasing.baulab.info.

1. Introduction
Recent text-to-image generative models have attracted attention due to their remarkable image quality and seemingly
infinite generation capabilities. These models are trained
on vast internet datasets, which enables them to imitate a
wide range of concepts. However, some concepts learned
by the model are undesirable, including copyrighted content
and pornography, which we aim to avoid in the model’s output [27, 16, 29]. In this paper, we propose an approach for
selectively removing a single concept from a text-conditional
model’s weights after pretraining. Prior approaches have
focused on dataset filtering [30], post-generation filtering
[29], or inference guiding [38]. Unlike data filtering methods, our method does not require retraining, which is prohibitive for large models. Inference-based methods can censor [29] or steer the output away from undesired concepts
effectively [38], but they can be easily circumvented. In
contrast, our approach directly removes the concept from the
model’s parameters, making it safe to distribute its weights.

* Equal contribution

The open-source release of the Stable Diffusion text-to-

2426

