This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniFusion: Unified Multi-view Fusion Transformer for Spatial-Temporal
Representation in Bird’s-Eye-View
Zequn Qin1 , Jingyu Chen2 , Chao Chen2 , Xiaozhi Chen2 *, Xi Li1,3,4 *
College of Computer Science & Technology, Zhejiang University; 2 DJI
3
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study of Zhejiang University
4
Zhejiang-Singapore Innovation and AI Joint Research Lab, Hangzhou

1

zequnqin@gmail.com, jeffery.chen@dji.com, huaijin.chen@dji.com
cxz.thu@gmail.com, xilizju@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Bird’s eye view (BEV) representation is a new perception
formulation for autonomous driving, which is based on spatial fusion. Further, temporal fusion is also introduced in
BEV representation and gains great success. In this work,
we propose a new method that unifies both spatial and temporal fusion and merges them into a unified mathematical
formulation. The unified fusion could not only provide a
new perspective on BEV fusion but also brings new capabilities. With the proposed unified spatial-temporal fusion, our
method could support long-range fusion, which is hard to
achieve in conventional BEV methods. Moreover, the BEV
fusion in our work is temporal-adaptive and the weights of
temporal fusion are learnable. In contrast, conventional
methods mainly use fixed and equal weights for temporal
fusion. Besides, the proposed unified fusion could avoid
information lost in conventional BEV fusion methods and
make full use of features. Extensive experiments and ablation studies on the NuScenes dataset show the effectiveness
of the proposed method and our method gains the state-ofthe-art performance in the map and vehicle segmentation
task.

1. Introducion
Recently, bird’s-eye-view (BEV) representation [17, 20,
11] becomes an emerging perception formulation in the autonomous driving field. The main idea of BEV representation is to map the multi-camera features into the ego BEV
space, i.e., spatial fusion, as shown in Fig. 1. This kind
of spatial fusion composes an integrated BEV space, and
duplicate results from different cameras are uniquely represented in the BEV space, which greatly reduces the diffi* Corresponding authors: Xiaozhi Chen and Xi Li.

(a) Inputs with surrounding images.

(b) Map.

Figure 1: Illustration of the map segmentation task in BEV.

culty in fusing multi-camera features. Moreover, the BEV
spatial fusion naturally shares the same 3D space as other
modalities like LiDAR and radar, making multi-modality
fusion simple.
The integrated BEV representation based on spatial fusion provides the basis of temporal fusion. Temporal fusion
is a cornerstone in BEV representation, which can be used
in many aspects like 1) representing temporarily occluded
objects; 2) accumulating observation in a long-range, which
can be used for generating map; 3) stabilizing the perception results for standstill vehicles. There have been many
methods [11, 9, 12] showing the importance and effectiveness of temporal fusion.
Despite the success of current progress, present methods usually use warp-based temporal fusion, i.e., warping
past BEV features to the current time according to the positions of BEV spaces at different time steps. Although this
kind of design can well align temporal information, there
are still some open problems. First, the warping is usually serial; that is to say, it is conducted only between ad-

8690

