This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WALDO: Future Video Synthesis using Object Layer Decomposition and
Parametric Flow Prediction
Guillaume Le Moing1, 2, *
1

Inria

Jean Ponce2, 3

Cordelia Schmid1, 2

2

3

Département d’informatique de
l’ENS (CNRS, ENS-PSL, Inria)

Center for Data Science
New York University

Abstract
This paper presents WALDO (WArping LayerDecomposed Objects), a novel approach to the prediction
of future video frames from past ones. Individual images
are decomposed into multiple layers combining object
masks and a small set of control points. The layer structure
is shared across all frames in each video to build dense
inter-frame connections. Complex scene motions are modeled by combining parametric geometric transformations
associated with individual layers, and video synthesis is
broken down into discovering the layers associated with
past frames, predicting the corresponding transformations
for upcoming ones and warping the associated object
regions accordingly, and filling in the remaining image
parts. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks
including urban videos (Cityscapes and KITTI) and videos
featuring nonrigid motions (UCF-Sports and H3.6M),
show that our method consistently outperforms the state
of the art by a significant margin in every case. Code,
pretrained models, and video samples synthesized by our
approach can be found in the project webpage.1

1. Introduction
Predicting the future from a video stream is an important
tool to make autonomous agents more robust and safe. In
this paper, we are interested in the case where future frames
are synthesized from a fixed number of past ones. One
possibility is to build on advanced image synthesis models [20, 23, 44, 59] and adapt them to predict new frames
conditioned on past ones [79]. Extending these already
memory- and compute-intensive methods to our task may,
however, lead to prohibitive costs due to the extra temporal
dimension. Hence, the resolution of videos predicted by this
approach is often limited [36, 95, 96]. Other works resort to
compression [64, 82] to reduce computations [63, 97, 103],
* corresponding author: guillaume.le-moing@inria.fr
1 url: https://16lemoing.github.io/waldo

T

T +10

T

T +10

Figure 1. WALDO synthesizes future frames by deforming grids
of control points, automatically associated with different objects.

at the potential cost of poorer temporal consistency [61].
Our work relies instead on semantic and motion cues extracted from the past to model complex dynamics in high
resolution and predict the future. Wu et al. [99] decompose scenes into objects/background, predict affine transformations for the objects and non-affine ones for the background, and warp the last input frame to produce new ones.
Bei et al. [7] predict dense flow maps for individual semantic regions. Geng et al. [29] augment classical frame reconstruction losses with flow-based correspondences between
pairs of frames. Wu et al. [100] build on a pretrained video
frame interpolation model which they adapt to future video
prediction. Contrary to [99], our model automatically discovers the object decomposition without explicit supervision. Moreover, rather than directly predicting optical flow
at each pixel [7,99,100], we use thin-plate splines (TPS) [9]
as a parametric model of per layer flow for any pair of
frames. This improves robustness since we predict future
frames using all past ones as opposed to [7, 29, 99, 100]. In
addition, TPS provide optical flow at any resolution, and
allow using a lower resolution for fast training while retaining good performance with high-resolution inputs at inference. Lastly, a few time-dependent control points associated with each object and the background are sufficient to
parameterize TPS. This compact yet expressive representation of motion allows us to break down video synthesis into:
(a) discovering the layers associated with past frames, (b)
predicting the corresponding transformations for upcoming
ones while handling complex motions [13] and modeling
future uncertainty if needed [1,2], and (c) warping the associated object regions accordingly and filling in the remain-

23229

