This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Designing Phase Masks for Under-Display Cameras
Anqi Yang† , Eunhee Kang‡ , Hyong-Euk Lee‡ , Aswin C. Sankaranarayanan†
‡
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology Suwon-si, South Korea
†
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA

Abstract
Diffractive blur and low light levels are two fundamental
challenges in producing high-quality photographs in underdisplay cameras (UDCs). In this paper, we incorporate
phase masks on display panels to tackle both challenges.
Our design inserts two phase masks, specifically two microlens arrays, in front of and behind a display panel. The
first phase mask concentrates light on the locations where
the display is transparent so that more light passes through
the display, and the second phase mask reverts the effect of
the first phase mask. We further optimize the folding height
of each microlens to improve the quality of PSFs and suppress chromatic aberration. We evaluate our design using a
physically-accurate simulator based on Fourier optics. The
proposed design is able to double the light throughput while
improving the invertibility of the PSFs. Lastly, we discuss
the effect of our design on the display quality and show that
implementation with polarization-dependent phase masks
can leave the display quality uncompromised.

1. Introduction
Diffraction is perhaps the fundamental limiter of performance in most imaging systems, and nowhere is this more
readily apparent than in an under-display camera (UDC).
UDCs obtain photographs from the light that passes through
the space between display pixels; since the spacing is small,
often in tens of microns, the resulting blur due to diffraction spans hundreds of pixels in the captured images and is
hard to remove in post-processing. This deblurring is further complicated by the display blocking a large portion of
light which results in the captured photograph having an unusually low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR).
Much of the prior work in recent UDC imaging has been
in designing deep neural networks to deblur [27, 12, 5, 26,
11]. Learning-based restoration largely outperforms conventional methods, such as Wiener deconvolution or regularized linear inverse techniques [3]. However, the performance of all techniques, whether regularized by analytical
or data-driven priors, is affected strongly by the condition-

TOLED
pattern

display

lens
(a)

sensor

phase masks
(b)

Captured

Naïve restored

25.09 / 0.8354

32.19 / 0.9306

SOTA restored

27.46 / 0.9398

31.48 / 0.9447

(a) TOLED

(b) TOLED + Phase Masks

Figure 1: A comparison between a UDC under a
transparent-OLED display (a) without and (b) with the
proposed phase masks. (From top to bottom) Rows show
the setup, images captured under each, restored images using a naive iterative solver, and using a state-of-the-art deep
network [5]. We show PSNR(↑) in dB and SSIM(↑) for restored images. Both UDCs have a pixel density of 600 DPI.

ing of the imaging model and SNR of the captured images.
Inspired by a large body of work that enhances capability of imaging systems with phase masks [22, 17, 10, 20,
8, 16, 19], we propose to design phase masks to suppress
diffractive blur and increase light throughput for UDCs. We
first show using basic Fourier optics [7] that inserting a thin
phase mask at the display is ineffective in improving UDCs.
To overcome the limitation of a single phase mask, we propose to use two phase masks—specifically two microlens
arrays– placed in front of and behind the display; we do
this for the specific case of transparent-OLEDs (TOLED),
a display model commonly used in today’s cellphones. The

10637

