This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spatial Self-Distillation for Object Detection with Inaccurate Bounding Boxes
Di Wu*, Pengfei Chen∗ , Xuehui Yu∗ , Guorong Li, Zhenjun Han†, Jianbin Jiao
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Object detection via inaccurate bounding boxes supervision has boosted a broad interest due to the expensive
high-quality annotation data or the occasional inevitability of low annotation quality (e.g. tiny objects). The previous works usually utilize multiple instance learning (MIL),
which highly depends on category information, to select
and refine a low-quality box. Those methods suffer from
object drift, group prediction and part domination problems without exploring spatial information. In this paper, we heuristically propose a Spatial Self-Distillation
based Object Detector (SSD-Det) to mine spatial information to refine the inaccurate box in a self-distillation fashion. SSD-Det utilizes a Spatial Position Self-Distillation
(SPSD) module to exploit spatial information and an interactive structure to combine spatial information and category information, thus constructing a high-quality proposal
bag. To further improve the selection procedure, a Spatial Identity Self-Distillation (SISD) module is introduced in
SSD-Det to obtain spatial confidence to help select the best
proposals. Experiments on MS-COCO and VOC datasets
with noisy box annotation verify our method’s effectiveness and achieve state-of-the-art performance. The code
is available at https://github.com/ucas-vg/
PointTinyBenchmark/tree/SSD-Det.

1. Introduction
Object detection [18, 38, 58, 30, 57] relying on largescale datasets like MS-COCO[31] has significantly progressed and achieved good performance. However, accurate
bounding box annotations are expensive and challenging in
natural contexts [12]. Especially in many professional scenarios, it is difficult to label accurate annotations without
domain knowledge (e.g., agricultural crop observation and
medical image processing) [12, 1]. As shown in Fig. 1a
in some complex datasets, the human annotators may also
annotate inaccurate bounding boxes due to the inherent
ambiguities[20] of objects. In addition, labelling with a de* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors. (hanzhj@ucas.ac.cn)

(a) Labelling strategies lead to inaccurate annotations (red box).

(b) Three problems during previous MIL refining. Because their selections depend solely on classification, (i,ii): the refined box (green
box) drifts to another object or makes a group prediction (merging
across multiple objects) due to neighbor disturbance. Yellow boxes
are proposals in the middle person’s MIL bag. (iii): Local part may
be more discriminative than the entire object and will be predicted.

Figure 1: The sources of inaccurate box annotations and
three problems caused by previous refinement methods.

tector or weak signal[11] (e.g., point) is much cheaper but
brings more inaccuracy. Therefore learning robust detectors
with inaccurate bounding boxes[12, 4, 35, 53, 25] is a practical and meaningful task and has boosted a broad interest.
To use the inaccurate annotations, most related methods [12, 11] refine the inaccurate annotations as Fig. 1a
shows, and then train a detector head or re-train a detector
with the refined box as the new supervision. There are two
main steps during refining: 1) Bag Construction: For each
object, obtaining some proposals around the inaccurate an-

6855

