This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Synthesizing Diverse Human Motions in 3D Indoor Scenes
Kaifeng Zhao1

Yan Zhang1 Shaofei Wang1 Thabo Beeler2
1
ETH Zürich 2 Google

Siyu Tang1

{kaifeng.zhao, yan.zhang, shaofei.wang, siyu.tang}@inf.ethz.ch
thabo.beeler@gmail.com

Figure 1: In this work, we propose a method to generate a sequence of natural human-scene interaction events in real-world
complex scenes as illustrated here. The human first walks to sit on a stool (yellow to red), then walk to another chair to sit
down (red to magenta), and finally walk to and lie on the sofa (magenta to blue).

Abstract
We present a novel method for populating 3D indoor
scenes with virtual humans that can navigate in the environment and interact with objects in a realistic manner. Existing approaches rely on high-quality training sequences that
contain captured human motions and the 3D scenes they interact with. However, such interaction data are costly, difficult to capture, and can hardly cover the full range of plausible human-scene interactions in complex indoor environments. To address these challenges, we propose a reinforcement learning-based approach that enables virtual humans
to navigate in 3D scenes and interact with objects realistically and autonomously, driven by learned motion control
policies. The motion control policies employ latent motion
action spaces, which correspond to realistic motion primitives and are learned from large-scale motion capture data
using a powerful generative motion model. For navigation in a 3D environment, we propose a scene-aware policy

with novel state and reward designs for collision avoidance.
Combined with navigation mesh-based path-finding algorithms to generate intermediate waypoints, our approach
enables the synthesis of diverse human motions navigating in 3D indoor scenes and avoiding obstacles. To generate fine-grained human-object interactions, we carefully curate interaction goal guidance using a marker-based body
representation and leverage features based on the signed
distance field (SDF) to encode human-scene proximity relations. Our method can synthesize realistic and diverse
human-object interactions (e.g., sitting on a chair and then
getting up) even for out-of-distribution test scenarios with
different object shapes, orientations, starting body positions, and poses. Experimental results demonstrate that our
approach outperforms state-of-the-art human-scene interaction synthesis methods in terms of both motion naturalness and diversity. Code, models, and demonstrative video
results are available at: https://zkf1997.github.io/DIMOS.

14738

