This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multimodal Motion Conditioned Diffusion Model for Skeleton-based Video
Anomaly Detection
Alessandro Flaborea* Luca Collorone* Guido Maria D’Amely di Melendugno*
Stefano D’Arrigo* Bardh Prenkaj Fabio Galasso
{flaborea,damely,darrigo,prenkaj,galasso}@di.uniroma1.it

luca.collorone@diag.uniroma1.it

Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
https://github.com/aleflabo/MoCoDAD

MocoDAD

Abstract
Anomalies are rare and anomaly detection is often therefore framed as One-Class Classification (OCC), i.e. trained
solely on normalcy. Leading OCC techniques constrain the
latent representations of normal1 motions to limited volumes and detect as abnormal anything outside, which accounts satisfactorily for the openset’ness of anomalies. But
normalcy shares the same openset’ness property since humans can perform the same action in several ways, which
the leading techniques neglect.
We propose a novel generative model for video anomaly
detection (VAD), which assumes that both normality and
abnormality are multimodal. We consider skeletal representations and leverage state-of-the-art diffusion probabilistic
models to generate multimodal future human poses. We
contribute a novel conditioning on the past motion of people
and exploit the improved mode coverage capabilities of diffusion processes to generate different-but-plausible future
motions. Upon the statistical aggregation of future modes,
an anomaly is detected when the generated set of motions
is not pertinent to the actual future. We validate our model
on 4 established benchmarks: UBnormal, HR-UBnormal,
HR-STC, and HR-Avenue, with extensive experiments surpassing state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) is a crucial task in
computer vision and security applications. It enables early
detection of unusual or abnormal events in videos, such
as accidents, illnesses, or people’s behavior which may
threaten public safety [41]. However, several aspects make
VAD a challenging task. Firstly, the definition of anomaly
* Authors contributed equally.

F0

F1

F2

MocoDAD

Figure 1: MoCoDAD detects anomalies by synthesizing
and statistically aggregating multi-modal future motions,
conditioned on past poses (frames on the left). Red (top)
and green (bottom) distributions represent examples of
anomaly and normality generations (2d mapped via t-SNE).
Within the distribution modes (dashed-contoured), the red
dots are the actual true futures corresponding to the conditioning past frames. In the case of normality, the true future
lies within a main distribution mode, and the generated predictions are pertinent. In the case of abnormality, the true
future lies in the tail of the distribution modes, which yields
poorer predictions, highlighting anomalies.

is highly subjective and varies depending on the context and
application, making it difficult to define it universally. Secondly, anomalies are intrinsically rare. To account for data
scarcity, models generally learn from regular samples only
(also known as One Class Classification - OCC) or have to

10318

