This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Persistent-Transient Duality: A Multi-mechanism Approach for Modeling
Human-Object Interaction
Hung Tran1 , Vuong Le2 , Svetha Venkatesh1 , Truyen Tran1
1

Applied AI Institute, Deakin University, 2 Amazon
{tduy, svetha.venkatesh, truyen.tran}@deakin.edu.au, levuong@amazon.com

Persistent Process

Abstract
Humans are highly adaptable, swiftly switching between
different modes to progressively handle different tasks, situations and contexts. In Human-object interaction (HOI) activities, these modes can be attributed to two mechanisms:
(1) the large-scale consistent plan for the whole activity and
(2) the small-scale children interactive actions that start
and end along the timeline. While neuroscience and cognitive science have confirmed this multi-mechanism nature
of human behavior, machine modeling approaches for human motion are trailing behind. While attempting to use
gradually morphing structures (e.g., graph attention networks) to model the dynamic HOI patterns, they miss the
expeditious and discrete mode-switching nature of the human motion. To bridge that gap, this work proposes to
model two concurrent mechanisms that jointly control human motion: the Persistent process that runs continually on
the global scale, and the Transient sub-processes that operate intermittently on the local context of the human while
interacting with objects. These two mechanisms form an
interactive Persistent-Transient Duality that synergistically
governs the activity sequences. We model this conceptual
duality by a parent-child neural network of Persistent and
Transient channels with a dedicated neural module for dynamic mechanism switching. The framework is trialed on
HOI motion forecasting. On two rich datasets and a wide
variety of settings, the model consistently delivers superior
performances, proving its suitability for the challenge.

1. Introduction
In a planned activity that involves interaction with objects, the patterns of human motion vary greatly, contextualized to the situation and stages of the plan. The variety of patterns comes from the fact that the subject needs
to switch between multiple modes of operations: navigating the global scene according to the plan, and occasionally
concentrate on a small set of objects to act on them. This

Transient Process

door
oven
chair
on

pantry

oﬀ

table

sink

Figure 1: We model the human motions by a duality of two
types of processes: A single Persistent process (red box)
considers the whole activity plan and trajectory (red curve)
and use dense relational structure (red graph). Its children
Transient processes (green boxes) work on the small and
local spatiotemporal scope of a human and the interacted
objects using egocentric structure (green graph). They get
turn on and off on-demand by the Persistent process.

mode-switching nature requires a machine model to adapt
quickly in structure, representation, and inference mechanisms to follow the patterns of the behavior. This observation is confirmed by neuroscience findings that human brain
activity contains transient networks that deals with particular situation [4]. In cognitive science, human activities are
also proved to follow parent-child planning patterns [2].
Recent advancements in graph neural networks [43] allow motion models to dynamically adjust their relational
structure to adapt to changing situations [8]. However, with
a singular inference mechanism, they can only have gradual adaptation: smoothly adjusting parameters of the same
model. They cannot account for quick and abrupt changes
regarding the discrete switching between distinctive mechanisms and as a result fail to keep up with the movement
patterns. This limitation is inherent in human-object interaction motion (HOI-M) prediction. Fig. 1 visualizes an example activity of cooking a dinner meal. Here the subject
navigates around the kitchen following a recipe and con19858

