This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Editable Image Geometric Abstraction via Neural Primitive Assembly
Ye Chen1 Bingbing Ni1,2∗ Xuanhong Chen1,2 Zhangli Hu1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
2
USC-SJTU Institute of Cultural and Creative Industry
{chenye123, nibingbing, chen19910528, tension-2019}@sjtu.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Image abstraction, as one of the fundamental tasks in
computer vision, originally aims at decomposing a given
image into a set of elementary primitives (e.g., basic shapes,
curves) as well as their inter-relationship, for the purpose of
visual understanding or object reconstruction [6, 14, 13].
Haeberli et al. [16] use texture maps as primitives for paint∗ Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni

5 mins

Input

CLIPasso
Siggraph 22’

66mins

ES-CLIP
EvoStar 22’

8mins

LIVE
CVPR 22’

0.04second

Ours

Geometric
Style Transfer
(Editing)

This work explores a novel image geometric abstraction paradigm based on assembly out of a pool of predefined simple parametric primitives (i.e., triangle, rectangle, circle and semicircle), facilitating controllable shape
editing in images. While cast as a mixed combinatorial and continuous optimization problem, the above task
is approximately reformulated within a token translation
neural framework that simultaneously outputs primitive
assignments and corresponding transformation and color
parameters in an image-to-set manner, thus bypassing
complex/non-differentiable graph-matching iterations. To
relax the searching space and address the vanishing gradient issue, a novel Neural Soft Assignment scheme that
well explores the quasi-equivalence between the assignment
in Bipartite b-Matching and opacity-aware weighted multiple rasterization combination is introduced, drastically
reducing the optimization complexity. Without groundtruth image abstraction labeling (i.e., vectorized representation), the whole pipeline is end-to-end trainable in a selfsupervised manner, based on the linkage of differentiable
rasterization techniques. Extensive experiments on several
datasets well demonstrate that our framework is able to predict highly compelling vectorized geometric abstraction results with a combination of ONLY four simple primitives,
also with VERY straightforward shape editing capability by
simple replacement of primitive type, compared to previous
image abstraction and image vectorization methods.

Geometric
Abstraction

Abstract

Figure 1. This work explores abstracting images based on a combination of simple geometric primitives (i.e., geometric abstraction).
Our method predicts highly compelling vectorized results to characterize the image geometric information efficiently. In addition,
our method has straightforward shape editing capability by simply
modifying primitives during inference.

ing and anti-aliased text drawing; while Hu et al. [19] adopt
statistical learning strategy for approximating Ghost Imaging (GI [30]) by a set of natural image patches. Contemporary abstraction approaches [24, 41, 20, 28] delve to represent image with parameterized sketches. These methods
usually represent sketches based on Bézier control points,
and the input image is translated into a sequence of Bézier
curves in a recursive way, based on deep architectures such
as transformers [34] or reinforcement learning [28].
Other than sketches, geometric shape primitive (triangle,
circle, etc.) based image abstraction approaches [9, 39] are
probably more favored by highly frequent applications such
as graphic design, industrial design, cartoon production, advertisement making and modern arts, given the following
facts. 1. Simplicity and Expressibility: On one hand, geometric primitive has very compact and explicit parameter
format, thus facilitating compact representation and convenient manipulation. On the other hand, numerous combinations of geometric primitives imply rich expressive power
compared with sketches. For example, the Bauhaus and
Cubism arts tend to adopt ONLY simplistic shapes like rectangles and spheres, yet still with extremely rich artistic expression. 2. Semantic Preservation: Human beings tend to

23514

