This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sparse Instance Conditioned Multimodal Trajectory Prediction
Yonghao Dong1 Le Wang1∗ Sanping Zhou1 Gang Hua2
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
and Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Wormpex AI Research

Abstract
Pedestrian trajectory prediction is critical in many vision tasks but challenging due to the multimodality of the
future trajectory. Most existing methods predict multimodal trajectories conditioned by goals (future endpoints)
or instances (all future points). However, goal-conditioned
methods ignore the intermediate process and instanceconditioned methods ignore the stochasticity of pedestrian
motions. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective
Sparse Instance Conditioned Network (SICNet), which gives
a balanced solution between goal-conditioned and instanceconditioned methods. Specifically, SICNet learns comprehensive sparse instances, i.e., representative points of the
future trajectory, through a mask generated by a long shortterm memory encoder and uses the memory mechanism to
store and retrieve such sparse instances. Hence SICNet can
decode the observed trajectory into the future prediction conditioned on the stored sparse instance. Moreover, we design
a memory refinement module that refines the retrieved sparse
instances from the memory to reduce memory recall errors.
Extensive experiments on ETH-UCY and SDD datasets show
that our method outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods. In addition, ablation studies demonstrate the superiority of our method compared with goal-conditioned and
instance-conditioned approaches.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian trajectory prediction aims to predict pedestrians’ future paths given their observed trajectories. It plays an
important role in autonomous driving [22, 43, 5], human motion prediction [6, 12, 19], video surveillance [57, 48, 18, 32],
and visual recognition [38, 42, 46]. Despite the recent advancement [30, 49, 8, 36, 10], pedestrian trajectory prediction is still challenging due to the multimodality of future
trajectories. As the pedestrian’s motions are stochastic and
∗ Corresponding author.

Observed

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Ground Truth

Prediction

Instance

Goal

Sparse Instance

Figure 1. Illustration of different multimodal prediction methods.
(a) Goals, instances and sparse-instances prepared for the prediction. (b) Goal-conditioned methods. (c) Instance-conditioned
methods. (d) Sparse-instance-conditioned methods. The sparseinstance-conditioned method is more accurate in in-between states
than the goal-conditioned method and more flexible than the
instance-conditioned method, thus making the better prediction.

indeterminate [29], multiple future paths are possible given
their current states.
To handle multimodality, many methods [27, 49, 55]
transform the multimodal trajectories into multimodal goals.
They first predict various goals as modality representations
and then sample multiple goals to generate diverse future
trajectories. However, they only focus on goals while neglecting the intermediate movement process. As illustrated
in Figure 1(b), although with accurate goals, the intermediate process could be far from the ground truth. Thus, the
multimodal goals are not equal to the multimodal future trajectories. It is necessary to consider the in-between states
to comprehensively describe the multimodality of trajectory. Moreover, some other work [27, 28] predicts multimodal trajectories conditioned by instances. However, the
instance-conditioned methods will lead to motion stochasticity loss and modality redundancy, resulting in performance
degradation and computational resource waste. As shown in
Figure 1(c), due to the reduced randomness of the instanceconditioned approach, the prediction retains the same bias

9763

