This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CDFSL-V: Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning for Videos
Sarinda Samarasinghe

Mamshad Nayeem Rizve

Navid Kardan

sarinda.samarasinghe@ucf.edu

mamshadnayeem.rizve@ucf.edu

nkardan@cs.ucf.edu

Mubarak Shah
shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Center for Research in Computer Vision
University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida, USA

Abstract

Few-shot video action recognition is an effective approach to recognizing new categories with only a few labeled examples, thereby reducing the challenges associated
with collecting and annotating large-scale video datasets.
Existing methods in video action recognition rely on large
labeled datasets from the same domain. However, this setup
is not realistic as novel categories may come from different
data domains that may have different spatial and temporal characteristics. This dissimilarity between the source
and target domains can pose a significant challenge, rendering traditional few-shot action recognition techniques
ineffective. To address this issue, in this work, we propose a novel cross-domain few-shot video action recognition method that leverages self-supervised learning and
curriculum learning to balance the information from the
source and target domains. To be particular, our method
employs a masked autoencoder-based self-supervised training objective to learn from both source and target data in
a self-supervised manner. Then a progressive curriculum
balances learning the discriminative information from the
source dataset with the generic information learned from
the target domain. Initially, our curriculum utilizes supervised learning to learn class discriminative features from
the source data. As the training progresses, we transition
to learning target-domain-specific features. We propose a
progressive curriculum to encourage the emergence of rich
features in the target domain based on class discriminative supervised features in the source domain. We evaluate
our method on several challenging benchmark datasets and
demonstrate that our approach outperforms existing crossdomain few-shot learning techniques. Our code is available
at https://github.com/Sarinda251/CDFSL-V

1. Introduction
Even though deep learning is inspired by the biological
brain, in sharp contrast to humans, current deep models rely
on large reservoirs of data to learn. The few-shot learning
problem [41] is introduced to close this gap, where a learning model should generalize solely based on a handful of
training data. In traditional few-shot learning [6], the learning model is initially exposed to an annotated base dataset,
to learn generic features for the domain of interest. Then,
this model is fine-tuned on a few labeled examples (support samples) of the test dataset and consequently evaluated
on unlabeled test examples (query samples). However, this
classic pipeline assumes the base and test datasets are from
the same domain, thus closely related [35].
To mitigate this shortcoming, cross-domain few-shot
learning (CDFSL) was proposed in [12], where the base
dataset is from a different domain than the test data. Interestingly, it is shown in [25] that standard transfer learning—
consisting of pre-training on the base dataset and finetuning on test data— can significantly outperform few-shot
learning methods in the cross-domain few-shot learning
problem. Recently, extra unlabeled test examples were incorporated in addition to the base dataset in [28, 16] . Their
approaches push forward cross-domain few-shot learning
performance. In this paper, we follow this recent adaptation of CDFSL.
While few-shot learning is widely studied in the computer vision community [26], video few-shot learning is
less explored [4]. To the best of our knowledge, current
methods in cross-domain few-shot learning are solely focused on image data. In this work, for the first time, we
study cross-domain few-shot learning in the video domain.
A common scheme in video few-shot learning [45] utilizes
an implicit assumption about video data, such as: a common
mode of variation, similar temporal dynamics, or class distinctive features. However, in cross-domain few-shot learning, the base dataset can be drastically different from the

11643

