This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Supervised Burst Super-Resolution
Goutam Bhat1,∗

Michaël Gharbi2
Jiawen Chen2
Luc Van Gool1
1
2
CVL, ETH Zurich
Adobe
Supervised
synthetic data

Input burst frame



synthetic/real domain shift
h
no data collection
perfect ground truth

Supervised
real LR bursts + GT

no input domain shift
difficult to collect
misaligned ground truth

Zhihao Xia2
Self-Supervised (Ours)
only real LR bursts

no input domain shift
easy to collect
no ground truth required

Figure 1: Comparison of our self-supervised approach with existing training strategies on the real-world BurstSR [2] dataset,
using the same architecture [3]. Training a model on only synthetically generated data often leads to artifacts on real images,
due to the domain shift. The same model trained in a supervised manner using real data provides better results. However,
collecting paired ground-truth for real data requires specialized setups and signiﬁant manual labor, which makes it hard to
scale. Furthermore, the smartphone and DSLR used to capture the input and ground-truth often has spatial misalignment and
different color responses. Models trained with such “weakly-paired” ground-truth exhibit color shifts in their predictions.
Our self-supervised approach alleviate these issues. Despite using only easy-to-acquire, unpaired noisy low-resolution bursts
during training, our method produces clean, artifact-free high-resolution results,

Abstract
We introduce a self-supervised training strategy for burst
super-resolution that only uses noisy low-resolution bursts
during training. Our approach eliminates the need to carefully tune synthetic data simulation pipelines, which often do not match real-world image statistics. Compared
to weakly-paired training strategies, which require noisy
smartphone burst photos of static scenes, paired with a
clean reference obtained from a tripod-mounted DSLR camera, our approach is more scalable, and avoids the color
mismatch between the smartphone and DSLR. To achieve
this, we propose a new self-supervised objective that uses
a forward imaging model to recover a high-resolution image from aliased high frequencies in the burst. Our approach does not require any manual tuning of the forward
model’s parameters; we learn them from data. Furthermore, we show our training strategy is robust to dynamic
scene motion in the burst, which enables training burst
super-resolution models using in-the-wild data. Extensive

experiments on real and synthetic data show that, despite
only using noisy bursts during training, models trained with
our self-supervised strategy match, and sometimes surpass,
the quality of fully-supervised baselines trained with synthetic data or weakly-paired ground-truth. Finally, we show
our training strategy is general using four different burst
super-resolution architectures.

1. Introduction
Recent RAW burst super-resolution pipelines have signiﬁcantly improved the quality of modern smartphones photos [33, 8]. State-of-the-art algorithms use specialized deep
learning models that learn to merge the burst frames into
a single high-resolution image [3, 19, 18, 23, 24]. Training them requires paired datasets, in which each noisy burst
is matched to a clean reference. Most approaches synthe∗ Work partly done during an internship at Adobe.

10605

