This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ICICLE: Interpretable Class Incremental Continual Learning
Dawid Rymarczyk1,2,3,∗

Joost van de Weijer4,5
Bartosz Zieliński1,3,6
Bartłomiej Twardowski4,5,6
1
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, Jagiellonian University
2
3
Doctoral School of Exact and Life Sciences, Jagiellonian University
Ardigen SA
4
5
6
Autonomous University of Barcelona
Computer Vision Center
IDEAS NCBR
∗

dawid.rymarczyk@doctoral.uj.edu.pl

,QSXWLPDJH

1. Introduction
With the growing use of deep learning models in diverse
domains, including robotics [10], medical imaging [17],
and autonomous driving [43], there is a pressing need to
develop models that can adapt to ever-changing conditions
and learn new tasks from non-stationary data. However,
a signiﬁcant challenge with neural networks is their tendency to suffer from catastrophic forgetting [26, 30, 44],
where performance on previous tasks deteriorates rapidly
as new ones are acquired. Continual Learning (CL) [19] has
emerged as a promising technique to address this challenge
by enabling models to learn new tasks without forgetting
those learned before.
While existing CL approaches signiﬁcantly reduce catastrophic forgetting, they are often difﬁcult for humans to
understand. It is especially problematic because deep net-

7DVN
7DVN

Continual learning enables incremental learning of new
tasks without forgetting those previously learned, resulting in positive knowledge transfer that can enhance performance on both new and old tasks. However, continual learning poses new challenges for interpretability, as
the rationale behind model predictions may change over
time, leading to interpretability concept drift. We address
this problem by proposing Interpretable Class-InCremental
LEarning (ICICLE), an exemplar-free approach that adopts
a prototypical part-based approach. It consists of three
crucial novelties: interpretability regularization that distills
previously learned concepts while preserving user-friendly
positive reasoning; proximity-based prototype initialization
strategy dedicated to the ﬁne-grained setting; and taskrecency bias compensation devoted to prototypical parts.
Our experimental results demonstrate that ICICLE reduces
the interpretability concept drift and outperforms the existing exemplar-free methods of common class-incremental
learning when applied to concept-based models.

7DVN

7DVN

Abstract

)LQHWXQLQJ

(:&

/:)

/:0

,&,&/(

Figure 1: We process the input image (top left) through the
network and visualize how its speciﬁc areas are similar to
one of the prototypes. The interpretability concept drift occurs when such a similarity map differs between tasks. ICICLE performs best, preserving similarity maps better than
the other continual learning methods.
works often predict the right answer for the wrong reason
(the “Clever Hans” phenomenon), leading to excellent performance in training but poor performance in practice [63].
This results in serious societal problems that deeply affect
health, freedom, racial bias, and safety [11]. As a result,
some initial steps were taken in the literature to introduce
explainable posthoc methods into the CL setup [32, 52, 64].
However, explaining black boxes, rather than replacing
them with interpretable (self-explainable) models, can escalate the problem by providing misleading or false characterizations [69] or adding unnecessary authority to the
black box [12]. Therefore, there is a clear need for innovative machine-learning models that are inherently interpretable [11]. To the best of our knowledge, no interpretable
CL approach has been proposed so far.
In this work, we introduce Interpretable Class-

1887

