This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HybridAugment++: Unified Frequency Spectra Perturbations for Model
Robustness
Mehmet Kerim Yucel1
Ramazan Gokberk Cinbis2
Pinar Duygulu1
1
Hacettepe University, Graduate School of Science and Engineering
2
Department of Computer Engineering, Middle East Technical University
mkerimyucel@gmail.com

gcinbis@ceng.metu.edu.tr

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) are known to
exhibit poor generalization performance under distribution shifts. Their generalization have been studied extensively, and one line of work approaches the problem
from a frequency-centric perspective. These studies highlight the fact that humans and CNNs might focus on different frequency components of an image. First, inspired by
these observations, we propose a simple yet effective data
augmentation method HybridAugment that reduces the reliance of CNNs on high-frequency components, and thus
improves their robustness while keeping their clean accuracy high. Second, we propose HybridAugment++, which is
a hierarchical augmentation method that attempts to unify
various frequency-spectrum augmentations. HybridAugment++ builds on HybridAugment, and also reduces the reliance of CNNs on the amplitude component of images, and
promotes phase information instead. This unification results in competitive to or better than state-of-the-art results
on clean accuracy (CIFAR-10/100 and ImageNet), corruption benchmarks (ImageNet-C, CIFAR-10-C and CIFAR100-C), adversarial robustness on CIFAR-10 and out-ofdistribution detection on various datasets. HybridAugment
and HybridAugment++ are implemented in a few lines of
code, does not require extra data, ensemble models or additional networks 1 .

1. Introduction
The last decade witnessed machine learning (ML) elevating many methods to new heights in various fields. Despite surpassing human performance in multiple tasks, the
generalization of these models are hampered by distribution shifts, such as adversarial examples [54], common image corruptions [21] and out-of-distribution samples [62].
1 Our code is available at https://github.com/MKYucel/
hybrid_augment.

pinar@cs.hacettepe.edu.tr

Addressing these issues are of paramount importance to facilitate the wide-spread adoption of ML models in practical deployment, especially in safety-critical ones [46, 11],
where such distribution shifts are simply inevitable.
Distribution shift-induced performance drops signal a
gap between how ML models and us humans perform perception. Several studies attempted to bridge, or at least understand, this gap from architecture [2, 63, 48] and training data [21, 57, 29, 7, 39, 4, 22] centric perspectives. An
interesting perspective is built on the frequency spectra of
the training data; convolutional neural networks (CNN) are
shown to leverage high-frequency components that are invisible to humans [56] and also shown to be reliant on the
amplitude component, as opposed to the phase component
humans favour [7]. Several studies leveraged frequency
spectra insights to improve model robustness. These methods, however, either leverage cumbersome ensemble models [48], formulate complex augmentation regimes [52, 34]
or focus on a single robustness venue [33, 52, 34] rather
than improving the broader robustness to various distribution shifts. Furthermore, it is imperative to preserve, if not
improve, the clean accuracy levels of the model while improving its robustness.
Our work aims to improve the robustness of CNNs to
various distribution shifts. Inspired by the frequency spectra based data augmentations, we propose HybridAugment,
inspired from the well-known hybrid images [45]. Based
on the observation that the label information of images
are predominantly related to the low-frequency components
[58, 31], HybridAugment simply swaps high-frequency and
low-frequency components of randomly selected images in
a batch, regardless of their class labels. This forces the network to focus on the low-frequency information of images
and makes the models less reliant on the high-frequency information, which are often shown to be the root cause of
robustness issues [58]. With virtually no training overhead,
HybridAugment improves the corruption robustness while
preserving or improving the clean accuracy, and additionally induces adversarial robustness.

5718

