This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Guiding image captioning models toward more speciﬁc captions
Simon Kornblith1
1
Google DeepMind

Lala Li1
Zirui Wang2∗
Thao Nguyen3†
2
3
Apple AI/ML
University of Washington

Abstract
Image captioning is conventionally formulated as the
task of generating captions for images that match the distribution of reference image-caption pairs. However, reference captions in standard captioning datasets are short and
may not uniquely identify the images they describe. These
problems are further exacerbated when models are trained
directly on image-alt text pairs collected from the internet. In this work, we show that it is possible to generate
more speciﬁc captions with minimal changes to the training process. We implement classiﬁer-free guidance [14]
for an autoregressive captioning model by ﬁne-tuning it to
estimate both conditional and unconditional distributions
over captions. The guidance scale applied at decoding
controls a trade-off between maximizing p(caption|image)
and p(image|caption). Compared to standard greedy decoding, decoding with a guidance scale of 2 substantially
improves reference-free metrics such as CLIPScore (0.808
vs. 0.775) and caption→image retrieval performance in
the CLIP embedding space (recall@1 44.6% vs. 26.5%),
but worsens standard reference-based captioning metrics
(e.g., CIDEr 78.6 vs 126.1). We further explore the use of
language models to guide the decoding process, obtaining
small improvements over the Pareto frontier of referencefree vs. reference-based captioning metrics that arises from
classiﬁer-free guidance, and substantially improving the
quality of captions generated from a model trained only on
minimally curated web data.

1. Introduction
Image captioning is both a difﬁcult task for computer vision systems to perform and a difﬁcult task to evaluate. Although automated captioning metrics rank the best captioning systems higher than humans, human raters still show a
strong preference for human-generated captions [20], suggesting shortcomings in both captioning models and metrics. One shortcoming relates to the lack of speciﬁcity
in generated captions. Conventional maximum likelihood∗ Work performed while at Google.

† Work performed as a student researcher at Google.

γ =1.0 a man riding a blue motorcycle on a dirt road
γ =1.5 a man riding a blue motorcycle on a straw bale
γ =2.0 rider on blue suzuki motorcycle near straw
bales

γ =3.0 racer on blue suzuki motorcycle leaning up
against straw bales
GT A person riding a baby blue motorcycle near
haystacks

Figure 1. Using classiﬁer-free guidance (γ > 1) results in more
speciﬁc captions that are farther from the reference distribution.
Left: Example of captions generated at different guidance scales
for a single image. Right: Caption→image recall@1 with CLIP
ViT-B/32 vs. CIDEr score, for captions generated with different
guidance scales γ on MS-COCO. Higher scales improve retrieval
accuracy at the expense of CIDEr.

based image captioning models attempt to generate captions such that the p(caption|image) is high. However,
captions from the ground truth distribution are often nonspeciﬁc, e.g., human annotators will usually describe a German Shepard only as a dog. Moreover, previous work
has emphasized “reference-based” captioning metrics that
measure the match between generated captions and humanprovided ground truth captions [28, 23, 42]. These metrics
intrinsically penalize captions that are more speciﬁc than
ground truth.
In this work, we explore strategies to guide image captioning models to produce more speciﬁc captions by modifying the decoding distribution, and explore the tradeoffs in captioning metrics that result. We ﬁrst investigate
the application of classiﬁer-free guidance (CFG) [14] to
image captioning with autoregressive models. Classiﬁerfree guidance increases p(image|caption) at the expense
of p(caption|image). Although CFG hurts reference-based
image captioning metrics such as BLEU [28], ROUGE [23],
and CIDEr [42], it improves “reference-free” metrics that
measure captions’ speciﬁcity via the similarity between the

15259

