This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Divide&Classify: Fine-Grained Classification for
City-Wide Visual Place Recognition
Gabriele Trivigno*1

Gabriele Berton*1 Juan Aragon1 Barbara Caputo1
1
Politecnico di Torino

Carlo Masone1

{gabriele.trivigno, gabriele.berton, barbara.caputo, carlo.masone}@polito.it

Abstract
Visual Place recognition is commonly addressed as an
image retrieval problem. However, retrieval methods are
impractical to scale to large datasets, densely sampled from
city-wide maps, since their dimension impact negatively on
the inference time. Using approximate nearest neighbour
search for retrieval helps to mitigate this issue, at the cost
of a performance drop. In this paper we investigate whether
we can effectively approach this task as a classification
problem, thus bypassing the need for a similarity search. We
find that existing classification methods for coarse, planetwide localization are not suitable for the fine-grained and
city-wide setting. This is largely due to how the dataset is
split into classes, because these methods are designed to
handle a sparse distribution of photos and as such do not
consider the visual aliasing problem across neighbouring
classes that naturally arises in dense scenarios. Thus, we
propose a partitioning scheme that enables a fast and accurate inference, preserving a simple learning procedure, and
a novel inference pipeline based on an ensemble of novel
classifiers that uses the prototypes learned via an angular
margin loss. Our method, Divide&Classify (D&C), enjoys
the fast inference of classification solutions and an accuracy
competitive with retrieval methods on the fine-grained, citywide setting. Moreover, we show that D&C can be paired
with existing retrieval pipelines to speed up computations
by over 20 times while increasing their recall, leading to
new state-of-the-art results. Code is available at https:
//github.com/ga1i13o/Divide-and-Classify

1. Introduction
Visual Place Recognition (VPR) is the task of recognizing the location where a photo was taken with an accuracy
of a few meters [45, 1, 25, 44, 29, 11, 13, 5, 18, 51, 32,
15, 46, 54, 6, 8, 7, 12, 24, 16]. This problem, also known
as visual geo-localization [3, 4, 25] or image localization
[29, 13], is commonly approached as an image retrieval

Figure 1. Experiments demonstrating the scalability problem of
retrieval-based VPR methods, using the state-of-the-art CosPlace
(with exhaustive kNN and with Approximate Nearest Neighbor ANN - search through Inverted File Index with Product Quantization, IVFPQ). Combining our Divide&Classify method with the
retrieval approach yields an optimal performance-efficiency tradeoff when scaling up to the city-wide setting.

problem: the query to be localized is compared to a database
of geo-tagged images, typically via a k-nearest neighbour
(kNN) in features space, and the most similar images retrieved from the database are the predictions of the query’s
location. Even though retrieval methods work remarkably
well when the VPR task is limited to a small map [4, 54, 3],
scaling them to large and densely mapped areas, such as an
entire city, is impractical because both the time and memory
required to execute the kNN grow with the dimension of the
database [54, 4, 36, 2].
Certainly, the space and time requirements of the kNN
can be reduced by resorting to Approximate Nearest Neighbors (ANNs) algorithms [22, 30, 2, 40], which grant impressive speed ups while simultaneously reducing memory
footprint. However, their accuracy may be significantly
worse than the one obtained with the exhaustive kNN,
which is their upper bound. This trade-off is easily demonstrated with an experiment. In Fig. 1 we show the behavior obtained using the state-of-the-art retrieval method CosPlace [3] on SF-XL [3], a dataset for urban VPR that covers the whole city of San Francisco, with an area of nearly

11142

