This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Eulerian Single-Photon Vision
Shantanu Gupta

Mohit Gupta

sgupta@cs.wisc.edu

mohitg@cs.wisc.edu

Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison

Abstract
Single-photon sensors measure light signals at the finest
possible resolution — individual photons. These sensors introduce two major challenges in the form of strong Poisson
noise and extremely large data acquisition rates, which are
also inherited by downstream computer vision tasks. Previous work has largely focused on solving the image reconstruction problem first and then using off-the-shelf methods
for downstream tasks, but the most general solutions that
account for motion are costly and not scalable to large data
volumes produced by single-photon sensors.
This work forgoes the image reconstruction problem. Instead, we demonstrate computationally light-weight phasebased algorithms for the tasks of edge detection and motion
estimation. These methods directly process the raw singlephoton data as a 3D volume with a bank of velocity-tuned
filters, achieving speed-ups of more than two orders of magnitude compared to explicit reconstruction-based methods.
Project webpage:
https://wisionlab.com/
project/eulerian-single-photon-vision/

1. Introduction
The spatio-temporal resolution of digital image sensing has continually increased, culminating in single-photon
or quanta sensors such as single-photon avalanche diodes
(SPADs) and jots which can resolve individual photon arrivals [53, 71, 50, 46, 34]. These sensors enable an exciting array of applications, including photography in challenging conditions like low-light, fast-motion, and high dynamic range [24, 47, 18, 9], high-speed tracking [27], and
3D imaging [68]. While quanta sensors open up new opportunities by providing access to individual photons, the
raw data from these sensors is heavily quantized (down to
a single bit per pixel), and noisy from Poisson statistics.
Cost is another problem – treating individual photons separately instead of aggregating them like conventional sensors
means we fundamentally need more storage, computation,
and communication (and ultimately power). These chal-

lenges are precluding large-scale adoption of this otherwise
exciting technology.
SPAD arrays in particular capture binary frames (Fig.
1a) at high speeds of up to 97 kHz [71]. In this context, the
most widely studied problem so far has been image reconstruction, with the idea being that recovering high-quality
images is critical for any vision task. Reconstructing images
from single binary frames is difficult, needing strong priors
and computationally intensive algorithms [4, 63, 8]. A natural idea is to aggregate information over many frames [77],
but this approach is prone to potentially severe motion blur
– in Fig. 1a, the falling ball gets completely blurred when
binary frames are naively averaged. Therefore, we need
more sophisticated methods to handle motion [27, 9, 12]
such as “explicit burst vision” [48], where the visual signal
is reconstructed by aligning and robustly merging frames
over time [47]. Motivated by the success of burst photography on smartphones [28], explicit burst vision yields highquality results, but at heavy computational cost (Fig. 1b).
We propose a class of light-weight computer vision algorithms for SPAD arrays (or very high-speed video in general). They are motivated by the idea that many vision tasks
ultimately do not need the full image [10], and are therefore
not necessarily tied to the same cost-versus-quality tradeoff as image reconstruction. We propose signal phase recovery as a proxy problem (Sec. 3), which can be addressed
without reconstructing the entire signal (image). Phase is
an important feature both in visual perception [59] and in
computer vision tasks [38, 51, 74, 20, 60]. Treating singlephoton sensor data (video) as a 3D volume, the response
of oriented and complex 3D filters applied to it encodes
scene information such as motion and edge locations. Sec.
4 describes a method to accurately estimate the reliability
of these filter responses, and Sec. 5 shows how we adapt
classical phase-based low-level vision algorithms to extract
the scene information. These methods can be run extremely
fast due to involving only linear filtering and pixel-wise operations. We obtain speed-ups of more than two orders of
magnitude compared to explicit burst vision, with comparable quality (Fig. 1c & Sec. 6).
The large difference in speed between explicit burst vi-

10465

