This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HairCLIPv2: Unifying Hair Editing via Proxy Feature Blending
Tianyi Wei1 , Dongdong Chen2 , Wenbo Zhou1,† , Jing Liao3 ,
Weiming Zhang1 , Gang Hua4 , Nenghai Yu1
1

University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Cloud AI
3
City University of Hong Kong 4 Xi’an Jiaotong University

{bestwty@mail., welbeckz@, zhangwm@, ynh@}ustc.edu.cn

+

color+ rgb

sketch
+

style mask

style ref

style ref

+

color
ref
+

sketch
+

style ref

style ref

color ref

“Blue
Hair”

“Bowl Cut Hairstyle” + “Dido Flip Hairstyle” +

“Quiff Hairstyle”

“Jewfro
Hairstyle”

“Gray Hair”

“Red Hair” +
“Pixie Cut Hairstyle”

Input Image

{cddlyf@, ganghua@}gmail.com, jingliao@cityu.edu.hk

color+ ref

style mask

color +mask

color ref

Figure 1. HairCLIPv2 supports hairstyle and color editing individually or jointly with unprecedented user interaction mode support, including text, mask, sketch, reference image, etc.

Abstract
Hair editing has made tremendous progress in recent
years. Early hair editing methods use well-drawn sketches
or masks to specify the editing conditions. Even though they
can enable very fine-grained local control, such interaction
modes are inefficient for the editing conditions that can be
easily specified by language descriptions or reference images. Thanks to the recent breakthrough of cross-modal
models (e.g., CLIP), HairCLIP is the first work that enables hair editing based on text descriptions or reference
images. However, such text-driven and reference-driven
interaction modes make HairCLIP unable to support finegrained controls specified by sketch or mask. In this paper,
we propose HairCLIPv2, aiming to support all the aforementioned interactions with one unified framework. Simultaneously, it improves upon HairCLIP with better irrelevant
attributes (e.g., identity, background) preservation and unseen text descriptions support. The key idea is to convert all
the hair editing tasks into hair transfer tasks, with editing
conditions converted into different proxies accordingly. The
editing effects are added upon the input image by blend† Wenbo Zhou is the corresponding author.

ing the corresponding proxy features within the hairstyle
or hair color feature spaces. Besides the unprecedented
user interaction mode support, quantitative and qualitative
experiments demonstrate the superiority of HairCLIPv2 in
terms of editing effects, irrelevant attribute preservation
and visual naturalness. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/wty-ustc/HairCLIPv2.

1. Introduction
Hair editing as an interesting and challenging problem
has attracted a lot of research attention from both academia
and industry. Over the past few decades, tremendous
progress [50, 41, 31, 36] has been made in this field, enabling high-fidelity hair editing based on various types of
user interactions or controls. In earlier hair editing methods [50, 41], commonly supported user editing conditions
are sketches and masks, which can enable fine-grained local
controls. But in real scenarios, many hair editing conditions
can be specified by simpler interactions, e.g., text descriptions (e.g., “bowl cut hairstyle”) and reference images.
Recently, cross-modal visual and language representation learning [29, 22, 43, 8, 35, 38, 45] has made remarkable breakthrough, which makes text-guided image manipu-

23589

